[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cml10)  [Next](cml12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="ch-07"></span>

### CHAPTER VII

### THE RISE OF THE SUN-GOD <span id="fr_108"></span>[1](#fn_108.md)

It was as a result of the loss of his hand in this battle with the Fir
Bolgs that Nuada got his name of *Argetlám*, that is, the "Silver
Handed". For Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha Dé Danann, made him
an artificial hand of silver, so skilfully that it moved in all, its
joints, and was as strong and supple as a real one. But, good as it was
of its sort, it was a blemish; and, according to Celtic custom, no
maimed person could sit upon the throne. Nuada was deposed; and the
Tuatha Dé Danann went into council to appoint a new king.

They agreed that it would be a politic thing for them to conciliate the
Fomors, the giants of the sea, and make an alliance with them. So they
sent a message to Bress, the son of the Fomorian king, Elathan, asking
him to come and rule over them. Bress accepted this offer; and they made
a marriage between him and Brigit, the daughter of the Dagda. At the
same time, Cian <span id="fr_109"></span>[2](#fn_109.md), the son of
Diancecht, the physician of the Tuatha Dé Danann, married

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Ethniu, the
daughter of the Fomor, Balor. Then Bress was made king, and endowed with
lands and a palace; and he, on his part, gave hostages that he would
abdicate if his rule ever became unpleasing to those who had elected
him.

But, in spite of all his fair promises, Bress, who belonged in heart to
his own fierce people, began to oppress his subjects with excessive
taxes. He put a tax upon every hearth, upon every kneading-trough, and
upon every quern, as well as a poll-tax of an ounce of gold upon every
member of the Tuatha Dé Danann. By a crafty trick, too, he obtained the
milk of all their cattle. He asked at first only for the produce of any
cows which happened to be brown and hairless, and the people of the
goddess Danu granted him this cheerfully. But Bress passed all the
cattle in Ireland between two fires, so that their hair was singed off,
and thus obtained the monopoly of the main source of food. To earn a
livelihood, all the gods, even the greatest, were now forced to labour
for him. Ogma, their champion, was sent out to collect firewood, while
the Dagda was put to work building forts and castles.

One day, when the Dagda was at his task, his son, Angus, came to him.
"You have nearly finished that castle," he said. "What reward do you
intend to ask from Bress when it is done?" The Dagda replied that he had
not yet thought of it. "Let me give you some advice," said Angus. "Ask
Bress to have all the cattle in Ireland gathered together upon a plain,
so that you can pick out one

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

for yourself. He will consent to that. Then choose the black-maned
heifer called 'Ocean'."

The Dagda finished building the fort, and then went to Bress for his
reward. "What will you have?" asked Bress. "I want all the cattle in
Ireland gathered together upon a plain, so that I may choose one of them
for myself." Bress did this; and the Dagda took the black-maned heifer
Angus had told him of. The king, who had expected to be asked very much
more, laughed at what he thought was the Dagda's simplicity. But Angus
had been wise; as will be seen hereafter.

Meanwhile Bress was infuriating the people of the goddess Danu by adding
avarice to tyranny. It was for kings to be liberal to all-comers, but at
the court of Bress no one ever greased his knife with fat, or made his
breath smell of ale. Nor were there ever any poets or musicians or
jugglers or jesters there to give pleasure to the people; for Bress
would distribute no largess. Next, he cut down the very subsistence of
the gods. So scanty was his allowance of food that they began to grow
weak with famine. Ogma, through feebleness, could only carry one-third
of the wood needed for fuel; so that they suffered from cold as well as
from hunger.

It was at this crisis that two physicians, Miach, the son, and Airmid,
the daughter, of Diancecht, the god of medicine, came to the castle
where the dispossessed King Nuada lived. Nuada's porter, blemished, like
himself (for he had lost an eye), was sitting at the gate, and on his
lap was a cat curled up asleep. The porter asked the strangers who

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

they were. "We are good doctors," they said. "If that is so," he
replied, "perhaps you can give me a new eye." "Certainly," they said,
"we could take one of the eyes of that cat, and put it in the place
where your lost eye used to be." "I should be very pleased if you would
do that," answered the porter, So Miach and Airmid removed one of the
cat's eyes, and put it in the hollow where the man's eye had been.

The story goes on to say that this was not wholly a benefit to him; for
the eye retained its cat's nature, and, when the man wished to sleep at
nights, the cat's eye was always looking out for mice, while it could
hardly be kept awake during the day. Nevertheless, he was pleased at the
time, and went and told Nuada, who commanded that the doctors who had
performed this marvellous cure should be brought to him.

As they came in, they heard the king groaning, for Nuada's wrist had
festered where the silver hand joined the arm of flesh. Miach asked
where Nuada's own hand was, and they told him that it had been buried
long ago. But he dug it up, and placed it to Nuada's stump; he uttered
an incantation over it, saying: "Sinew to sinew, and nerve to nerve be
joined!" and in three days and nights the hand had renewed itself and
fixed itself to the arm, so that Nuada was whole again.

When Diancecht, Miach's father, heard of this he was very angry to think
that his son should have excelled him in the art of medicine. He sent
for him, and struck him upon the head with a sword, cutting

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the skin, but not wounding the flesh. Miach easily healed this. So
Diancecht hit him again, this time to the bone. Again Miach cured
himself. The third time his father smote him, the sword went right
through the skull to the membrane of the brain, but even this wound
Miach was able to leech. At the fourth stroke, however, Diancecht cut
the brain in two, and Miach could do nothing for that. He died, and
Diancecht buried him. And upon his grave there grew up three hundred and
sixty-five stalks of grass, each one a cure for any illness of each of
the three hundred and sixty-five nerves in a man's body. Airmid, Miach's
sister, plucked all these very carefully, and arranged them on her
mantle according to their properties. But her angry and jealous father
overturned the cloak, and hopelessly confused them. If it had not been
for that act, says the early writer, men would know how to cure every
illness, and would so be immortal.

The healing of Nuada's blemish happened just at the time when all the
people of the goddess Danu had at last agreed that the exactions and
tyranny of Bress could no longer be borne. It was the insult he put upon
Cairpré, son of Ogma the god of literature, that caused things to come
to this head. Poets were always held by the Celts in great honour; and
when Cairpré, the bard of the Tuatha Dé Danann, went to visit Bress, he
expected to be treated with much consideration, and fed at the king's
own table. But, instead of doing so, Bress lodged him in a small, dark
room where there was no fire, no bed, and no furniture except

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

a mean table on which small cakes of dry bread were put on a little dish
for his food. The next morning, Cairpré rose early and left the palace
without having spoken to Bress. It was the custom of poets when they
left a king's court to utter a panegyric on their host, but Cairpré
treated Bress instead to a magical satire. It was the first satire ever
made in Ireland, and seems to us to bear upon it all the marks of an
early effort. Roughly rendered, it said:

"No meat on the plates,  
  No milk of the cows;  
No shelter for the belated;  
  No money for the minstrels:  
May Bress's cheer be what he gives to others!"

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This satire of
Cairpré's was, we are assured, so virulent that it caused great red
blotches to break out all over Bress's face. This in itself constituted
a blemish such as should not be upon a king, and the Tuatha Dé Danann
called upon Bress to abdicate and let Nuada take the throne again.

Bress was obliged to do so. He went back to the country of the Fomors,
underneath the sea, and complained to his father Elathan, its king,
asking him to gather an army to reconquer his throne. The Fomors
assembled in council--Elathan, Tethra, Balor, Indech, and all the other
warriors and chiefs--and they decided to come with a great host, and
take Ireland away, and put it under the sea where the people of the
goddess Danu would never be able to find it again.

At the same time, another assembly was also

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

being held at Tara, the capital of the Tuatha Dé Danann. Nuada was
celebrating his return to the throne by a feast to his people. While it
was at its height, a stranger clothed like a king came to the palace
gate. The porter asked him his name and errand.

"I am called Lugh," he said. "I am the grand-son of Diancecht by Cian,
my father, and the grand-son of Balor by Ethniu, my mother."

"But what is your profession?" asked the porter; "for no one is admitted
here unless he is a master of some craft."

"I am a carpenter," said Lugh.

"We have no need of a carpenter. We already have a very good one; his
name is Luchtainé.

"I am an excellent smith," said Lugh.

"We do not want a smith. We have a very good one; his name is Goibniu."

"I am a professional warrior," said Lugh.

"We have no need of one. Ogma is our champion."

"I am a harpist," said Lugh.

"We have an excellent harpist already."

"I am a warrior renowned for skilfulness rather than for mere strength."

"We already have a man like that."

"I am a poet and tale-teller," said Lugh.

"We have no need of such. We have a most accomplished poet and
tale-teller."

"I am a sorcerer," said Lugh.

"We do not want one. We have numberless sorcerers and druids."

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

"I am a physician," said Lugh.

"Diancecht is our physician."

"I am a cup-bearer," said Lugh.

"We already have nine of them."

"I am a worker in bronze."

"We have no need of you. We already have a worker in bronze. His name is
Credné."

"Then ask the king," said Lugh, "if he has with him a man who is master
of all these crafts at once, for, if he has, there is no need for me to
come to Tara."

So the door-keeper went inside, and told the king that a man had come
who called himself Lugh the *Ioldanach* <span
id="fr_110"></span>[1](#fn_110.md), or the "Master of all Arts", and that
he claimed to know everything.

The king sent out his best chess-player to play against the stranger.
Lugh won, inventing a new move called "Lugh's enclosure".

Then Nuada invited him in. Lugh entered, and sat down upon the chair
called the "sage's seat", kept for the wisest man.

Ogma, the champion, was showing off his strength. Upon the floor was a
flagstone so large that four-score yokes of oxen would have been needed
to move it. Ogma pushed it before him along the hall, and out at the
door. Then Lugh rose from his chair, and pushed it back again. But this
stone, huge as it was, was only a portion broken from a still greater
rock outside the palace. Lugh picked it up, and put it back into its
place.

The Tuatha Dé Danann asked him to play the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

harp to them. So he played the "sleep-tune", and the king and all his
court fell asleep, and did not wake until the same hour of the following
day. Next he played a plaintive air, and they all wept. Lastly, he
played a measure which sent them into transports of joy.

When Nuada had seen all these numerous talents of Lugh, he began to
wonder whether one so gifted would not be of great help against the
Fomors. He took counsel with the others, and, by their advice, lent his
throne to Lugh for thirteen days, taking the "sage's seat" at his side.

Lugh summoned all the Tuatha Dé Danann to a council.

"The Fomors are certainly going to make war on us," he said. "What can
each of you do to help?"

Diancecht the Physician said: "I will completely cure everyone who is
wounded, provided his head is not cut off, or his brain or spinal marrow
hurt."

"I," said Goibniu the Smith, "will replace every broken lance and sword
with a new one, even though the war last seven years. And I will make
the lances so well that they shall never miss their mark, or fail to
kill. Dulb, the smith of the Fomors, cannot do as much as that. The fate
of the fighting will be decided by my lances."

"And I," said Credné the Bronze-worker, "will furnish all the rivets for
the lances, the hilts for the swords, and the rims and bosses for the
shields."

"And I," said Luchtainé the Carpenter, "will provide all the shields and
lance-shafts."

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

Ogma the Champion promised to kill the King of the Fomors, with thrice
nine of his followers, and to capture one-third of his army.

"And you, O Dagda," said Lugh, "what will you do?"

"I will fight," said the Dagda, "both with force and craft. Wherever the
two armies meet, I will crush the bones of the Fomors with my club, till
they are like hailstones under a horse's feet."

"And you, O Morrígú?" said Lugh.

"I will pursue them when they flee," she replied. "And I always catch
what I chase."

"And you, O Cairpré, son of Etan?" said Lugh to the poet, "what can you
do?"

"I will pronounce an immediately-effective curse upon them; by one of my
satires I will take away all their honour, and, enchanted by me, they
shall not be able to stand against our warriors."

"And ye, O sorcerers, what will ye do?"

"We will hurl by our magic arts," replied Mathgan, the head sorcerer,
"the twelve mountains of Ireland at the Fomors. These mountains will be
Slieve League, Denna Ulad, the Mourne Mountains, Bri Ruri, Slieve Bloom,
Slieve Snechta, Slemish, Blai-Sliab, Nephin, Sliab Maccu Belgodon,
Segais <span id="fr_111"></span>[1](#fn_111.md), and Cruachan Aigle <span
id="fr_112"></span>[2](#fn_112.md)".

Then Lugh asked the cup-bearers what they would do.

"We will hide away by magic," they said, "the twelve chief lakes and the
twelve chief rivers of Ireland from the Fomors, so that they shall not
be

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

able to find any water, however thirsty they may be; those waters will
conceal themselves from the Fomors so that they shall not get a drop,
while they will give drink to the people of the goddess Danu as long as
the war lasts, even if it last seven years." And they told Lugh that the
twelve chief lakes were Lough Derg, Lough Luimnigh <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113.md), Lough Corrib, Lough Ree, Lough Mask,
Strangford Lough, Lough Læig, Lough Neagh, Lough Foyle, Lough Gara,
Lough Reagh, and Márloch, and that the twelve chief rivers were the
Bush, the Boyne, the Bann, the Nem, the Lee, the Shannon, the Moy, the
Sligo, the Erne, the Finn, the Liffey, and the Suir.

Finally, the Druid, Figol, son of Mamos, said: "I will send three
streams of fire into the faces of the Fomors, and I will take away
two-thirds of their valour and strength, but every breath drawn by the
people of the goddess Danu will only make them more valorous and strong,
so that even if the fighting lasts seven years, they will not be weary
of it.

All decided to make ready for a war, and to give the direction of it to
Lugh.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_108"></span>[78:1](cml11.htm#fr_108.md) The principal sources
of information for this chapter are the Harleian MS. 5280 entitled *The
Second Battle of Moytura*, of which translations have been made by Dr.
Whitley Stokes in the *Revue Celtique* and M. de Jubainville in his
*L’Épopée Celtique en Irlande*, and Eugene O’Curry s translation in Vol.
IV. of *Atlantis* of the *Fate of the Children of Tuirenn*.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[78:2](cml11.htm#fr_109.md) Pronounced *Kian*.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[85:1](cml11.htm#fr_110.md) Pronounced *Ildāna*.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[87:1](cml11.htm#fr_111.md) The Curlieu Hills,
between Roscommon and Sligo.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[87:2](cml11.htm#fr_112.md) Croagh Patrick.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[88:1](cml11.htm#fr_113.md) The estuary of the
Shannon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Gaelic Argonauts](cml12.md)
