[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cml27)  [Next](cml29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span id="ch-24"></span>

### CHAPTER XXIV

### THE DECLINE AND FALL OF THE GODS

If there be love of fame in celestial minds, those gods might count
themselves fortunate who shared in the transformation of Arthur. Their
divinity had fallen from them, but in their new rôles, as heroes of
romance, they entered upon vivid reincarnations. The names of Arthur's
Knights might almost be described as "household words", while the gods
who had no portion in the Table Round are known only to those who busy
themselves with antiquarian lore. It is true that a few folk-tales still
survive in the remoter parts of Wales, in which the names of such
ancient British deities as Gwydion, Gwyn, Arianrod, and Dylan appear,
but it is in such a chaos of jumbled and distorted legend that one finds
it hard to pick out even the slenderest thread of story. They have none
of the definite coherence of the contemporary Gaelic folk-tales quoted
in a previous chapter as still preserving the myths about Goibniu, Lugh,
Cian, Manannán, Ethniu, and Balor. Indeed, they have reached such a
stage of disintegration that they can hardly now survive another
generation. <span id="fr_521"></span>[1](#fn_521.md)

There have been, however, other paths by which the fame of a god might
descend to a posterity

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

which would no longer credit his divinity. The rolls of early British
history were open to welcome any number of mythical personages, provided
that their legends were attractive. Geoffrey of Monmouth's famous
*Historia Britonum* is, under its grave pretence of exact history, as
mythological as the Morte Darthur, or even the Mabinogion. The annals of
early British saintship were not less accommodating. A god whose
tradition was, too potent to be ignored or extinguished was canonized,
as a matter of course, by clerics who held as an axiom that "the
toleration of the cromlech facilitated the reception of the
Gospel. <span id="fr_522"></span>[1](#fn_522.md)" Only the most
irreconcilable escaped them--such a one as Gwyn son of Nudd, who, found
almost useless by Geoffrey and intractable by the monkish writers,
remains the last survivor of the old gods--dwindled to the proportions
of a fairy, but unsubdued.

This part of resistance is perhaps the most dignified; for deities can
be sadly changed by the caprices of their euhemerizers. Dôn, whom we
knew as the mother of the heaven gods, seems strangely described as a
*king* of Lochlin and Dublin, who led the Irish into north Wales in A.D.
267. <span id="fr_523"></span>[2](#fn_523.md) More recognizable is *his*
son Gwydion, who introduced the knowledge of letters into the country of
his adoption. The dynasty of "King" Dôn, according to a manuscript in
the collection of Mr. Edward Williams--better known under his bardic
name of Iolo Morganwg--held north Wales for a hundred and twenty-nine

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

years, when the North British king, Cunedda, invaded the country,
defeated the Irish in a great battle, and drove them across sea to the
Isle of Man. This battle is historical, and, putting Dôn and Gwydion out
of the question, probably represented the last stand of the Gael, in the
extreme west of Britain, against the second and stronger wave of Celtic
invasion. In the same collection of *Iolo Manuscripts* is found a
curious, and even comic, euhemeristic version of the strange myth of the
Bone Prison of Oeth and Anoeth which Manawyddan son of Llyr, built in
Gower. The new reading makes that ghastly abode a real building,
constructed out of the bones of the "Caesarians" (Romans) killed in
battle with the Cymri. It consisted of numerous chambers, some of large
bones and some of small, some above ground and some under. Prisoners of
war were placed in the more comfortable cells, the underground dungeons
being kept for traitors to their country. Several times the "Caesarians"
demolished the prison, but, each time, the Cymri rebuilt it stronger
than before. At last, however, the bones decayed, and, being spread upon
the ground, made an excellent manure! "From that time forth" the people
of the neighbourhood "had astonishing crops of wheat and barley and of
every other grain for many years". <span id="fr_524"></span>[1](#fn_524.md)

It is not, however, in these, so to speak, unauthorized narratives that
we can best refind our British deities, but in the compact, coherent,
and at times almost convincing *Historia Britonum* of Geoffrey of
Monmouth, published in the first half of

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

the twelfth century, and for hundreds of years gravely quoted as the
leading authority on the early history of our islands. The modern
critical spirit has, of course, relegated it to the region of fable. We
can no longer accept the pleasant tradition of the descent of the
Britons from the survivors of Troy, led westward in search of a new home
by Brutus, the great-grandson of the pious Æneas. Nor indeed does any
portion of the "History", from Æneas to Athelstan, quite persuade the
latter-day reader. Its kings succeed one another in plausible sequence,
but they themselves are too obviously the heroes of popular legend.

A large part of Geoffrey's chronicle--two books <span
id="fr_525"></span>[1](#fn_525.md) out of twelve--is, of course, devoted to
Arthur. In it he tells the story of that paladin's conquests, not only
in his own country, against the Saxons, the Irish, the Scots, and the
Picts, but over all western Europe. We see the British champion, after
annexing Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, and the Orkneys, following up these
minor victories by subduing Norway, Dacia (by which Denmark seems to
have been meant), Aquitaine, and Gaul. After such triumphs there was
clearly nothing left for him but the overthrow of the Roman empire; and
this he had practically achieved when the rebellion of Mordred brought
him home to his death, or rather (for even Geoffrey does not quite lose
hold of the belief in the undying Arthur) to be carried to the island of
Avallon to be healed of his wounds, the crown of Britain falling to "his
kinsman Constantine, the son

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

of Cador, Duke of Cornwall, in the five hundred and forty-second year of
our Lord's incarnation". <span id="fr_526"></span>[1](#fn_526.md) Upon the
more personal incidents connected with Arthur, Geoffrey openly professes
to keep silence, possibly regarding them as not falling within the
province of his history, but we are told shortly how Mordred took
advantage of Arthur's absence on the Continent to seize the throne,
marry Guanhamara (Guinevere), and ally himself with the Saxons, only to
be defeated at that fatal battle called by Geoffrey "Cambula", in which
Mordred, Arthur, and Walgan--the "Sir Gawain" of Malory and the
Gwalchmei of the earlier legends--all met their dooms.

We find the gods of the older generation standing in the same position
with regard to Arthur in Geoffrey's "History" as they do in the later
Welsh triads and tales. Though rulers, they are yet his vassals. In
"three brothers of royal blood", called Lot, Urian, and Augusel, who are
represented as having been chiefs in the north, we may discern Lludd,
Urien, and Arawn. To these three Arthur restored "the rights of their
ancestors", handing over the semi-sovereignty of Scotland to Augusel,
giving Urian the government of Murief (Moray), and re-establishing Lot
"in the consulship of Loudonesia (Lothian), and the other provinces
belonging to him". <span id="fr_527"></span>[2](#fn_527.md) Two other
rulers subject to him are Gunvasius, King of the Orkneys, and Malvasius,
King of Iceland, <span id="fr_528"></span>[3](#fn_528.md) in whom we
recognize Gwyn,

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

under Latinized forms of his Welsh name Gwynwas and his Cornish name
Melwas. But it is characteristic of Geoffrey of Monmouth's loose hold
upon his materials that, not content with having connected several of
these gods with Arthur's period, he further endows them with reigns of
their own. "Urien" was Arthur's vassal, but "Urianus" was himself King
of Britain centuries before Arthur was born. <span
id="fr_529"></span>[1](#fn_529) Lud (that is, Lludd.md) succeeded his
father Beli. <span id="fr_530"></span>[2](#fn_530.md) We hear nothing of
his silver hand, but we learn that he was "famous for the building of
cities, and for rebuilding the walls of Trinovantum <span
id="fr_531"></span>[3](#fn_531.md), which he also surrounded with
innumerable towers . . . and though he had many other cities, yet he
loved this above them all, and resided in it the greater part of the
year; for which reason it was afterwards called Kaerlud, and by the
corruption of the word, Caerlondon; and again by change of languages, in
process of time, London; as also by foreigners who arrived here, and
reduced this country under their subjection, it was called Londres. At
last, when he was dead, his body was buried by the gate which to this
time is called in the British tongue after his name Parthlud, and in the
Saxon, Ludesgata." He was succeeded by his brother, Cassibellawn
(Cassivelaunus), during whose reign Julius Caesar first invaded Britain.

Lludd, however, is not entirely dependent upon Geoffrey of Monmouth for
his reputation as a king

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

of Britain. One of the old Welsh romances, <span
id="fr_532"></span>[1](#fn_532.md) translated by Lady Charlotte Guest in
her Mabinogion, relates the rebuilding of London by Lludd in almost the
same words as Geoffrey. The story which these pseudo-historical details
introduce is, however, an obviously mythological one. It tells us how,
in the days of Lludd, Britain was oppressed by three plagues. The first
was the arrival of a strange race of sorcerers called the
"Coranians", <span id="fr_533"></span>[2](#fn_533.md) who had three
qualities which made them unpopular; they paid their way in "fairy
money", which, though apparently real, returned afterwards--like the
shields, horses, and hounds made by Gwydion son of Dôn, to deceive
Pryderi--into the fungus out of which it had been charmed by magic; they
could hear everything that was said over the whole of Britain, in
however low a tone, provided only that the wind met it; and they could
not be injured by any weapon. The second was "a shriek that came on
every May eve, over every hearth in the Island of Britain, and went
through people's hearts and so scared them that the men lost their hue
and their strength, and the women their children, and the young men and
the maidens their senses, and all the animals and trees and the earth
and the waters were left barren". The third was a disappearance of the
food hoarded in the king's palace, which was so complete that a year's
provisions vanished in a single night, and so mysterious that no one
could ever find out its cause.

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

By the advice of his nobles, Lludd went to France to obtain the help of
its king, his brother Llevelys, who was "a man great of counsel and
wisdom". In order to be able to consult with his brother without being
overheard by the Coranians, Llevelys caused a long tube of brass to be
made, through which they talked to one another. The sorcerer tribe,
however, got to know of it, and, though they could not hear what was
being said inside the speaking-tube, they sent a demon into it, who
whispered insulting messages up and down it, as though from one brother
to the other. But Lludd and Llevelys knew one another too well to be
deceived by this, and they drove the demon out of the tube by flooding
it with wine. Then Llevelys told Lludd to take certain insects, which he
would give him, and pound them in water. When the water was sufficiently
permeated with their essence, he was to call both his own people and the
Coranians together, as though for a conference, and, in the midst of the
meeting, to cast it over all of them alike. The water, though harmless
to his own people, would nevertheless prove a deadly poison to the
Coranians.

As for the shriek, Llevelys explained it to be raised by a dragon. This
monster was the Red Dragon of Britain, and it raised the shriek because
it was being attacked by the White Dragon of the Saxons, which was
trying to overcome and destroy it. The French king told his brother to
measure the length and breadth of Britain, and, when he had found the
exact centre of the island, to cause a pit to be dug there. In this pit
was to be placed

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

a vessel containing the best mead that could be made, with a covering of
satin over it to hide it. Lludd was then to watch from some safe place.
The dragons would appear and fight in the air until they were exhausted,
then they would fall together on to the top of the satin cloth, and so
draw it down with them into the vessel full of mead. Naturally they
would drink the mead, and, equally naturally, they would then sleep. As
soon as Lludd was sure that they were helpless, he was to go to the pit,
wrap the satin cloth round both of them, and bury them together in a
stone coffin in the strongest place in Britain. If this were safely
done, there would be no more heard of the shriek.

And the disappearance of the food was caused by "a mighty man of magic",
who put everyone to sleep by charms before he removed the king's
provisions. Lludd was to watch for him, sitting by the side of a
cauldron full of cold water. As often as he felt the approach of
drowsiness, he was to plunge into the cauldron. Thus he would be able to
keep awake and frustrate the thief.

So Lludd came back to Britain. He pounded the insects in the water, and
then summoned both the men of Britain and the Coranians to a meeting. In
the midst of it, he sprinkled the water over everyone alike. The natives
took no harm from this mythological "beetle powder", but the Coranians
died.

Lludd was then ready to deal with the dragons. His careful measurements
proved that the centre of the island of Britain was at Oxford, and there
he

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

caused the pit to be dug, with the vessel of mead in it, hidden by the
satin covering. Having made everything ready, he watched, and soon saw
the dragons appear. For a long time they fought desperately in the air;
then they fell down together on to the satin cloth, and, drawing it
after them, subsided into the mead. Lludd waited till they were quite
silent, and then pulled them out, folded them carefully in the wrapping,
and took them to the district of Snowdon, where he buried them in the
strong fortress whose remains, near Beddgelert, are still called "Dinas
Emrys". After this the terrible shriek was not heard again until Merlin
had them dug up, five hundred years later, when they recommenced
fighting, and the red dragon drove the white one out of Britain.

Last of all, Lludd prepared a great banquet in his hall, and watched
over it, armed, with the cauldron of water near him. In the middle of
the night, he heard soft, drowsy music, such as nearly put him to sleep;
but he kept awake by repeatedly dipping himself in the cold water. Just
before dawn a huge man, clad in armour, came into the hall, carrying a
basket, which he began to load with the viands on the table. Like the
bag in which Pwyll captured Gwawl, its holding capacity seemed endless.
However, the man filled it at last, and was carrying it out, when Lludd
stopped him. They fought, and Lludd conquered the man of magic, and made
him his vassal. Thus the "Three Plagues of Britain" came to an end.

Lludd, in changing from god to king, seems to

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

have lost most of his old mythological attributes. Even his daughter
Creudylad is taken from him and given to another of the ancient British
deities. Why Lludd, the sky-god, should have been confounded with Llyr,
the sea-god, is not very apparent, but it is certain that "Creudylad" of
the early Welsh legends and poems is the same as Geoffrey's "Cordeilla"
and Shakespeare's "Cordelia". The great dramatist was ultimately
indebted to the Celtic mythology for the groundwork of the legend which
he wove into the tragic story of *King Lear*. "Leir", as Geoffrey calls
him, <span id="fr_534"></span>[1](#fn_534.md) was the son of Bladud, who
built Caer Badus (Bath), and perished, like Icarus, as the result of an
accident with a flying-machine of his own invention. Having no sons, but
three daughters, Gonorilla, Regan, and Cordeilla, he thought in his old
age of dividing his kingdom among them. But, first of all, he decided to
make trial of their affection for him, with the idea of giving the best
portions of his realm to the most worthy. Gonorilla, the eldest, replied
to his question of how much she loved him, "that she called heaven to
witness, she loved him more than her own soul". Regan answered "with an
oath, 'that she could not otherwise express her thoughts, but that she
loved him above all creatures'". But when it came to Cordeilla's turn,
the youngest daughter, disgusted with her sisters’ hypocrisy, spoke
after a quite different fashion. "'My father,' said she, 'is there any
daughter that can love her father more than duty requires? In my
opinion, whoever pretends to it, must disguise her real sentiments

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

under the veil of flattery. I have always loved you as a father, nor do
I yet depart from my purposed duty; and if you insist to have something
more extorted from me, hear now the greatness of my affection, which I
always bear you, and take this for a short answer to all your questions;
look how much you have, so much is your value, and so much do I love
you.'" Her enraged father immediately bestowed his kingdom upon his two
other daughters, marrying them to the two highest of his nobility,
Gonorilla to Maglaunus, Duke of Albania <span
id="fr_535"></span>[1](#fn_535.md), and Regan to Henuinus, Duke of
Cornwall. To Cordeilla he not only refused a share in his realm, but
even a dowry. Aganippus, King of the Franks, married her, however, for
her beauty alone.

Once in possession, Leir's two sons-in-law rebelled against him, and
deprived him of all regal authority. The sole recompense for his lost
power was an agreement by Maglaunus to allow him maintenance, with a
body-guard of sixty soldiers. But, after two years, the Duke of Albania,
at his wife Gonorilla's instigation, reduced them to thirty. Resenting
this, Leir left Maglaunus, and went to Henuinus, the husband of Regan.
The Duke of Cornwall at first received him honourably, but, before a
year was out, compelled him to discharge all his attendants except five.
This sent him back in a rage to his eldest daughter, who, this time,
swore that he should not stay with her, unless he would be satisfied
with one serving-man only. In despair, Leir resolved to throw himself
upon the mercy of Cordeilla, and, full

 

<span id="img_38200"></span>

[![LEAR AND CORDELIA&lt;br&gt; From the Picture by Ford Madox
Brown&lt;br&gt; Annan photo](tn/38200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/38200.jpg.md)  
LEAR AND CORDELIA  
From the Picture by Ford Madox Brown  
Annan photo  

 

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

of contrition for the way he had treated her, and of misgivings as to
how he might be received, took ship for Gaul.

Arriving at Karitia <span id="fr_536"></span>[1](#fn_536.md), he sent a
messenger to his daughter, telling her of his plight and asking for her
help. Cordeilla sent him money, robes, and a retinue of forty men, and,
as soon as he was fully equipped with the state suitable to a king, he
was received in pomp by Aganippus and his ministers, who gave the
government of Gaul into his hands until his own kingdom could be
restored to him. This the king of the Franks did by raising an army and
invading Britain. Maglaunus and Henuinus were routed, and Leir replaced
on the throne, after which he lived three years. Cordeilla, succeeding
to the government of Britain, "buried her father in a certain vault,
which she ordered to be made for him under the River Sore, in Leicester
("Llyr-cestre"), and which had been built originally under the ground to
the honour of the god Janus. And here all the workmen of the city, upon
the anniversary solemnity of that festival, used to begin their yearly
labours."

Exactly what myth is retold in this history of Leir and his three
daughters we are hardly likely ever to discover. But its mythological
nature is clear enough in the light of the description of the
underground temple dedicated to Llyr, at once the god of the subaqueous,
and therefore subterranean, world and a British Dis Pater, connected
with the origin of things, like the Roman god Janus, with whom he was
apparently identified. <span id="fr_537"></span>[2](#fn_537.md)

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

Ten kings or so after this (for any more exact way of measuring the
flight of time is absent from Geoffrey's *History*) we recognize two
other British gods upon the scene. Brennius (that is, Brân) disputes the
kingdom with his brother Belinus. Clearly this is a version of the
ancient myth of the twin brothers, Darkness and Light, which we have
seen expressed in so many ways in Celtic mythology. Brân, the god of
death and the underworld, is opposed to Belinus, god of the sun and
health. In the original, lost myth, probably they alternately conquered
and were conquered--a symbol of the alternation of night and day and of
winter and summer. In Geoffrey's *History* <span
id="fr_538"></span>[1](#fn_538.md), they divided Britain, Belinus taking
"the crown of the island with the dominions of Loegria, Kambria, and
Cornwall, because, according to the Trojan constitution, the right of
inheritance would come to him as the elder", while Brennius, as the
younger, had "Northumberland, which extended from the River Humber to
Caithness". But flatterers persuaded Brennius to ally himself with the
King of the Norwegians, and attack Belinus. A battle was fought, in
which Belinus was conqueror, and Brennius escaped to Gaul, where he
married the daughter of the Duke of the Allobroges, and on that ruler's
death was declared successor to the throne. Thus firmly established with
an army, he invaded Britain again. Belinus marched with the whole
strength of the kingdom to meet him, and the armies were already drawn

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

out opposite to one another in battle array when Conwenna, the mother of
the two kings, succeeded in reconciling them. Not having one another to
fight with, the brothers now agreed upon a joint expedition with their
armies into Gaul. The Britons and the Allobroges conquered all the other
kings of the Franks, and then entered Italy, destroying villages and
cities as they marched to Rome. Gabius and Porsena, the Roman consuls,
bought them off with large presents of gold and silver and the promise
of a yearly tribute, whereupon Brennius and Belinus withdrew their army
into Germany and began to devastate it. But the Romans, now no longer
taken by surprise and unprepared, came to the help of the Germans. This
brought Brennius and Belinus back to Rome, which, after a long siege,
they succeeded in taking. Brennius remained in Italy, "where he
exercised unheard-of tyranny over the people"; and one may take the
whole of this veracious history to be due to a patriotic desire to make
out the Brennus of "Vae Victis" fame--who actually did sack Rome, in
B.C. 390--a Briton. Belinus, the other brother, returned to England. "He
made a gate of wonderful structure in Trinovantum, upon the bank of the
Thames, which the citizens call after his name Billingsgate to this day.
Over it he built a prodigiously large tower, and under it a haven or
quay for ships. . . . At last, when he had finished his days, his body
was burned, and the ashes put up in a golden urn, which they placed at
Trinovantum, with wonderful art, on the top of the tower above
mentioned." He was succeeded by Gurgiunt

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Brabtruc, <span
id="fr_539"></span>[1](#fn_539.md) who, as he was returning by way of the
Orkneys from a raid on the Danes, met the ships of Partholon and his
people as they came from Spain to settle in Ireland. <span
id="fr_540"></span>[2](#fn_540.md)

Llyr and his children, large as they bulk in mythical history, were
hardly less illustrious as saints. The family of Llyr Llediath is always
described by the early Welsh hagiologists as the first of the "Three
chief Holy Families of the Isle of Britain". The glory of Llyr himself,
however, is but a reflected one; for it was his son Brân "the Blesséd"
who actually introduced Christianity into Britain. Legend tells us that
he was taken captive to Rome with his son Caradawc (who was identified
for the purpose with the historical Caratacus), and the rest of his
family, and remained there seven years, during which time he became
converted to the Gospel, and spread it enthusiastically on his return.
Neither his son Caradawc nor his half-brother Manawyddan exactly
followed in his footsteps, but their descend-ants did. Caradawc's sons
were all saintly, while his daughter Eigen, who married a chief called
Sarrlog, lord of Caer Sarrlog (Old Sarum), was the first female saint in
Britain. Manawyddan's side of the family was less adaptable. His son and
his grand-son were both pagans, but his great-grandson obtained
Christian fame as St. Dyfan, who was sent as a bishop to Wales by Pope
Eleutherius, and was martyred at Merthyr Dyvan. After this, the saintly
line of Llyr increases and flourishes.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Singularly
inappropriate persons are found in it--Mabon, the Gallo-British Apollo,
as well as Geraint and others of King Arthur's court. <span
id="fr_541"></span>[1](#fn_541.md)

It is so quaint a conceit that Christianity should have been, like all
other things, the gift of the Celtic Hades, that it seems almost a pity
to cast doubt on it. The witness of the classical historians sums up,
however, dead in its disfavour. Tacitus carefully enumerates the family
of Caratacus, and describes how he and his wife, daughter, and brother
were separately interviewed by the Emperor Claudius, but makes no
mention at all of the chieftain's supposed father Brân. Moreover, Dio
Cassius gives the name of Caratacus's father as
Cunobelinus--Shakespeare's "Cymbeline"--who, he adds, had died before
the Romans first invaded Britain. The evidence is wholly against Brân as
a Christian pioneer. He remains the grim old god of war and death,
"blesséd" only to his pagan votaries, and especially to the bards, who
probably first called him *Bendigeid Vran*, and whose stubborn adherence
must have been the cause of the not less stubborn efforts of their
enemies, the Christian clerics, to bring him over to their own side by
canonization. <span id="fr_542"></span>[2](#fn_542.md)

They had an easier task with Brân's sister, Branwen of the "Fair Bosom".
Goddesses, indeed, seem to have stood the process better than
gods--witness "Saint" Brigit, the "Mary of the Gael". The

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

British Aphrodité became, under the name of Brynwyn, or Dwynwen, a
patron saint of lovers. As late as the fourteenth century, her shrine at
Llandwynwyn, in Anglesey, was the favourite resort of the disappointed
of both sexes, who came to pray to her image for either success or
forgetfulness. To make the result the more certain, the monks of the
church sold Lethean draughts from her sacred well. The legend told of
her is that, having vowed herself to perpetual celibacy, she fell in
love with a young chief called Maelon. One night, as she was praying for
guidance in her difficulty, she had a vision in which she was offered a
goblet of delicious liquor as a draught of oblivion, and she also saw
the same sweet medicine given to Maelon, whom it at once froze into a
block of ice. She was then, for her faith, offered the granting of three
boons. The first she chose was that Maelon might be allowed to resume
his natural form and temperature; the second, that she should no longer
desire to be married; and the third, that her intercessions might be
granted for all true-hearted lovers, so that they should either wed the
objects of their affection or be cured of their passion. <span
id="fr_543"></span>[1](#fn_543.md) From this cause came the virtues of her
shrine and fountain. But the modern generation no longer flocks there,
and the efficacious well is choked with sand. None the less, she whom
the Welsh bards called the "Saint of Love" <span
id="fr_544"></span>[2](#fn_544.md) still has her occasional votaries.
Country girls of the

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

neighbourhood seek her help when all else fails. The water nearest to
the church is thought to be the best substitute for the now dry and
ruined original well. <span id="fr_545"></span>[1](#fn_545.md)

A striking contrast to this easy victory over paganism is the stubborn
resistance to Christian adoption of Gwyn son of Nudd. It is true that he
was once enrolled by some monk in the train of the "Blesséd Brân", <span
id="fr_546"></span>[2](#fn_546.md) but it was done in so half-hearted a way
that, even now, one can discern that the writer felt almost ashamed of
himself. His fame as at least a powerful fairy was too vital to be thus
tampered with. Even Spenser, though, in his *Faerie Queene*, he calls
him "the good Sir Guyon . . . in whom great rule of Temp’raunce goodly
doth appeare", <span id="fr_547"></span>[3](#fn_547.md) does not attempt to
conceal his real nature. It is no man, but

        "an Elfin born, of noble state  
And mickle worship in his native land", <span
id="fr_548"></span>[4](#fn_548.md)

who sets forth the beauties of that virtue for which the original Celtic
paradise, with its unfailing ale and rivers of mead and wine, would
hardly seem to have been the best possible school. Save for Spenser, all
authorities agree in making Gwyn the determined opponent of things
Christian. A curious and picturesque legend <span
id="fr_549"></span>[5](#fn_549.md) is told of him in connection with St.
Collen, who was himself the great-grandson of Brân's son, Caradawc. The
saint, desirous of

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

still further retirement from the world, had made himself a cell beneath
a rock near Glastonbury Tor, in Gwyn's own "island of Avilion". It was
close to a road, and one day he heard two men pass by talking about Gwyn
son of Nudd, and declaring him to be King of Annwn and the fairies. St.
Collen put his head out of the cell, and told them to hold their
tongues, and that Gwyn and his fairies were only demons. The two men
retorted by warning the saint that he would soon have to meet the dark
ruler face to face. They passed on, and not long afterwards St. Collen
heard someone knocking at his door. On asking who was there, he got the
answer: "I am here, the messenger of Gwyn ap Nudd, King of Hades, to bid
thee come by the middle of the day to speak with him on the top of the
hill." The saint did not go; and the messenger came a second time with
the same message. On the third visit, he added a threat that, if St.
Collen did not come now, it would be the worse for him. So, a little
disquieted, he went, but not unarmed. He consecrated some water, and
took it with him.

On other days the top of Glastonbury Tor had always been bare, but on
this occasion the saint found it crowned by a splendid castle. Men and
maidens, beautifully dressed, were going in and out. A page received him
and told him that the king was waiting for him to be his guest at
dinner. St. Collen found Gwyn sitting on a golden chair in front of a
table covered with the rarest dainties and wines. He invited him to
share them, adding that

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

if there was anything he especially liked, it should be brought to him
with all honour. "I do not eat the leaves of trees," replied the saint,
who knew what fairy meats and drinks were made of. Not taken aback by
this discourteous answer, the King of Annwn genially asked the saint if
he did not admire his servants' livery, which was a motley costume, red
on one side and blue on the other. "Their dress is good enough for its
kind," said St. Collen. "What kind is that?" asked Gwyn. "The red shows
which side is being scorched, and the blue shows which side is being
frozen," replied the saint, and, splashing his holy water all round him,
he saw castle, serving-men, and king vanish, leaving him alone on the
bare, windy hill-top.

Gwyn, last of the gods of Annwn, has evidently by this time taken over
the functions of all the others. He has the hounds which Arawn once
had--the *Cwn Annwn*, "dogs of hell", with the white bodies and the red
ears. We hear more of them in folk-lore than we do of their master,
though even their tradition is dying out with the spread of newspapers
and railways. We are not likely to find another Reverend Edmund
Jones <span id="fr_550"></span>[1](#fn_550.md) to insist upon belief in
them, lest, by closing our minds to such manifest witnesses of the
supernatural world, we should become infidels. Still, we may even now
find peasants ready to swear that they have heard them sweeping along
the hill-sides upon stormy nights, as they pursued the flying souls of
unshriven men or

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

unbaptized babes. The tales told of them agree curiously. Their cry is
like that of a pack of fox-hounds, but softer in tone. The nearer they
are to a man, the less loud their voices seem, and the farther off they
are, the louder. But they are less often seen than heard, and it has
been suggested that the sounds were the cries of migrating bean-geese,
which are not unlike those of hounds in chase. The superstition is
widely spread. The *Cwn Annwn* of Wales are called in North Devon the
"Yeth" (Heath or Heathen), or "Yell" Hounds, and on Dartmoor, the "Wish"
Hounds. In Durham and Yorkshire they are called "Gabriel" Hounds, and
they are known by various names in Norfolk, Gloucestershire, and
Cornwall. In Scotland it is Arthur who leads the Wild Hunt, and the
tradition is found over almost the whole of western Europe.

Not many folk-tales have been preserved in which Gwyn is mentioned by
name. His memory has lingered longest and latest in the fairy-haunted
Vale of Neath, so close to his "ridge, the Tawë abode . . . not the
nearest Tawë . . . but that Tawë which is the farthest". But it may be
understood whenever the king of the fairies is mentioned. As the last of
the greater gods of the old mythology, he has been endowed by popular
fancy with the rule of all the varied fairy population of Britain, so
far, at least, as it is of Celtic or pre-Celtic origin. For some of the
fairies most famous in English literature are Teutonic. King Oberon
derives his name, through the French *fabliaux*, from Elberich, the

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

dwarf king of the *Niebelungenlied*, <span
id="fr_551"></span>[1](#fn_551.md) though his queen, Titania, was probably
named out of Ovid's *Metamorphoses*. <span
id="fr_552"></span>[2](#fn_552.md) Puck, another of Shakespeare's fays, is
merely the personification of his race, the "pwccas" of Wales, "pookas"
of Ireland, "poakes" of Worcestershire, and "pixies" of the West of
England. <span id="fr_553"></span>[3](#fn_553.md) It is Wales that at the
present time preserves the most numerous and diverse collection of
fairies. Some of them are beautiful, some hideous; some kindly, some
malevolent. There are the gentle damsels of the lakes and streams called
Gwragedd Annwn, and the fierce and cruel mountain fairies known as the
Gwyllion. There are the household sprites called Bwbachod, like the
Scotch and English "brownies"; the Coblynau, or gnomes of the mines
(called "knockers" in Cornwall); and the Ellyllon, or elves, of whom the
pwccas are a branch. <span id="fr_554"></span>[4](#fn_554.md) In the North
of England the spirits belong more wholly to the lower type. The bogies,
brownies, killmoulis, redcaps, and their like seem little akin to the
higher, Aryan-seeming fairies. The Welsh bwbach, too, is described as
brown and hairy, and the coblynau as black or copper-faced. We shall
hardly do wrong in regarding such spectres as the degraded gods of a
pre-Aryan race, like the Irish leprechauns and pookas, who have nothing
in common with the still beautiful, still noble figures of the Tuatha Dé
Danann.

Of these numberless and nameless subjects of Gwyn, some dwell beneath
the earth or under the

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

surface of lakes--which seem to take, in Wales, the place of the Gaelic
"fairy hills"--and others in Avilion, a mysterious western isle of all
delights lying on or just beneath the sea. Pembrokeshire--the ancient
Dyfed--has kept the tradition most completely. The story goes that there
is a certain square yard in the hundred of Cemmes in that county which
holds the secret of the fairy realm. If a man happens to set his feet on
it by chance, his eyes are opened, and he can see that which is hidden
from other men--the fairy country and commonwealth,--but, the moment he
moves from the enchanted spot, he loses the vision, and he can never
find the same place again. <span id="fr_555"></span>[1](#fn_555.md) That
country is upon the sea, and not far from shore; like the Irish paradise
of which it is the counterpart, it may sometimes be sighted by sailors.
The "Green Meadows of Enchantment" are still an article of faith among
Pembrokeshire and Caermarthenshire sailors, and evidently not without
some reason. In 1896 a correspondent of the *Pembroke County Guardian*
sent in a report made to him by a certain Captain John Evans to the
effect that, one summer morning, while trending up the Channel, and
passing Gresholm Island (the scene of the entertaining of Brân's head),
in what he had always known as deep water, he was surprised to see to
windward of him a large tract of land covered with a beautiful green
meadow. It was not, however, above water, but two or three feet below
it, so that the grass waved or swam about as the ripple floated over it,
in a way that made one

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

who watched it feel drowsy. Captain Evans had often heard of the
tradition of the fairy island from old people, but admitted that he had
never hoped to see it with his own eyes. <span
id="fr_556"></span>[1](#fn_556.md) As with the "Hounds of Annwn" one may
suspect a quite natural explanation. Mirage is at once common enough and
rare enough on our coasts to give rise to such a legend, and it must
have been some such phenomenon as the "Fata Morgana" of Sicily which has
made sober men swear so confidently to ocular evidence of the Celtic
Paradise, whether seen from the farthest western coasts of Gaelic
Ireland or Scotland, or of British Wales.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_521"></span>[371:1](cml28.htm#fr_521.md) See, for example, a
folk-tale, pp. 117-123 in Rhys's *Celtic Folklore*.

<span id="fn_522"></span>[372:1](cml28.htm#fr_522.md) Stephens's
Preliminary Dissertation to his translation of Aneurin's *Gododin*.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[372:2](cml28.htm#fr_523.md) *Iolo MSS.*, p. 471.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[373:1](cml28.htm#fr_524.md) *Iolo MSS*., pp.
597-600.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[374:1](cml28.htm#fr_525.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Books IX, X, and chaps. I and II of XI.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[375:1](cml28.htm#fr_526.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Book XI, chap. II.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[375:2](cml28.htm#fr_527.md) *Ibid*., Book IX,
chap. IX.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[375:3](cml28.htm#fr_528.md) *Ibid*., Book IX,
chap. XII. They appear also as Guanius, King of the Huns, and Melga,
King of the Picts, in Book V, chap. XVI.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[376:1](cml28.htm#fr_529.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Book III, chap. XIX.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[376:2](cml28.htm#fr_530.md) *Ibid*., Book III,
chap. XX.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[376:3](cml28.htm#fr_531.md) *I.e.* London, under
its traditionary earlier name, Troja Nova, given it by Brutus.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[377:1](cml28.htm#fr_532.md) *The Story of Lludd
and Llevelys*.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[377:2](cml28.htm#fr_533.md) The name means
"dwarfs". Rhys: *Hibbert Lectures*, p. 606.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[381:1](cml28.htm#fr_534.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Book II, chap. X-XIV.

<span id="fn_535"></span>[382:1](cml28.htm#fr_535.md) Alba, or North
Britain.

<span id="fn_536"></span>[383:1](cml28.htm#fr_536.md) Now Calais.

<span id="fn_537"></span>[383:2](cml28.htm#fr_537.md) Rhys: *Arthurian
Legend*, pp. 131-132.

<span id="fn_538"></span>[384:1](cml28.htm#fr_538.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Book III, chaps. I-X.

<span id="fn_539"></span>[386:1](cml28.htm#fr_539.md) The same fabulous
personage, perhaps, as the original of Rabelais' Gargantua, a popular
Celtic god.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[386:2](cml28.htm#fr_540.md) *Historia Britonum*,
Book III, Chaps. XI-XII.

<span id="fn_541"></span>[387:1](cml28.htm#fr_541.md) See the *Iolo MSS*.
The genealogies and families of the saints of the island of Britain.
Copied by Iolo Morganwg in 1783 from the *Long Book of Thomas Truman of
Pantlliwydd* in the parish of Llansanor in Glamorgan, p. 515, &c. Also
see *An Essay on the Welsh Saints* by the Rev, Rice Rees, Sections IV
and V.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[387:2](cml28.htm#fr_542.md) Rhys: *Arthurian
Legend*, pp. 261-262.

<span id="fn_543"></span>[388:1](cml28.htm#fr_543.md) *Iolo MSS*, p. 474.

<span id="fn_544"></span>[388:2](cml28.htm#fr_544.md) "The Welsh bards call
Dwynwen the goddess, or saint of love and affection, as the poets
designate Venus." *Iolo MSS*.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[389:1](cml28.htm#fr_545.md) Wirt Sikes: *British
Goblins*, p. 350.

<span id="fn_546"></span>[389:2](cml28.htm#fr_546.md) *Iolo MSS*, p. 523.

<span id="fn_547"></span>[389:3](cml28.htm#fr_547.md) *The Faerie Queene*,
Prologue to Book II.

<span id="fn_548"></span>[389:4](cml28.htm#fr_548.md) *Ibid*., Book II,
canto I, verse 6.

<span id="fn_549"></span>[389:5](cml28.htm#fr_549.md) Published in *Y
Greal* (London, 1805), and is to be found quoted in Rhys: *Arthurian
Legend*, pp. 338, 339; also in Sikes: *British Goblins*, pp. 7-8.

<span id="fn_550"></span>[391:1](cml28.htm#fr_550.md) *A Relation of
Apparitions of Spirits in the County of Monmouth and the Principality of
Wales*. Published at Newport, 1813.

<span id="fn_551"></span>[393:1](cml28.htm#fr_551.md) Thistleton Dyer:
*Folklore of Shakespeare*, p. 3.

<span id="fn_552"></span>[393:2](cml28.htm#fr_552.md) *Ibid*., p. 4.

<span id="fn_553"></span>[393:3](cml28.htm#fr_553.md) *Ibid*., p. 5.

<span id="fn_554"></span>[393:4](cml28.htm#fr_554.md) Wirt Sikes: *British
Goblins*, p. 12.

<span id="fn_555"></span>[394:1](cml28.htm#fr_555.md) *The Brython*, Vol.
I, p. 130.

<span id="fn_556"></span>[395:1](cml28.htm#fr_556.md) Rhys: *Celtic
Folklore*, pp. 171-172.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. Survivals of the Celtic Paganism into Modern
Times](cml29.md)
