[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Legends/Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cml21)  [Next](cml23) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0809531534/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span> <span id="ch-18"></span>

### CHAPTER XVIII

### THE WOOING OF BRANWEN AND THE BEHEADING OF BRÂN <span id="fr_335"></span>[1](#fn_335)

In the second of the "Four Branches", Pryderi, come to man's estate, and
married to a wife called Kicva, appears as a guest or vassal at the
court of a greater god of Hades than himself--Brân, the son of the
sea-god Llyr. The children of Llyr--Brân, with his sister Branwen of the
"Fair Bosom" and his half-brother Manawyddan, as well as two sons of
Manawyddan's mother, Penardun, by an earlier marriage, were holding
court at *Twr Branwen*, "Branwen's Tower", now called Harlech. As they
sat on a cliff, looking over the sea, they saw thirteen ships coming
from Ireland. The fleet sailed close under the land, and Brân sent
messengers to ask who they were, and why they had come. It was replied
that they were the vessels of Matholwch, King of Ireland, and that he
had come to ask Brân for his sister Branwen in marriage. Brân consented,
and they fixed upon Aberffraw, in Anglesey, as the place at which to
hold the wedding feast. Matholwch and his fleet went there by sea, and
Brân and his host by land. When they arrived, and met, they set up
pavilions; for "no house could ever hold the

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

blessed Brân". And there Branwen became the King of Ireland's
bride. <span id="fr_336"></span>[1](#fn_336)

These relations were not long, however, allowed to be friendly. Of the
two other sons of Llyr's wife, Penardun, the mother of Manawyddan, one
was called Nissyen, and the other, Evnissyen. Nissyen was a lover of
peace, and would always "cause his family to be friends when their wrath
was at the highest", but Evnissyen "would cause strife between his two
brothers when they were most at peace". Now Evnissyen was enraged
because his consent had not been asked to Branwen's marriage. Out of
spite at this, he cut off the lips, ears, eyebrows, and tails of all
Matholwch's horses.

When the King of Ireland found this out, he was very indignant at the
insult. But Brân sent an embassy to him twice, explaining that it had
not been done by his consent or with his knowledge. He appeased
Matholwch by giving him a sound horse in place of every one that
Evnissyen had mutilated, as well as a staff of silver as large and tall
as Matholwch himself, and a plate of gold as broad as Matholwch's face.
To these gifts he also added a magic cauldron brought from Ireland. Its
property was that any slain man who was put into it was brought to life
again, except that he lost the use of speech. The King of Ireland
accepted this recompense for the insult done him, renewed his friendship
with the children of Llyr, and sailed away with Branwen to Ireland.

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

Before a year was over, Branwen bore a son. They called him Gwern, and
put him out to be foster-nursed among the best men of Ireland. But,
during the second year, news came to Ireland of the insult that
Matholwch had received in Britain. The King of Ireland's foster-brothers
and near relations insisted that he should revenge himself upon Branwen.
So the queen was compelled to serve in the kitchen, and, every day, the
butcher gave her a box upon the ear. That this should not become known
to Brân, all traffic was forbidden between Ireland and Britain. This
went on for three years.

But, in the meantime, Branwen had reared a tame starling, and she taught
it to speak, and tied a letter of complaint to the root of its wing, and
sent it off to Britain. At last it found Brân, whom its mistress had
described to it, and settled upon his shoulder, ruffling its wings. This
exposed the letter, and Brân read it. He sent messengers to one hundred
and forty-four countries, to raise an army to go to Ireland. Leaving his
son Caradawc, with seven others, in charge of Britain, he
started--himself wading through the sea, while his men went by ship.

No one in Ireland knew that they were coming until the royal swineherds,
tending their pigs near the sea-shore, beheld a marvel. They saw a
forest on the surface of the sea--a place where certainly no forest had
been before--and, near it, a mountain with a lofty ridge on its top, and
a lake on each side of the ridge. Both the forest and the mountain were
swiftly moving towards Ireland. They informed

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Matholwch, who
could not understand it, and sent messengers to ask Branwen what she
thought it might be. "It is the men of the Island of the Mighty <span
id="fr_337"></span>[1](#fn_337)," said she, "who are coming here because
they have heard of my ill-treatment. The forest that is seen on the sea
is made of the masts of ships. The mountain is my brother Brân, wading
into shoal water; the lofty ridge is his nose, and the two lakes, one on
each side of it, are his eyes."

The men of Ireland were terrified. They fled beyond the Shannon, and
broke down the bridge over it. But Brân lay down across the river, and
his army walked over him to the opposite side.

Matholwch now sent messengers suing for peace. He offered to resign the
throne of Ireland to Gwern, Branwen's son and Brân's nephew. "Shall I
not have the kingdom myself?" said Brân, and would not hear of anything
else. So the counsellors of Matholwch advised him to conciliate Brân by
building him a house so large that it would be the first house that had
ever held him, and, in it, to hand over the kingdom to his will. Brân
consented to accept this, and the vast house was built.

It concealed treachery. Upon each side of the hundred pillars of the
house was hung a bag, and in the bag was an armed man, who was to cut
himself out at a given signal. But Evnissyen came into the house, and
seeing the bags there, suspected the plot. "What is in this bag?" he
said to one of the Irish, as he came up to the first one. "Meal,"

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

replied the Irishman. Then Evnissyen kneaded the bag in his hands, as
though it really contained meal, until he had killed the man inside; and
he treated all of them in turn in the same way.

A little later, the two hosts met in the house. The men of Ireland came
in on one side, and the men of Britain on the other, and met at the
hearth in the middle, and sat down. The Irish court did homage to Brân,
and they crowned Gwern, Branwen's son, King of Ireland in place of
Matholwch. When the ceremonies were over, the boy went from one to
another of his uncles, to make acquaintance with them. Brân fondled and
caressed him, and so did Manawyddan, and Nissyen. But when he came to
Evnissyen, the wicked son of Penardun seized the child by the feet, and
dropped him head first into the great fire.

When Branwen saw her son killed, she tried to leap into the flames after
him, but Brân held her back. Then every man armed himself, and such a
tumult was never heard in one house before. Day after day they fought;
but the Irish had the advantage, for they had only to plunge their dead
men into the magic cauldron to bring them back to life. When Evnissyen
knew this, he saw a way of atoning for the misfortunes his evil nature
had brought upon Britain. He disguised himself as an Irishman, and lay
upon the floor as if dead, until they put him into the cauldron. Then he
stretched himself, and, with one desperate effort, burst both the
cauldron and his own heart.

Thus things were made equal again, and in the

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

next battle the men of Britain killed all the Irish. But of themselves
there were only seven left unhurt--Pryderi; Manawyddan; Gluneu, the son
of Taran <span id="fr_338"></span>[1](#fn_338); Taliesin the Bard;
Ynawc; Grudyen, the son of Muryel; and Heilyn, the son of Gwynn the
Ancient.

Brân himself was wounded in the foot with a poisoned dart, and was in
agony. So he ordered his seven surviving followers to cut off his head,
and to take it to the White Mount in London <span
id="fr_339"></span>[2](#fn_339), and bury it there, with the face
towards France. He prophesied how they would perform the journey. At
Harlech they would be feasting seven years, the birds of Rhiannon
singing to them all the time, and Brân's own head conversing with them
as agreeably as when it was on his body. Then they would be fourscore
years at Gwales <span id="fr_340"></span>[3](#fn_340). All this while,
Brân's head would remain uncorrupted, and would talk so pleasantly that
they would forget the flight of time. But, at the destined hour, someone
would open a door which looked towards Cornwall, and, after that, they
could stay no longer, but must hurry to London to bury the head.

So the seven beheaded Brân, and set off, taking Branwen also with them.
They landed at the mouth of the River Alaw, in Anglesey. Branwen first
looked back towards Ireland, and then forward towards Britain. "Alas."
she cried, "that I was

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

ever born! two islands have been destroyed because of me." Her heart
broke with sorrow, and she died. An old Welsh poem says, with a touch of
real pathos:

"Softened were the voices in the brakes  
Of the wondering birds  
On seeing the fair body.  
Will there not be relating again  
Of that which befel the paragon  
At the stream of Amlwch?" <span id="fr_341"></span>[1](#fn_341)

"They made her a four-sided grave," says the Mabinogi, "and buried her
upon the banks of the Alaw." The traditionary spot has always borne the
name of *Ynys Branwen*, and, curiously enough, an urn was found there,
in 1813, full of ashes and half-burnt bones, which certain enthusiastic
local antiquaries saw "every reason to suppose" were those of the fair
British Aphrodité herself. <span id="fr_342"></span>[2](#fn_342)

The seven went on towards Harlech, and, as they journeyed, they met men
and women who gave them the latest news. Caswallawn, a son of Beli, the
husband of Dôn, had destroyed the ministers left behind by Brân to take
care of Britain. He had made himself invisible by the help of a magic
veil, and thus had killed all of them except Pendaran Dyfed,
foster-father of Pryderi, who had escaped into the woods, and Caradawc
son of Brân, whose heart had broken from grief. Thus he had made himself
king of the whole island in place of

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Manawyddan, its
rightful heir now that Brân was dead.

However, the destiny was upon the seven that they should go on with
their leader's head. They went to Harlech and feasted for seven years,
the three birds of Rhiannon singing them songs compared with which all
other songs seemed unmelodious. Then they spent fourscore years in the
Isle of Gwales, eating and drinking, and listening to the pleasant
conversation of Brân's head. The "Entertaining of the Noble Head" this
eighty years' feast was called. Brân's head, indeed, is almost more
notable in British mythology than Brân before he was decapitated.
Taliesin and the other bards invoke it repeatedly as *Urddawl Ben* (the
"Venerable Head") and *Uther Ben* (the "Wonderful Head").

But all pleasure came to an end when Heilyn, the son of Gwynn, opened
the forbidden door, like Bluebeard's wife, "to know if that was true
which was said concerning it". As soon as they looked towards Cornwall,
the glamour that had kept them merry for eighty-seven years failed, and
left them as grieved about the death of their lord as though it had
happened that very day. They could not rest for sorrow, but went at once
to London, and laid the now dumb and corrupting head in its grave on
Tower Hill, with its face turned towards France, to watch that no foe
came from foreign lands to Britain. There it reposed until, ages
afterwards, Arthur, in his pride of heart, dug it up, "as he thought it
beneath his dignity to hold the island

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

otherwise than by valour". Disaster, in the shape of

                  "the godless hosts  
Of heathen swarming o’er the Northern sea", <span
id="fr_343"></span>[1](#fn_343)

came of this disinterment; and therefore it is called, in a triad, one
of the "Three Wicked Uncoverings of Britain".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_335"></span>[289:1](cml22.htm#fr_335) Retold from Lady
Guest's translation of the Mabinogi of *Branwen, the Daughter of Llyr*.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[290:1](cml22.htm#fr_336) Rhys--*Lectures on
Welsh Philology*--compares Matholwch with Mâth, and the story,
generally, with the Greek myth of Persephoné.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[292:1](cml22.htm#fr_337) A bardic name for
Britain.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[294:1](cml22.htm#fr_338) This personage may
have been the same as the Gaulish god Taranis. Mention, too, is made in
an ancient Irish glossary of "Etirun, an idol of the Britons".

<span id="fn_339"></span>[294:2](cml22.htm#fr_339) This spot, called by
a twelfth-century Welsh poet "The White Eminence of London, a place of
splendid fame", was probably the hill on which the Tower of London now
stands.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[294:3](cml22.htm#fr_340) The island of
Gresholm, off the coast of Pembrokeshire.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[295:1](cml22.htm#fr_341) The *Gododin* of
Aneurin, as translated by T. Stephens. Branwen is there called "the lady
Bradwen".

<span id="fn_342"></span>[295:2](cml22.htm#fr_342) See note to *Branwen,
the Daughter of Llyr* in Lady Guest's *Mabinogion*.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[297:1](cml22.htm#fr_343) Tennyson: *Idylls of
the King*--"Guinevere".

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIX. The War of Enchantments](cml23)
