<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa040)  [Next](psa042.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 41:0</span></span>

Title - To the Chief Musician. A Psalm of David. This title has
frequently occurred before and serves to remind us of the value of the
Psalm, seeing that it was committed to no mean songster; and also to
inform us as to the author who has made his own experience the basis of
a prophetic song, in which a far greater than David is set forth. How
wide a range of experience David had! What power it gave him to edify
future ages! And how full a type of our Lord did he become! What was
bitterness to him has proved to be a fountain of unfailing sweetness to
many generations of the faithful.

Jesus Christ betrayed of Judas Iscariot is evidently the great theme of
this Psalm, but we think not exclusively. He is the antitype of David,
and all his people are in their measure like him; hence words suitable
to the Great Representative are most applicable to those who are in him.
Such as receive a vile return for long kindness to others, may read this
song with much comfort, for they will see that it is alas! too common
for the best of men to be rewarded for their holy charity with cruelty
and scorn; and when they have been humbled by falling into sin,
advantage has been taken of their low estate, their good deeds have been
forgotten, and the vilest spite has been vented upon them.

Division - The Psalmist in [Psa
41:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md), describes the mercies which
are promised to such as consider the poor, and this he uses as a preface
to his own personal plea for succour: from [Psa
41:4-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md) he states his own case,
proceeds to prayer in [Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md), and
closes with thanksgiving, [Psa
41:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md).

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001) (first clause.md) - The
incidental blessings resulting from considering the pious poor.

1\. We learn gratitude.

2\. We see patience.

3\. We often remark the triumphs of great grace.

4\. We obtain light on Christian experience.

5\. We have their prayers.

6\. We feel the pleasure of beneficence.

7\. We enter into communion with the lowly Saviour.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md) - The support of the
small-pox hospitals recommended - Bishop Squire, 1760. Scores of sermons
of this kind have been preached from this text.

[Psa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md) - "Blessed upon the earth."
What blessings of an earthly character godly character secures, and in
general what it is to be blessed with regard to this life.

[Psa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002) (second clause.md) - What it is
to be delivered in trouble. From impatience, from despair, from sinful
expedients, from violent attacks, from losing fellowship with God.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md) - Strength in weakness.
Inward strength, divinely given, continuously sustained, enduring to the
end, triumphant in death, glorifying to God, proving the reality of
grace, winning others to the faith.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003) (last clause.md) - The heavenly
bed-making.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004) (first clause.md) - A saying
worth repeating: "I said." It expresses penitence humility, earnestness,
faith importunity, fear of God, etc.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md) - "Heal my soul."

I. The hereditary disease, breaking out in many disorders - open sin,
unbelief, decline of grace, etc.

II\. Spiritual health struggling with it; shown in spiritual pain,
desire, prayer, effort.

III\. The well-proved Physician. Has healed, and will, by his word, his
blood, his Spirit, etc.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md) - "I have sinned against
thee." This confession is personal, plain, without pretence of excuse,
comprehensive and intelligent, for it reveals the very heart of sin -
"against thee."

[Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md) - What we may expect. What
our enemies desire. What we may, therefore prize, i.e., the power of
Christian life and name. What we should do - tell the Lord all in
prayer. What good will then come of the evil.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006) (first clause.md) - The folly
and sin of frivolous visits.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006) (second and third clauses.md) -
Like to like, or the way in which character draws its like to itself.
The same subject might be treated under the title of The Chiffonnier, or
the rag-collector. What he gathers; where he puts it - in his "heart;"
what he does with it; what he gets for it; and what will become of him.

[Psa 41:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007.md) - On a sick bed a man
discovers not only his enemies and his friends, but himself and his God,
more intimately.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md) - The treachery of Judas.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md) - Deliverance from
temptation a token of divine favour.

[Psa 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#012.md) - This text reveals the
insignia of those whom grace has distinguished.

1\. Their integrity is manifest.

2\. Their character is divinely sustained.

3\. They dwell in the favour of God.

4\. Their position is stable and continuous.

5\. Their eternal future is secure.

[Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md) -

I. The object of praise - Jehovah, the covenant God.

II\. The nature of the praise - without beginning or end.

III\. Our participation in the praise - "Amen and Amen."

The ancient rabbins saw in the Five Books of the Psalter the image of
the Five Books of the Law. This way of looking on the Psalms as a second
Pentateuch, the echo of the first, passed over into the Christian
church, and found favour with some early fathers. It has commended
itself to the acceptance of good recent expositors, like Dr. Delitzsch,
who calls the Psalter "the Congregation's five-fold word to the Lord,
even as the Thora (the Law) is the Lord's five-fold word to the
Congregation." This may be mere fancy, but its existence from ancient
times shows that the five-fold division attracted early notice. -
William Binnie, D.D.

God presented Israel with the Law, a Pentateuch, and grateful Israel
responded with a Psalter, a Pentateuch of praise, in acknowledgment of
the divine gift. - J. L. K.

Here Endeth the First Book of the Psalms.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The Syriac says, "It was a Psalm of David, when he appointed overseers
to take care of the poor." - Adam Clarke.

Whole Psalm

A prophecy of Christ and the traitor Judas. - Eusebius of Caesarea,
quoted by J. M. Neale.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." Interpreters are generally of
opinion that the exercise of kindness and compassion, manifested in
taking care of the miserable, and helping them, is here commended.
Those, however, who maintain that the Psalmist here commends the
considerate candour of those who judge wisely and charitably of men in
adversity, form a better judgment of his meaning. Indeed, the
participle, משׂכּיל, maskil, cannot be explained in any other way. At
the same time it ought to be observed on what account it is that David
declares those to be blessed who form a wise and prudent judgment
concerning the afflictions by which God chastises his servants....
Doubtless it happened to him as it did to the holy patriarch Job, whom
his friends reckoned to be one of the most wicked of men, when they saw
God treating him with great severity. And certainly it is an error which
is by far too common among men, to look upon those who are oppressed
with afflictions as condemned and reprobate.... For the most part,
indeed, we often speak rashly and indiscriminately concerning others,
and, so to speak, plunge even into the lowest abyss those who labour
under affliction. To restrain such a rash and unbridled spirit, David
says, that they are blessed who do not suffer themselves, by speaking at
random, to judge harshly of their neighbours; but discerning aright the
afflictions by which they are visited, mitigate by the wisdom of the
spirit, the severe and unjust judgments to which we naturally are so
prone. - John Calvin.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." As Christ considered us in
our state of poverty, so ought we most attentively to consider him in
his; to consider what he suffered in his own person; to discern him
suffering in his poor afflicted members; and to extend to them the mercy
which he extended to us. He, who was "blessed" of Jehovah, and
"delivered in the evil day" by a glorious resurrection, will "bless" and
"deliver" in like manner, such as for his sake, love and relieve their
brethren. - George Horne.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." Not the poor of the world in
common, nor poor saints in particular but some single poor man; for the
word is in the Singular number, and designs our Lord Jesus Christ, who,
in the last verse of the preceding Psalm, is said to be poor and needy.
- John Gill.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." I call your attention to the
way in which the Bible enjoins us to take up the care of the poor. It
does not say in the text before us, Commiserate the poor; for, if it
said no more than this, it would leave their necessities to be provided
for by the random ebullitions of an impetuous and unreflecting sympathy.
It provides them with a better security than the mere feeling of
compassion - a feeling which, however useful to the purpose of
excitement, must be controlled and regulated. Feeling is but a faint and
fluctuating security. Fancy may mislead it. The sober realities of life
may disgust it. Disappointment may extinguish it. Ingratitude may
embitter it. Deceit, with its counterfeit representations, may allure it
to the wrong object. At all events, Time is the little circle in which
it in general expatiates. It needs the impression of sensible objects to
sustain it; nor can it enter with zeal or with vivacity into the wants
of the abstract and invisible soul. The Bible, then, instead of leaving
the relief of the poor to the mere instinct of sympathy, makes it a
subject for consideration - "Blessed is he that considereth the poor," a
grave and prosaic exercise, I do allow, and which makes no figure in
those high-wrought descriptions, where the exquisite tale of benevolence
is made up of all the sensibilities of tenderness on the one hand, and
of all the ecstasies of gratitude on the other. The Bible rescues the
cause from the mischief to which a heedless or unthinking sensibility
would expose it. It brings it under the cognisance of a higher faculty -
a faculty of steadier operation than to be weary in well-doing, and of
sturdier endurance than to give it up in disgust. It calls you to
consider the poor. It makes the virtue of relieving them a matter of
computation, as well as of sentiment, and in so doing puts you beyond
the reach of the various delusions, by which you are at one time led to
prefer the indulgence of pity to the substantial interest of its object;
at another, are led to retire chagrined and disappointed from the scene
of duty, because you have not met with the gratitude or the honesty that
you laid your account with; at another, are led to expend all your
anxieties upon the accommodation of time, and to overlook eternity. It
is the office of consideration to save you from all these fallacies.
Under its tutorage attention to the wants of the poor ripens into
principle.....

It must be obvious to all of you, that it is not enough that you give
money, and add your name to the contributions of charity. You must give
it with judgment. You must give your time and your attention. You must
descend to the trouble of examination. You must rise from the repose of
contemplation, and make yourself acquainted with the object of your
benevolent exercises.... To give money is not to do all the work and
labour of benevolence. You must go to the poor man's sick-bed. You must
lend your hand to the work of assistance. This is true and
unsophisticated goodness. It may be recorded in no earthly documents;
but, if done under the influence of Christian principle, in a word, if
done unto Jesus, it is written in the book of heaven, and will give a
new lustre to that crown to which his disciples look forward in time and
will wear through eternity. - From a Sermon preached before the Society
for Relief of the Destitute Sick, in St. Andrew's. Church, Edinburgh, by
Thomas Chalmers, D.D and LL.D. (1780-1847).

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." A Piedmontese nobleman into
whose company I fell, at Turin, told me the following story: "I was
weary of life, and after a day such as few have known, and none would
wish to remember, was hurrying along the street to the river, when I
felt a sudden check, I turned and beheld a little boy, who had caught
the skirt of my cloak in his anxiety to solicit my notice. His look and
manner were irresistible. No less so was the lesson he had learnt -
'There are six of us, and we are dying for want of food.' 'Why should I
not,' said I to myself, 'relieve this wretched family? I have the means,
and it will not delay me many minutes. But what if it does?' The scene
of misery he conducted me to I cannot describe. I threw them my purse,
and their burst of gratitude overcame me. It filled my eyes, it went as
a cordial to my heart. 'I will call again tomorrow,' I cried. 'Fool that
I was to think of leaving a world where such pleasure was to be had, and
so cheaply!'" - Samuel Rogers (1763-1855) in "Italy."

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"He that considereth the poor:" -

An ardent spirit dwells with Christian love,

The eagle's rigour in the pitying dove.

'Tis not enough that we with sorrow sigh.

That we the wants of pleading man supply,

That we in sympathy with sufferers feel,

Nor hear a grief without a wish to heal:

Not these suffice - to sickness, pain, and woe,

The Christian spirit loves with aid to go:

Will not be sought, waits not for want to plead,

But seeks the duty - nay, prevents the need;

Her utmost aid to every ill applies,

And plants relief for coming miseries.

George Crabbe, 1754-1832.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

How foolish are they that fear to lose their wealth by giving it, and
fear not to lose themselves by keeping it! He that lays up his gold may
be a good jailer, but he that lays it out is a good steward. Merchants
traffic thither with a commodity where 'tis precious in regard of
scarcity. We do not buy wines in England to carry them to France, spices
in France to carry them to the Indies; so for labour and work,
repentance and mortification, there is none of them in heaven, there is
peace and glory; and the favour of God indeed. A merchant without his
commodity hath but a sorry welcome. God will ask men that arrive at
heaven's gates, ubi opera? [Rev 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#012.md).
His reward shall be according to our works. Thou hast riches here, and
here be objects that need thy riches - the poor; in heaven there are
riches enough but no poor, therefore, by faith in Christ make over to
them thy moneys in this world, that by bill of exchange thou mayest
receive it in the world to come; that only you carry with you which you
send before you. Do good while it is in your power; relieve the
oppressed, succour the fatherless, while your estates are your own; when
you are dead your riches belong to others. One light carried before a
man is more serviceable than twenty carried after him. In your
compassion to the distressed, or for pious uses, let your hands be your
executors, and your eyes your overseers. - Francis Raworth, Teacher to
the Church at Shoreditch, in a Funeral Sermon, 1656.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md), [Psa
41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

It is a blessed thing to receive when a man hath need; but 'tis a more
blessed thing to give than to receive. "Blessed (saith the prophet
David) is he that considereth the poor." What? to say, alas, poor man!
the world is hard with him, I would there were a course taken to do him
good? No, no; but so to consider him as to give; to give till the poor
man be satisfied, to draw out one's sheaf, ay, one's very soul to the
hungry. But what if troubles should come? were it not better to keep
money by one? Money will not deliver one. It may be an occasion to
endanger one, to bring one into, rather than help one out of trouble;
but if a man be a merciful man, God will deliver him, either by himself,
or by some other man or matter. Ay, but what if sickness come? Why, "the
Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing;" and, which is a
great ease and kindness; God, as it were, himself "will make all his bed
in his sickness." Here poor people have the advantage: such must not
say, Alas, I am a poor woman, what works of mercy can I do? for they are
they, who can best make the beds of sick folk, which we see is a great
act of mercy in that it is said, that the Lord himself will make their
bed in their sickness. And there are none so poor, but they may make the
beds of the sick. - Richard Capel.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md), [Psa
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md)

"He that considereth." "Mine enemies." Strigelius has observed, there is
a perpetual antithesis in this Psalm between the few who have a due
regard to the poor in spirit, and the many who afflict or desert them. -
W. Wilson, D.D.

[Psa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md)

"The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive." It is worthy of
remark, that benevolent persons, who "consider the poor," and especially
the sick poor; who search cellars, garrets, back lanes, and such abodes
of misery, to find them out (even in the places where contagion keeps
its seat), very seldom fall a prey to their own benevolence. The Lord,
in an especial manner, keeps them alive, and preserves them; while many,
who endeavour to keep far from the contagion, are assailed by it, and
fall victims to it. God loves the merciful man. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md)

"He shall be blessed upon the earth." None of the godly man's
afflictions shall hinder or take away his begun blessedness, even in
this world. - David Dickson.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

"Thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness." Into what minuteness of
exquisite and touching tenderness does the Lord condescend to enter! One
feels almost as we may suppose Peter felt when the Saviour came to him,
and would have washed his feet, "Lord! thou shalt never wash my feet;"
thou shalt never make my bed. And yet, "If I wash thee not, thou hast no
part with me;" if the Lord make not our bed in our sickness, there is no
peace nor comfort there. We have had David calling on God to bow down
his ear, like a loving mother listening to catch the feeblest whisper of
her child; and the image is full of the sweetest sympathy and
condescension; but here the Lord, the great God of heaven, he that said
when on earth, "I am among you as one that serveth," does indeed take
upon him the form, and is found in fashion as a servant, fulfilling all
the loving and tender offices of an assiduous nurse. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

"Thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness." The meaning rather is, "it
is no longer a sick bed, for thou hast healed him of his disease." - J.
J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

When a good man is ill at ease, God promiseth to make all his bed in his
sickness. Pillow, bolster, head, feet, sides, all his bed. Surely that
God who made him knows so well his measure and temper as to make his bed
to please him. Herein his art is excellent, not fitting the bed to the
person, but the person to the bed; infusing patience into him. But, oh!
how shall God make my bed, who have no bed of mine own to make. Thou
fool, he can make thy not having a bed to be a bed unto thee. When Jacob
slept on the ground, who would not have had his hard lodging,
therewithal to have his heavenly dream? - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

Sure that bed must need be soft which God will make. - T. Watson.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

We must not forget that Oriental beds needed not to be made in the same
sense as our own. They were never more than mattresses or quilts thickly
padded, and were turned when they became uncomfortable, and that is just
the word here used. - C. H. S.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

When I visited one day, as he was dying, my beloved friend Benjamin
Parsons, I said, "How are you today, Sir?" He said, "My head is resting
very sweetly on three pillows - infinite power, infinite love, and
infinite wisdom." Preaching in the Canterbury Hall, in Brighton, I
mentioned this some time since; and many months after I was requested to
call upon a poor but holy young woman, apparently dying. She said, "I
felt I must see you before I died. I heard you tell the story of
Benjamin Parsons and his three pillows; and when I went through a
surgical operation, and it was very cruel, I was leaning my head on
pillows, and as they were taking them away I said, ' Mayn't I keep
them?' The surgeon said, ' No, my dear, we must take them away.' 'But,'
said I, 'you can't take away Benjamin Parsons' three pillows. I can lay
my head on infinite power, infinite love, and infinite wisdom.'" -
Paxton Hood, in "Dark Sayings on a Harp," 1865.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md), [Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)

What saith David from the very bottom of his heart, in his sickness?
Not, take away this death only. No; but David being sick, first comforts
himself with this promise, "The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of
languishing: thou wilt make all his bed in his sickness;" and then add,
"I said, Lord, be merciful unto me, and heal my soul;" that is, destroy
my lusts, which are the diseases of my soul, Lord; and heal my soul, and
renew life and communion with thee, which is the health and strength of
my soul. Do not take this sickness and death only away; but this sin
away, that hath dishonoured thee, hath separated between me and thee:
"Heal my soul, for I have sinned against thee." - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)

"I said, Lord, be merciful." Mercy, not justice! The extreme of mercy
for the extreme of misery. Righteousness as filthy rags; a flesh in
which dwelleth no good thing, on the one side; on the other, it is
"neither herb nor mollifying plaster that restored" to health; "but thy
word, O Lord, which healeth all things." Wisd. 16:12. - Thomas Aquinas,
quoted by J. M. Neale.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)

God is the strength of a Christian's heart, by healing and restoring him
when the infused habits of grace fail, and sin grows strong and
vigorous. A Christian never fails in the exercise of grace, but sin
gives him a wound; and therefore David prayed, "Lord, heal my soul, for
1 have sinned. And what David prayed for, God promiseth to his people:
"I will heal their backsliding." [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004.md). The weakness and decay of grace,
brings a Christian presently to the falling sickness; and so it did
David and Ephraim; ay, but God will be a physician to the soul in this
case, and will heal their diseases; and so he did David's falling
sickness, for which he returned the tribute of praise. [Psa
103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003.md). - Samuel Blackerby.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004) (last clause.md)

Saul and Judas each said, "I have sinned;" but David says, "I have
sinned against thee." - William S. Plainer.

[Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md)

"Mine enemies speak evil of me." To speak is here used in the sense of
to imprecate. - John Calvin.

[Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md)

"His name." It is the name, the character, and privileges of a true
servant of God, that calls out the hatred of ungodly men, and they would
gladly extirpate him from their sight. - W. Wilson, D.D.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006.md)

"If he come to see me, he speaketh vanity:" many fair words, but none of
them true. - David Dickson.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006.md)

I remember a pretty apologue that Bromiard tells: - A fowler, in a sharp
frosty morning, having taken many little birds,for which he had long
watched, began to take up his nets, and nipping the birds on the head
laid them down. A young thrush, espying the tears trickling down his
cheeks by reason of the extreme cold, said to her mother, that certainly
the man was very merciful and compassionate, who wept so bitterly over
the calamity of the poor birds. But her mother told her more wisely,
that she might better judge of the man's disposition by his hand than by
his eye; and if the hands do strike treacherously, he can never be
admitted to friendship, who speaks fairly and weeps pitifully. - Jeremy
Taylor.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006.md)

"His heart gathereth iniquity to itself." 1. By adding sin to sin, in
that he covers over his malice with such horrid hypocrisy. 2. By
inventing or contriving all the several ways he can to ensnare me, or do
me some mischief, thereby seeking to satisfy and please his corrupt
lusts and affections; 3. (which I like best), by observing all he can in
me, and drawing what he can from me, and so laying all up together in
his mind, as the ground of his unjust surmises and censures concerning
me. - Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008.md)

"An evil disease, say they, cleaveth last unto him." An evil deed of
Belial cleaveth fast to him. Grammarians maintain that the word Belial
is compounded of בּלי, beli, and יעל, yaal, which signify "not to rise;"
the expression, "thing of Belial" (for so it is literally in the
Hebrew), I understand in this place as meaning an extraordinary and
hateful crime which as we commonly say can never be expiated, and from
which there is no possibility of escape; unless perhaps some would
rather refer it to the affliction itself under which he laboured, as if
his enemies had said that he was seized by some incurable malady. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008.md)

"An evil disease," etc. What is here meant by דּבד-בּליּעל is matter of
some difficulty. The ancient interpreters generally render it a
perverse, or mischievous, or wicked word; the Chaldee, a perverse word;
the Syriac, a word of iniquity; the lxx λόγον παράνομον; the Latin,
iniquum verbum, a wicked word; the Arabic, words contrary to the law.
And so in all probability it is set to signify a great slander, or
calumny - that as "men of Belial" are slanderous persons, so the speech
of Belial shall signify a slanderous speech. And this is said to
"cleave" to him on whom it is fastened, it being the nature of
calumnies, when strongly affixed on any, to cleave fast, and leave some
evil mark behind them. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Yea, mine own familiar friend," etc. The sufferings of the church, like
those of her Redeemer, generally begin at home: her open enemies can do
her no harm, until her pretended friends have delivered her into their
hands; and, unnatural as it may seem, they who have waxed fat upon her
bounty, are sometimes the first to "lift the heel" against her. - George
Horne.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Mine own familiar friend." He who, on visiting me, continually saluted
me with the kiss of love and veneration, and the usual address; peace be
to thee. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Which did eat of my bread." If the same sentiment prevailed among the
Hebrews, which prevails at the present day among the Bedouin Arabs, of
sacred regard to the person and property of one with whom they have
eaten bread and salt, the language is very forcible. "Hath lifted up his
heel:" a metaphor drawn from the horse, which attacks with its heel.
This language may well have been used by our Saviour in [Joh
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#018.md), in the way of rhetorical
illustration or emphasis. - George R. Noyes, D.D.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Hath lifted up his heel against me." In this phrase he seems to allude
to a beast's kicking at his master by whom he is fed, or the custom of
men's spurning at or trampling upon those that are cast down on the
ground, in a way of despite and contempt. - Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Hath lifted up his heel against me;" i.e., hath spurned me, hath kicked
at me, as a vicious beast of burden does; hath insulted me in my misery.
- Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md)

"That I may requite them." Either (1), kindness for injuries (as in [Psa
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#013).md): it is the mark of a good and
brave man to do good to all in his power, to hurt no one, even though
provoked by wrong: or, (2), punishment for wrong-doing - that I may
punish them; for am I not their magistrate, and the executioner of God's
justice! - Martin Geier.

[Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md)

"That I may requite them." David was not as one of the common people,
but a king appointed by God and invested with authority, and it is not
from an impulse of the flesh, but in virtue of the nature of his office,
that he is led to denounce against his enemies the punishment which they
had merited. - John Calvin.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

"By this I know that thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not
triumph over me:" not because I have no enemies, or because I have no
trouble which would overcome me. Therefore when he wrote down many
troubles, he blotted it (as it were) with his pen again, as a merchant
razeth his book when the debt is discharged; and instead of many
troubles, he putteth in, the Lord delivereth. Because he forgiveth all
sins, he is said to deliver from all troubles, to show that we have need
of no Saviour, no helper, no comforter, but him. - Henry Smith.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

"By this I know that thou favourest me." In this text we see two things.
1. How David assureth himself of God's love towards him. 2. How thankful
he is to God for assuring him of his love. The first he doth by two
arguments; one is taken from his enemies, they were prevented of their
expectation "Therefore thou lovest me." The other is taken from his own
estate, which was not one whir hurt, or impaired, but bettered by
them.... Here the prophet speaketh of his knowledge, and telleth us that
though he knew not all things, yet he knew that God loved him, and so
long as he knoweth that, he careth not greatly for other matters, how
the world goeth with him, etc. And, to say the truth, he need not, for
he that is sure of that, is sure of all. God loveth all his creatures as
a good God, and hateth nothing that he made, but he loveth his elect
children with a more especial love than the rest, as a Father in Christ
Jesus, and he that is sure that God doth so favour him, is sure, I say,
of all. For to him whom God loveth, he will deny no good thing, no, not
his own Son; and if he gave us his Son, because he loved us, how shall
he not with him give us all things else?

When the child is persuaded that his father loveth him, he is bold to
ask this and that of his father: so may we be bold to ask anything of
God our heavenly Father that is good for us, when we be sure that he
loveth us. As Mary and Martha put Christ in mind but of two things; the
first was, that Christ loved their brother Lazarus; the second was, that
Lazarus was sick; "He whom thou lovest is sick:" it was no need to tell
him what he should do, for they knew he would do what might be done for
him, because he loved him. So we may say to the Lord, when we are sure
that he loveth us: Lord, he whom thou lovest wanteth this or that for
his body or his soul. We need not then appoint him what to do, or when,
or how; for look what he seeth most convenient for us, and for his own
glory, he will surely do it. Therefore whatsoever David knoweth, he will
be sure to know this; and whatsoever he is ignorant of, yet of this he
will not be ignorant; to teach us that whatsoever we seek to make sure,
this must first be made sure, or else nothing is sure. Peter bids us
make our election sure; Job, when he saith, "I am sure that my Redeemer
liveth," teacheth us to make our redemption sure. And here David
teacheth us to make God's favour sure: now if we make that sure, then
our election is sure, our redemption is sure, our vocation is sure, and
our salvation is sure. - William Burton, 1602.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

"Because mine enemy doth not triumph over me." When God doth deliver us
from the hands of our enemies, or any trouble else, we may persuade
ourselves thereby, he hath a favour unto us, as David did. But then it
may be demanded, If God doth love his church, why doth he suffer his
church to be troubled and molested with enemies? The reason is this,
because by this means his love may be made more manifest in saving and
delivering them. For as a sure friend is not known but in time of need,
so God's goodness and love is never so well perceived as it is in
helping of us when we cannot help ourselves. As Adam's fall did serve to
manifest God's justice and mercy, the one in punishing, the other in
pardoning of sin, which otherwise we had never known: so the troubles of
the church serve to manifest, first, our deserts by reason of our sins;
secondly, our weakness and inability to help ourselves; and, thirdly,
the lovingkindness of the Lord our God, in saving and defending, that so
we might be truly thankful, and return all the praise and glory to God,
and none to ourselves. So that the church of God may have enemies, and
yet be still the beloved of God, as Lazarus was beloved of Christ,
although he was sick; for whom the Lord loveth he correcteth, and
therefore he correcteth them because he loveth them. - William Burton.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

God preserves his own, and bringeth their foes to nought after Passion
week comes Easter. - J. P. Lange's Commentary.

[Psa 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#012.md)

"Integrity." This same integrity is like Noah's ark, wherein he was
preserved, when others perished, being without it. It is like the red
thread, which the spies of Joshua gave to Rahab, it was a charter
whereby she claimed her life when the rest were destroyed, which had not
the like. So is this integrity of small reckoning, I confess, with the
men of this world, which think that there Is no other heaven but earth;
but as Rahab's thread was better to her than all her goods and substance
when the sword came, so this is better to God's children than all the
world when death comes. If they have this within they care not, nay,
they need not care what can come without. If Satan's buffering come,
this is a helmet of proof; if Satan's darts fly out, this is a shield to
quench them; if floods of crosses come to carry us away, this is a boat
to bear us up; if all the world cast mire and filth in our faces we are
never a whir the more deformed, but still beautiful for all that, for
"'the king's daughter," (saith Solomon, [Psa
45:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#013).md), that is, the church of Christ,
"is all glorious within." - William Burton.

[Psa 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#012.md)

"Settest me before thy face for ever;" or hast confirmed or established
me in thy presence; i.e., either under thine eye and special care, or to
minister unto thee, not only in thy temple, but as a king over thy
people, or in that land where thou art peculiarly present. - Matthew
Pool.

[Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md)

"Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to everlasting.
Amen, and Amen." We are here taught, 1. To give glory to God, as "the
Lord God of Israel," a God in covenant with his people; that has done
great and kind things for them, and has more and better in reserve. 2.
To give him glory as an eternal God, that has both his being and, his
blessedness "from everlasting and to everlasting." 3. To do this with
great affection and fervour of spirit, intimated in a double seal set to
it, "Amen, and Amen." We say Amen to it and let all other say Amen too.
- Matthew Henry.

[Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md)

"Amen and Amen." As the Psalms were not written by one man, so neither
do they form one book. The Psalter is, in fact, a Pentateuch, and the
lines of demarcation, which divide the five books one from another, are
clear and distinct enough. At the end of the [Psa
41:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md), of the 72nd, of the 89th, and
of the 106th, we meet with the solemn Amen, single or redoubled,
following on a doxology, which indicates that one book ends and that
another is about to begin. A closer study of the Psalms shows that each
book possesses characteristics of its own. Jehovah, ("the Lord") for
example, is prominent as the divine name in the first book, Elohim
("God") in the second. - E. H. Plumptre, M.A., in "Biblical Studies,"
1870.

There is also another observable difference between the two books. In
the first, all those Psalms which have any inscription at all are
expressly assigned to David as their author, whereas in the second we
find a whole series attributed to some of the Levitical singers. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne.

How ancient this division is cannot now be clearly ascertained. Jerome,
in his epistle to Marcella, and Epiphanius speak of the Psalms as having
been divided by the Hebrews into five books, but when this division was
made they do not inform us. The forms of ascriptions of praise, added at
the end of each of the five books, are in the Septuagint version, from
which we may conclude that this distribution had been made before that
version was executed. It was probably made by Ezra, after the return of
the Jews from Babylon to their own country, and the establishment of the
worship of God in the new temple, and it was perhaps made in imitation
of a similar distribution of the books of Moses. In making this division
of the Hebrew Psalter, regard appears to have been paid to the subject
matter of the Psalms. - John Calvin.

These forty-one Psalms, it has been observed, forming the first book,
relate chiefly to the ministry of Christ upon earth, preparing those who
were looking for the consolation of Israel, for his appearing amongst
them. Accordingly, the second book, commencing with [Psa
42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001.md), may refer chiefly to the
infant church of Christ. - W. Wilson, D.D.

May not the growth of the Book of Psalms be illustrated by the case of
our Modern Hymn Books which in the course of years require first one
appendix and then another, so as to incorporate the growing psalmody of
the church? In this case the purely Davidic Psalms of the first division
formed the nucleus to which other sacred songs were speedily added. - C.
H. S.

[Psalms 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 41:1</span></span>

1 Blessed is he that considereth the poor: the Lord will deliver him in
time of trouble.

2 The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive; and he shall be
blessed upon the earth: and thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of
his enemies.

3 The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing: thou wilt
make all his bed in his sickness.

[Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md)

"Blessed is he that considereth the poor." This is the third Psalm
opening with a benediction, and there is a growth in it beyond the first
two. To search the word of God comes first, pardoned sin is second, and
now the forgiven sinner brings forth fruit unto God available for the
good of others. The word used is as emphatic as in the former cases, and
so is the blessing which follows it. The poor intended, are such as are
poor in substance, weak in bodily strength, despised in repute, and
desponding in spirit. These are mostly avoided and frequently scorned.
The worldly proverb bequeathes the hindmost to one who has no mercy: The
sick and the sorry are poor company, and the world deserts them as the
Amalekite left his dying servant. Such as have been made partakers of
divine grace receive a tenderer nature, and are not hardened against
their own flesh and blood; they undertake the cause of the down trodden,
and turn their minds seriously to the promotion of their welfare. They
do not toss them a penny and go on their way, but enquire into their
sorrows, sift out their cause, study the best ways for their relief, and
practically come to their rescue; such as these have the mark of the
divine favour plainly upon them, and are as surely the sheep of the
Lord's pasture as if they wore a brand upon their foreheads. They are
not said to have considered the poor years ago, but they still do so.
Stale benevolence, when boasted of, argues present churlishness. First
and foremost, yea, far above all others put together in tender
compassion for the needy is our Lord Jesus, who so remembered our low
estate, that though he was rich, for our sakes he became poor. All his
attributes were charged with the task of our uplifting. He weighed our
case and came in the fulness of wisdom to execute the wonderful work of
mercy by which we are redeemed from our destructions. Wretchedness
excited his pity, misery moved his mercy, and thrice blessed is he both
by his God and his saints for his attentive care and wise action towards
us. He still considereth us; his mercy is always in the present tense,
and so let our praises be.

"The Lord will deliver him in time of trouble." The compassionate lover
of the poor thought of others and therefore God will think of him. God
measures to us with our own bushel. Days of trouble come even to the
most generous, and they have made the wisest provision for rainy days
who have lent shelter to others when times were better with them. The
promise is not that the generous saint shall have no trouble, but that
he shall be preserved in it, and in due time brought out of it. How true
was this of our Lord I never trouble deeper nor triumph brighter than
his, and glory be to his name, he secures the ultimate victory of all
his blood-bought ones. Would that they all were more like him in putting
on bowels of compassion to the poor. Much blessedness they miss who
stint their alms. The joy of doing good, the sweet reaction of another's
happiness, the approving smile of heaven upon the heart, if not upon the
estate; all these the niggardly soul knows nothing of. Selfishness bears
in itself a curse, it is a cancer in the heart; while liberality is
happiness, and maketh fat the bones. In dark days we cannot rest upon
the supposed merit of almsgiving, but still the music of memory brings
with it no mean solace when it tells of widows and orphans whom we have
succoured, and prisoners and sick folk to whom we have ministered.

[Psa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#002.md)

"The Lord will preserve him, and keep him alive." His noblest life shall
be immortal, and even his mortal life shall be sacredly guarded by the
power of Jehovah. Jesus lived on till his hour came, nor could the
devices of crafty Herod take away his life till the destined hour had
struck; and even then no man took his life from him, but he laid it down
of himself, to take it again. Here is the portion of all those who are
made like their Lord, they bless and they shall be blessed, they
preserve and shall be preserved, they watch over the lives of others and
they themselves shall be precious in the sight of the Lord. The miser
like the hog is of no use till he is dead - then let him die; the
righteous like the ox is of service during life - then let him live.
"And he shall be blessed upon the earth." Prosperity shall attend him.
His cruse of oil shall not be dried up because he fed the poor prophet.
He shall cut from his roll of cloth and find it longer at both ends.

"There was a man, and some did count him mad,

The more he gave away the more he had."

If temporal gains be not given him, spirituals shall be doubled to him.
His little shall be blessed, bread and water shall be a feast to him.
The liberal are and must be blessed even here; they have a present as
well as future portion. Our Lord's real blessedness of heart in the joy
that was set before him is a subject worthy of earnest thought,
especially as it is the picture of the blessing which all liberal saints
may look for. "And thou wilt not deliver him unto the will of his
enemies." He helped the distressed, and now he shall find a champion in
his God. What would not the good man's enemies do to him if they had him
at their disposal? Better be in a pit with vipers than be at the mercy
of persecutors. This sentence sets before us a sweet negative, and yet
it were not easy to have seen how it could be true of our Lord Jesus,
did we not know that although he was exempted from much of blessing,
being made a curse for us, yet even he was not altogether nor for ever
left of God, but in due time was exalted above all his enemies.

[Psa 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#003.md)

"The Lord will strengthen him upon the bed of languishing." The
everlasting arms shall stay up his soul as friendly hands and downy
pillows stay up the body of the sick. How tender and sympathising is
this image; how near it brings our God to our infirmities and
sicknesses! Whoever heard this of the old heathen Jove, or of the gods
of India or China? This is language peculiar to the God of Israel; he it
is who deigns to become nurse and attendant upon good men. If he smites
with one hand he sustains with the other. Oh, it is blessed fainting
when one falls upon the Lord's own bosom, and is upborne thereby! Grace
is the best of restoratives; divine love is the noblest stimulant for a
languishing patient; it makes the soul strong as a giant, even when the
aching bones are breaking through the skin. No physician like the Lord,
no tonic like his promise, no wine like his love. "Thou wilt make all
his bed in his sickness." What, doth the Lord turn bedmaker to his sick
children? Herein is love indeed. Who would not consider the poor if such
be the promised reward? A bed soon grows hard when the body is weary
with tossing to and fro upon it, but grace gives patience, and God's
smile gives peace, and the bed is made soft because the man's heart is
content; the pillows are downy because the head is peaceful. Note that
the Lord will make all his bed, from head to foot. What considerate and
indefatigable kindness! Our dear and ever blessed Lord Jesus, though in
all respects an inheritor of this promise, for our sakes condescended to
forego the blessing, and died on a cross and not upon a bed; yet, even
there, he was after awhile upheld and cheered by the Lord his God, so
that he died in triumph.

We must not imagine that the benediction pronounced in these three
verses belongs to all who casually give money to the poor, or leave it
in their wills, or contribute to societies. Such do well, or act from
mere custom, as the case may be, but they are not here alluded to. The
blessing is for those whose habit it is to love their neighbour as
themselves, and who for Christ's sake feed the hungry and clothe the
naked. To imagine a man to be a saint who does not consider the poor as
he has ability, is to conceive the fruitless fig tree to be acceptable;
there will be sharp dealing with many professors on this point in the
day when the King cometh in his glory.

[Psalms 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 41:4</span></span>

4 I said, Lord, be merciful unto me: heal my soul; for I have sinned
against thee.

5 Mine enemies speak evil of me, When shall he die, and his name perish?

6 And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity: his heart gathereth
iniquity to itself; when he goeth abroad, he telleth it.

7 All that hate me whisper together against me; against me do they
devise my hurt.

8 An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him: and now that he
lieth he shall rise up no more.

9 Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat of my
bread, hath lifted up his heel against me.

Here we have a controversy between the pleader and his God. He had been
a tender friend to the poor, and yet in the hour of his need the
promised assistance was not forthcoming. In our Lord's case there was a
dark and dreary night in which such arguments were well befitting
himself and his condition.

[Psa 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md)

"I said" - said it in earnest prayer - "Lord, be merciful unto me."
Prove now thy gracious dealings with my soul in adversity, since thou
didst aforetime give me grace to act liberally in my prosperity. No
appeal is made to justice; the petitioner but hints at the promised
reward, but goes straightforward to lay his plea at the feet of mercy.
How low was our Redeemer brought when such petitions could come from his
reverend mouth, when his lips like lilies dropped such sweet smelling
but bitter myrrh! "Heal my soul." My time of languishing is come, now do
as thou hast said, and strengthen me, especially in my soul. We ought to
be far more earnest for the soul's healing than for the body's ease. We
hear much of the cure of souls, but we often forget to care about it.
"For I have sinned against thee." Here was the root of sorrow. Sin and
suffering are inevitable companions. Observe that by the Psalmist sin
was felt to be mainly evil because directed against God. This it, of the
essence of true repentance. The immaculate Saviour could never have used
such language as this unless there be here a reference to the sin which
he took upon himself by imputation; and for our part we tremble to apply
words so manifestly indicating personal rather than imputed sin.
Applying the petition to David and other sinful believers, how strangely
evangelical is the argument: heal me, not for I am innocent, but "I have
sinned." How contrary is this to all self-righteous pleading! How
consonant with grace! How inconsistent with merit! Even the fact that
the confessing penitent had remembered the poor, is but obliquely urged,
but a direct appeal is made to mercy on the ground of great sin. O
trembling reader, here is a divinely revealed precedent for thee, be not
slow to follow it.

[Psa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#005.md)

"Mine enemies speak evil of me." It was their nature to do and speak
evil; it was not possible that the child of God could escape them. The
viper fastened on Paul's hand: the better the man the more likely, and
the more venomous the slander. Evil tongues are busy tongues, and never
deal in truth. Jesus was traduced to the utmost, although no offence was
in him. "When shall be die, and his name perish?" They could not be
content till he was away. The world is not wide enough for evil men to
live in while the righteous remain, yea, the bodily presence of the
saints may be gone, but their memory is an offence to their foes. It was
never merry England, say they, since men took to Psalm-singing. In the
Master's case, they cried, "Away with such a fellow from the earth, it
is not fit that he should live." If persecutors could have their way,
the church should have but one neck, and that should be on the block.
Thieves would fain blow out all candles. The lights of the world are not
the delights of the world. Poor blind bats, they fly at the lamp, and
try to dash it down; but the Lord liveth, and preserveth both the saints
and their names.

[Psa 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#006.md)

"And if he come to see me, he speaketh vanity." His visits of sympathy
are visitations of mockery. When the fox calls on the sick lamb his
words are soft, but he licks his lips in hope of the carcass. It is
wretched work to have spies haunting one's bedchamber, calling in
pretence of kindness, but with malice in their hearts. Hypocritical talk
is always fulsome and sickening to honest men, but especially to the
suffering saint. Our divine Lord had much of this from the false hearts
that watched his words. "His heart gathereth iniquity to itself." Like
will to like. The bird makes its nest of feathers. Out of the sweetest
flowers chemists can distil poison, and from the purest words and deeds
malice can gather groundwork for calumnious report. It is perfectly
marvellous how spite spins webs out of no materials whatever. Its is no
small trial to have base persons around you lying in wait for every word
which they may pervert into evil. The Master whom we serve was
constantly subject to this affliction. "When he goeth abroad, he telleth
it." He makes his lies, and then vends them in open market. He is no
sooner out of the house than he outs with his lie, and this against a
sick man whom he called to see as a friend - a sick man to whose
incoherent and random speeches pity should be showed. Ah, black-hearted
wretch! A devil's cub indeed. How far abroad men will go to publish
their slanders! They would fain placard the sky with their falsehoods. A
little fault is made much of; a slip of the tongue is a libel, a mistake
a crime, and if a word can bear two meanings the worse is always
gathered upon it. Tell it in Gath, publish it in Askelon, that the
daughters of the uncircumcised may triumph. It is base to strike a man
when he is down, yet such is the meanness of mankind towards a Christian
hero should he for awhile chance to be under a cloud.

[Psa 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#007.md)

"All that hate me whisper together against me." The spy meets his
comrades in conclave and sets them all a whispering. Why could they not
speak out? Were they afraid of the sick warrior? Or were their designs
so treacherous that they must needs be hatched in secresy? Mark the
unanimity of the wicked - "all." How heartily the dogs unite to hunt the
stag! Would God we were half as united in holy labour as persecutors in
their malicious projects, and were half as wise as they are crafty, for
their whispering was craft as well as cowardice, the conspiracy must not
be known till all is ready. "Against me do they devise my hurt." They
lay their heads together, and scheme and plot. So did Ahithophel and the
rest of Absalom's counsellors, so also did the chief priests and
Pharisees. Evil men are good at devising; they are given to meditation,
they are deep thinkers, but the mark they aim at is evermore the hurt of
the faithful. Snakes in the grass are never there for a good end.

[Psa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008.md)

"An evil disease, say they, cleaveth fast unto him." They whisper that
some curse has fallen upon him, and is riveted to him. They insinuate
that a foul secret stains his character, the ghost whereof haunts his
house, and never can be laid. An air of mystery is cast around this
doubly dark saying, as if to show how indistinct are the mutterings of
malice. Even thus was our Lord accounted "smitten of God and afflicted."
His enemies conceived that God had forsaken him, and delivered him for
ever into their hands. "And now that he lieth he shall rise up no more."
His sickness they hoped was mortal, and this was fine news for them. No
more would the good man's holiness chide their sin, they would now be
free from the check of his godliness. Like the friars around Wickliffe's
bed, their prophesyings were more jubilant than accurate, but they were
a sore scourge to the sick man. When the Lord smites his people with his
rod of affliction for a small moment, their enemies expect to see them
capitally executed, and prepare their jubilates to celebrate their
funerals, but they are in too great a hurry, and have to alter their
ditties and sing to another tune. Our Redeemer eminently fore-tokened
this, for out of his lying in the grave he has gloriously risen. Vain
the watch, the stone, the seal! Rising he pours confusion on his
enemies.

[Psa 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#009.md)

"Yea." Here is the climax of the sufferer's woe, and he places before it
the emphatic affirmation, as if he thought that such villany would
scarcely be believed. "Mine own familiar friend." "The man of my peace,"
so runs the original, with whom I had no differences, with whom I was in
league, who had aforetime ministered to my peace and comfort. This was
Ahithophel to David, and Iscariot with our Lord. Judas was an apostle,
admitted to the privacy of the Great Teacher, hearing his secret
thoughts, and, as it were, allowed to read his very heart. "Et tu
Brute?" said the expiring Caesar. The kiss of the traitor wounded our
Lord's heart as much as the nail wounded his hand. "In whom I trusted."
Judas was the treasurer of the apostolic college. Where we place great
confidence an unkind act is the more severely felt. "Which did eat of my
bread." Not only as a guest but as a dependant, a pensioner at my board.
Judas dipped in the same dish with his Lord, and hence the more accursed
was his treachery in his selling his Master for a slave's price. "Hath
lifted up his heel against me." Not merely turned his back on me, but
left me with a heavy kick such as a vicious horse might give. Hard is it
to be spurned in our need by those who formerly fed at our table. It is
noteworthy that the Redeemer applied only the last words of this verse
to Judas, perhaps because, knowing his duplicity, he had never made a
familiar friend of him in the fullest sense, and had not placed implicit
trust in him. Infernal malice so planned it that every circumstance in
Jesus' death should add wormwood to it; and the betrayal was one of the
bitterest drops of gall. We are indeed, wretched when our quondam friend
becomes our relentless foe, when confidence is betrayed, when all the
rites of hospitality are perverted, and ingratitude is the only return
for kindness; yet in so deplorable a case we may cast ourselves upon the
faithfulness of God, who, having delivered our Covenant Head, is in
verity engaged to be the very present help of all for whom that covenant
was made.

[Psalms 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 41:10</span></span>

10 But thou O Lord, be merciful unto me, and raise me up, that I may
requite them.

"But thou, O Lord, be merciful unto me." How the hunted and affrighted
soul turns to her God! How she seems to take breath with a "but, thou!"
How she clings to the hope of mercy from God when every chance of pity
from man is gone! "And raise me up." Recover me from my sickness, give
me to regain my position. Jesus was raised up from the grave; his
descent was ended by an ascent. "That I may requite them." This as it
reads is a truly Old Testament sentence, and quite aside from the spirit
of Christianity, yet we must remember that David was a person in
magisterial office, and might without any personal revenge, desire to
punish those who had insulted his authority and libelled his public
character. Our great Apostle and High Priest had no personal
animosities, but even he by his resurrection has requited the powers of
evil, and avenged on death and hell all their base attacks upon his
cause and person. Still the strained application of every sentence of
this Psalm to Christ is not to our liking, and we prefer to call
attention to the better spirit of the gospel beyond that of the old
dispensation.

[Psalms 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 41:11</span></span>

11 By this I know thou favourest me, because mine enemy doth not triumph
over me.

12 And as for me, thou upholdest me in mine integrity, and settest me
before thy face for ever.

13 Blessed be the Lord God of Israel from everlasting, and to
everlasting. Amen and Amen.

[Psa 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#011.md)

We all are cheered by tokens for good, and the Psalmist felt it to be an
auspicious omen, that after all his deep depression he was not utterly
given over to his foe. "By this I know that thou favourest me." Thou
hast a special regard to me, I have the secret assurance of this in my
heart, and, therefore, thine outward dealings do not dismay me, for I
know that thou lovest me in them all. "Because mine enemy doth not
triumph over me." What if the believer has no triumph over his foes, he
must be glad that they do not triumph over him. If we have not all we
would we should praise God for all we have. Much there is in us over
which the ungodly might exult, and if God's mercy keeps the dogs' mouths
closed when they might be opened, we must give him our heartiest
gratitude. What a wonder it is that when the devil enters the lists with
a poor, erring, bedridden, deserted, slandered saint, and has a thousand
evil tongues to aid him, yet he cannot win the day, but in the end
slinks off without renown.

"The feeblest saint shall win the day

Though death and hell obstruct his way."

[Psa 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#012.md)

"And as for me," despite them all and in the sight of them all, "thou
up-holdest me in mine integrity;" thy power enables me to rise above the
reach of slander by living in purity and righteousness. Our innocence
and consistency are the result of the divine upholding. We are like
those glasses without feet, which can only be upright while they are
held in the hand; we fall, and spill, and spoil all, if left to
ourselves. The Lord should be praised every day if we are preserved from
gross sin. When others sin they show us what we should do but for grace.
"He today and I tomorrow," was the exclamation of a holy man, whenever
he saw another falling into sin. Our integrity is comparative as well as
dependant, we must therefore be humbled while we are grateful. If we are
clear of the faults alleged against us by our calumniators, we have
nevertheless quite enough of actual blameworthiness to render it
shameful for us to boast. "And settest me before thy face for ever." He
rejoiced that he lived under the divine surveillance; tended, cared for,
and smiled upon by his Lord; and yet more, that it would be so world
without end. To stand before an earthly monarch is considered to be a
singular honour, but what must it be to be a perpetual courtier in the
palace of the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible?

[Psa 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#013.md)

The Psalm ends with a doxology. "Blessed be the Lord," i.e., let him be
glorified. The blessing at the beginning from the mouth of God is
returned from the mouth of his servant. We cannot add to the Lord's
blessedness, but we can pour out our grateful wishes, and these he
accepts, as we receive little presents of flowers from children who love
us. Jehovah is the personal name of our God. "God of Israel" is his
covenant title, and shows his special relation to his elect people.
"From everlasting and to everlasting." The strongest way of expressing
endless duration. We die, but the glory of God goes on and on without
pause. "Amen and amen." So let it surely, firmly, and eternally be. Thus
the people joined in the Psalm by a double shout of holy affirmation;
let us unite in it with all our hearts. This last verse may serve for
the prayer of the universal church in all ages, but none can sing it so
sweetly as those who have experienced as David did the faithfulness of
God in times of extremity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 42](psa042.md)

</div>
