<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa012)  [Next](psa014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 13:0</span></span>

Occasion - The Psalm cannot be referred to any especial event or period
in David's history. All attempts to find it a birthplace are but
guesses. It was, doubtless, more than once the language of that much
tried man of God, and is intended to express the feelings of the people
of God in those ever-returning trials which beset them. If the reader
has never yet found occasion to use the language of this brief ode, he
will do so ere long, if he be a man after the Lord's own heart. We have
been wont to call this the "How Long Psalm." We had almost said the
Howling Psalm, from the incessant repetition of the cry "how long?"

Division - This Psalm is very readily to be divided into three parts: -
the question of anxiety, [Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md),
[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md); the cry of prayer, [Psa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md), [Psa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md); the song of faith, [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md), [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md).

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md) - The apparent length of
sorrow, only apparent. Contrast with days of joy, with eternal misery
and eternal joy. Impatience, and other evil passions, cause the seeming
length. Means of shortening, by refusing to forestall, or to repine
afterwards.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001) (second clause.md) - Hiding of
the divine face. Why at all? Why from me? Why so long?

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md) - Advice to the dejected, or
the soul directed to look out of itself for consolation - A. Fuller.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002) (first clause.md) -
Self-torture, its cause, curse, crime, and cure.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md) - "Having sorrow in my heart
daily."

I. The cause of daily sorrow. Great enemy, unbelief, sin, trial, loss of
Jesus' presence, sympathy with others, mourning for human ruin.

II\. The necessity of daily sorrow. Purge corruptions, excite graces,
raise desires heavenward.

III\. The cure of daily sorrow. Good food from God's table, old wine of
promises, walks with Jesus, exercise in good works, avoidance of
everything unhealthy.

\- B. Davis.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002) (second clause.md) - Time
anticipated when defeat shall be turned into victory.

[Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md) - By accommodating the text
to the believer.

I. True character of Satan, "enemy."

II\. Remarkable fact that his enemy is exalted over us.

III\. Pressing enquiry, "How long?"

\- B. Davis.

[Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md) - "Lighten mine eyes." A
prayer fit for

\(1\) Every benighted sinner.

\(2\) Every seeker of salvation.

\(3\) Every learner in Christ's school.

\(4\) Every tried believer.

\(5\) Every dying saint.

\- B. Davis.

[Psa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md) - Noteth the nature of the
wicked two ways; namely, the more they prevail the more insolent they
are; they wonderfully exult over those that are afflicted - T. Wilcocks.

[Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md) - Experience and
perseverance. "I have," "my heart shall."

[Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md) - The bountiful giver and
the hearty singer.

The whole Psalm would make a good subject, showing the stages from
mourning to rejoicing, dwelling especially upon the turning point,
prayer. There are two verses for each, mourning, praying, rejoicing. -
A. G. Brown.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

"How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord?" etc. The departures of God from
true believers are never final; they may be tedious, but they are
temporary. As the evil spirit is said to depart from Christ for a season
([Luk 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#013.md); though he quitted that
temptation, he did not quit his design, so as to tempt no more), so the
good Spirit withdraws from those that are Christ's for a season only,
'tis with a purpose of coming again. When he hath most evidently
forsaken, 'tis as unquestionable that sooner or later he will return;
and the happiness of his return will richly recompense for the sadness
of his desertion; [Isa 54:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#007.md), "For a
small moment have I forsaken thee; but with great mercies will I gather
thee;" here is not only a gathering after a forsaking, but "great
mercies" to make amends for "a small moment." He who hath engaged to be
our God for ever, cannot depart for ever. - Timothy Cruso, 1696.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

"How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord?" Whatever be the pressing need of
Christ's followers in troubles, and their constant cleaving to duty for
all that; and whatever be Christ's purpose of love towards them, yet he
seeth it fit ofttimes not to come to them at first, but will let the
trial go on till it come to a height, and be a trial indeed, and put
them seriously to it; for before he came he lets them row "about five
and twenty or thirty furlongs" (the last of which make near four miles,
eight furlongs going to a mile); and ([Mar
6:48](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#048).md) he came not till the fourth
watch of the night, which is the morning watch. We are indeed very
sparing of ourselves in trouble, and do soon begin to think that we are
low and tried enough, and therefore would be delivered; but our wise
Lord seeth that we need more. - George Hutcheson, 1657.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

"How long," etc. Enquire into the cause of God's anger. He is never
angry but when there is very great reason, when we force him to be so.
What is that accursed thing in our hearts, or in our lives, for which
God hides his face, and frowns upon us? What particular disobedience to
his commands is it for which he has taken up the rod? [Job
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#002.md); "I will say unto God, Do not
condemn me; shew me wherefore thou contendest with me;" as if he should
say, Lord, my troubles and my sorrows are very well known.... We must
not cease to be solicitous to know what are the particular sins that
have made him to tear us up by the roots, to throw us down as with a
whirlwind; what is it that has made him so long angry with us, and so
long to delay his help, that if any evil be undiscovered in our souls,
we may lament it with a seasonable grief, and get a pardon for it. It is
not the common course of God's providence to cover his servants with so
thick a darkness as this is, which our troubled souls labour under in
the day, or rather in the night of his displeasure; and, therefore, we
may with humility desire to know why he proceeds with us in a way that
is so singular; for it is some way delightful to the understanding to
pierce into the reasons and causes of things. - Timothy Rogers.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

"How long wilt thou forget me," etc. For God to forget David, not to
mind him, or look after him, is much! If his eye be never so little once
off us, the spiritual adversary is ready presently to seize on us, as
the kite on the chick if the hen look not carefully after it.... As a
father will sometimes cross his son to try the child's disposition, to
see how he will take it, whether he will mutter and grumble at it, and
grow humorous and wayward, neglect his duty to his father because his
father seemeth to neglect him, or make offer to run away and withdraw
himself from his father's obedience because he seemeth to carry himself
harshly and roughly towards him, and to provoke him thereunto; so doth
God likewise ofttimes cross his children and seemeth to neglect them, so
to try their disposition, what metal they are made of, how they stand
affected towards him: whether they will neglect God because God seemeth
to neglect them, forbear to serve him because he seemeth to forget them,
cease to depend upon him because he seemeth not to look after them, to
provide for them, or to protect them. Like Joram's prophane pursuivant,
"This evil," saith he," is of the Lord; what should I wait for the Lord
any longer?" Or whether they will still constantly cleave to him, though
he seem not to regard them, nor to have any care of them; and say with
Isaiah, "Yet will I wait upon God, though he have hid his face from us,
and I will look for him though he look not on us;" for, "They are
blessed that wait on him; and he will not fail in due time to show mercy
unto all them that do so constantly wait on him." [Isa
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017.md); [Isa
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#018.md). As Samuel dealt with Saul; he
kept away till the last hour, to see what Saul would do when Samuel
seemed not to keep touch with him. So doth God with his saints, and with
those that be in league with him; he withdraweth himself oft, and keeps
aloof oft for a long time together to try what they will do, and what
courses they will take when God seemeth to break with them and to leave
them in the suds, as we say; amidst many difficulties much perplexed, as
it was with David at this time. - Thomas Gataker, 1637.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

1\. For desertions. I think them like lying fallow of lean and weak land
for some years, while it gathers sap for a better crop. It is possible
to gather gold, where it may be had, with moonlight. Oh, if I could but
creep one foot, or half a foot, nearer in to Jesus, in such a dismal
night as that when he is away, I should think it a happy absence! 2. If
I knew that the Beloved were only gone away for trial, and further
humiliation, and not smoked out of the house with new provocations, I
would forgive desertions and hold my peace at his absence. But Christ's
bought absence (that I bought with my sin), is two running boils at
once, one upon each side; and what side then can I lie on? 3. I know
that, as night and shadows are good for flowers, and moonlight and dews
are better than a continual sun, so is Christ's absence of special use,
and that it hath some nourishing virtue in it, and giveth sap to
humility, and putteth an edge on hunger, and furnisheth a fair field to
faith to put forth itself, and to exercise its fingers in gripping it
seeth.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md), [Psa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md)

That which the French proverb hath of sickness is true of all evils,
that they come on horseback and go away on foot; we have often seen that
a sudden fall, or one meal's surfeit, has stuck by many to their graves;
whereas pleasures come like oxen, slow and heavily, and go away like
post-horses, upon the spur. Sorrows, because they are lingering guests,
I will entertain but moderately, knowing that the more they are made of
the longer they will continue: and for pleasures, because they stay not,
and do but call to drink at my door, I will use them as passengers with
slight respect. He is his own best friend that makes the least of both
of them. - Joseph Hall.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md), [Psa
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md)

"How Long will thou forget me? How Long wilt thou hide thy face from me?
How Long shall I take counsel in my soul?" The intenseness of the
affliction renders it trying to our fortitude; but it is by the
continuance of it that patience is put to the test. It is not under the
sharpest, but the longest trials, that we are most in danger of
fainting. In the first case, the soul collects all its strength, and
feels in earnest to call in help from above; but, in the last, the mind
relaxes, and sinks into despondency. When Job was accosted with evil
tidings, in quick succession, he bore it with becoming fortitude; but
when he could see no end to his troubles, he sunk under them. - Andrew
Fuller.

[Psa 13:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

Everything is strangely changed; all its comeliness, and beauty, and
glory, vanishes when the life is gone: life is the pleasant thing; 'tis
sweet and comfortable; but death with its pale attendants, raises a
horror and aversion to it everywhere. The saints of God dread the
removal of his favour, and the hiding of his face; and when it is hid, a
faintness and a cold amazement and fear seizes upon every part, and they
feel strange bitterness, and anguish, and tribulation, which makes their
joints to tremble, and is to them as the very pangs of death. - Timothy
Rogers.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md), [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md), [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

Prayer helps towards the increase and growth of grace, by drawing the
habits of grace into exercise. Now, as exercise brings benefit to the
body, so does prayer to the soul. Exercise doth help to digest or
breathe forth those humours that clog the spirits. One that stirs little
we see grow pursy, and is soon choked up with phlegm, which exercise
clears the body of. Prayer is the saint's exercise-field, where his
graces are breathed; it is as the wind to the air, it brightens the
soul; as bellows to the fire, which clears the coal of those ashes that
smother them. The Christian, while in this world, lives in an
unwholesome climate; one while, the delights of it deaden and dull his
love of Christ; another while, the trouble he meets in it damps his
faith on the promise. How now should the Christian get out of these
distempers, had he not a throne of grace to resort to, where if once his
soul be in a melting frame, he (like one laid in a kindly sweat), soon
breathes out the malignity of his disease, and comes into his right
temper again? How often do we find the holy prophet, when he first
kneels down to pray, full of fears and doubts, who, before he and the
duty part, grows into a sweet familiarity with God, and repose in his
own spirit! ([Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001).md) He begins his
prayer as if he thought God would never give him a kind look more: "How
long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever?" But by that time he had
exercised himself a little in duty, his distemper wears off, the mists
scatter, and his faith breaks out as the sun in its strength, [Psa
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md), [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md) : "I have trusted in thy mercy;
my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation. I will sing unto the Lord."
Thus his faith lays the cloth, expecting a feast ere long to be set on:
he that now questioned whether he should ever hear good news from
heaven, is so strong in faith as to make himself merry with the hopes of
that mercy which he is assured will come at last. Abraham began with
fifty, but his faith got ground on God every step till he brought down
the price of their lives to ten. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md), [Psa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

Whatever discouragements thou meetest with in thine attendance on God in
ordinances, be like the English jet, fired by water, and not like our
ordinary fires, quenched by it; let them add to, not diminish, thy
resolution and courage; let not one repulse beat thee off; be violent,
give a second storm to the kingdom of heaven. Parents sometimes hide
themselves to make their children continue seeking. He that would not at
first open his mouth, nor vouchsafe the woman of Canaan a word, doth,
upon her continued and fervent petitions, at last open his hand and give
her whatsoever she asks: "O woman, be it unto thee as thou wilt."
Continued importunity is undeniable oratory. And truly, if after all thy
pains thou findest Jesus Christ, will it not make amends for thy long
patience? Men that venture often at a lottery, though they take blanks
twenty times, if afterwards they get a golden bason and ewer, it will
make them abundant satisfaction. Suppose thou shouldst continue knocking
twenty, nay, forty years, yet if at last, though but one hour before
thou diest thy heart be opened to Christ, and he be received into thy
soul, and when thou diest heaven be opened to thee, and thy soul
received into it, will it not infinitely requite thee for all thy
labour? Oh, think of it, and resolve never to be dumb while God is deaf,
never to leave off prayer till God return a gracious answer. And for thy
comfort, know that he who began his Psalm with, "How long wilt thou
forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long wilt thou hide thy face from me?"
comes to conclude it with, "I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath
dealt bountifully with me." - George Swinnock.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md)

"How long?" There are many situations of the believer in this life in
which the words of this Psalm may be a consolation, and help to revive
sinking faith. A certain man lay at the pool of Bethesda, who had an
infirmity thirty and eight years. [Joh
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#005.md). A woman had a spirit of infirmity
eighteen years, before she was "loosed." [Luk
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#011.md). Lazarus all his life long
laboured under disease and poverty, till he was released by death and
transferred to Abraham's bosom. [Luk
16:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020.md). Let every one, then, who may
be tempted to use the complaints of this Psalm, assure his heart that
God does not forget his people, help will come at last, and, in the
meantime, all things shall work together for good to them that love him.
- W. Wilson, D.D.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md)

"How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily?" There is such a thing as to pore on our guilt and wretchedness,
to the overlooking of our highest mercies. Though it be proper to know
our own hearts, for the purposes of conviction, yet, if we expect
consolation from this quarter, we shall find ourselves sadly
disappointed. Such, for a time, appears to have been the case of David.
He seems to have been in great distress; and as is common in such cases,
his thoughts turned inward, casting in his mind what he should do, and
what would be the end of things. While thus exercised, he had sorrow in
his heart daily: but, betaking himself to God for relief, he succeeded,
trusting in his mercy, his heart rejoiced in his salvation. There are
many persons, who, when in trouble, imitate David in the former part of
this experience: I wish we may imitate him in the latter. - Andrew
Fuller.

[Psa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#002.md), [Psa
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md)

"How shall mine enemy be exalted over me?" 'Tis a great relief to the
miserable and afflicted, to be pitied by others. It is some relief when
others, though they cannot help us, yet seem to be truly concerned for
the sadness of our case; when by the kindness of their words and of
their actions they do a little smooth the wounds they cannot heal; but
'tis an unspeakable addition to the cross, when a man is brought low
under the sense of God's displeasure, to have men to mock at his
calamity, or to revile him, or to speak roughly; this does inflame and
exasperate the wound that was big enough before; and it is a hard thing
when one has a dreadful sound in his ears to have every friend to become
a son of thunder. It is a small matter for people that are at ease, to
deal severely with such as are afflicted, but they little know how their
severe speeches and their angry words pierce them to the very soul. 'Tis
easy to blame others for complaining, but if such had felt but for a
little while what it is to be under the fear of God's anger, they would
find that they could not but complain. It cannot but make any person
restless and uneasy when he apprehends that God is his enemy. It is no
wonder if he makes every one that he sees, and every place that he is
in, a witness of his grief; but now it is a comfort in our temptations
and in our fears, that we have so compassionate a friend as Christ is to
whom we may repair, "For we have not an high priest which cannot be
touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points
tempted like as we are, yet without sin." [Heb
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#015.md). - Timothy Rogers.

[Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)

"Lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep the sleep of death." In time of
sickness and grief, the "eyes" are dull and heavy; and they grow more
and more so as death approaches, which closes them in darkness. On the
other hand, health and joy render the organs of vision bright and
sparkling, seeming, as it were, to impart "light" to them from within.
The words, therefore, may be fitly applied to a recovery of the body
natural, and thence, of the body politic, from their respective
maladies. Nor do they less significantly describe the restoration of the
soul to a state of spiritual health and holy joy, which will manifest
themselves in like manner, by "the eyes of the understanding being
enlightened;" and in this case, the soul is saved from the sleep of sin,
as the body is in the other, from the sleep of death. - George Horne.

[Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)

Why dost thou hide thy face? happily thou wilt say, None can see thy
face and live. Ah, Lord, let me die, that I may see thee; let me see
thee, that I may die: I would not live, but die; that I may see Christ,
I desire death; that I may live with Christ, I despise life. -
Augustine.

[Psa 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)

"How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?" Oh, excellent hiding, which
is become my perfection! My God, thou hidest thy treasure to kindle my
desire! Thou hidest thy pearl, to inflame the seeker; thou delayest to
give, that thou mayest teach me to importune; seemest not to hear, to
make me persevere. - John Anselm, 1034-1109.

[Psa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md)

Ah! can you bear contempt; the venom'd tongue

Of those whom ruin pleases, the keen sneer,

The lewd reproaches of the rascal herd;

Who for the selfsame actions, if successful,

Would be as grossly lavish in your praise?

To sum up all in one - an you support

The scornful glances, the malignant joy,

Or more detested pity of a rival -

Of a triumphant rival?

James Thomson, 1700-1748.

[Psa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#004.md)

"And those that trouble me rejoice when I am moved" - compose comedies
out of my tragedies. - John Trapp.

[Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

"I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation."
Faith rejoiceth in tribulations, and triumpheth before the victory. The
patient is glad when he feels his physic to work, though it make him
sick for the time because he hopes it will procure health. We rejoice in
afflictions, not that they are joyous for the present, but because they
shall work for our good. As faith rejoiceth, so it triumpheth in
assurance of good success: for it seeth not according to outward
appearance, but when all means fail, it keepeth God in sight, and
beholdeth him present for our succour. - John Ball.

[Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

"I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy salvation."
Though passion possess our bodies, let "patience possess our souls." The
law of our profession binds us to a warfare; patiendo vincimus, our
troubles shall end, our victory is eternal. Here David's triumph ([Psa
18:38-40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#038).md), "I have wounded them, that
they were not able to rise; they are fallen under my feet. Thou hast
subdued under me those that rose up against me. Thou hast also given me
the neck of mine enemies," etc. They have wounds for their wounds; and
the treaders down of the poor are trodden down by the poor. The Lord
will subdue those to us that would have subdued us to themselves; and
though for a short time they rode over our heads, yet now at last we
shall everlastingly tread upon their necks. Lo, then, the reward of
humble patience and confident hope. Speramus et superareas. [Deu
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#031.md). "Our God is not as their God,
even our enemies being judges." [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md). "Some put their trust in
chariots, and some in horses." But no chariot hath strength to oppose,
nor horse swiftness to escape, when God pursues. [Psa
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008.md). "They are brought down and
fallen; we are risen and stand upright." Their trust hath deceived them;
down they fall, and never to rise. Our God hath helped us; we are risen,
not for o breathing space, but to stand upright for ever. - Thomas
Adams.

[Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

None live so easily, so pleasantly, as those that live by faith. -
Matthew Henry.

[Psa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

Wherefore I say again, "Live by faith;" again I say, always live by it,
rejoice through faith in the Lord. I dare boldly say it is thy fault and
neglect of its exercise if thou suffer either thy own melancholy humour
or Satan to interrupt thy mirth and spiritual alacrity, and to detain
thee in dumps and pensiveness at any time. What if thou beest of a sad
constitution? of a dark complexion? Is not faith able to rectify nature?
Is it not stronger than any hellebore? Doth not an experienced divine
and physician worthily prefer one dram of it before all the drugs in the
apothecary's shop for this effect? Hath it not sovereign virtue in it,
to excerebrate all cares, expectorate all fears and griefs, evacuate the
mind of all ill thoughts and passions, to exhilarate the whole man? But
what good doth it to any to have a cordial by him if he use it not? To
wear a sword, soldier-like, by his side, and not to draw it forth in an
assault? When a dump overtakes thee, if thou wouldst say to thy soul in
a word or two, "Soul, why art thou disquieted? know and consider in whom
thou believest," would it not presently return to its rest again? Would
not the Master rebuke the winds and storms, and calm thy troubled mind
presently? Hath not every man something or other he useth to put away
dumps, to drive away the evil spirit, as David with his harp? Some with
merry company, some with a cup of sack, most with a pipe of tobacco,
without which they cannot ride or go. If they miss it a day together
they are troubled with rheums, dulness of spirits. They that live in
fens and in airs dare not stir out without a morning draught of some
strong liquor. Poor, silly, smoky helps, in comparison with the least
taste (but for dishonouring faith I would say whiff) or draught of
faith. - Samuel Ward, 1577-1653.

[Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

"I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me."
Faith keeps the soul from sinking under heavy trials, by bringing in
former experiences of the power, mercy, and faithfulness of God to the
afflicted soul. Hereby was the Psalmist supported in distress. Oh, saith
faith, remember what God hath done both for thy outward and inward man:
he hath not only delivered thy body when in trouble, but he hath done
great things for thy soul; he hath brought thee out of a state of black
nature, entered into a covenant relation with thee, made his goodness
pass before thee; he hath helped thee to pray, and many times hath heard
thy prayers and thy tears. Hath he not formerly brought thee out of the
horrible pit, and out of the miry clay, and put a new song in thy mouth,
and made thee to resolve never to give way to such unbelieving thoughts
and fears again? and how unbecoming is it for thee now to sink in
trouble? - John Willison, 1680-1750.

[Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

"I will sing unto the Lord." Mr. John Philpot having lain for some time
in the bishop of London's coal-house, the bishop sent for him, and
amongst other questions, asked him why they were so merry in prison?
singing (as the prophet speaks) Exultantes in rebus pessimis, rejoicing
in your naughtiness, whereas you should rather lament and be sorry. Mr.
Philpot answered, "My lord, the mirth which we make is but in singing
certain Psalms, as we are commanded by Paul to rejoice in the Lord,
singing together hymns and Psalms, for we are in a dark, comfortless
place, and therefore, we thus solace ourselves. I trust, therefore, your
lordship will, not be angry, seeing the apostle saith, 'If any be of an
upright heart, let him sing! Psalms;' and we, to declare that we are of
an upright mind to God, though we are in misery, yet refresh ourselves
with such singing." After some other discourse, saith he, "I was carried
back to my lord's coal-house, where I, with my six fellow prisoners, do
rouze together in the straw, as cheerfully (I thank God) as others do in
their beds of down." And in a letter to a friend, he thus writes:
"Commend me to Mr. Elsing and his wife, and thank them for providing me
some ease in my prison; and tell them that though my lord's coal-house
be very black, yet it is more to be desired of the faithful than the
Queen's palace. The world wonders how we can be so merry under such
extreme miseries; but our God is omnipotent, who turns misery into
felicity. Believe me, there is no such joy in the world, as the people
of God have under the cross of Christ: I speak by experience, and
therefore believe me, and fear nothing that the world can do unto you,
for when they imprison our bodies, they set our souls at liberty to
converse with God; when they cast us down, they lift us up; when they
kill us, then do they send us to everlasting life. What greater glory
can there be than to be made conformable to our Head, Christ? And this
is done by affliction. O good God, what am I, upon whom thou shouldst
bestow so great a mercy? This is the day which the Lord hath made; let
us rejoice and be glad in it. This is the way, though it be narrow,
which is full of the peace of God, and leadeth to eternal bliss. Oh, how
my heart leapeth for joy that I am so near the apprehension thereof! God
forgive me my unthankfulness and unworthiness of so great glory. I have
so much joy, that though I be in a place of darkness and mourning, yet I
cannot lament; but both night and day am so full of joy, as I never was
so merry before; the Lord's name be praised for ever. Our enemies do
fret, fume, and gnash their teeth at it. O pray instantly that this joy
may never be taken from us; for it passeth all the delights in this
world. This is the peace of God that passeth all understanding. This
peace the more his chosen be afflicted, the more they feel it, and
therefore cannot faint neither for fire nor water." - Samuel Clarke's
"Mirtour," 1671.

[Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

"I will sing unto the Lord." How far different is the end of this Psalm
from the beginning! - John Trapp.

[Psa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#006.md)

"I will sing unto the Lord," etc. I never knew what it was for God to
stand by me at all turns, and at every offer of Satan to afflict me,
etc., as I have found him since I came in hither; for look how fears
have presented themselves, so have supports and encouragements; yet,
when I have started, even as it were at nothing else but my shadow, yet
God, as being very tender of me, hath not suffered me to be molested,
but would with one Scripture or another, strengthen me against all;
insomuch that I have often said, Were it lawful, I could pray for
greater trouble, for the greater comfort's sake. [Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014.md); [Co2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#005.md). - John Bunyan, 1628-1688.

[Psalms 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 13:1</span></span>

1 How long wilt thou forget me, O Lord? for ever? how long wilt thou
hide thy face from me?

2 How long shall I take counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart
daily? how long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?

"How long?" - This question is repeated no less than four times. It
betokens very intense desire for deliverance, and great anguish of
heart. And what if there be some impatience mingled therewith; is not
this the more true a portrait of our own experience? It is not easy to
prevent desire from degenerating into impatience. O for grace that,
while we wait on God, we may be kept from indulging a murmuring spirit!
"How long?" Does not the oft-repeated cry become a very howling? And
what if grief should find no other means of utterance? Even then, God is
not far from the voice of our roaring; for he does not regard the music
of our prayers, but his own Spirit's work in them in exciting desire and
inflaming the affections.

"How long?" Ah! how long do our days appear when our soul is cast down
within us!

"How wearily the moments seem to glide

O'er sadness! How the time

Delights to linger in its flight!"

Time flies with full-fledged wing in our summer days, but in our winters
he flutters painfully. A week within prison-walls is longer than a month
at liberty. Long sorrow seems to argue abounding corruption; for the
gold which is long in the fire must have had much dross to be consumed,
hence the question "how long?" may suggest deep searching of heart. "How
long wilt thou forget me?" Ah, David! how like a fool thou talkest! Can
God forget? Can Omniscience fail in memory? Above all, can Jehovah's
heart forget his own beloved child? Ah I brethren, let us drive away the
thought, and hear the voice of our covenant God by the mouth of the
prophet, "But Zion said, The Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath
forgotten me. Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not
have compassion on the son of her womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I
not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands;
thy walls are continually before me." "For ever?" Oh, dark thought! It
was surely bad enough to suspect a temporary forgetfulness, but shall we
ask the ungracious question, and imagine that the Lord will for ever
cast away his people? No, his anger may endure for a night, but his love
shall abide eternally. "How long wilt thou hide thy face from me?" This
is a far more rational question, for God may hide his face, and yet he
may remember still. A hidden face is no sign of a forgetful heart. It is
in love that his face is turned away; yet to a real child of God, this
hiding of his Father's face is terrible, and he will never be at ease
until once more he hath his Father's smile. "How long shall I take
counsel in my soul, having sorrow in my heart daily?" There is in the
original the idea of "laying up" counsels in his heart, as if his
devices had become innumerable but unavailing. Herein we have often been
like David, for we have considered and reconsidered day after day, but
have not discovered the happy device by which to escape from our
trouble. Such store is a sad sore. Ruminating upon trouble is bitter
work. Children fill their mouths with bitterness when they rebelliously
chew the pill which they ought obediently to have taken at once. "How
long shall mine enemy be exalted over me?" This is like wormwood in the
gall, to see the wicked enemy exulting while our soul is bowed down
within us. The laughter of a foe grates horribly upon the ears of grief.
For the devil to make mirth of our misery is the last ounce of our
complaint, and quite breaks down our patience; therefore let us make it
one chief argument in our plea with mercy.

Thus the careful reader will remark that the question "how long?" is put
in four shapes. The writer's grief is viewed, as it seems to be, as it
is, as it affects himself within, and his foes without. We are all prone
to play most on the worst string. We set up monumental stones over the
graves of our joys, but who thinks of erecting monuments of praise for
mercies received? We write four books of Lamentations and only one of
Canticles, and are far more at home in wailing out a Miserere than in
chanting a Te Deum.

[Psalms 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 13:3</span></span>

3 Consider and hear me, O Lord my God lighten mine eyes, lest I sleep
the sleep of death;

4 Lest mine enemy say, I have prevailed against him; and those that
trouble me rejoice when I am moved.

But now prayer lifteth up her voice, like the watchman who proclaims the
daybreak. Now will the tide turn, and the weeper shall dry his eyes. The
mercy-seat is the life of hope and the death of despair. The gloomy
thought of God's having forsaken him is still upon the Psalmist's soul,
and he therefore cries, "Consider and hear me." He remembers at once the
root of his woe, and cries aloud that it may be removed. The final
absence of God is Tophet's fire, and his temporary absence brings his
people into the very suburbs of hell. God is here entreated to see and
hear, that so he may be doubly moved to pity. What should we do if we
had no God to turn to in the hour of wretchedness?

Note the cry of faith, "O Lord my God!" Is it not a very glorious fact
that our interest in our God is not destroyed by all our trials and
sorrows? We may lose our gourds, but not our God. The title-deed of
heaven is not written in the sand, but in eternal brass.

"Lighten mine eyes:" that is, let the eye of my faith be clear, that I
may see my God in the dark; let my eye of watchfulness be wide open,
lest I be entrapped, and let the eye of my understanding be illuminated
to see the right way. Perhaps, too, here is an allusion to that cheering
of the spirits so frequently called the enlightening of the eyes because
it causes the face to brighten, and the eyes to sparkle. Well may we use
the prayer, "Lighten our darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord!" for in many
respects we need the Holy Spirit's illuminating rays. "Lest I sleep the
sleep of death." Darkness engenders sleep, and despondency is not slow
in making the eyes heavy. From this faintness and dimness of vision,
caused by despair, there is but a step to the iron sleep of death. David
feared that his trials would end his life, and he rightly uses his fear
as an argument with God in prayer; for deep distress has in it a kind of
claim upon compassion, not a claim of right, but a plea which has power
with grace. Under the pressure of heart sorrow, the Psalmist does not
look forward to the sleep of death with hope and joy, as assured
believers do, but he shrinks from it with dread, from which we gather
that bondage from fear of death is no new thing.

Another plea is urged in the fourth verse, and it is one which the tried
believer may handle well when on his knees. We make use of our
arch-enemy for once, and compel him, like Samson, to grind in our mill
while we use his cruel arrogance as an argument in prayer. It is not the
Lord's will that the great enemy of our souls should overcome his
children. This would dishonour God, and cause the evil one to boast. It
is well for us that our salvation and God's honour are so intimately
connected, that they stand or fall together.

Our covenant God will complete the confusion of all our enemies, and if
for awhile we become their scoff and jest, the day is coming when the
shame will change sides, and the contempt shall be poured on those to
whom it is due.

[Psalms 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 13:5</span></span>

5 But I have trusted in thy mercy; my heart shall rejoice in thy
salvation.

6 I will sing unto the Lord, because he hath dealt bountifully with me.

What a change is here! Lo, the rain is over and gone, and the time of
the singing of birds is come. The mercy-seat has so refreshed the poor
weeper, that he clears his throat for a song. If we have mourned with
him, let us now dance with him. David's heart was more often out of tune
than his harp. He begins many of his Psalms sighing, and ends them
singing; and others he begins in joy and ends in sorrow; "so that one
would think," says Peter Moulin, "that those Psalms had been composed by
two men of a contrary humour." It is worthy to be observed that the joy
is all the greater because of the previous sorrow, as calm is all the
more delightful in recollection of the preceding tempest.

"Sorrows remembered sweeten present joy."

Here is his avowal of his confidence: "But I have trusted in thy mercy."
For many a year it had been his wont to make the Lord his castle and
tower of defence, and he smiles from behind the same bulwark still. He
is sure of his faith, and his faith makes him sure; had he doubted the
reality of his trust in God, he would have blocked up one of the windows
through which the sun of heaven delights to shine. Faith is now in
exercise, and consequently is readily discovered; there is never a doubt
in our heart about the existence of faith while it is in action; when
the hare or partridge is quiet we see it not, but let the same be in
motion and we soon perceive it. All the powers of his enemies had not
driven the Psalmist from his stronghold. As the shipwrecked mariner
clings to the mast, so did David cling to his faith; he neither could
nor would give up his confidence in the Lord his God. O that we may
profit by his example, and hold by our faith as by our very life!

Now hearken to the music which faith makes in the soul. The bells of the
mind are all ringing, "My heart shall rejoice in thy salvation." There
is joy and feasting within doors, for a glorious guest has come, and the
fatted calf is killed. Sweet is the music which sounds from the strings
of the heart. But this is not all; the voice joins itself in the blessed
work, and the tongue keeps tune with the soul, while the writer
declares, "I will sing unto the Lord."

"I will praise thee every day.

Now thine anger's turned away;

Comfortable thoughts arise

From the bleeding sacrifice.'

The Psalm closes with a sentence which is a refutation of the charge of
forgetfulness which David had uttered in the first verse, "He hath dealt
bountifully with me." So shall it be with us if we wait awhile. The
complaint which in our haste we utter shall be joyfully retracted, and
we shall witness that the Lord hath dealt bountifully with us.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 14](psa014.md)

</div>
