<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa025)  [Next](psa027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 26:0</span></span>

Title - A Psalm of David. The sweet singer of Israel appears before us
in this Psalm as one enduring reproach; in this he was the type of the
great Son of David, and is an encouraging example to us to carry the
burden of slander to the throne of grace. It is an ingenious surmise
that this appeal to heaven was written by David at the time of the
assassination of Ish-bosheth, by Baanah and Rechab, to protest his
innocence of all participation in that treacherous murder; the tenor of
the Psalm certainly agrees with the supposed occasion, but it is not
possible with such a slender clue to go beyond conjecture.

Division - Unity of subject is so distinctly maintained, that there are
no sharp divisions. David Dickson has given an admirable summary in
these words: - "He appealeth to God, the supreme Judge, in the testimony
of a good conscience, bearing him witness; first, of his endeavour to
walk uprightly as a believer, [Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001), [Psa
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002), [Psa
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003); secondly, of his keeping himself
from the contagion of the evil counsel, sinful courses, and example of
the wicked, [Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004), [Psa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005); thirdly, of his purpose still to
behave himself holily and righteously, out of love to the partaker of
the public privileges of the Lord's people in the congregation, [Psa
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006), [Psa
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007), [Psa
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008). Whereupon he prayeth to be free
of the judgment coming upon the wicked, [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009), [Psa
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010), according as he had purposed to
eschew their sins, [Psa 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011); and he
closeth his prayer with comfort and assurance of being heard, [Psa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012).

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

I. Two inseparable companions - faith and holiness.

II\. The blessedness of the man who possesses them. He needs not fear
the judgment, nor the danger of the way.

III\. The only means of procuring them.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001) (last sentence) - The
upholding power of trust in God.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002) - Divine examinations. Their
variety, severity, searching nature, accuracy, certainty: when to be
desired, and when to be dreaded.

[Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003) - Delight for the eyes and
safety for the feet; or the good man's sweet contemplation and holy
practice; or the heavenly compound of godliness - motive, and motion,
enjoying and acting, love and truth, free grace and good works.

[Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003) - "Thy lovingkindness is
before mine eyes." It might be well to follow David and to keep the
lovingkindness of God before our eyes. This should be done in four ways:
-

I. As a subject of contemplation.

II\. As the source of encouragement.

III\. As an incitement to praise.

IV\. As an example for imitation.

\- William Jay.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004) - "Vain persons." Who they
are. Why they are to be avoided. What will become of them.
"Dissemblers." Describe this numerous family. Show what their objects
are. The mischief done to believers by their craftiness. The need of
shunning them, and their fearful end.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005) - Bad company. Cases of its
evil results, excuses for it answered, warnings given, motives urged for
relinquishing.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006) - The necessity of personal
holiness in order to acceptable worship.

[Psa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007)

I. The believer's calling - a publisher.

II\. The author selected, mud the quality of his works. "Thy wondrous
works."

III\. The mode of advertising - "voice of thanksgiving, tell," etc.

[Psa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008) - God's house. Why we love
it. What we love in it. How we show our love. How our love will be
rewarded.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009) - See "Spurgeon's Sermons,"
No. 524. "The Saints' Horror at the Sinners' Hell."

[Psa 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011) - The best men needing
redemption and mercy; or the outward walk before men, and the secret
walk with God.

[Psa 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012) - Secure standing, honoured
position, grateful praise.

[Psa 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012) (last clause) -
Congregational Psalmody, and our personal share in it.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is coupled on to the foregoing by thoughts and words. At the
close of the foregoing the Psalmist had prayed for integrity ([Psa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)). Unless this Psalm is regarded
as a sequel to the preceding one, it will seem vainglorious; but being
combined with the penitential acknowledgments of sin, and with the
earnest supplications for pardon and grace, and with the earnest
profession of faith that God has heard his prayer, which breathe forth
in the foregoing Psalm, it will be seen that the declarations which the
Psalmist now makes of integrity, are not assertions of human merit, but
acknowledgments of divine mercy. As Augustine says, "Non merita mea, sed
misericordia tua, ante oculos meos est." - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity." - A good cause,
a good conscience, and a good deportment, are good grounds of appeal to
God. - Ingram Cobbin.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Judge me, O Lord." Nothing is so pleasing to him that is upright as to
know that God knoweth he is so. As it is a small matter with those who
are sincere to be condemned by men, so it is not much with them to be
commended or approved by them; for indeed neither "he that commendeth
himself," as the apostle speaks ([Co2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#018)), nor he that is commended by
others, "is approved, but whom the Lord commendeth." The testimony, or
letters commendatory of all the men in the world will do us no good,
unless God give us his also. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Judge me, O Lord." As an instance of appeal to heaven, we quote that
mighty preacher of the Word, George Whitfield. "However some may account
me a mountebank and an enthusiast, one that is only going to make you
methodically mad; they may breathe out their invectives against me, yet
Christ knows all; he takes notice of it, and I shall leave it to him to
plead my cause, for he is a gracious Master. I have already found him
so, and am sure he will continue so. Vengeance is his, and he will repay
it." - George Whitfield, 1714-1770.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Integrity." תּם, or תּמים is used of whatever is uninjured, or is free
from any spot or blemish; and hence we find the term applied to an
unblemished animal offered in sacrifice. [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003); [Lev
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009). - George Phillips.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Mine integrity." There is a force in the possessive pronoun "my," which
must be attended to. The Psalmist intimates that he had proceeded in one
uniform course, notwithstanding all the devices of his enemies. - W.
Wilson, D.D.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"I have trusted in the Lord." Trust in God is the fountain of
"integrity." Whoever places his hope in God need not seek to advance his
worldly interests by violating his duty towards his neighbour: he waits
for everything from above, and is, at the same time, always determined
that he will not be deprived of the favour of his heavenly Father
through violating his commandments. - E. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"I shall not slide." It is a striking word, as fully expressive of the
completeness of God's protection and the security of his upholding hand
as the Psalmist's language of the integrity of his walk and trust in
God. It is not, as in our Prayer-book version, "I shall not fall," but
it is, "I shall not even slide;" not even make a false step or stumble.
- Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)

The Psalmist uses three words, "examine," "prove," "try." These words
are designed to include all the modes in which the reality of anything
is tested; and they imply together that he wished the most thorough
investigation to be made; he did not shrink from any test. - Albert
Barnes.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)

"Examine" - "prove" - "try." As gold, by fire, is severed and parted
from dross, so singleness of heart and true Christian simplicity is best
seen and made most evident in troubles and afflictions. In prosperity
every man will seem godly, but afflictions do draw out of the heart
whatsoever is there, whether it be good or bad. - Robert Cawdray.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)

"Prove me." The work of conscience within us doth prove us. God hath set
up a light within us, and when this is enlightened by the Word, then it
makes a man's breast full of light. Now a faithful godly man loveth that
this should be tender, active, speaking out of God's Word for every
duty, and against every sin. You see the quickness of it in David, when
it is said, "His heart smote him;" and 1 John 3, "If thy heart condemn
thee, God is greater than thy heart." Alas! if thou within thy own self
judgest thyself to sin thus and thus, God doth much more. Try thy
integrity; art thou willing to have a tender conscience, and an informed
conscience? Dost thou love to hear what that speaks out of God's Word?
whether peace or duty? this is comfortable. But on the other side, if
thou art a man that rebellest against the light of it, wouldst fain put
out the sting of it, wouldst be glad to feel no such living thing in thy
breast, then thou hast cause to suspect thyself. Oh, it is to be feared
that there are many that give themselves to lusts, and carnal pleasures,
that so they may put a foggy mist between their conscience and
themselves. Others dig into the world, labouring to become senseless,
that so there may be an eclipse of this light by the interposition of
the earth. Others run to damnable heresies, denying Scriptures, God,
heaven, hell; pleading for an universal salvation of all. What are these
but refuges of guilty consciences? We must distinguish between our
carnal concupiscence, and conscience; between deluded imaginations, and
conscience; between an erroneous and scrupulous conscience, and a
well-grounded and truly informed conscience; and when we have done so,
we must follow conscience as far as that follows the Word. - Anthony
Burgess.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)

"Reins.... heart." - The "reins," as the seat of the lower animal
passions; the "heart," as comprising not only the higher affections, but
also the will and the conscience. He thus desires to keep nothing back;
he will submit himself to the searching flame of the Great Refiner, that
all dross of self-deception may be purged away. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003)

The practical effect of divine goodness is seen in this text. As the
chief thing communicated from God is the divine nature, whereby we are
made to resemble him, so the promises of God set home upon the soul are
the means of communication; they are the milk and honey of the
Scripture, which do not cherish the old man, but support the new; they
are not pillows for sinful sloth, but spurs to holy diligence. The
promises of grace animate the soul to duty; and when we thus see the
goodness of the Lord, it encourages our subjection to his government. -
Timothy Cruso.

[Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003), [Psa
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"I have walked in thy truth, I have not sat with vain persons." Be as
careful as thou canst, that the persons thou choosest for thy companions
be such as fear God. The man in the gospel was possessed with the devil,
who dwelt amongst the tombs, and conversed with graves and carcases.
Thou art far from walking after the good Spirit, if thou choosest to
converse with open sepulchres, and such as are dead in sills and
trespasses. God will not shake the wicked by the hand, as the Vulgate
reads ([Job 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#020)), neither must the
godly man. David proves the sincerity of his course, by his care to
avoid such society: "I have walked in thy truth; I have not sat with
vain persons." There is a twofold "truth." 1. Truth of doctrine. Thy law
is the truth, free from all dross of corruption and falsehood of error.
2. Truth of affection, or of the inward parts. This may be called "thy
truth," or God's truth, though man be the subject of it, partly because
it proceedeth from him, partly because it is so pleasant to him; in
which respect a broken heart is called the "sacrifice of God." [Psa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#006). As if he had said, I could not
have walked in the power of religion, and in integrity, if I had
associated with vile and vain company; I could never have walked in thy
precepts if I had "sat with vain persons." Observe the phrase, "I have
not sat with vain persons." 1. Sitting is a posture of choice. It is at
a man's liberty, whether he will sit or stand. 2. Sitting is a posture
of pleasure. Men sit for their ease, and with delight; therefore, the
glorified are said to "sit in heavenly places." [Eph
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006). 3. Sitting is a posture of
staying or abiding. 2 Kings v. 3. Standing is a posture of going, but
sitting of staying. The blessed, who shall for ever be with the Lord and
his chosen, are mentioned "to sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
in the kingdom of heaven." [Mat 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011).
David in neither of these senses durst sit with vain persons. He might,
as his occasions required, use their company, but durst not knowingly
choose such company. They could not be the object of his election who
were not the object of his affection. "I hate the congregation of evil
doers," saith he. As sitting is a posture of pleasure, he did not sit
with vain persons. He was sometimes amongst them to his sorrow, but not
to his solace. They were to him, as the Canaanites to the Israelites,
pricks in his eyes, and thorns in his sides. "Woe is me, that I sojourn
in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar!" [Psa
120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005). It caused grief, not gladness,
that he was forced to be amongst the profane. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"I have not sat with vain persons." There is a necessary commerce with
men in buying and selling, or as the apostle says, "We must needs go out
of the world," but do not voluntarily choose the company of the wicked.
[Co1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#010). "I have written unto you
not to keep company," etc. [Co1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011).
Do not be too familiar with them. What do Christ's doves among birds of
prey? What do virgins among harlots? The company of the wicked is very
defiling, it is like going among them that have the plague. "They were
mingled among the heathen and learned their works." If you mingle bright
armour with rusty, the bright armour will not brighten the rusty, but
the rusty armour will spoil the bright. Pharaoh taught Joseph to swear,
but Joseph did not teach Pharaoh to pray. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"Neither will I go in with dissemblers." Chaldee: "I will not go in with
those that hide themselves to do evil." Wickedness is uncandid, and
loves concealment, while truth and righteousness are open, and seek
scrutiny. [Job 24:13-17](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013); [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020), [Joh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021). None will deny that the candid
man has far fewer troubles with his own conduct than the tortuous and
deceitful. The righteous shun the wicked both for the sin and for the
misery that are in their ways. - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"Dissemblers." The hypocrite has much angel without, more devil within.
He fries in words, freezes in works; speaks by ells, doth good by
inches. He is a stinking dunghill, covered over with snow; a loose-hung
mill that keeps great clacking, but grinds no grist; a lying hen that
cackles when she hath not laid. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"Dissemblers." Perhaps when the bright sunbeams of an early spring have
robed all nature in a smiling garb, you have taken your little baskets,
and gone in quest of a bank of sweet-smelling modest violets, and you
may have found flowers so like them, in form and colour, that you have
been deceived, and eagerly grasped your prize; but alas I the sweet
odour which should have scented the gale, was found wanting, and
betrayed the dog violet. An apt emblem this of those, who, "having the
form of godliness, deny the power thereof." [Ti2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#005). - Mrs. Rogers, in "The Shepherd
King."

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004), [Psa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

As rotten apples corrupt those sound ones that do touch them and lie
close to them, even so the evil manners and bad conditions of the
ungodly do infect those that keep them company. - Robert Cawdray.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004), [Psa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

"It is difficult (saith a late ingenious writer) even to a miracle to
keep God's commandments and evil company too." How suddenly after your
soul-refreshments in your closet communion have you lost all your heats
and spiritual fervencies, which you had in secret, and have instantly
cooled by going forth into cold and corrupt air! When a saint hath been
in private ravished with the love of God and the joys of heaven, and
afterwards meets with company, which neither doth nor can speak one word
of such matters, what a damp is it to him! What a quenching, as it were,
of the Spirit of God in him! Nay, is not that true which one saith, that
"the people of God do generally lose more by worldly men, that are of a
blameless conversation before men, than they lose by wicked and profane
men"? - Lewis Stuckley.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004), [Psa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005), [Psa
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

He that would not be found amongst sinners in the other world, must take
heed that he do not frequent their company in this. Those whom the
constable finds wandering with vagrants, may be sent with them to the
house of correction. "Lord," said a good woman, on her death bed, when
in some doubt of her salvation, "send me not to hell amongst wicked men,
for thou knowest I never loved their company all my life long." David
deprecates their future doom upon the like ground, and argueth it as a
sign of his sincerity: "I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I
go in with dissemblers. I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and
will not sit with the wicked.... O gather not my soul with sinners."
Lord, I have not loved the wicked so well as to sit with them for a
little time, and shall I live with them for ever? I have not lain
amongst them rotting on the earth; and wilt thou gather my soul with
those sticks for the unquenchable fire of hell? Lord, I have been so far
from liking, that thou knowest I have loathed the congregation of evil
doers. Do not I hate them that hate thee? Yea, I hate them with perfect
hatred; and shall thy friends fare as thy foes? I appeal to thy Majesty,
that my great comfort is in thy chosen. I rejoice only to be amongst thy
children here, and shall I be excluded their company hereafter? "O do
not gather my soul with sinners," for the wine-press of thine eternal
anger! Marcion, the heretic, seeing Polycarp, wondered that he would not
own him. Do you not know me, Polycarp? Yea, saith Polycarp, "Scio te
esse primogenitum diaboli;" "I know thee to be the firstborn of the
devil," and so despised him. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

"I have hated the congregation of evil doers," etc. The hatred of God's
enemies, qu his enemies - "yea, I hate them right sore" so entirely
opposed to the indifferentism of the present day, has always been one
distinguishing mark of his ancient servants. Witness Phinehas ([Psa
106:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#031)); "And that was counted unto
him for righteousness unto all generations for evermore;" Samuel with
Agag; Elias with the priests of Baal. And notice the commendation of the
angel of Ephesus, "Thou canst not bear them that are evil." [Rev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002). - J. M. Neale.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

"I have hated the congregation of evil doers." We consider them as God's
enemies, so we hate them; not their persons, but their vices; for that,
as Augustine defineth, it is odium perfectum, a perfect hatred. And
indeed it is the hatred that God beareth to his enemies; for "the wrath
of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men" ([Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018));
not against their persons - they are his workmanship, and carry his
image in some sort, though much disfigured; but against the
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, by which their persons do stand
obnoxious to his displeasure. And thus I find the saints of God have
triumphed over the wicked, as Israel over Pharaoh, and the Gileadites
over the children of Ammon; not rejoicing in the destruction of God's
creatures, but of God's enemies; and wishing with Deborah and Barak, "So
let all thine enemies perish, O Lord." This is no more but an applauding
of the judgment of God, and a celebration of his justice. - Edward
Marbury.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

"I have hated," etc. Consider that there can be no true friendship
betwixt a godly and a wicked person; therefore it concerneth thee to be
the more wary in thy choice. He that in factions hath an eye to power,
in friendship will have an eye to virtue. Friendship, according to the
philosopher, is one soul in two bodies. But how can they ever be of one
soul that are as different as air and earth, and as contrary as fire and
water? All true love is, motus animi ad fruendum Deo propter ipsum; se
et proximo propter Deum - a motion of the soul towards the enjoyment of
God for himself, and his neighbours for God's sake; so that be can never
truly love man who doth not love his Maker. God is the only foundation
upon which we can build friendship; therefore such as live without him,
cannot love us in him. That building which is loose, without this
foundation can never stand long. A wicked man may call that profession
he maketh to his brother by the name of love, but heathens can tell us
that virtue alone is the hand which can twist the cords of love; that
other combinations are but a confederacy, and all other but conjunctions
in hypocrisy. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

Wheresoever we perceive any people to worship God truly after his word,
there we may be certain the church of Christ to be, unto the which we
ought to associate ourselves, and to desire, with the prophet David, to
praise God in the midst of this church. But if we behold, through the
iniquity of time, congregations to be made with counterfeit religion,
otherwise than the word of God doth teach, we ought then, if we be
required to be companions thereof, to say again with David, "I have
hated the synagogue of the malignant, and will not sit with the wicked."
In the Apocalypse, the church of Ephesus is highly commended, because
she tried such as said they were apostles and were not in deed, and
therefore would not abide the company of them. Further, God commanded
his people that they should not seek Bethel, neither enter into Galgala,
where idolatry was used, by the mouth of his prophet Amos. - John
Philpot (Martyr). Burnt at Smithfield, 1555.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

How few consider how they harden wicked men by an intimacy with them,
whereas withdrawment from them might be a means to make them ashamed!
Whilst we are merry and jovial with them, we make them believe their
condition is not deplorable, their danger is not great; whereas if we
shunned them, as we would a bowed wall, whilst they remain enemies to
the Lord, this might do them good, for the startling of them, and
rousing of them out of their unhappy security and strong delusions
wherein they are held. - Lewis Stuckley.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will wash mine hands in innocency." There are two eminent lavers in
the gospel; the first, Christ's bath, a hot bath, lavacrum sanguinis,
the laver of Christ's blood; the second, our bath, a cold bath, lavacrum
lachrimarum, the laver of repentance. These two mixed together will
prove a sovereign composition, wrought first by Christ himself when he
sweat water and blood. The first is as that pool of Bethesda into which
whosoever enters with faith, is healed; the blood of Christ is the true
laver of regeneration, a fountain set open for Judah and Jerusalem to
wash in. "The blood of Christ purgeth us from all sins." [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007). We account it charity in mothers
to feed their children with their own milk: how dear is the love of
Christ, that both washeth and feeds us with his own blood! No sooner are
we born in Christ, but just as our mother's, so Christ's blood is turned
into milk, nourishing us to everlasting salvation. What is calamus
benjamini, or storax, or a thousand rivers of oil, to make us clean,
except the Lord purge and cleanse us? No; 'tis his blood "that speaks
better things than the blood of Abel." "Unto him, therefore, that loved
us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and hath made us kings
and priests to God and his Father: to him be glory and dominion for
ever." [Rev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006). But yet 'tis the second bath, the
laver of repentance, that must apply and make the first operative. This
bath of Mary Magdalene's repentance, it is a kind of rebaptisation,
giving strength and effect to the first washing. And it implies a
threefold act: first, to bruise our hearts by contrition: secondly, to
lay our wounds open by confession to God; thirdly, to wash our hands in
innocency, by satisfaction to men.... Wash now and wash all; from the
crown of the head to the sole of the foot there is nothing in us but
wounds and sores; yet above all there is something here in it that David
washeth his "hands." Indeed it is not enough to come with wet eyes, if
we come with foul hands, to offer with unwashen hands; the Gentiles
would not do it. Contrition and confession to God make not up complete
repentance without satisfaction to men. Non remittitur peccatum nisi
restituatur ablatum: it is as true as old, and in old father Latimer's
English it is, "Either there must be restitution, open or secret, or
else hell." Whoever repairs not the wrong, rejoiceth in the sin. [Pro
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014). Where there is no satisfaction,
Non agitur sed fingitur paenitentia," saith St. Augustine; and those who
restore not all, wash not their whole hands, they dip only the tips of
their fingers. Extortion, rapine, bribery, these are the sins of the
hands (sins so proper to the Jews, that they may well conceive as they
do that the devil lies all night on their hands, and that is it makes
them so diligent in washing); but as for us Christians, unless these
vipers be shaken off our hands, though ye cover the altar of the Lord
with tears, with weeping, and with crying out, yet if you continue in
your pollutions, God regards not your offering any more, nor will he
receive it with good will at your hands. [Mat
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013). - Isaac Bargrave's Sermon before
the House of Commons, 1623.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will wash my hands in innocency: so will I compass thine altar, O
Lord." If greatness might have privileged this person from impurity,
David was a king; if the grace of his soul might have freed him from the
soil of sin, he was "a man after God's own heart." But let not great men
put too much trust in their greatness; the longer the robe is, the more
soil it contracts: great power may prove the mother of great damnation.
And as for purity, there is a generation that say there's no sin in
them, but they deceive themselves; there is no truth in them. Whatever
Rome's φυσιόλογοι pretend for the power of nature, and of free will, we
wretched sinners are taught to conceive more truly of our own infirmity.
Christ's own apostle, stout Thomas, failed in the faith of his
resurrection; Peter (whose chair is now the pretended seat of
infallibility) denied his Master; David, "a man after God's own heart,"
hath need of washing; and who can say, I am pure in the sight of the
Lord? Certainly, O Lord, no flesh is righteous in thy sight. No; this is
the best ground of Christian felicity, if with David we fall to a sight
of our own sins; if with the Publican we strike our own breasts, and not
with the Pharisee, cast our eye so much upon other men's faults. Why
should we, like tailors, measure all men but ourselves? as if the best
of us had not sin enough of his own to think on. See how David calls
himself to account for his own sins; "O Lord, I know mine iniquity, and
my sin is ever before me." Oh, the powerful effect of Christian
devotion, when by the reflective act of the understanding, science is
turned into conscience, and our knowledge is but the glass of our own
imperfection, the glass wherein the sight of our sins sends us presently
to God, as it did David here, who makes this account only betwixt God
and his own soul, "I, O Lord." First, he takes his rise from humility
and the sight of his own sins, and he soars up by the wings of faith to
the throne of God's mercy: "I, O Lord." He sees with his own eyes, and
not only with the church, or the priest's spectacles; he is his own
penitentiary and confessor; here's no intercession by saints, no masses,
merits, indulgencies, trentals, dirges: all's done betwixt God and him:
"I, O Lord." With the eye of humility he looks to himself and his own
misery; then with the eye of faith to God and his mercy, and from both
these results a third virtue of repentance in the act of preparation,
washing the soil of sin in the bath of sorrow: "I will wash mine hands,"
etc. - Isaac Bargrave.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will wash my hands in purity." Referring in these words, to the
ordinary use of the sacrifices, he makes a distinction between himself
and those who professed to offer the same divine worship, and thrust
themselves forward in the services of the sanctuary, as if they alone
had the sole right to perform them. As David, therefore, and these
hypocrites were one in this respect, that they entered the sanctuary,
and surrounded the sacred altar together, he proceeds to show that he
was a true worshipper, declaring that he not only diligently attended to
the external rites, but came to worship God with unfeigned devotion. It
is obvious that he alludes to the solemn rite of washing which was
practised under the law. He, accordingly, reproves the gross
superstition of hypocrites, who, in seeking only the purification of
water, neglected true purification; whereas it was God's design, in the
appointment of the outward sign, to put men in mind of their inward
pollution, and thus to encourage them to repentance. The outward washing
alone, instead of profiting hypocrites, kept them at a greater distance
from God. When the Psalmist, therefore, says, "I will wash my hands in
innocence," he intimates that they only gather more pollution and filth
by their washings. The Hebrew word, גקּיון nikkayon, signifies the
cleanness of anything, and is figuratively used for innocence. We thus
see, that as hypocrites derive no moral purity whatever from their
washings, David mocks at the labour with which they vainly toil and
torment themselves in such rites. - John Calvin.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will wash mine hands," etc. David willing to express his coming with
a pure heart to pray to God, doth it by this similitude of a priest;
that as a priest washes his hands, and then offers oblation, so had he
constantly joined purity and devotion together. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"In innocency." The very ἀκμὴand crown of all our preparation, the
purest water we can wash in, is innocency; and innocency is a virtue of
the heart as well as of the hand. "Cleanse your hands, ye sinners; and
purity your hearts, ye double minded." [Jam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#008). I could wish our washing might be
like Cyprian's baptising, ad tincturam, even till we were dyed in
repentance and the blood of Christ. Let the quantity of thy sins be the
measure of thy repentance. First offer thine innocency, then thy
sacrifice. It is not enough that you come this day by order, you must
come with innocency. God requires the duty of the second table, as well
as of the first; he abhors the outward act of piety where he finds no
conscience and practice of innocency. - Isaac Bargrave.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006) (first clause)

One morning, as Gotthold was pouring water into a basin, he recollected
the words of Scripture: "I will wash my hands in innocency," a text
which shows how diligently the royal prophet had endeavoured to lead a
blameless life, and walk habitually in the fear of God. Upon this he
mused, and said, Henceforth, my God, every time I pour out water to wash
with, I will call to mind that it is my duty to cleanse my hands from
wicked actions, my mouth from wicked words, and my heart from wicked
lusts and desires, that so I may be enabled to lift holy hands unto
thee, and with unspotted lips and heart worship thee, to the best of my
ability. What will it profit me to strive after outward purity, if my
heart is filthy and abominable in thy sight? Can the food nourish me
which I have earned with polluted hands, or seized with violence and
injustice, or eaten with insensibility and ingratitude? Ah! no, my God;
far from me be food like this. My first care shall be to maintain a
blameless walk; my next, when I have thoughtlessly defiled myself, to
cleanse and wash away the stain, and remove mine iniquity from thine
eyes. "Purge me, O my God, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter than snow." [Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007). -
Christian Scriver (1629-1693), in "Gotthold's Emblems."

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will compass thine altar, O Lord. On the next day after this feast
\[the Feast of Tabernacles\], the people compassed the altar seven
times, with palm boughs in their hands, in the remembrance of the
overthrow of Jericho.... Not only the boughs, but the days of this whole
Feast of Tabernacles, were termed Hosannoth, from the usual acclamation
of the people whilst they carried the boughs up and down. - Thomas
Godwyn, B.D. (1587-1643), in "Moses and Aaron."

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

By the phrase compassing the altar, either he alludes to some Levitical
custom of going about the altar, as the priests did in the oblation of
their sacrifices; and the people, especially those of them who were more
devout and zealous, who possibly moved from place to place, but still
within their own court, that they might discern what was done on the
several sides of the altar, and so be the more affected with it; or
rather he implies that he would offer many sacrifices together, which
would employ the priests round about the altar. - Matthew Pool.

[Psa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)

"Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house," etc. "I have in my
congregation," said a venerable minister of the gospel, "a worthy, aged
woman, who has for many years been so deaf as not to distinguish the
loudest sound, and yet she is always one of the first in the meeting. On
asking the reason of her constant attendance (as it was impossible for
her to hear my voice), she answered, 'Though I cannot hear you, I come
to God's house because I love it, and would be found in his ways; and he
gives me many a sweet thought upon the text when it is pointed out to
me' another reason is, because there I am in the best company, in the
more immediate presence of God, and among his saints, the honourable of
the earth. I am not satisfied with serving God in private; it is my duty
and privilege to honour him regularly in public." What a reproof this is
to those who have their hearing, and yet always come to a place of
worship late, or not at all! - K. Arvine.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

"Gather not my soul with sinners." Now is the time that people should be
in care and concern, that their souls be not gathered with sinners in
the other world. In discoursing from this doctrine we shall - 1.
Consider some things implied in it. 2. Show who are the sinners, that we
are to have a horror of our souls being gathered with in the other
world. 3. What it is for one's soul to be gathered with sinners in the
other world. 4. Consider this care and concern, or show what is implied
in this earnest request, "Gather not my soul with sinners." 5. Give the
reasons why we should be in such care and concern. 6. Make application.

Death is the gathering time, which the Psalmist has in view in the text.
Ye have a time here that ye call the gathering time, about the term when
the servants are going away, wherein ye gather your strayed sheep, that
every one may get their own again. Death is God's gathering time wherein
he gets the souls belonging to him, and the devil those belonging to
him. They did go long together, but then they are parted; and saints are
taken home to the congregation of saints, and sinners to the
congregation of sinners. And it concerns us to say, "Gather not my soul
with sinners." Whoever be our people here, God's people or the devil's,
death will gather our souls to them.

It is a horrible thing to be gathered with sinners in the other world.
To think of our souls being gathered with them there, may make the hair
of one's head stand up. Many now like no gathering like the gathering
with sinners; it is the very delight of their hearts, it makes a brave
jovial life in their eyes. And it is a pain to them to be gathered with
saints, to be detained before the Lord on a Sabbath-day. But to be
gathered with them in the other world, is a horror to all sorts. 1. The
saints have a horror of it, as in the text. To think to be staked down
in their company in the other world would be a hell of itself to the
godly. David never had such a horror of the society of the diseased, the
persecuted, etc., as of sinners. He is content to be gathered with
saints of whatever condition; but, "Lord," says he, "Gather not my soul
with sinners." 2. The wicked themselves have a horror of it. [Num
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010). "Let me die the death of the
righteous," said the wicked Balaam, "and let my last end be like his."
Though they would be content to live with them, or be with them in life,
their consciences bear witness that they have a horror of being with
them in death. They would live with sinners, but they would die with
saints. A poor, unreasonable, self-condemning thought. - Thomas Boston.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

"Gather not my soul with sinners." Bind me not up in the same bundle
with them, like the tares for the fire. [Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030). The contrast to this is seen in
the following Psalm ([Psa 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#010)),
"When my father and my mother forsake me, then the Lord will take me
up;" literally, will gather me to his fold. - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

"Gather not my soul with sinners." The Lord hath a harvest and a
gleaning time also, set for cutting down and binding together, in the
fellowship of judgments, God's enemies, who have followed the same
course of sinning: for here we are given to understand that God will
"gather their souls," and so will let none escape. - David Dickson.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

"Gather not my soul with sinners." After all, it may be objected that
this concern seems to be common to saints and sinners. Even a wicked
Balaam said, "Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end
be like his." [Num 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#010). Take a few
differences between them in this matter. 1. It is separation from Christ
that makes the saints to have a horror at being gathered with sinners
hereafter. Separation from Christ is the main ground of the believer's
horror: but if other things were to be right with the sinner in the
other world, he would be easy under separation from Christ. 2. The
believer has a horror at being gathered with sinners on account of their
filthiness; but the thing that makes the sinner concerned is the
prospect of punishment. No doubt, a principle of self-preservation must
make punishment frightful to all; but abstracted from that, the saints
have a concern not to be gathered with sinners in the other world, upon
account of their unholiness and filthiness. "He who is filthy, let him
be filthy still," is enough to make a saint abhor the lot of sinners in
the life to come. 3. The concern of the saints has a mighty influence
upon them, to make them study holiness here; but sinners live unholy for
all their concern. "And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth
himself, even as he is pure." [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003). What hope? The hope of seeing
Christ as he is, and of being perfectly like him, of being separated
from sinners. 4. Lastly, the concern of the saints is such, that they do
with purpose of heart come out from among sinners more and more in this
world; but sinners are not concerned to be separated from sinners here.
Balaam wished to die the death of the righteous; but he had no concern
to live the life of the righteous, and to be separated from sinners
here. - James Scot, 1773.

[Psa 26:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

David prays that God would not "gather his would with sinners, whose
right hand is full of bribes;" such as, for advantage, would be bribed
to sin, to which wicked gang he opposeth himself, [Psa
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011) : "But as for me, I will walk in
mine integrity;" where he tells us what kept him from being corrupted
and enticed, as they were, from God - it was his integrity. A soul
walking in its integrity will take bribes neither from men, nor sin
itself; and therefore he saith ([Psa
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012)), "His foot stood in an even
place;" or, as some read it, "My foot standeth in righteousness." -
William Gurnall.

[Psa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010)

"Their right hand is full of bribes." If the great men in Turkey should
use their religion of Mahomet to sell, as our patrons commonly sell
benefices here (the office of preaching, the office of salvation), it
should be taken as an intolerable thing; the Turk would not suffer it in
his commonwealth. Patrons be charged to see the office done, and not to
seek a lucre and a gain by their patronship. There was a patron in
England that had a benefice fallen into his hand, and a good brother of
mine came unto him, and brought him thirty apples in a dish, and gave
them to his man to carry them to his master. It is like he gave one to
his man for his labour, to make up the gain, and so there was
thirty-one. This man cometh to his master, and presented him with the
dish of apples, saying, "Sir, such a man hath sent you a dish of fruit,
and desireth you to be good unto him for such a benefice." "Tush, tush,"
quoth he, "this is no apple matter, I will none of his apples, I have as
good as these (or any he hath) in mine own orchard." The man came to the
priest again, and told him what his master said. "Then," quoth the
priest, "desire him yet to prove one of them for my sake, he shall find
them much better than they look for." He cut one of them, and found ten
pieces of gold in it. "Marry," quoth he, "this is a good apple." The
priest standing not far off, hearing what the gentleman said, cried out
and answered, "they are all one apples, I warrant you, sir; they grew
all on one tree, and have all one taste." "Well, he is a good fellow,
let him have it," quoth the patron, etc. Get you a graft of this same
tree, and I warrant you it shall stand you in better stead than all St.
Paul's learning. - Hugh Latimer.

[Psa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010)

"Bribes." They that see furthest into the law, and most clearly discern
the cause of justice, if they suffer the dust of bribes to be thrown
into their sight, their eyes will water and twinkle, and fall at last to
blind connivance. It is a wretched thing when justice is made a hackney
that may be backed for money, and put on with golden spurs, even to the
desired journey's end of injury and iniquity. Far be from our souls this
wickedness, that the ear which should be open to complaints should be
stopped with the earwax of partiality. Alas! poor truth, that she must
now be put to the charges of a golden earpick, or she cannot be heard! -
Thomas Adams.

[Psa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010)

What makes all doctrines plain and clear?

About two hundred pounds a-year.

And that which was proved true before

Proved false again? Two hundred more.

Samuel Butler (1600 - 1680), in "Hudibras." Part III. Canto I.

[Psa 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012) (first clause)

The upright man's "foot," is said to "stand in an even place;" he walks
not haltingly and uncomely as those who go in unequal ways, which are
hobbling, and up and down, or those whose feet and legs are not even (as
Solomon saith), "The legs of the lame are not equal," and so cannot
stand in an even place, because one is long and the other short; the
sincere man's feet are even, and legs of a length, as I may say; his
care alike conscientious to the whole will of God. The hypocrite, like
the badger, hath one foot shorter than another; or, like a foundered
horse, he doth not stand, as we say, right of all four; one foot at
least you shall perceive he favours, doth to put it down. - William
Gurnall.

[Psa 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012)

"On an even place." As a man whose feet are firmly fixed upon even
ground is apprehensive of no fall, so the pious worshippers of Jehovah
feel no dread lest their adversaries should finally triumph over them. -
William Walford.

[Psalms 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 26:1</span></span>

1 Judge me, O Lord; for I have walked in mine integrity: I have trusted
also in the Lord; therefore I shall not slide.

2 Examine me, O Lord, and prove me; try my reins and my heart.

3 For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes: and I have walked in thy
truth.

[Psa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#001)

"Judge me, O Jehovah." - A solemn appeal to the just tribunal of the
heart-searching God, warranted by the circumstances of the writer, so
far as regarded the particular offences with which he was wrongly
charged. Worried and worn out by the injustice of men, the innocent
spirit flies from its false accusers to the throne of Eternal Right. He
had need have a clear case who dares to carry his suit into the King's
Bench of heaven. Such an appeal as this is not to be rashly made on any
occasion; and as to the whole of our walk and conversation, it should
never be made at all, except as we are justified in Christ Jesus: a far
more fitting prayer for a sinful mortal is the petition, "Enter not into
judgment with thy servant." "For I have walked in mine integrity." He
held integrity as his principle, and walked in it as his practice. David
had not used any traitorous or unrighteous means to gain the crown, or
to keep it; he was conscious of having been guided by the noblest
principles of honour in all his actions with regard to Saul and his
family. What a comfort it is to have the approbation of one's own
conscience! If there be peace within the soul, the blustering storms of
slander which howl around us are of little consideration. When the
little bird in my bosom sings a merry song, it is no matter to me if a
thousand owls hoot at me from without. "I have trusted also in the
Lord." Faith is the root and sap of integrity. He who leans upon the
Lord is sure to walk in righteousness. David knew that God's covenant
had given him the crown, and therefore he took no indirect or unlawful
means to secure it; he would not slay his enemy in the cave, nor suffer
his men-at-arms to smite him when he slept unguarded on the plain. Faith
will work hard for the Lord, and in the Lord's way, but she refuses so
much as to lift a finger to fulfil the devices of unrighteous cunning.
Rebecca acted out a great falsehood in order to fulfil the Lord's decree
in favour of Jacob - this was unbelief; but Abraham left the Lord to
fulfil his own purposes, and took the knife to slay his son - this was
faith. Faith trusts God to accomplish his own decrees. Why should I
steal when God has promised to supply my need? Why should I avenge
myself when I know that Lord has espoused my cause? Confidence in God is
a most effectual security against sin. "Therefore I shall not slide."
Slippery as the way is, so that I walk like a man upon ice, yet faith
keeps my heels from tripping, and will continue to do so. The doubtful
ways of policy are sure sooner or later to give a fall to those who run
therein, but the ways of honesty, though often rough, are always safe.
We cannot trust in God if we walk crookedly; but straight paths and
simple faith bring the pilgrim happily to his journey's end.

[Psa 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#002)

There are three modes of trial here challenged, which are said in the
original to refer to trial by touch, trial by smell, and trial by fire.
The Psalmist was so clear from the charge laid against him, that he
submitted himself unconditionally to any form of examination which the
Lord might see fit to employ. "Examine me, O Lord." Look me through and
through; make a minute survey; put me to the question, cross-examine my
evidence. "And prove me." Put me again to trial; and see if I would
follow such wicked designs as my enemies impute to me. "Try my reins and
my heart." Assay me as metals are assayed in the furnace, and do this to
my most secret parts, where my affections hold their court; see, O God,
whether or no I love murder, and treason, and deceit. All this is a very
bold appeal, and made by a man like David, who feared the Lord
exceedingly, it manifests a most solemn and complete conviction of
innocence. The expressions here used should teach us the thoroughness of
the divine judgment, and the necessity of being in all things profoundly
sincere, lest we be found wanting at the last. Our enemies are severe
with us with the severity of spite, and this a brave man endures without
a fear; but God's severity is that of unswerving right, who shall stand
against such a trial? The sweet singer asks "Who can stand before his
cold?" and we may well enquire, "Who can stand before the heat of his
justice?"

[Psa 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#003)

"For thy lovingkindness is before mine eyes." - An object of memory and
a ground of hope. A sense of mercy received sets a fair prospect before
the faithful mind in its gloomiest condition, for it yields visions of
mercies yet to come, visions not visionary but real. Dwell, dear reader,
upon that celestial word lovingkindness. It has a heavenly savour. Is it
not an unmatchable word, unexcelled, unrivalled? The goodness of the
Lord to us should be before our eyes as a motive actuating our conduct;
we are not under the bondage of the law, but we are under the sweet
constraints of grace, which are far more mighty, although far more
gentle. Men sin with the law before their eyes, but divine love when
clearly seen, sanctifies the conversation. If we were not so forgetful
of the way of mercy in which God walks towards us, we should be more
careful to walk in the ways of obedience towards him. "And I have walked
in thy truth." The Psalmist was preserved from sin by his assurance of
the truthfulness of God's promise, which truth he endeavoured to imitate
as well as to believe. Observe from this verse, that an experience of
divine love will show itself in a practical following of divine truth;
those who neglect either the doctrinal or practical parts of truth must
not wonder if they lose the experimental enjoyment of it. Some talk of
truth, it is better to walk in it. Some vow to do well in future, but
their resolutions come to nothing; only the regenerate man can say "I
have walked in thy truth."

[Psalms 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 26:4</span></span>

4 I have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with
dissemblers.

5 I have hated the congregation of evil doers; and will not sit with the
wicked.

So far from being himself an open offender against the laws of God, the
Psalmist had not even associated with the lovers of evil. He had kept
aloof from the men of Belial. A man is known by his company, and if we
have kept ourselves apart from the wicked, it will always be evidence in
our favour should our character be impugned. He who was never in the
parish is not likely to have stolen the corn. He who never went to sea
is clearly not the man who scuttled the ship.

[Psa 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#004)

"I have not sat with vain persons." - True citizens have no dealings
with traitors. David had no seat in the parliament of triflers. They
were not his boon companions at feasts, nor his advisers in council, nor
his associates in conversation. We must needs see, and speak, and trade,
with men of the world, but we must on no account take our rest and
solace in their empty society. Not only the profane, but the vain are to
be shunned by us. All those who live for this life only are vain,
chaffy, frothy men, quite unworthy of a Christian's friendship.
Moreover, as this vanity is often allied with falsehood, it is well to
save ourselves altogether from this untoward generation lest we should
be led from bad to worse, and from tolerating the vain, should come to
admire the wicked. "Neither will I go in with dissemblers." Since I know
that hypocritical piety is double iniquity, I will cease all
acquaintance with pretenders. If I must needs walk the same street, I
will not enter the same door and spend my time in their society. The
congregation of the hypocrites is not one with which we should cultivate
communion; their ultimate rendezvous will be the lowest pit of hell, let
us drop their acquaintance now! for we shall not desire it soon. They
hang their beads around their necks, and carry the devil in their
hearts. This clause is in the future tense, to indicate that the writer
felt no desire to begin an acquaintance with characters whom up till
then he had shunned. We must maintain the separated path with more and
more circumspection as we see the great redemption day approaching.
Those who would be transfigured with Jesus, must not be disfigured by
conformity to the world. The resolution of the Psalmist suggests, that
even among professed followers of truth we must make distinctions, for
as there are vain persons oat of the church, so there are dissemblers in
it, and both are to be shunned with scrupulous decision.

[Psa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#005)

"I have hated the congregation of evil doers." - A severe sentence, but
not too severe. A man who does not hate evil terribly, does not love
good heartily. Men, as men, we must always love, for they are our
neighbours, and therefore to be loved as ourselves; but evil doers, as
such, are traitors to the Great King, and no loyal subject can love
traitors. What God hates we must hate. The congregation or assembly of
evil doers, signifies violent men in alliance and conclave for the
overthrow of the innocent; such synagogues of Satan are to be held in
abhorrence. What a sad reflection it is that there should be a
congregation of evil doers as well as a congregation of the upright, a
church of Satan as well as a church of God; a seed of the serpent as
well as a seed of the woman; an old Babylon as well as a new Jerusalem;
a great whore sitting upon many waters, to be judged in wrath, as well
as a chaste bride of the Lamb to be crowned at his coming. "And will not
sit with the wicked." Saints have a seat at another table, and will
never leave the King's dainties for the husks of the swine-trough.
Better to sit with the blind, and the halt, and the lame, at the table
of mercy, than with the wicked in their feasts of ungodliness, yea,
better to sit on Job's dunghill than on Pharaoh's throne. Let each
reader see well to his company, for such as we keep in this world, we
are likely to keep in the next.

[Psalms 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 26:6</span></span>

6 I will wash mine hands in innocency so will I compass thine altar, O
Lord:

7 That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and tell of all thy
wondrous works.

8 Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house, and the place where
thine honour dwelleth.

[Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006)

"I will wash mine hands in innocency." - He would publicly avow himself
to be altogether clear of the accusations laid against him, and if any
fault in other matters could be truthfully alleged against him, he would
for the future abstain from it. The washing of the hands is a
significant action to set forth our having no connection with a deed, as
we still say, "I wash my hands of the whole business." As to perfect
innocence, David does not here claim it, but he avows his innocence of
the crimes whereof he was slanderously accused; there is, however, a
sense in which we may be washed in absolute innocence, for the atoning
blood makes us clean every whir. We ought never to rest satisfied short
of a full persuasion of our complete cleansing by Jesus' precious blood.
"So will I compass thine altar, O Lord." Priests unto God must take
great care to be personally cleansed; the brazen laver was as needful as
the golden altar; God's worship requires us to be holy in life. He who
is unjust to man cannot be acceptably religious towards God. We must not
bring our thank offerings with hands defiled with guilt. To love justice
and purity is far more acceptable to God than ten thousands of the fat
of fed beasts. We see from this verse that holy minds delight in the
worship of the Lord, and find their sweetest solace at his altar; and
that it is their deepest concern never to enter upon any course of
action which would unfit them for the most sacred communion with God.
Our eye must be upon the altar which sanctifieth both the giver and the
gift, yet we must never draw from the atoning sacrifice an excuse for
sin, but rather find in it a most convincing argument for holiness.

[Psa 26:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#007)

"That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving." David was so far
instructed that he does not mention the typical offering, but discerns
the spiritual offering which was intended thereby, not the groans of
bullocks, but songs of gratitude the spiritual worshipper presents. To
sound abroad the worthy praises of the God of all grace should be the
everyday business of a pardoned sinner. Let men slander us as they will,
let us not defraud the Lord of his praises; let dogs bark, but let us
like the moon shine on. "And tell of all thy wondrous works." God's
people should not be tongue-tied. The wonders of divine grace are enough
to make the tongue of the dumb sing. God's works of love are wondrous if
we consider the unworthiness of their objects, the costliness of their
method, and the glory of their result. And as men find great pleasure in
discoursing upon things remarkable and astonishing, so the saints
rejoice to tell of the great things which the Lord hath done for them.

[Psa 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#008)

"Lord, I have loved the habitation of thy house." Into the abodes of sin
he would not enter, but the house of God he had long loved, and loved it
still. We were sad children if we did not love our Father's
dwelling-place. Though we own no sacred buildings, yet the church of the
living God is the house of God, and true Christians delight in her
ordinances, services, and assemblies. O that all our days were Sabbaths!
"And the place where thine honour dwelleth." In his church where God is
had in honour at all times, where he reveals himself in the glory of his
grace, and is proclaimed by his people as the Lord of all. We come not
together as the Lord's people to honour the preacher, but to give glory
to God; such an occupation is most pleasant to the saints of the Most
High. What are those gatherings where God is not honoured, are they not
an offence to his pure and holy eyes, and are they not a sad
stumbling-block to the people of God? It brings the scalding-tear upon
our cheek to hear sermons in which the honour of God is so far from
being the preacher's object, that one might almost imagine that the
preacher worshipped the dignity of manhood, and thought more of it than
of the Infinite Majesty of God.

[Psalms 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 26:9</span></span>

9 Gather not my soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men:

10 In whose hand is mischief, and their right hand is full of bribes.

[Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009)

"Gather not my soul with sinners." - Lord, when, like fruit, I must be
gathered, put me not in the same basket with the best of sinners, much
less with the worst of them. The company of sinners is so distasteful to
us here, that we cannot endure the thought of being bound up in the same
bundle with them to all eternity. Our comfort is, that the Great
Husbandman discerns the tares from the wheat, and will find a separate
place for distinct characters. In the former verses we see that the
Psalmist kept himself clear of profane persons, and this is to be
understood as a reason why he should not be thrust into their company at
the last. Let us think of the doom of the wicked, and the prayer of the
text will forcibly rise to our lips; meanwhile, as we see the rule of
judgment by which like is gathered to its like, we who have passed from
death unto life have nothing to fear. "Nor my life with bloody men." Our
soul sickens to hear them speak; their cruel dispatches, in which they
treat the shooting of their fellow-men as rare sport, are horrifying to
us; Lord, let us not be shut up in the same prison with them; nay, the
same paradise with such men would be a hell, if they remained as they
now are.

[Psa 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#010)

"In whose hands is mischief." - They have both hands full of it,
plotting it and carrying it out. "And their right hand," with which they
are most dexterous, "is full of bribes;" like thieves who would steal
with impunity, they carry a sop for the dogs of justice. He who gives
bribes is every way as guilty as the man who takes them, and in the
matter of our parliamentary elections the rich villain who gives the
bribe is by far the worse. Bribery, in any form or shape, should be as
detestable to a Christian as carrion to a dove, or garbage to a lamb.
Let those whose dirty hands are fond of bribes remember that neither
death nor the devil can be bribed to let them escape their well-earned
doom.

[Psalms 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 26:11</span></span>

11 But as for me, I will walk in mine integrity: redeem me, and be
merciful unto me.

Here is the lover of godliness entering his personal protest against
unrighteous gain. He is a Nonconformist, and is ready to stand alone in
his Nonconformity. Like a live fish, he swims against the stream.
Trusting in God the Psalmist resolves that the plain way of
righteousness shall be his choice, and those who will, may prefer the
tortuous paths of violence and deceit. Yet he is by no means a boaster,
or a self-righteous vaunter of his own strength, for he cries for
redemption and pleads for mercy. Our integrity is not absolute nor
inherent it is a work of grace in us and is marred by human infirmity;
we must, therefore, resort to the redeeming blood and the throne of
mercy, confessing that though we are saints strong men, we must still
bow as sinners before God.

[Psalms 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 26:12</span></span>

12 My foot standeth in an even place: in the congregations will I bless
the Lord.

The song began in the minor, but it has now reached the major key.
Saints often sing themselves into happiness. The even place upon which
our foot stands is the sure, covenant faithfulness, eternal promise and
immutable oath of the Lord of Hosts; there is no fear of falling from
this solid basis, or of its being removed from under us. Established in
Christ Jesus, by being vitally united to him, we have nothing left to
occupy our thoughts but the praises of our God. Let us not forsake the
assembling of ourselves together, and when assembled, let us not be slow
to contribute our portion of thanksgiving. Each saint is a witness to
divine faithfulness, and should be ready with his testimony. As for the
slanderers, let them howl outside the door while the children sing
within.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 27](psa027)

</div>
