<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa081)  [Next](psa083) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 82](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 82:0</span></span>

Title and Subject. - A Psalm of Asaph. This poet of the temple here acts
as a preacher to the court and to the magistracy. Men who do one thing
well are generally equal to another; he who writes good verse is not
unlikely to be able to preach. What preaching it would have been had
Milton entered the pulpit, or had Virgil been an apostle.

Asaph's sermon before the judges is now before us. He speaks very
plainly, and his song is rather characterised by strength than by
sweetness. We have here a clear proof that all psalms and hymns need not
be direct expressions of praise to God; we may, according to the example
of this Psalm, admonish one another in our songs. Asaph no doubt saw
around him much bribery and corruption, and while David punished it with
the sword, he resolved to scourge it with a prophetic Psalm. In so
doing, the sweet singer was not forsaking his profession as a musician
lot the Lord, but rather was practically carrying it out in another
department. He was praising God when he rebuked the sin which
dishonoured him, and if he was not making music, he was hushing discord
when he bade rulers dispense justice with impartiality.

The Psalm is a whole and needs no formal division.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001). - The sovereignty of God
over the most powerful and exalted. How that sovereignty reveals itself,
and what we may expect from it.

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001). - The Lord's presence in
cabinets and senates.

[Psa 82:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002). - A common sin. Regard for
the persons of men often influences our judgment of their opinions,
virtues, vices, and general bearing; this involves injustice to others,
as well as deep injury to the flattered.

[Psa 82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003). - A plea for orphans.

[Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005). -

I. The characters of wicked princes.

1\. Ignorance: "They know not."

2\. Wilful blindness: "Neither will they," etc.

3\. Unrestrained perverseness: "They walk on," etc.

II\. The consequences to others: "All the foundations," etc.

1\. Of personal security.

2\. Of social comfort.

3\. Of commercial prosperity.

4\. Of national tranquility.

5\. Of religious liberty; all are out of course. - G. R.

[Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005). - (middle clause). - A
description of the pilgrimage of presumptuous sinners.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006). - "Ye are gods." The
passages in the Old Testament which involve the doctrine of the divinity
of Christ. - J. P. Lange.

[Psa 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008). -

I. The invocation: "Arise," etc.

II\. The prediction: "For thou shalt," etc. - G. R.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

Asaph, who has written so much in the previous Psalms of the coming of
Christ in the flesh, now speaks of his second coming to judgment. -
Josephus Maria Thomasius. 1649-1713.

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

"God standeth." He is said to stand, because of his immutability, his
power, his abiding presence, and also because of his promptness in act,
to decide for the right, and to help the poor, as he did S. Stephen. But
one commentator draws a yet deeper lesson from the word stand. He
reminds us that it is for the judge to sit, and for the litigants or
accused to stand; as it is written, "Moses sat to judge the people; and
the people stood by Moses from the morning until the evening." [Exo
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#013). It is then a solemn warning for
judges to remember, that whatever cause is before them is God's cause,
since right and wrong are at stake in it, and that by acquitting the
guilty, or condemning the innocent, they pass sentence against God
himself. - Albertus Magnus, Le Blanc, and Agellias, quoted by Neale and
Littledale.

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

"God standeth in the congregation of the mighty," or, "of God." These
words are exegetical, and help to illustrate what he had said before,
"God standeth in the congregation of God." What is that? Why he judgeth
as supreme amongst the judges of the world. He stands not as a cipher,
or a bare spectator, but he himself makes one amongst them.

I. He judgeth actively amongst them. We look upon men, and think the
judgment is theirs, but it is God that exerciseth judgment amongst them.
He knows the causes, directs the judges, and executes the sentence.

II\. Passively, he is so in the midst of these earthly gods, that if
they do unjustly he will execute justice on them, and judge the judges
of the world; for though they be great, yet there is a greater than
they, to whom they must shortly give an account. - Thomas Hall. 1659-60.

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

"In the congregation." - Rulers must understand that they are not placed
over stocks and stones, nor over swine and dogs, but over the
congregation of God: they must therefore be afraid of acting against God
himself when they act unjustly. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 82:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002)

"And accept the persons of the wicked." The last clause exemplifies one
of the most peculiar Hebrew idioms. The combination usually rendered
respect persons in the English Bible, and applied to judicial
partiality, means literally to take (or take up) faces. Some suppose
this to mean the raising of the countenance, or causing to look up from
dejection. But the highest philological authorities are now agreed that
the primary idea is that of accepting one man's face or person rather
than another's, the precise form of expression, though obscure, being
probably derived from the practice of admitting suitors to confer with
governors or rulers face to face, a privilege which can sometimes only
be obtained by bribes, especially, though not exclusively, in oriental
courts. - Joseph Addison Alexander.

[Psa 82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003)

It is said of Francis the First, of France, that when a woman kneeled to
him to beg justice, he bade her stand up; for, said he, Woman, it is
justice that I owe thee, and justice thou shalt have; if thou beg
anything of me, let it be mercy. A happy place and people surely, where
justice (as it seemeth), was not extorted, but dropt as kindly as honey
from the comb; where there was no sale of offices, no exchanging of
fees, no subtleties of delay, no truckling for expedition, no making
snares of petty penal statutes: where Justice had scales in her hand,
not to weigh gold, but equity; where judges and magistrates were as
Noah's ark to take in weary doves, and as the horns of the altar, for
oppressed innocency to betake itself unto; where lawyers, advocates,
pleaders, did not call evil good, or good evil, bitter sweet, etc.,
where plaintiffs and accusers did not inform or persecute through
malice, envy, or for advantage; where subordinate officers durst not
help potent delinquents out of the briars, nor suffer poor men,
tempest-tossed in law, to languish in their business within ken of
harbour for want of giving a sop to Cerberus, or sacrificing to the
great Diana of expedition; where those setting dogs, such as base,
promoting informers, were not countenanced, and severly punished upon
any false, unjust, or malicious information. To close up all, where the
magistrate owed justice to the people, and paid it; where the people
begged for mercy and had it. - William Price, 1642.

[Psa 82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003), [Psa
82:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#004)

The touchstone of magistrates' justice is in the causes and cases of the
poor, fatherless, afflicted and needy, who are not able to attend long
their suits of law, have no friends nor money to deal for them; to whom,
therefore, the mighty should be eyes to direct them, and a staff to
their weakness, to support and help them in their right. - David
Dickson.

[Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)

"They know not, neither will they understand," etc. Every judge must
have in him (as Baldus acutely said) two kinds of salt: the first is sal
scientist, that he may know his duty; the second is sal conscientise,
that he may do his duty. Such as fail in the first, are censured here
with a nescierunt, and non intellexerunt; such as fail in the second,
are branded here with an ambulant in tenebris.

The dangers upon the neglect of these duties are two: the one concerning
the whole commonwealth, "All the foundations of the earth are out of
course;" the other especially touching the private persons of the
judges, at the [Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007), "Ye shall
die like men, and fall like one of the princes," and after death comes
judgment, [Psa 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008) - "Arise, O God,
Judge the earth." Almighty God "standeth in the congregation of princes,
and is a judge among gods"; he sits Chief Justice in every session and
assize, to mark what matters pass, and how they pass, ready to judge
those righteously, who judge others unjustly, "giving wrong judgment,
and accepting the persons of the wicked." [Psa
67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004). Thus I have made the way plain
before you; God infinitely rich in mercy, grant, that both I in
speaking, and you in hearing, may walk therein (as the blessed Apostle
phraseth it, [Gal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#014)) "with a right
foot."

"They know not, neither will they understand." That is, they neither
"know" God, who made them gods; nor yet "understand" his law, which is a
lantern to their feet, and a light to their paths. Or, as Placidus
Parmensis upon the place, - They neither consider how they that be
called "gods," as commissioners and ministers of God, ought to judge
others: nor yet remember how they shall be judged themselves at the last
day, when "all the foundations of the world shall be moved," and God
himself shall "arise to judge the earth." Or, they be so corrupt and
abominable, that they will neither learn what is their office from
others, nor yet understand it by themselves. Or briefly, to give that
gloss (which fits best I think the text, I am sure the time), Nescierunt
quid facti, non intelexerunt quid jaris; they were both ignorant in the
matter of fact, as not searching out the cause; and ignorant in the
matter of law, sitting (as Paul said of Ananias), to give judgment
according to the law, and yet commanding that which is contrary to the
law. The first concerns a good deal the jury, the second a great deal
the judges; in both are condemned, as the nurses of all confusions in a
commonwealth, ignorantia simplex, and af fectata; simple ignorance, when
as they be so shallow that they cannot; affected ignorance, when as they
be so deep, that they will not understand what is right and reason. -
John Boys, in "The Judges Charge," 1618.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

"Ye are gods," etc. It is of course, to civil governors, especially
those entrusted with the administration of justice, that the prophet
addresses this stern admonition. He calls them "the gods," and "the sons
of the Most High." To the people of Israel this kind of appellation
would not seem over bold: for it was applied to judges in well-known
texts of the Law of Moses. Thus, in the code of civil statutes delivered
at Sinai, it is said, "Thou shalt not revile the gods, nor curse the
ruler of thy people." [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028). Nor
is that the only instance of the kind. In two other passages of the same
code ([Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006), and [Exo
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008), [Exo
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009)), the word which our translators
have rendered "the judges," is in the Hebrew, "the gods," or "God."
Since the ordinary Hebrew word for God (Elohim) is almost always used in
the plural form, it is hard to say whether it ought to be rendered in
these passages in the singular or plural. The meaning is the same either
way. It is a matter of indifference, for example, whether the law in
[Exo 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006), be rendered thus, "his (the
bondman's) master shall bring him to the gods"; or, with the Septuagint,
"his master shall bring him to the judgment-seat of God." In either case
the terms are plainly meant to imply that the Majesty of God is present
in the place of judgment. As it is said of Solomon that he "sat on the
throne of the Lord as King," [Ch1
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#023), so it may be said of every
magistrate that he sits in God's seat. God has put upon him a portion of
his own dominion and authority; and has ordained that he is to be
obeyed, not for wrath's sake only, but for conscience sake. The civil
magistrate, in discharging his high function, may justly claim to govern
with a divine right.

No one needs to be told that this old doctrine of the divine right of
rulers has been woefully abused. Sycophantic divines have often made of
it a flattering unction for the ears of princes; teaching them that they
owed no obedience to the laws; that they were responsible to none but
God for their administration; that any attempt on the part of the people
to curb their tyranny, or to depose them from their seats when milder
measures failed, was rebellion against God whose Vicegerents they were.
Even now, the same doctrine occasionally makes itself heard from the
pulpit and the press; and thus men attempt to subject the consciences of
the people to the caprice of tyrants. Let it be carefully observed that
the harp of Asaph lends no sanction to this "right divine of kings to
govern wrong." If the prophet testifies that princes are gods, he
includes in the honour the humblest magistrate. The elders administering
justice in the gate of Bethlehem, though their town be little among the
thousands of Judah, sit in God's seat as truly as King Solomon on his
ivory throne in the porch of judgment at Jerusalem. The common saying
that "the divine right of kings is the divine right of constables," is a
rough way of expressing a Bible truth. Let this be borne in mind, and no
one will allege Scripture in defence of royal claims to indefeasible and
irresponsible authority, or claim for such authority the sanction, of
divine right.

But while care ought to be taken to guard the divine right of civil
government from abuse, the right itself is not to be forgotten. The
state is an ordinance of God, having, like the family, its foundation in
the very constitution of human nature. The officers of the state,
whether supreme or subordinate, have a divine right to administer
justice in the community over which Providence has placed them. They who
resort to the civil magistrate for judgment, resort to the judgment-seat
of God; just as they who resort to the Ministry of the Word resort to
the Great Prophet of the Church. Unless the magistrate had received a
commission from God, he could not lawfully bear the sword. To take the
life of an unarmed fellow-man, without a commission from the Most High
warranting the act, would be to commit murder. - William Binnie.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

In his Lex Rex, Rutherford argues from this Psalm that judges are not
the creatures of kings, to execute their pleasure, and do not derive
their power from the monarch, but are authorized by God himself as much
as the king, and are therefore bound to execute justice whether the
monarch desires it or no.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

"I have said, ye are gods." Princes and judges are "gods" (Elohim), on
the ground that "unto them the word of God came" ([Joh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035)), constituting them such. Even
here, when God is about to pass sentence on them, he begins with
recognizing their divinely-appointed dignity on which they presumed, as
if giving them absolute power to do as they pleased, right or wrong;
forgetting that high office has its duties as well as its dignities.
Sonship is closely allied to kingship and judgeship. These combined
dignities, which by all others have been abused, shall be realized in
all their grandest ideal by the coming King, Judge, and Son of the Most
High ([Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006), [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007), [Psa
2:10-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010).) - A. R. Fausset.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

"I have said, ye are gods." As parasites in base flattery and compliance
with their pride, have vainly called some of them so, and as some
princes have most wickedly and blasphemously affected to be called, yea
to be adored, as gods, (God will take highest vengeance upon all those
who take his name upon them, or submit to it when given them), so God
himself hath put his own name upon magistrates, to mind them of their
duty, or for a twofold end. First, that being called gods, they should
judge and rule as God doth, or with a mind like God, free from the
mixture of a private or passionate spirit, and filled with a love to,
and a delight in, impartial judgment and righteousness. Secondly, that
being called gods, all men might learn their duty, freely to submit to
them and duly honour them; seeing any dishonour done to them reflects
upon God whose name they bear. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

"Gods." It is not Jah or Jehovah, a name of essence, but Eloah or
Elohim, a name of office that is given them. - Thomas Gataker.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006), [Psa
82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

"Ye are gods;" there he considered their pomp and dignity: "But ye shall
die like men;" there he minds their end, that with the change of his
note they might also change countenance. He tells them their honour, but
withal their lot. In power, wealth, train, titles, friends, they differ
from others; in death they differ not from others. They are cold when
winter comes, withered with age, weak with sickness, and melt away with
death, as the meanest: all to ashes. "All flesh is as grass, and all the
glory of man as the flower," [Pe1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#024)
: the glory, that is, the best of it, but a flower. No great difference,
the flower shows fairer, the grass stands longer, one scythe cuts down
both. Beasts fat and lean, fed in one pasture, killed in one slaughter.
The prince in his lofty palace, the beggar in his lowly cottage, have
double difference, local and ceremonial height and lowness; yet meet at
the grave, and are mingled in ashes. We walk in this world as a man in a
field of snow; all the way appears smooth, yet cannot we be sure of any
step. All are like actors on a stage, some have one part and some
another, death is still busy amongst us; here drops one of the players,
we bury him with sorrow, and to our scene again: then falls another, yea
all, one after another, till death be left upon the stage. Death is that
damp which puts out all the dim lights of vanity. Yet man is easier to
believe that all the world shall die, than to suspect himself. - Thomas
Adams.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

"Ye shall die like men," etc. Even you which glisten like angels, whom
all the world admires, and sues and bows to, which are called
honourable, mighty and gracious lords, I will tell you to what your
honour shall come: first, ye shall wax old like others, then ye shall
fall sick like others, then ye shall die like others, then ye shall be
buried like others, then ye shall be consumed like others, then ye shall
be judged like others, even like the beggars which cry at your gates-one
sickens, the other sickens; one dies, the other dies; one rots, the
other rots: look in the grave, and shew me which was Dives and which was
Lazarus. This is some comfort to the poor, that once he shall be like
the rich; one day he shall be as wealthy, and as glorious as a king; one
hour of death will make all alike; they which crowed over others, and
looked down upon them like oaks, others shall walk upon them like worms,
and they shall be gone as if they had never been. - Henry Smith.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

"Ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes." The
meditation of death would pull down the plumes of pride; thou art but
dust animated; shall dust and ashes be proud? Thou hast a grassy body,
and shall shortly be mowed down: "I have said, ye are gods;" but lest
they should grow proud, he adds a corrective: "ye shall die like men;"
ye are dying gods. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

"And fall like one of the princes." Tyrants seldom go to their graves in
peace. Most of the Caesars fell by the hands of the people, q.d., If you
be like tyrants in sin, expect to be like them in punishment; as I cast
them out of their thrones for their insolence and violence, so will I
cast you out, and you shall fall like one of these tyrannical princes. -
Thomas Hall.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

I. Ye shall fall from the highest pinnacle of honour and reputation. The
place of magistracy, which knoweth you now, will know you no more. One
of the ancients, standing by Caesar's tomb, crieth out, Ubi nune
pulchritudo Csaris? quo abiit magntflcentia ejus? Where is now the
beauty; what is become of the magnificence; where are the armies now;
where the honours, the triumphs, the trophies of Caesar? All was gone
when Caesar was gone. Your honours and your worships, your power, and
your places, all die with you, if not before you.

II\. Ye fall from your greatest treasures and possessions. As ye brought
nothing into the world, so it is certain ye shall carry nothing out of
the world, [Ti1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007). Saladin, the
mighty monarch of the east, is gone, and hath carried no more along with
him than ye see - i.e., a shirt hung up for that purpose - said the
priest that went before the bier.

III\. Ye fall from all your friends and relations; when ye die, they
that were near and dear to you will leave you. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

Impressiveness is a leading characteristic of the "death" or "fall" of
"princes:" such incidents, from a variety of causes, are most striking.
But can the same remark be commonly made respecting the decease of the
children of poverty? Regard being had to the startling effect which the
demise of the potentate is calculated to produce, - has the departure of
the peasant, for example, in itself, the same tendency to beget
solemnity and awe, so that, even under this point of view, the peasant
might be justly affirmed to "fall like one of the princes"? Indeed, if
you think of the outward circumstances attending his last moments; and
then, immediately afterwards, of those which belong to the close of the
life of the dweller in regal or stately halls, there would seem to be
hardly any ground here for instituting the slightest comparison: but I
would have you to associate the man, as he lies on the eve of
dissolution, not with others, his superiors in rank, in a similar case,
but with himself, when, in the full rigour of existence, he walked to
and fro, and performed his own humble but laborious share of this
world's business; and, as you subsequently mark how the great Destroyer
has crushed all his energies, and left but a corpse behind, you will
surely admit that there is as wide a difference between the individual
as he was and as he is, as there can possibly be between the scenes at
the death-beds, respectively, of princes and of the poor. Yes, and as
impressive a difference too; so that you have only to allow the
exhibition of the striking change to have its legitimate effect upon the
mind, and then, so far as that effect will be concerned, you may declare
of the rural labourer, that "he has fallen like one of the princes;"
seeing that he has given a lesson every whit as awakening and as
emphatic in its admonitions, as could the other. - Hugh B. Moffatt,
1861.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007), [Psa
82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)

Your day is coming! The saints are raising the loud cry of [Psa
82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008), inviting Messiah, the true God,
the Son of the Most High ([Joh 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034)),
the Mighty One, the Judge and Ruler, to arise and take his inheritance,
for he is the "heir of all things;" and to be the true Othniel, Ehud,
Shamgar, Barak, Gideon, Tola, Jair, Jephthah, Samson, and Samuel, who
will judge, or govern and rule, a mismanaged earth. We sing this song of
Zion in his ears, urging him to come quickly; and we sing it to one
another in joyful hope, while the foundations of earth seem out of
course, because here we find Messiah the true Judge of a misgoverned
world. - Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)

"Arise, O God." A metaphor taken from the common gesture of judges,
whose usual manner is to sit while they are hearing of cases; to arise
and stand up when they come to give sentence. - Thomas Gataker.

[Psalms 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 82:1</span></span>

1 God standeth in the congregation of the mighty; he judgeth among the
gods.

2 How long will ye judge unjustly, and accept the persons of the wicked?
Selah.

3 Defend the poor and fatherless: do justice to the afflicted and needy.

4 Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand of the wicked.

5 They know not, neither will they understand; they walk on in darkness:
all the foundations of the earth are out of course.

6 I have said, Ye are gods; and all of you are children of the most
High.

7 But ye shall die like men, and fall like one of the princes.

8 Arise, O God, judge the earth: for thou shalt inherit all nations.

[Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001)

"God standeth in the congregation of the mighty." He is the overlooker,
who, from his own point of view, sees all that is done by the great ones
of the earth. When they sit in state he stands over them, ready to deal
with them if they pervert judgment. Judges shall be judged, and to
justices justice shall be meted out. Our village squires and country
magistrates would do well to remember this. Some of them had need go to
school to Asaph till they have mastered this Psalm. Their harsh
decisions and strange judgments are made in the presence of him who will
surely visit them for every unseemly act, for he has no respect unto the
person of any, and is the champion of the poor and needy. A higher
authority will criticise the decision of petty sessions, and even the
judgments of our most impartial judges will be revised by the High Court
of heaven. "He judgeth among the gods." They are gods to other men, but
he is God to them. He lends them his name, and this is their authority
for acting as judges, but they must take care that they do not misuse
the power entrusted to them, for the Judge of judges is in session among
them. Our puisne judges are but puny judges, and their brethren who
administer common law will one day be tried by the common law. This
great truth is, upon the whole, well regarded among us in these times,
but it was not so in the earlier days of English history, when Jeffries,
and such as he, were an insult to the name of justice. Oriential judges,
even now, are frequently, if not generally, amenable to bribes, and in
past ages it was very hard to find a ruler who had any notion of justice
apart from his own arbitrary will. Such plain teaching as this Psalm
contains was needful indeed, and he was a bold, good man who, in such
uncourtly phrases, delivered his own soul.

[Psa 82:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002)

"How long will ye judge unjustly and accept the persons of the wicked?"
It is indirectly stated that the magistrates had been unjust and
corrupt. They not only excused the wicked, but even decided in their
favour against the righteous. A little of this is too much, a short time
too long. Some suitors could get their claims settled at once, and in
their own favour, while others were wearing out their lives by waiting
for an audience, or were robbed by legal process because their opponents
had the judge's ear: how long were such things to be perpetrated? Would
they never remember the Great Judge, and renounce their wickedness? This
verse is so grandly stern that one is tempted to say, "Surely an Elijah
is here." "Selah." This gives the offenders pause for consideration and
confession.

[Psa 82:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#003)

"Defend the poor and fatherless." Cease to do evil, learn to do well.
Look not to the interests of the wealthy whose hands proffer you bribes,
but protect the rights of the needy, and especially uphold the claims of
orphans whose property too often becomes a prey. Do not hunt down the
peasant for gathering a few sticks, and allow the gentlemanly swindler
to break through the meshes of the law. "Do justice to the afflicted and
needy." Even they can claim from you as judge no more than justice; your
pity for their circumstances must not make you hold the scales unfairly:
but if you give them no more than justice, at least be sure that you
give them that to the full. Suffer not the afflicted to be further
afflicted by enduring injustice, and let not the needy long stand in
need of an equitable hearing.

[Psa 82:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#004)

"Deliver the poor and needy: rid them out of the hand, of the wicked."
Break the nets of the man-catchers, the legal toils, the bonds, the
securities, with which cunning men capture and continue to hold in
bondage the poor and the embarrassed. It is a brave thing when a judge
can liberate a victim like a fly from the spider's web, and a horrible
case when magistrate and plunderer are in league. Law has too often been
an instrument for vengeance in the hand of unscrupulous men, an
instrument as deadly as poison or the dagger. It is for the judge to
prevent such villainy.

[Psa 82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005)

"They know not, neither will they understand." A wretched plight for a
nation to be in when its justices know no justice, and its judges are
devoid of judgment. Neither to know his duty nor to wish to know it is
rather the mark of an incorrigible criminal than of a magistrate, yet
such a stigma was justly set upon the rulers of Israel. "They walk on in
darkness." They are as reckless as they are ignorant. Being both
ignorant and wicked they yet dare to pursue a path in which knowledge
and righteousness are essential: they go on without hesitation,
forgetful of the responsibilities in which they are involved, and the
punishment which they are incurring. "All the foundations of the earth
are out of course." When the dispensers of law have dispensed with
justice, settlements are unsettled, society is unhinged, the whole
fabric of the nation is shaken. When injustice is committed in due
course of law the world is indeed out of course. When "Justices'
justice" becomes a by-word it is time that justice dealt with justices.
Surely it would be well that certain of "the great unpaid" should be
paid off, when day after day their judgments show that they have no
judgment. When peasants may be horsewhipped by farmers with impunity,
and a pretty bird is thought more precious than poor men, the
foundations of the earth are indeed sinking like rotten piles unable to
bear up the structures built upon them. Thank God we have, as an almost
invariable rule, incorruptible judges; may it always be so. Even our
lesser magistrates are, in general, most worthy men; for which we ought
to be grateful to God evermore.

[Psa 82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006)

"I have said, ye are gods." The greatest honour was thus put upon them;
they were delegated gods, clothed for a while with a little of that
authority by which the Lord judges among the sons of men. "And all of
you are children of the Most High." This was their ex-officio character,
not their moral or spiritual relationship. There must be some government
among men, and as angels are not sent to dispense it, God allows men to
rule over men, and endorses their office, so far at least that the
prostitution of it becomes an insult to his own prerogatives.
Magistrates would have no right to condemn the guilty if God had not
sanctioned the establishment of government, the administration of law,
and the execution of sentences. Here the Spirit speaks most honourably
of these offices, even when it censures the officers; and thereby
teaches us to render honour to whom honour is due, honour to the office
even if we award censure to the office-bearer.

[Psa 82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007)

"But ye shall die like men." What sarcasm it seems! Great as the office
made the men, they were still but men, and must die. To every judge this
verse is a memento mori! He must leave the bench to stand at the bar,
and on the way must put off the ermine to put on the shroud. "And fall
like one of the princes." Who were usually the first to die: for battle,
sedition, end luxury, made greater havoc among the great than among any
others. Even as princes have been cut off by sudden and violent deaths,
so should the judges be who forget to do justice. Men usually respect
the office of a judge, and do not conspire to slay him, as they do to
kill princes and kings; but injustice withdraws this protection, and
puts the unjust magistrate in personal danger. How quickly death unrobes
the great. What a leveller he is. He is no advocate for liberty, but in
promoting equality and fraternity he is a masterly democrat. Great men
die as common men do. As their blood is the same, so the stroke which
lets out their life produces the same pains and throes. No places are
too high for death's arrows: he brings down his birds from the tallest
trees. It is time that all men considered this.

[Psa 82:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#008)

"Arise, O God, judge the earth." Come thou Judge of all mankind, put the
bad judges to thy bar and end their corruption and baseness. Here is the
world's true hope of rescue from the fangs of tyranny. "For thou shall
inherit all nations." The time will come when all races of men shall own
their God, and accept him as their king. There is one who is "King by
right divine," and he is even now on his way. The last days shall see
him enthroned, and all unrighteous potentates broken like potter's
vessels by his potent sceptre. The second advent is still earth's
brightest hope. Come quickly, even so, come, Lord Jesus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 83](psa083)

</div>
