<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa057)  [Next](psa059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 58](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 58:0</span></span>

To the Chief Musician. - Although David had his own case in his mind's
eye, yet he wrote not as a private person, but as an inspired prophet,
and therefore his song is presented, for public and perpetual use, to
the appointed guardian of the Temple psalmody. Al-taschith. The wicked
are here judged and condemned, but over the godly the sacred "Destroy
not" is solemnly pronounced. Michtam of David. This is the fourth of the
Psalms of the Golden Secret, and the second of the "Destroy nots." These
names if they serve for nothing else maybe useful to aid the memory. Men
give names to their horses, jewels, and other valuables, and these names
are meant not so much to describe as to distinguish them, and in some
cases to set forth the owner's high esteem of his treasure; after the
same fashion the Oriental poet gave a title to the song he loved, and so
aided his memory, and expressed his estimation of the strain. We are not
always to look for a meaning in these superscriptions, but to treat them
as we would the titles of poems, or the names of tunes.

Division. - The ungodly enemy is accused, [Psa
58:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001); judgment is sought from the
judge, [Psa 58:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006); and seen in
prophetic vision as already executed, [Psa
58:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009).

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003). -

I. The natural effects of original sin are seen in early suffering and
death.

II\. Its moral effects are seen in the early commission of actual sin.

III\. Early depravity is evinced in the conscious guilt of telling lies.
- G. R.

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003) (first clause). - The inner
pandemonium, or the calendar of the heart's crime.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004) (first clause). - A
generation of serpents. - T. Adam's Sermon.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004). - Sin as a poison. Poisons
may be attractive in colour and taste, slow or rapid in action, painful
in effect, withering, soporific or maddening. In all cases deadly.

[Psa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005). - The serpent charmer.

I. He charms with moral suasion, promise, threatening, etc.

II\. He charms wisely, earnestly, affectionately, argumentatively.

III\. He charms in vain; the will is averse. Hence the need of divine
grace and of the gospel.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008). - The snail-like course of
ungodly men. Their sin destroys their property, health, time, influence,
life.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011). - Remarkable cases of
divine Judgments and their results.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The proper meaning of the root of Michtam is to engrave, or to stamp a
metal. It therefore, in strictness, means, an engraving or sculpture.
Hence in the Septuagint, it is translated στηλογραφία, an inscription on
a column. I would venture to offer a conjecture in perfect harmony with
this view. It appears by the titles of four out of these six Psalms,
that they were composed by David while flying and hiding from the
persecutions of Saul. What, then, should hinder us from imagining that
they were inscribed on the rocks and on the sides of the caves which so
often formed his place of refuge? This view would accord with the strict
etymological meaning of the word, and explain the rendering of the
Septuagint. - John Jebb, in "A Literal Translation of the Book of
Psalms," 1846. \[See also Explanatory Notes on Psalms 16 and 56.
"Treasury of David," Volume One (Part 1); Volume One (Part 2).\]

Whole Psalm

Kimchi says this Psalm was written on account of Abner, and the rest of
Saul's princes, who judged David as a rebel against the government, and
said it was for Saul to pursue after him to slay him; for if they had
restrained him, Saul would not have pursued after him; and indeed they
seem to be wicked judges who are addressed in this Psalm; do not
destroy. Arama says, it declares the wickedness of Saul's judges. - John
Gill.

[Psa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

"Are ye dumb (when) ye (should) speak righteousness, (and) judge
equitably, sons of man?" The first words are exceedingly obscure. One of
them (אלס), not expressed in the English, and the ancient versions,
means dumbness, as in [Psa 61:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa061.htm#001), and
seems to be here used as a strong expression for entirely speechless. In
what respect they were thus dumb, is indicated by the verb which
follows, but the connection can be made clear in English only by a
circumlocution. The interrogation, are ye indeed, expresses wonder, as
at something scarcely credible. Can it be so? Is it possible? are you
really silent, you, whose very office is to speak for God, and against
the sins of men? - Joseph Addison Alexander.

[Psa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

"O congregation," O band, or company. The Hebrew aelem, which hath the
signification of binding as a sheaf or bundle, seemeth here to be a
company that are combined or confederate. - Henry Ainsworth.

[Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)

"In heart ye work wickedness," etc. The Psalmist doth not say, they had
wickedness in their heart, but they did work it there: the heart is a
shop within, an under-ground shop; there they did closely contrive,
forge, and hammer out their wicked purposes, and fit them into actions;
yea, they weighed the violence of their hands in the earth. That is an
allusion to merchants, who buy and sell by weight; they weigh their
commodity to an ounce; they do not give it out in gross, but by exact
weight. Thus saith the Psalmist, they weigh the violence of their hands;
they do not oppress grossly, but with a kind of exactness and skill,
they sit down and consider what and how much violence they may use in
such a case, or how much such a person may endure, or such a season may
bear. They are wiser than to do all at once, or all to one, lest they
spoil all. They "weigh" what they do, though what they do be so bad that
it will hold no weight when God comes to weigh it. Nor do they arrive at
this skill presently, but after they have, as it were, served an
apprenticeship at it; and they bind themselves to the trade very early;
for as it follows at the [Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003) of
the Psalm, "The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as
soon as they be born, speaking lies," that is, they are estranged both
by nature and by early practice; they lose no time, they go to it young,
even "as soon as they are born," as soon as they are fit for any use, or
to do any thing, they are using and setting themselves to do wickedly. -
Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)

The word עולות wickedness, properly signifies the inclinations of
scales, when the scale weighs down to one side; then it is transferred
to respect of persons, to injustice and iniquity, especially in public
tribunals and decisions, as in [Psa
82:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#002), How long will ye judge (עול) by
an unjust inclination of the scales? - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)

The principles of the wicked are even worse than an their practices,
premeditated violence is doubly guilty. - George Rogers.

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)

"The wicked are estranged from the womb," etc. How early men do sin! How
late do they repent! As soon as they are born "they go astray," but if
left to themselves they will not return till they die; they will never
return. Children can neither go nor speak as soon as born, but as soon
as born they can "go astray" and "speak lies;" that is, their first
speaking is lying, and their first going is straying; yea, when they
cannot go naturally, they can go astray morally or metaphorically: the
first step they are able to take is a step out of the way. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)

"They go astray as soon as they be born, speaking lies." Of all sins, no
sin can call Satan father like to lying. All the corruption that is in
us came from Satan, but yet this sin of forging and lying is from the
devil more than any; tastes of the devil more than any. Hence every
mania a liar ([Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)), and so every
man is every sinner else; but in a special manner every man is a liar;
for that the very first depravation of our nature came in by lying, and
our nature doth taste much still of this old block to be given to lying,
the devil also breathing into us a strong breath to stir us up to lying.
Hence no sooner do we speak but we lie. As we are in body, subject to
all diseases, but yet, some to one sickness rather than to another: so
in the soul, all are apt enough to all sin, and some rather to one vice
than to another; but all are much inclined to lying. A liar then is as
like the devil as ever he can look as unlike to God as ever he can be. -
Richard Capel, 1586-1656, in "Tentations, their Nature, Danger, Cure."

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)

The figure of the wicked going astray as soon as they are born, seems to
be taken from the disposition and power of a young serpent soon after
its birth. The youngest serpent can convey poison to anything which it
bites; and the suffering in all cases is great, though the bite is
seldom fatal. Place a stick near the reptile whose age does not amount
to many days, and he will immediately snap at it. The offspring of the
tiger and of the alligator are equally fierce in their earliest habits.
- Joseph Roberts, in "Oriental Illustrations of the Sacred Scriptures,"
1844.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"Poison." There is such a thing as poison; but where to be found?
Ubicanque fuerit, in homine quis quaereret? Wheresoever it is, in man
who would look for it? God made man's body of the dust; he mingled no
poison with it. He inspireth his soul from heaven; he breathes no poison
with it. He feeds him with bread; he conveys no poison with it. Unde
venenum? Whence is the poison? [Mat
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#027) - "Didst not thou, O Lord, sow
good seed in thy field?" Unde zizaniae - "From whence then hath it
tares?" Whence? Hoc fecit inimicus - "The enemy hath done this." We may
perceive the devil in it. That great serpent, the red dragon, hath
poured into wicked hearts this poison. His own: poison, malitiam,
wickedness. Cum infundit peccatum, infundit venemum - "When he pours in
sin he pours in poison." Sin is poison. Original pravity is called
corruption; actual poison. The violence and virulence of this venomous
quality comes not at first. Nemo fit repente pessimus - No man becomes
worst at the first dash. We are born corrupt, we have made ourselves
poisonous. There be three degrees, as it were so many ages, in sin.
First - secret sin; an ulcer lying in the bones, but skinned over with
hypocrisy. Secondly - open sin, bursting forth into manifest villainy.
The former is corruption, the second is eruption. Thirdly - frequented
and confirmed sin, and that is rank poison, envenoming soul and body. -
Thomas Adams, 1614.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"Adder." Heb. פּתן, pethen, the Egyptian cobra (Naja hage), one of the
venomous Colubrine Snakes (Colubridoe). This is one of the so called
hooded snakes, with which serpent charmers chiefly deal. The Spectacled
Snake proper (Naja tripudians) is a closely related species. The well
known Cobra di Capello is another. They are all noted for their deadly
bite. The hollow fangs communicate with a poison gland, which being
pressed in the act of biting, sends a few drops into the puncture. The
venom quickly acts on the Whole system, and death soon ensues. - John
Duns, D. D., in "Biblical Natural Science," 1868.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"The deaf adder." Certain it is, says a modern writer upon the Psalms,
that the common adder or viper here in England, the bite of which too,
by the way, is very venomous, if it is not wholly deaf has the sense of
hearing very imperfectly. This is evident from the danger there is of
treading upon these animals, unless you happen to see them; for if they
do not see you, and you do not disturb them, they never endeavour to
avoid you, which when they are disturbed and do see you, they are very
solicitous of doing. Allowing, then, that there is a species of these
noxious animals, which either not having the sense of hearing at all, or
having it only in a low degree, may very well be said to be deaf; this
may help to explain the present poetical passage of the Psalmist. He
very elegantly compares the pernicious and destructive practices of
wicked men to the venom of a serpent; and his mentioning this species of
animals, seems to have brought to his mind another property of at least
one sort of them, in which they likewise resembled perverse and
obstinate sinners, who are deaf to all advice, utterly irreclaimable,
and not to be persuaded. This the adder resembled, which is a very
venomous animal, and moreover is deaf, or very near it. And perhaps his
saying that she stoppeth her ear, may be no more than a poetical
expression for deafness; just as the mole, which in common speech is
said to be blind, might in a poetical phrase, be said to shut her eyes;
as in fact she does when you expose her to the light. The next clause,
"Which refuseth to hear," etc., is another poetical expression for the
same thing. - Samuel Burder, in "The Scripture Expositor," 1810.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"The deaf adder." Several of the serpent tribe are believed to be either
quite deaf, or very dull of hearing. Perhaps that which is called the
puddeyan, the "beaver, serpent," is more so than any other. I have
frequently come close up to these reptiles; but they did not make any
effort to move out of the way. They lurk in the path, and the victim on
whom they pounce will expire within a few minutes after he is bitten. -
Joseph Roberts.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"The deaf adder." The "adder," or "asp," is the haje naja or cobra of
Egypt, according to Cuvier. The hearing of all the serpent tribes is
imperfect, as all are destitute of a tympanic cavity, and of external
openings to the ear. The "deaf adder" is not a particular species. The
point of the rebuke is, the pethen, or "adder," here in question, could
hear in some degree but would not; just as the unrighteous judges, or
persecutors, of David could hear with their outward ears such appeals as
he makes in [Psa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001), [Psa
58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002), but would not. The charmer
usually could charm the serpent by shrill sounds, either of his voice or
of the flute, the serpent's comparative deafness rendering it the more
amenable to those sounds which it could hear. But exceptional cases
occurred of a "deaf adder" which was deaf only in the sense that it
refused to hear, or to be acted on, Also [Jer
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017); compare [Ecc
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#011). - A. R. Fausset.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"The deaf adder that stoppeth her ear." With respect to what is said of
the animal's stopping its ears, it is not necessary to have recourse to
the supposition of its actually doing so, which by some persons has been
stated, but it is sufficient to know, that whilst some serpents are
operated upon in the manner above described, others are partly or
altogether insensible to the incantation. - Richard Mant.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004) (second clause)

This clause admits of a different construction, like the deaf adder he
stops his ear, which some interpreters prefer, because an adder cannot
stop its ears, and need not stop them if naturally deaf, whereas it is
by stopping his, that the wicked man becomes like a deaf adder. - J. A.
Alexander.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004), [Psa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

Experienced and skillful as the serpent-charmers are, however they do
not invariably escape with impunity. Fatal terminations to these
exhibitions of the psyllic art now and then occur; for there are still
to be found "deaf adders, which will not hearken to the voice of
charmers, charming never so wisely."... Roberts mentions the instance of
a man who came to a gentleman's house to exhibit tame snakes, and on
being told that a cobra, or hooded snake, was in a cage in the house,
was asked if he could charm it; on his replying in the affirmative, the
serpent was released from the cage, and no doubt, in a state of high
irritation. The man began his incantations, and repeated his charms; but
the snake darted at him, fastened upon his arm, and before night he was
a corpse. - Philip Henry Gosse, in "The Romance of Natural History,"
1681.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004), [Psa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

One day, a rattlesnake entered our encampment. Among us was a Canadian
who could play the flute, and who, to divert us, marched against the
serpent with his new species of weapon. On the approach of his enemy,
the haughty reptile curls himself into a spiral line, flattens his head,
inflates his cheeks, contracts his lips, displays his envenomed fangs
and his bold throat; his tongue flows like two flames of fire; his eyes
are burning coals; his body, swollen with rage, rises and falls like the
bellows of a forge; his dilated skin assumes a dull and scaly
appearance; and his tail, whence proceeds the death-announcing sound,
vibrates with such rapidity as to resemble a light vapour. The Canadian
begins to play upon his flute - the serpent starts with surprise, and
draws back his head. In proportion as he is struck with the magic notes,
his eyes lose their fierceness; the oscillations of his tail become
slower, and the sounds which it makes become weaker, and gradually die
away. Less perpendicular upon their spiral line, the rings of the
charmed serpent are by degrees expanded, and sink one after another on
the ground in concentric circles. The shades of azure, green, white, and
gold recover their brightness on his quivering skin, and slightly
turning his head, he remains motionless, in the attitude of attention
and pleasure. At this moment the Canadian advances a few steps,
producing with the flute sweet and simple notes. The serpent, inclining
his variegated neck, opens a passage with the head through the high
grass, and begins to creep after the musician; stopping when he stops,
and beginning to follow him again as soon as he advances forward. In
this manner he was led out of the camp, attended by a great number of
spectators, both savages and Europeans, who could scarcely believe their
eyes which had witnessed this effect of harmony. - Francois Auguste,
Viscount de Chateaubriand, 1768-1848.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004), [Psa
58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

The serpent, when she begins to feel the charmer, clappeth one ear
presently to the ground, and stoppeth the other ear with her tail,
although by hearkening to the charmer, as some observe, she would be
provoked to spit out her poison, and renew her age. So hot is man upon
his harlot sin, that he is deaf to all that would counsel him to the
contrary; he stoppeth his ear, hardeneth his heart, stiffeneth his neck
against the thunders of the law, the still voice of the gospel, the
motions of the Spirit, and the convictions of his own conscience. When
sin calls, they run through thick and thin for haste; when the world
Commands, how readily do they hearken, how quickly do they hear, how
faithfully do they obey! but when the blessed God crieth to them,
chargeth them by his unquestionable authority, beseecheth them for their
own unchangeable felicity, they, like statues of men, rather than living
creatures, stand still and stir not at all. Other things move swiftly to
their centres; stones fall tumbling downward, sparks fly apace upward,
coneys run with speed to their burrows, rivers with violence to the
ocean, and yet silly man hangs off from his Maker, that neither
entreaties, nor threatenings, nor the word, nor the works of God, nor
hope of heaven, nor fear of hell, can quicken or hasten him to his
happiness. Who would imagine that a reasonable soul should act so much
against sense and reason? - George Swinnock, 1627-1673.

[Psa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

"Will not hearken." The Lord hath some of his elect ones whom he seeth
walking in by-paths and crooked ways the Lord giveth a commission to his
servants, the ministers, and saith, Go invite and call yon soul to come
to me, and say, Return, O Shulamite; but the soul stirs not: the Lord
sends and calls again: yet with the deaf adder, he hearkeneth not to the
voice of the enchanter: well, saith the Lord, "If you will not come; I
will fetch you; if fair means will not do, foul means must; then he
hisseth for the fly and the bee of affliction, and Calls forth armies of
trouble, and gives them commission to seize upon, and to lay siege to
such a man or woman, and saith, Ply them with your cannon shot, till you
make them yield, give up the keys and strike the sail; he sends sickness
to their bodies, a consumption to their estate, death to their friends,
shame to their reputation, a fire to their house, and the like, and bids
them prey and spoil, till they see and acknowledge the hand of the Lord
lifted up." - J. Votier's "Survey of Effectual Calling," 1652.

[Psa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

"Break their teeth," destroy the fangs of these serpents, in which their
poison is contained. This will amount to the same meaning as above. Save
me from the adders, the sly and poisonous slanderers save me also from
the lions - the tyrannical and bloodthirsty men. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

"Great teeth." מלתּעות, according to Michaelis and Gesenius, are the
eye-teeth, which in lions are sharp and terrible. - George Phillips, B.
D., in "The Psalms in Hebrew: With a Commentary," 1846.

[Psa 58:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

David's enemies were strong and fierce as young lions: he therefore
prayed that their teeth might be broken, even their strongest teeth,
their grinders, with which they were ready to devour him; that so they
might be disabled from doing mischief. They overwhelmed him like an
inundation but he desired it might prove a land-flood, which is soon
wasted. They were about to shoot at him: but he would have their bows,
or their arrows, to be shivered to pieces, and become like straw, and do
no execution, and he prayed that they might waste insensibly as the
snail, which leave its substance all along its track; and that they
might come to nothing, like an abortion. He also predicted, that their
prosperous rage (which resembled the crackling of thorns under a pot),
would soon be extinct, and produce no effect; while the Lord in his
wrath would hurry them into speedy destruction; as a furious whirlwind
drives a living man down a precipice, or into a dreadful pit. - Thomas
Scott, 1747-1821.

[Psa 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007) (first clause)

Perowne renders this clause, "Let them melt away, as water (which)
runneth apace," and says that the reference is to "water running away,
and so wasted and lost."

[Psa 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007) (first clause)

In desert parts of Africa it has afforded much Joy to fall in with a
brook of water, especially when running in the direction of the Journey,
expecting it would prove a valuable companion. Perhaps before it
accompanied us two miles it became invisible by sinking into the sand;
but two miles further along it would re-appear, and raise hopes Of its
continuance; but after running few hundred yards, would sink finally
into the sand, no more again to rise. - John Campbell, 1766-1840.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)

"As a snail which melteth away as it goeth, lit which goeth in melting"
(or slime), the noun being in the accusative as describing the nature of
the action, and the allusion being to the slimy trail which the snail
leaves behind it, so that it seems to waste away. Evidently this is
nothing more than a poetical hyperbole, and need not be explained,
therefore, as a popular error or a mistake in natural history. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne, B. D., in "The Book of Psalms; a New Translation, with
Introductions and Notes," 1864.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)

"As a snail which melteth," etc. This is a very remarkable and not very
intelligible passage. The Jewish Bible renders the passage in a way
which explains the idea which evidently prevailed at the time the Psalms
were composed: "As a snail let him melt as he passeth on." The ancients
had an idea that the slimy track made by a snail as it crawled along was
subtracted from the substance its body, and that in consequence the
farther it crept the smaller it became, until at last it wasted entirely
away. The commentators on the Talmud took this view of the case. The
Hebrew word, שׁבּלוּל shablul, which undoubtedly does signify a snail of
some kind, is thus explained: - "The Shablul is a creeping thing; when
it comes out of its shell, saliva pours from itself until it becomes
liquid, and so dies." Other explanations of this passage have been
offered, but there is no doubt that the view taken by these commentators
is the correct one, and that the Psalmist, when he wrote the terrible
series of denunciations in which the passage occurs, had in his mind the
popular belief regarding the gradual wasting away of the snail as it,
"passeth on." It is needless to say that no particular species of snail
is mentioned, and almost as needless to state that in Palestine there
are many species of snails, to any or all of which these words are
equally applicable. - J. G. Wood, in "Bible Animals," 1869.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)

"The untimely birth of a woman." The wicked are all, so to speak, human
abortions; they are and for ever remain defective beings, who have not
accomplished the great purpose of their existence. Heaven is the one end
for Which man is created, and he who falls short of it does not attain
the purpose of his being; he is an eternal abortion. - O. Prescott
Hiller.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008) (second clause)

David when he curseth the plots of wicked men, that though they have
conceived mischief; and though they have gone with it a long time, and
are ready to bring it forth, yet saith he, "Let them be", (that is, let
their counsels and designs be) "like the untimely birth of a woman, that
they may not see the sun:" that is, let them be dashed and blasted, let
them never bring forth their poisonous brood to the hurt and trouble of
the world. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009) (first clause)

"Before your cooking vessels," etc. It would puzzle Oedipus himself to
make any tolerable sense of the English translation of this verse. It
refers to the usage of travellers in the East, who when Journeying
through the deserts, make a hasty blaze with the thorns which they
collect, some green and full of sap, others dry and withered, for the
purpose of dressing their food; in which circumstances, violent storms
of wind not unfrequently arise, which sweep away their fuel and entire
apparatus, before the vessels which they use become warm by the heat. An
expressive and graphical image of the overwhelming ruin of wicked men! -
William Walford, 1837.

[Psa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)

"Before your pots feel the bramble." By this proverbial expression the
Psalmist describes the sudden eruption of the divine wrath; sudden and
violent as the ascension of the dry bramble underneath the housewife's
pot. The brightness of the flame which this furnishes the height to
which it mounts in an instant, the fury with which it seems to rage on
all sides of the vessel, give force, and even sublimity to the image,
though taken from one of the commonest occurrences of the lowest life -
a cottager's wife boiling her pot! The sense, then, will be: "Before
your pots feel the bramble, he shall sweep them away in whirlwind and
hurricane." - Samuel Horsley, 1733-1806.

[Psa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)

In all the book of God I do not remember any sentence so variously and
differently translated as this verse.... This variety of translations
ariseth chiefly from the original Hebrew word, סירות siroth, which in
the Hebrew tongue signifies, first, pots or caldrons, wherein flesh is
sod, as [Exo 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003); [Exo
38:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#003); [Eze
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011), Secondly, thorns, and pricks of
thorns and briers, as [Isa 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013); [Hos
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#008). Thirdly, because the pricks of
the great bramble are Very sharp and hooked, this word is used to
signify fish-hooks. [Amo 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002). In all
our English Bibles of the old, new and Geneva translation, and some
Latin Bibles, this word is taken to signify pots or caldrons; but the
Septuagint, Hierome, vulgar Latin, Austine, Pagnine, Tremellius, and all
others that I have seen, take this word in the second sense, for the
sharp pricks of thorns and brambles. Here, certainly, this word
signifies the sharp pricks of the great dog-bramble, where here in the
Hebrew text is אמד atad, and is used ([Jdg 9:14, 7
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#014)) in Jotham's parable to signify
the bramble, which being made king of the trees, kindled a fire, which
devoured the cedars of Lebanon. Now this bramble in the body, and every
branch of it, is beset with sharp hooked pricks, some of which are green
and have life and moisture in them, and though they be sharp, yet they
are not so stiff and strong as to make any deep wound in a man's flesh.
Others are greater, more hooked, and hardened by drying and parching
with the vehement heat of the sun; and they strike to the quick, and
bold fast, or tear where they catch hold of man's skin or flesh. The
first are here called, - , living or green; the others are called, חוון,
dried, or parched and hardened; and the prophetical Psalmist affirmeth
that "God who judgeth in the earth, will take away and destroy as with a
tempestuous whirlwind, every one of them, as well the green as the dry,"
as Tremellius out of the original doth most truly translate the word ...
The whole text runs thus: "Before they feel your thorns or pricks, O ye
bramble, he will take away every one as with a whirlwind, as well the
green as the dry." "Before they," that is, the righteous whom ye hate
and persecute; "do feel," that is, have a full sense and understanding
of your thorns or pricks, that is, of the sharpness, fury, and mischief
which is in the heart and hand of all and every one among you; for every
one in your band and congregation is a grievous throne and sharp prick
of the cursed bramble, sharply set and bent to do mischief in malice and
fury to the people and church of God. "He that is God who judgeth in the
earth" (as it is expressed in [Psa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011), in the last words) "will take
away as with a whirlwind" (that is, scatter and destroy tempestuously)
"every one, as well the living and green as the dry and hardened." That
is, "of every sort banded together, as well the green-headed and young
persecutors, sharp" set, but not so strong to hurt, as the old and dry
who are hardened in malice by long custom, and in power and policy are
strong to do mischief. - George Walker, in a Fast Sermon before the
House of Commons, 1644.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

"The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance." When the just
man seeth the vengeance and rejoiceth, it is not of malice, but of
benevolence, either hoping that the wicked may by punishment he amended,
or loving God's justice above men's persons, not being displeased with
the punishment of the wicked, because it proceedeth from the Lord, nor
desiring that the wicked may be acquitted from penalty because they
deserve in justice to be punished. - Nicholas Gibbens.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

"The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the Vengeance." Not that he
shall be glad of the vengeance purely as it is a hurt, or a suffering to
the creature, but the righteous shall be glad when he seeth the
vengeance of God, as it is a fulfilling of the threatening of God
against the sin of man, and an evidence of his own holiness. [Psa
64:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#009), [Psa
64:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#010). - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

"He shall wash his feet," etc. That is, he gets comfort and
encouragement by seeing the Lord avenge his cause against his
adversaries. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

"He shall wash his feet in the blood," etc. As the victorious survivor
of a conflict, walking over, the battle-field, might be said: to do. R.
T. Society's

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

When angels execute God's judgments upon sinners; saints see much in it;
they see matter of fear and praise; of fear, in that God's power, wrath,
and hatred are manifested in them against sin and sinners; of praise, in
that themselves are delivered and justice is performed. When the wicked
are taken away by a divine stroke, by the hand of justice, and God hath
the glory of his justice, the righteous rejoice at it: but is that all?
No, "he washeth his feet in the blood of the wicked;" that is, by this
judgment he fears and reforms. It is a metaphor taken from the practice
of those parts where they went barefoot, or with sandals and so
contracted much filth, and used to wash and cleanse their feet when they
came in; so here the godly seeing the hand of God upon: the wicked,
fears and judges himself for his sins, purges his conscience and
affections, and stands now in awe of that God who hath stricken the
wicked for those: sins which he himself in part is guilty of. Waldus, a
man of note in Lyons, seeing one struck dead in his presence, he washed
his hand in his blood; for presently he gave alms to the poor,
instructed his family in the true knowledge of God, and exhorted all
that came unto him to repentance and holiness of life. - William
Greenhill, 1691-1677.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

No doubt, at the sight of Sodom, Gomorrah, Admah, and Zeboim destroyed,:
angels saw cause to rejoice and Sing, "Hallelujah." Wickedness was swept
away; earth was lightened of a burden:; justice, the justice of God, was
highly exalted; love to his other creatures was displayed in freeing
them from the neighbourhood of hellish contaminations. On the same
principles (entering, however, yet deeper into the mind of the Father,
and sympathising to the full in his justice), the Lord Jesus himself,
and each one of his members shall cry "Hallelujah," over Antichrist's
trained hosts.: [Rev 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003). "The
righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall wash his
feet in the blood of the wicked." He shall be refreshed at the end of
his journey ([Joh 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005); [Luk
7:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#044); [Gen
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#004)), he shall wipe off all the dust
of the way, and end its weariness by entering into that strange, that
divine joy over sin destroyed, justice honoured, the law magnified,
vengeance taken for the insult done to Godhead, the triumph of the Holy
One over the unholy. It is not merely the time when that joy begins - it
is also the occasion and cause of that day's rapturous delight. - Andrew
A. Bonar.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

Abroad and vital distinction is to be made between desire for the
gratification of personal Vengeance, and zeal for the vindication of the
glory of God, "The glory of God" includes necessarily the real good of
the offender and the well-being of society. Desire for retaliation is
always wrong; desire for retribution may be in the highest degree
praiseworthy. For personal motives only can I desire retaliation upon
the Wrong-doer; but for motives most interested and noble: I may desire
retribution. - R. A. Bertram, in: "The Imprecatory Psalms," 1867.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

"So that a man shall say Verily," etc. This shall be said not by a man,
nor by any particular man, but by men in general, by man as opposed to
God. The particle translated "verily" really means only, and denotes
that this and nothing else is true. - J. A. Alexander.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

"So that," etc. There is something worth noting from the connexion of
this verse with the context, and is implied in the first word, "so
that," Which joins this verse with the former parts of this Psalm, and
shows this to be an illation from them. What? did God so suddenly, "as
with a whirlwind," overthrow those wicked judges who lorded it over his
people? did he make those "lions" melt like snails? did he confirm the
joints of his people, which were little before, trembling and smiting
one against another, as if they had been so many forlorn wretches
exposed and cast forth, and no eye to pity them; as if they had been
floating with Moses upon the sea in a basket of bulrushes, without any
pilot to guide them, and even ready to cry out with the disciple,
"Master, carest thou not that we perish?" Did he then command a calm,
and bring them to the haven where they would be? Did he turn their
howling like dragons and chattering like cranes, under the whips and
saws of tyrannical taskmasters, into a song of joy and triumph? Did he
dismantle himself of that cloud wherein for a time he had so enveloped
himself, that he seemed not to behold the pressures of his people? Did
he, I say, then step in to his people's rescue, by breaking their yokes
as in the day of Midian, and kissing them with the kisses of his mouth?
"So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous"
verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth. "Observe" Though the
passages of God's providence may seem so rugged and uncouth, as if they
were destructive to his church, and likely to put out the eye of his own
glory; yet our God will so dispose of them in the close, that they shall
have an advantageous tendency, to the setting forth of his honour and
our good. - John Hinckley, 1657.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

Some of the judgments of God are a shallow, or a ford, over which a lamb
may wade; every child may read the meaning of them; and "a man" - any
ordinary man may say, Verily there is a reward for the righteous "verily
he is a God that judgeth in the earth." - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

This judging here does not refer to the judgment to come, at the last
day, when there shall be a general convention of quick and dead before
the Lord's dreadful tribunal; though so, tis most true affore tempus,
that there will be a time when God will ride his circuit here in a
solemn manner, "so that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for
the righteous verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth;" but that is
not the scope of this place. 'Tis in the present tense, ο κρινων, that
now judgeth, or is now judging the earth and the inhabitants thereof;
and therefore it must be understood of a judgment on this side, the
judgment of the great day; and so God judges the earth, or in the earth,
three manner of ways. First, by a providential ordering and wise
disposal of all the affairs of all creatures. Secondly, in relieving the
oppressed and pleading the cause of the innocent. Thirdly, in
overthrowing and plaguing the wicked doers. - John Hinckley.

[Psalms 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 58:1</span></span>

1 O ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation? do ye judge
uprightly, O ye sons of men?

2 Yea, in heart ye work wickedness; ye weigh the violence of your hands
in the earth.

3 The wicked are estranged from the womb: they go astray as soon as they
be born, speaking lies.

4 Their poison is like the poison of a serpent: they are like the deaf
adder that stoppeth her ear;

5 Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so
wisely.

[Psa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#001)

"Do ye indeed speak righteousness, O congregation?" The enemies of David
were a numerous and united band, and because they so unanimously
condemned the persecuted one, they were apt to take it for granted that
their verdict was a right one. "What everybody says must be true," is a
lying proverb based upon the presumption which comes of large
combinations. Have we not all agreed to hound the man to the death, and
who dare hint that so many great ones can be mistaken? Yet the
persecuted one lays the axe at the root by requiring his judges to
answer the question whether or not they were acting according to
justice. It were well if men would sometimes pause, and candidly
consider this. Some of those who surrounded Saul were rather passive
than active persecutors; they held their tongues when the object of
royal hate was slandered; in the original, this first sentence appears
to be addressed to them, and they are asked to justify their silence.
Silence gives consent. He who refrains from defending the right is
himself an accomplice in the wrong. "Do ye judge uprightly, O ye sons of
men?" Ye too are only men though dressed in a little brief authority.
Your office for men, and your relation to men both bind you to
rectitude; but have ye remembered this? Have ye not put aside all truth
when ye have condemned the godly, and united in seeking the overthrow of
the innocent? Yet in doing this be not too sure of success, for ye are
only the "sons of men," and there is a God who can and will reverse your
verdicts.

[Psa 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#002)

"Yea, in heart ye work wickedness." Down deep in your very souls ye hold
a rehearsal of the injustice ye intend to practise, and when your
opportunity arrives, ye wreak vengeance with a gusto; your hearts are in
your wicked work, and your hands are therefore ready enough. Those very
men who sat as judges, and pretended to so much indignation at the
faults imputed to their victim, were in their hearts perpetrating all
manner of evil. "Ye weigh the violence of your hands in the earth." They
were deliberate sinners, cold, calculating villains. As righteous judges
ponder the law, balance the evidence, and weigh the case, so the
malicious dispense injustice with malice aforethought in cold blood.
Note in this verse that the men described sinned with heart and hand;
privately in their heart, publicly in the earth; they worked and they
weighed - they were active, and yet deliberate. See what a generation
saints have to deal with! Such were the foes of our Lord, a generation
of vipers, an evil and adulterous generation; they sought to kill him
because he was righteousness Itself, yet they masked their hatred to his
goodness by charging him with sin.

[Psa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#003)

"The wicked are estranged from the womb." It is small wonder that some
men persecute the righteous seed of the woman, since all of them are of
the serpent's brood, an enmity is set between them. No sooner born than
alienated from God - what a condition to be found in! Do we so early
leave the right track? Do we at the same moment begin to be men and
commence to be sinners? "They go astray as soon as they be born,
speaking lies." Every observer may see how very soon infants act lies.
Before they can speak they practise little deceptive arts. This is
especially the case in those who grow up to be adepts in slander, they
begin their evil trade early, and there is no marvel that they become
adepts in it. He who starts early in the morning will go far before
night. To be untruthful is one of the surest proofs of a fallen state,
and since falsehood is universal, so also is human depravity.

[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)

"Their poison is like the poison of a serpent." Is man also a poisonous
reptile? Yes, and his venom is even as that of a serpent. The viper has
but death for the body in his fangs; but unregenerate man carries poison
under his tongue, destructive to the nobler nature. "They are like the
deaf adder that stoppeth her ear." While speaking of serpents the
Psalmist remembers that many of them have been conquered by the
charmer's art, but men such as he had to deal with, no art could tame or
restrain; therefore, he likens them to a serpent less susceptible than
others to the charmer's music, and says that they refused to hear
reason, even as the adder shuts her ear to those incantations which
fascinate other reptiles. Man, in his natural corruption, appears to
have all the ill points of a serpent without its excellences. O sin,
what hast thou done!

[Psa 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#005)

"Which will not hearken to the voice of charmers, charming never so
wisely." Ungodly men are not to be won to right by arguments the most
logical, or appeals the most pathetic. Try all your arts, ye preachers
of the word! Lay yourselves out to meet the prejudices and tastes of
sinners, and ye shall yet have to cry, "Who hath believed our report?"
It is not in your music, but in the sinner's ear that the cause of
failure lies, and it is only the power of God that can remove it.

"You can call spirits from the vasty deep,

But will they come when you do call for them?"

No, we call and call, and call in vain, till the arm of the Lord is
revealed. This Is at once the sinner's guilt and danger. He ought to
hear but will not, and because he will not hear, he cannot escape the
damnation of hell.

[Psalms 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 58:6</span></span>

6 Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth break out the great teeth of
the young lions, O Lord.

7 Let them melt away as waters which run continually: when he bendeth
his bow to shoot his arrows, let them be as cut in pieces.

8 As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away: like the
untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun.

[Psa 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#006)

"Break their teeth, O God, in their mouth." If they have no capacity for
good, at least deprive them of their ability for evil. Treat them as the
snake-charmers do their serpents, extract their fangs, break their
teeth. The Lord can do this, and he will. He will not suffer the malice
of the wicked to triumph, he will deal them such a blow as shall disable
them from mischief. "Break out the great teeth of the young lions, O
Lord." As if one brute creature had not enough of evil in it to complete
the emblem of ungodly nature, another specimen of ferae naturae is
fetched in. For fierce cruelty the wicked are likened to young lions,
monsters in the prime of their vigour, and the fury of their lustiness;
and It is asked that their grinders may be smashed in, broken off, or
dashed out, that the creatures may henceforth be harmless. One can well
understand how the banished son of Jesse, while poisoned by the venomous
slander of his foes, and wowed by their cruel power, should appeal to
heaven for a speedy and complete riddance from his enemies.

[Psa 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#007)

"Let them melt away as waters which run continually." Like mountain
torrents dried up by the summer heats let them disappear; or like
running streams whose waters are swiftly gone, so let them pass away; or
like water spilt which none can find again, so let them vanish out of
existence. Be gone, ye foul streams, the sooner ye are forgotten the
better for the universe. "When he bendeth his bow to shoot his arrows,
let them be as cut in pieces." When the Lord goes forth to war, let his
judgments so tell upon these persecutors that they may be utterly cut in
pieces as a mark shattered by many shafts. Or perhaps the meaning is,
when the ungodly man marches to the conflict, let his arrows and his bow
drop into fragments, the string cut, the bow snapped, the arrows
headless, the points blunted; so that the boastful warrior may not have
wherewithal to hurt the object of his enmity. In either sense the prayer
of the Psalm has often become fact, and will be again fulfilled as often
as need arises.

[Psa 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008)

"As a snail which melteth, let every one of them pass away" As the snail
makes its own way by its slime, and so dissolves as it goes, or as its
shell is often found empty, as though the inhabitant had melted away, so
shall the malicious eat out their own strength while they proceed upon
their malevolent designs, and shall themselves disappear. To destroy
himself by envy and chagrin is the portion of the ill-disposed. "Like
the untimely birth of a woman, that they may not see the sun." Solemn is
this curse, but how surely does it fall on many graceless wretches! They
are as if they had never been. Their character is shapeless, hideous,
revolting. They are fitter to be hidden away in an unknown grave than to
be reckoned among men. Their life comes never to ripeness, their aims
are abortive, their only achievement is to have brought misery to
others, and horror to themselves. Such men as Herod, Judas, Alva,
Bonner, had it not been better for them if they had never been born?
Better for the mothers who bore them? Better for the lands they cursed?
Better for the earth in which their putrid carcasses are hidden from the
sun? Every unregenerate man is an abortion. He misses the true form of
God-made manhood; he corrupts in the darkness of sin; he never sees or
shall see the light of God in purity, in heaven.

[Psalms 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 58:9</span></span>

9 Before your pots can feel the thorns, he shall take them away as with
a whirlwind, both living, and in his wrath.

10 The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance: he shall
wash his feet in the blood of the wicked.

11 So that a man shall say, Verily there is a reward for the
righteous-verily he is a God that judgeth in the earth.

[Psa 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#009)

"Before your pots can feel the thorns." So sudden is the overthrow of
the wicked, so great a failure is their life, that they never see joy.
Their pot is put upon the hook to prepare a feast of joy, and the fuel
is placed beneath, but before the thorns are lit, before any heat can be
brought to bear upon the pot, yea, even as soon as the fuel has touched
the cooking vessel, a storm comes and sweeps all away; the pot is
overturned, the fuel is scattered far and wide. Perhaps the figure may
suppose the thorns, which are the fuel, to be kindled, and then the
flame is so rapid that before any heat can be produced the fire is out,
the meat remains raw, the man is disappointed, his work is altogether a
failure. "He shall take them away as with a whirlwind." Cook, fire, pot,
meat and all, disappear at once, whirled away to destruction. "Both
living, and in his wrath." In the very midst of the man's life, and in
the fury of his rage against the righteous, the persecutor is
overwhelmed with a tornado, his designs are baffled, his contrivances
defeated, and himself destroyed. The passage is difficult, but this is
probably its meaning, and a very terrible one it is. The malicious
wretch puts on his great seething pot, he gathers his fuel, he means to
play the cannibal with the godly; but he reckons without his host, or
rather without the Lord of hosts, and the unexpected tempest removes all
trace of him, and his fire, and his feast, and that in a moment.

[Psa 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010)

"The righteous shall rejoice when he seeth the vengeance." He will have
no hand in meting it out, neither win he rejoice in the spirit of
revenge, but his righteous soul shall acquiesce in the judgments of God,
and he shall rejoice to see justice triumphant. There is nothing in
Scripture of that sympathy with God's enemies which modern traitors are
so fond of parading as the finest species of benevolence. We shall at
the last say, "Amen," to the condemnation of the wicked, and feel no
disposition to question the ways of God with the impenitent. Remember
how John, the loving disciple, puts it. "And after these things I heard
a great voice of much people in heaven, saying, Alleluia; Salvation, and
glory, and honour, and power, unto the Lord our God: for true and
righteous are his Judgments: for he hath judged the great whore, which
did corrupt the earth with her fornication, and hath avenged the blood
of his servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluia. And her
smoke rose up for ever and ever." "He shall wash his feet in the blood
of the wicked." He shall triumph over them, they shall be so utterly
vanquished that their overthrow shall be final and fatal, and his
deliverance complete and crowning. The damnation of sinners shall not
mar the happiness of saints.

[Psa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#011)

"So that a man shall say." Every man however ignorant shall be compelled
to say, "Verily," in very deed, assuredly, "there is a reward for the
righteous." If nothing else be true this is. The godly are not after all
forsaken and given over to their enemies; the wicked are not to have the
best of it, truth and goodness are recompensed in the long run. "Verily
he is a God that judgeth in the earth." All men shall be forced by the
sight of the final judgment to see that there is a God, and that he is
the righteous ruler of the universe. Two things will come out clearly
after all - there is a God and there is a reward for the righteous. Time
will remove doubts, solve difficulties, and reveal secrets; meanwhile
faith's foreseeing eye discerns the truth even now, and is glad thereat.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 59](psa059)

</div>
