<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 28:0</span></span>

Title and Subject - Again, the title, "A Psalm of David," is too general
to give us any clue to the occasion upon which it was written. Its
position, as following the twenty-seventh, seems to have been designed,
for it is a most suitable pendant and sequel to it. It is another of
those "songs in the night" of which the pen of David was so prolific.
The thorn at the breast of the nightingale was said by the old
naturalists to make it sing: David's griefs made him eloquent in holy
psalmody. The main pleading of this Psalm is that the suppliant may not
be confounded with the workers of iniquity for whom he expresses the
utmost abhorrence; it may suit any slandered saint who, being
misunderstood by men, and treated by them as an unworthy character, is
anxious to stand aright before the bar of God. The Lord Jesus may be
seen here pleading as the representative of his people.

Division - The first and second verses earnesty entreat audience of the
Lord in a time of dire emergency. From [Psa
28:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002.md), the portion of the wicked is
described and deprecated. In [Psa
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006.md), [Psa
28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md), and [Psa
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008.md), praise is given for the Lord's
mercy in hearing prayer, and the Psalm concludes with a general petition
for the whole host of militant believers.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001) (first clause.md) - A sinner's
wise resolution in the hour of despondency.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md) - The saint's fear of
becoming like the ungodly.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md) - God's silence - what
terror may lie in it.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001) (last clause.md) - How low a
soul may sink when God hides his face.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md), [Psa
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002.md) - Prayer.

I. Its nature - a "cry."

1\. The utterance of life.

2\. The expression of pain.

3\. The pleading of need.

4\. The voice of deep earnestness.

II\. Its object - "O Lord, my rock." God is our Foundation, Refuge, and
immutable Friend.

III\. Its aim - "Hear, Be not silent." We expect an answer, a clear and
manifest answer, a speedy answer, a suitable answer, an effectual
answer.

IV\. Its medium - "Toward thy holy oracle." Our Lord Jesus, the true
mercy seat, etc.

[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md) - The characters to be
avoided, the doom to be dreaded, the grace to keep us from both.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md) - Measure for measure, or
punishment proportioned to desert.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md) - Endeavour the measure of
sin rather than mere result. Hence some are guilty of sins which they
were unable to commit.

[Psa 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005.md) - Culpable negligence
constantly persisted in, losing much blessing, and involving terrible
condemnation.

[Psa 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006.md) - Answered prayers, a
retrospect and song.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md) - The heart's possessions,
confidence, experience, joy, and music.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md) - Adoring God for his
mercies.

I. What God is to the believer.

II\. What should be the disposition of our hearts towards him?

\- C. Simeon.

[Psa 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008.md) - All power given to
believers because of their union with Jesus.

[Psa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009.md) - "A prayer for the church
militant." See Exposition and "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 768.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee do I cry." It is of the utmost importance that we should have
a definite object on which to fix our thoughts. Man, at the best of
times, has but little power for realising abstractions; but least of all
in his time of sorrow. Then he is helpless; then he needs every possible
aid; and if his mind wander in vacancy, it will soon weary, and sink
down exhausted. God has graciously taken care that this need not be
done. He has so manifested himself to man in his word, that the
afflicted one can fix his mind's eye on him, as the definite object of
his faith, and hope, and prayer. "Call unto me, and I will answer thee,
and show thee great and mighty things, which thou knowest not." [Jer
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#003.md). This was what the Psalmist did;
and the definiteness of God, as the object of his trust in prayer, is
very clearly marked. And specially great is the privilege of the
Christian in this matter. He can fix his eye on Jesus; he, without any
very great stretch of imagination, can picture that Holy One looking
down upon him; listening to him; feeling for him; preparing to answer
him. Dear reader, in the time of your trouble, do not roam; do not send
out your sighs into vacancy; do not let your thoughts wander, as though
they were looking for some one on whom to fix; for some one to whom you
could tell the story of your heart's need and desolation. Fix your heart
as the Psalmist did, and say, "Unto thee will I cry." ... Oh! how happy
is that man, who feels and knows that when trouble comes, he cannot be
bewildered and confused by the stroke, no matter how heavy it may be.
Sorrow-stricken he will be, but he has his resource, and he knows it,
and will avail himself of it. His is no vague theory of the general
sympathy of God for man; his is a knowledge of God, as a personal and
feeling God; he says with the Psalmist, "Unto thee will I cry." - Philip
Bennett Power.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"My rock." One day a female friend called on the Rev. William Evans, a
pious minister in England, and asked how he felt himself. "I am weakness
itself," he replied; "but I am on the Rock. I do not experience those
transports which some have expressed in the view of death; but my
dependence is on the mercy of God in Christ. Here my religion began, and
here it must end."

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"My rock." The Rev. John Rees, of Crown Street, Soho, London, was
visited on his death-bed by the Rev. John Leifchild, who very seriously
asked him to describe the state of his mind. This appeal to the honour
of his religion roused him, and so freshened his dying lamp, that
raising himself up in his bed, he looked his friend in the face, and
with great deliberation, energy, and dignity, uttered the following
words: - "Christ in his person, Christ in the love of his heart, and
Christ in the power of his arm, is the Rock on which I rest; and now"
(reclining his head gently on the pillow), "Death, strike!" - K. Arvine.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"Be not silent to me." Let us next observe what the heart desires from
God. It is that he would speak. "Be not silent to me." Under these
circumstances, when we make our prayer, we desire that God would let us
know that he hears us, and that he would appear for us, and that he
would say, he is our Father. And what do we desire God to say? We want
him to let us know that he hears us; we want to hear him speak as
distinctly to us, as we feel that we have spoken to him. We want to
know, not only by faith that we have been heard, but by God's having
spoken to us on the very subject whereupon we have spoken to him. When
we feel thus assured that God has heard us, we can with the deepest
confidence leave the whole matter about which we have been praying, in
his hands. Perhaps an answer cannot come for a long time; perhaps
things, meanwhile, seem working in a contrary way; it may be, that there
is no direct appearance at all of God upon the scene; still faith will
hold up and be strong; and there will be comfort in the heart, from the
felt consciousness that God has heard our cry about the matter, and that
he has told us so. We shall say to ourselves, "God knows all about it;
God has in point of fact told me so; therefore I am in peace." And let
it be enough for us that God tells us this, when he will perhaps tell us
no more; let us not want to try and induce him to speak much, when it is
his will to speak but little: the best answer we can have at certain
times is simply the statement that "he hears;" by this answer to our
prayer he at once encourages and exercises our faith. "It is said," said
Rutherford, speaking of the Saviour's delay in responding to the request
of the Syrophenician woman, "'he answered not a word,' but it is not
said, he heard not a word. These two differ much. Christ often heareth
when he doth not answer - his not answering is an answer, and speaks
thus - 'pray on, go on and cry, for the Lord holdeth his door fast
bolted, not to keep you out, but that you may knock, and knock, and it
shall be opened.'" - Philip Bennett Power.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"Lest... I become like them that go down into the pit." Thou seest,
great God, my sad situation. Nothing to me is great or desirable upon
this earth but the felicity of serving thee, and yet the misery of my
destiny, and the duties of my state, bring me into connection with men
who regard all godliness as a thing to be censured and derided. With
secret horror I daily hear them blaspheming the ineffable gifts of thy
grace, and ridiculing the faith and fervour of the godly as mere
imbecility of mind. Exposed to such impiety, all my consolation, O my
God, is to make my cries of distress ascend to the foot of thy throne.
Although for the present, these sacrilegious blasphemies only awaken in
my soul emotions of horror and pity, yet I fear that at last they may
enfeeble me and seduce me into a crooked course of policy, unworthy of
thy glory, and of the gratitude which I owe to thee. I fear that
insensibly I may become such a coward as to blush at thy name, such a
sinner as to resist the impulses of thy grace, such a traitor as to
withhold my testimony against sin, such a self-deceiver as to disguise
my criminal timidity by the name of prudence. Already I feel that this
poison is insinuating itself into my heart, for while I would not have
my conduct resemble that of the wicked who surround me, yet I am too
much biassed by the fear of giving them offence. I dare not imitate
them, but I am almost as much afraid of irritating them. I know that it
is impossible both to please a corrupt world and a holy God, and yet I
so far lose sight of this truth, that instead of sustaining me in
decision, it only serves to render my vacillation the more inexcusable.
What remains for me but to implore thy help! Strengthen me, O Lord,
against these declensions so injurious to thy glory, so fatal to the
fidelity which is due to thee. Cause me to hear thy strengthening and
encouraging voice, If the voice of thy grace be not lifted up in my
spirit, reanimating my feeble faith, I feel that there is but a step
between me and despair. I am on the brink of the precipice, I am ready
to fall into a criminal complicity with those who would fain drag me
down with them into the pit. - Jean Baptiste Massilion, 1663-1742,
freely translated by C. H. S.

[Psa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002.md)

"I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle." Called דּביד, debhir,
because there-hence God spake and gave answer. Toward this (a type of
Christ, the Word essential), David lifteth up his hands, that it might
be as a ladder, whereby his prayer might get up to heaven. - John Trapp.

[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)

"Draw me not away with the wicked.... which speak peace to their
neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts." The godly man abhors
dissimulation towards men; his heart goes along with his tongue, he
cannot flatter and hate, commend and censure. "Let love be without
dissimulation." [Rom 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#009.md). Dissembled
love is worse than hatred; counterfeiting of friendship is no better
than a lie ([Psa 78:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#036).md), for there is
a pretense of that which is not. Many are like Joab: "He took Amasa by
the beard to kiss him, and smote him with his sword in the fifth rib,
that he died." There is a river in Spain, where the fish seem to be of a
golden colour, but take them out of the water, and they are like other
fish. All is not gold that glitters; there are some pretend much
kindness, but they are like great veins, which have little blood; if you
lean upon them they are as a leg out of joint. For my part, I much
question his truth towards God, that will flatter and lie to his friend.
"He that hideth hatred with lying lips, and he that uttereth a slander
is a fool." [Pro 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#018.md). - Thomas
Watson.

[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)

"Draw me not out with." An allusion, I conceive, to a shepherd selecting
out a certain portion of his flock. "Reckon me not among." - Professor
Lee.

[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)

"Draw me not away." אל-תּמשׁכגי from משׁך; that signifies, both to draw
and apprehend, will be best rendered here, seize not on me, as he that
seizeth on any to carry or drag him to execution. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

"Give them according to their deeds," etc. Here, again, occurs the
difficult question about praying for vengeance, which, however, I shall
despatch in a few words. In the first place, then, it is unquestionable,
that if the flesh move us to seek revenge, the desire is wicked in the
sight of God. He not only forbids us to imprecate evil upon our enemies
in revenge for private injuries, but it cannot be otherwise than that
all those desires which spring from hatred must be disordered. David's
example, therefore, must not be alleged by those who are driven by their
own intemperate passion to seek vengeance. The holy prophet is not
inflamed here by Iris own private sorrow to devote his enemies to
destruction; but laying aside the desire of the flesh, he gives judgment
concerning the matter itself. Before a man can, therefore, denounce
vengeance against the wicked, he must first shake himself free from all
improper feelings in his own mind. In the second place prudence must be
exercised, that the heinousness of the evils which offend us drive us
not to intemperate zeal, which happened even to Christ's disciples, when
they desired that fire might be brought from heaven to consume those who
refused to entertain their Master. [Luk
9:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054.md). They pretended, it is true, to
act according to the example of Elias, but Christ severely rebuked them,
and told them that they knew not by what spirit they were actuated. In
particular, we must observe this general rule, that we cordially desire
and labour for the welfare of the whole human race. Thus it will come to
pass, that we shall not only give way to the exercise of God's mercy,
but shall also wish the conversion of those who seem obstinately to rush
upon their own destruction. In short, David, being free from every evil
passion, and likewise endued with the spirit of discretion and judgment,
pleads here not so much his own cause as the cause of God. And by this
prayer, he further reminds both himself and the faithful, that although
the wicked may give themselves loose reins in the commission of every
species of vice with impunity for a time, they must at length stand
before the judgment-seat of God. - John Calvin.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

"Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their endeavours." Yes, great God, since thou hast from the beginning
been only occupied in saving men, thou wilt surely strike with an
eternal malediction these children of iniquity who appear to have been
born only to be lost themselves, and to destroy others. Thy very
benevolence towards mankind solicits thy thunders against these
corrupters of society. The more thou hast done for our race, the more
surely will the severity of thy justice reveal itself in destroying the
wretches whose only study is to counteract thy goodness towards mankind.
They labour incessantly to put men far away from thee, O my God, and in
return thou wilt put them far away from thee for ever. They count it
great gain to make their fellows thine enemies, and they shall have the
desperate consolation of being such themselves to all eternity. What
more fitting punishment for the wretches who desire to make all hearts
rebel against thine adorable Majesty, than to lie through the baseness
of their nature, under the eternal and frightful necessity of hating
thee for ever. - Jean Baptiste Massilion, rendered very freely by C. H.
S.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

"Give them according to their deeds." The Egyptians killed the Hebrew
male children, and God smote the firstborn of Egypt. Sisera, who thought
to destroy Israel with his iron chariots, was himself killed with an
iron nail, stuck through his temples. Adoni-bezek, [Jdg
1:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#005.md). Gideon slew forty elders of
Succoth, and his sons were murdered by Abimelech. Abimelech slew seventy
sons of Gideon upon one stone, and his own head was broken by a piece of
millstone thrown by a woman. Samson fell by the "lust of the eye," and
before death the Philistines put out his eyes. Agag, [Sa1
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#033.md). Saul slew the Gibeonites, and
seven of his sons were hung up before the Lord. [Sa2
21:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#001.md). Ahab, after coveting Naboth's
vineyard, [Kg1 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#019.md), fulfilled [Kg2
9:24-26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024.md). Jeroboam, the same hand that
was stretched forth against the altar was withered, [Kg1
13:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001.md). Joab having killed Abner,
Amasa, and Absalom, was put to death by Solomon. Daniel's accusers
thrown into the lions' den meant for Daniel. Haman hung upon the gallows
designed for Mordecai. Judas purchased the field of blood, and then went
and hanged himself. So in the history of later days, Bajazet was carried
about by Tamerlane in an iron cage, as he intended to have carried
Tamerlane. Mazentius built a bridge to entrap Constantine, and was
overthrown himself on that very spot. Alexander VI was poisoned by the
wine he had prepared for another. Charles IX made the streets of Paris
to stream with Protestant blood, and soon after blood streamed from all
parts of his body in a bloody sweat. Cardinal Beaton condemned George
Wishart to death, and presently died a violent death himself; he was
murdered in bed, and his body was laid out in the same window from which
he had looked upon Wishart's execution. - G. S. Bowes, in "Illustrative
Gatherings."

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

"Render to them their desert." Meditate on God's righteousness, that it
is not only his will, but his nature to punish sin; sin must damn thee
without Christ, there is not only a possibility or probability that sin
may ruin, but without an interest in Christ it must do so; whet much
upon thy heart that must; God cannot but hate sin, because he is holy;
and he cannot but punish sin, because he is righteous. God must not
forego his own nature to gratify our humours. - Christopher Fowler, in
"Morning Exercises," 1676.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

He prayeth against his enemies, not out of any private revenge, but
being led by the infallible spirit of prophecy, looking through these
men to the enemies of Christ, and of his people in all ages. - David
Dickson.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md), [Psa
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005.md)

In these verses, as indeed in most of the imprecatory passages, the
imperative and the future are used promiscuously: "Give them - render
them - he shall destroy them." If therefore, the verbs, in all such
passages, were uniformly rendered in the "future," every objection
against the Scripture imprecations would vanish at once, and they would
appear clearly to be what they are, namely, prophecies of the divine
judgments, which have been since executed against the Jews, and which
will be executed against all the enemies of Jehovah, and his Christ;
whom neither the "works" of creation, nor those of redemption, can lead
to repentance. - George Horne.

[Psa 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006.md)

"He hath heard." Prayer is the best remedy in a calamity. This is indeed
a true catholicum, a general remedy for every malady. Not like the
empiric's catholicum, which sometimes may work, but for the most part
fails: but that which upon assured evidence and constant experience hath
its probatum est; being that which the most wise, learned, honest, and
skilful Physician that ever was, or can be, hath prescribed - even he
that teacheth us how to bear what is to be borne, or how to heal and
help what hath been borne. - William Gouge.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md)

"The Lord is my strength." Oh, sweet consolation! If a man have a
burthen upon him, yet if he have strength added to him, if the burthen
be doubled, yet if his strength be trebled, the burden will not be
heavier, but lighter than it was before to his natural strength; so if
our afflictions be heavy, and we cry out, Oh, we cannot bear them! yet
if we cannot bear them with our own strength, why may we not bear them
with the strength of Jesus Christ? Do we think that Christ could not
bear them? or if we dare not think but that Christ could bear them, why
may not we come to bear them? Some may question, can we have the
strength of Christ? Yes; that very strength is made over to us by faith,
for so the Scripture saith frequently, The Lord is our strength; God is
our strength; The Lord Jehovah is our strength; Christ is our strength
([Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md); [Psa
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#002.md); [Psa
118:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#014.md); [Isa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#002.md); [Hab
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#019.md); [Col
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#011).md); and, therefore, is Christ's
strength ours, made over unto us, that we may be able to bear whatsoever
lies upon us. - Isaac Ambrose.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md)

"The Lord is my strength" inwardly, "and my shield" outwardly. Faith
finds both these in Jehovah, and the one not without the other, for what
is a shield without strength, or strength without a shield? "My heart
trusted in him, and I am helped'" the idea of the former sentence is
here carried out, that outward help was granted to inward confidence. -
W. Wilson, D.D.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md)

"My heart trusted in him, and I am helped." Faith substantiateth things
not yet seen; it altereth the tenses, saith one, and putteth the future
into the present tense as here. - John Trapp.

[Psa 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008.md)

"The Lord is their strength'" not mine only, but the strength of every
believer. Note - the saints rejoice in their friends' comforts as well
as their own; for as we have not the less benefit by the light of the
sun, so neither by the light of God's countenance, for others sharing
therein; for we are sure there is enough for all, and enough for each.
This is our communion with all saints, that God is their strength and
ours; Christ their Lord and ours. [Co1
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002.md). He is their strength, the
strength of all Israel, because he is the saving strength of "his
anointed," i.e., 1. Of David in the type: God in strengthening him that
was their king and fought their battles, strengthened the whole kingdom.
He calls himself God's anointed, because it was the unction he had
received that exposed him to the envy of his enemies, and therefore
entitled him to the divine protection. 2. Of Christ, his Anointed, his
Messiah, in the antitype. God was his "saving strength," qualified him
for his undertaking, and carried him through it. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009.md)

"Lift them up." The word here used may mean sustain them, or support
them; but it more properly means bear, and would be best expressed by a
reference to the fact, that the shepherd carries the feeble, the young,
and the sickly of his flock in his arms, or that he lifts them up when
unable themselves to rise. - Albert Barnes.

[Psalms 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 28:1</span></span>

1 Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock; be not silent to me, lest, if
thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the pit.

2 Hear the voice of my supplications, when I cry unto thee, when I lift
up my hands toward thy holy oracle.

[Psa 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee will I cry, O Lord my rock." - A cry is the natural
expression of sorrow, and is a suitable utterance when all other modes
of appeal fail us; but the cry must be alone directed to the Lord, for
to cry to man is to waste our entreaties upon the air. When we consider
the readiness of the Lord to hear, and his ability to aid, we shall see
good reason for directing all our appeals at once to the God of our
salvation, and shall use language of firm resolve like that in the text,
"I will cry." The immutable Jehovah is our rock, the immovable
foundation of all our hopes and our refuge in time of trouble: we are
fixed in our determination to flee to him as our stronghold in every
hour of danger. It will be in vain to call to the rocks in the day of
judgment, but our rock attends to our cries. "Be not silent to me." Mere
formalists may be content without answers to their prayers, but genuine
suppliants cannot; they are not satisfied with the results of prayer
itself in calming the mind and subduing the will - they must go further
and obtain actual replies from heaven, or they cannot rest; and those
replies they long to receive at once, if possible; they dread even a
little of God's silence. God's voice is often so terrible that it shakes
the wilderness; but his silence is equally full of awe to an eager
suppliant. When God seems to close his ear, we must not therefore close
our mouths, but rather cry with more earnestness; for when our note
grows shrill with eagerness and grief, he will not long deny us a
hearing. What a dreadful case should we be in if the Lord should become
for ever silent to our prayers! This thought suggested itself to David,
and he turned it into a plea, thus teaching us to argue and reason with
God in our prayers. "Lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like them
that go down into the pit." Deprived of the God who answers prayer, we
should be in a more pitiable plight than the dead in the grave, and
should soon sink to the same level as the lost in hell. We must have
answers to prayer: ours is an urgent case of dire necessity; surely the
Lord will speak peace to our agitated minds, for he never can find it in
his heart to permit his own elect to perish.

[Psa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002.md)

This is much to the same effect as the first verse, only that it refers
to future as well as present pleadings. Hear me! Hear me! "Hear the
voice of my supplications!" This is the burden of both verses. We cannot
be put off with a refusal when we are in the spirit of prayer; we
labour, use importunity, and agonise in supplications until a hearing is
granted us. The word "supplications," in the plural, shows the number,
continuance, and variety of a good man's prayers, while the expression,
"hear the voice," seems to hint that there is an inner meaning, or
heart-voice, about which spiritual men are far more concerned than for
their outward and audible utterances. A silent prayer may have a louder
voice than the cries of those priests who sought to awaken Baal with
their shouts. "When I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle:" which
holy place was the type of our Lord Jesus; and if we would gain
acceptance, we must turn ourselves evermore to the blood-besprinkled
mercy seat of his atonement. Uplifted hands have ever been a form of
devout posture, and are intended to signify a reaching upward towards
God, a readiness, an eagerness to receive the blessing sought after. We
stretch out empty hands, for we are beggars; we lift them up, for we
seek heavenly supplies; we lift them towards the mercy seat of Jesus,
for there our expectation dwells. O that whenever we use devout
gestures, we may possess contrite hearts, and so speed well with God.

[Psalms 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 28:3</span></span>

3 Draw me not away with the wicked, and with the workers of iniquity,
which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts.

4 Give them according to their deeds, and according to the wickedness of
their endeavours: give them after the work of their hands; render to
them their desert.

5 Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of
his hands, he shall destroy them, and not build them up.

[Psa 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003.md)

"Draw me not away with the wicked." - They shall be dragged off to hell
like felons of old drawn on a hurdle to Tyburn, like logs drawn to the
fire, like fagots to the oven. David fears lest he should be bound up in
their bundle, drawn to their doom; and the fear is an appropriate one
for every godly man. The best of the wicked are dangerous company in
time, and would make terrible companions for eternity; we must avoid
them in their pleasures, if we would not be confounded with them in
their miseries. "And with the workers of iniquity." These are overtly
sinful, and their judgment will be sure; Lord, do not make us to drink
of their cup. Activity is found with the wicked even if it be lacking to
the righteous. Oh! to be "workers" for the Lord. "Which speak peace to
their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts." They have learned
the manners of the place to which they are going: the doom of liars is
their portion for ever, and lying is their conversation on the road.
Soft words, oily with pretended love, are the deceitful meshes of the
infernal net in which Satan catches the precious life; many of his
children are learned in his abominable craft, and fish with their
father's nets, almost as cunningly as he himself could do it. It is a
sure sign of baseness when the tongue and the heart do not ring to the
same note. Deceitful men are more to be dreaded than wild beasts: it
were better to be shut up in a pit with serpents than to be compelled to
live with liars. He who cries "peace" too loudly, means to sell it if he
can get his price. "Good wine needs no bush:" if he were so very
peaceful he would not need to say so; he means mischief, make sure of
that.

[Psa 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004.md)

When we view the wicked simply as such, and not as our fellow-men, our
indignation against sin leads us entirely to coincide with the acts of
divine justice which punish evil, and to wish that justice might use her
power to restrain by her terrors the cruel and unjust; but still the
desires of the present verse, as our version renders it, are not readily
made consistent with the spirit of the Christian dispensation, which
seeks rather the reformation than the punishment of sinners. If we view
the words before us as prophetic, or as in the future tense, declaring a
fact, we are probably nearer to the true meaning than that given in our
version. Ungodly reader, what will be your lot when the Lord deals with
you according to your desert, and weighs out to you his wrath, not only
in proportion to what you have actually done, but according to what you
would have done if you could? Our "endeavours" are taken as facts; God
takes the will for the deed, and punishes or rewards accordingly. Not in
this life, but certainly in the next, God will repay his enemies to
their faces, and give them the wages of their sins. Not according to
their fawning words, but after the measure of their mischievous deeds,
will the Lord mete out vengeance to them that know him not.

[Psa 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005.md)

"Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his
hands." God works in creation - nature teems with proofs of his wisdom
and goodness, yet purblind atheists refuse to see him: he works in
providence, ruling and overruling and his hand is very manifest in human
history, yet the infidel will not discern him: he works in grace -
remarkable conversions are still met with on all hands, yet the ungodly
refuse to see the operations of the Lord. Where angels wonder, carnal
men despise. God condescends to teach, and man refuses to learn. "He
shall destroy them." he will make them "behold, and wonder, and perish."
If they would not see the hand of judgment upon others, they shall feel
it upon themselves. Both soul and body shall be overwhelmed with utter
destruction for ever and ever. "And not build them up." God's curse is
positive and negative; his sword has two edges, and cuts right and left.
Their heritage of evil shall prevent the ungodly receiving any good; the
ephah shall be too full of wrath to contain a grain of hope. They have
become like old, rotten, decayed houses of timber, useless to the owner,
and harbouring all manner of evil, and, therefore, the Great Builder
will demolish them utterly. Incorrigible offenders may expect speedy
destruction: they who will not mend, shall be thrown away as worthless.
Let us be very attentive to all the lessons of God's word and work, lest
being found disobedient to the divine will, we be made to suffer the
divine wrath.

[Psalms 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 28:6</span></span>

6 Blessed be the Lord, because he hath heard the voice of my
supplications.

7 The Lord is my strength and my shield; my heart trusted in him, and I
am helped therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song will I
praise him.

8 The Lord is their strength, and he is the saving strength of his
anointed.

[Psa 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006.md)

"Blessed be the Lord." Saints are full of benedictions; they are a
blessed people, and a blessing people; but they give their best
blessings, the fat of their sacrifices, to their glorious Lord. Our
Psalm was prayer up to this point, and now it turns to praise. They who
pray well, will soon praise well: prayer and praise are the two lips of
the soul; two bells to ring out sweet and acceptable music in the ears
of God; two angels to climb Jacob's ladder; two altars smoking with
incense; two of Solomon's lilies dropping sweet-smelling myrrh; they are
two young roes that are twins, feeding upon the mountain of myrrh and
the hill of frankincense. "Because he hath heard the voice of my
supplications." Real praise is established upon sufficient and
constraining reasons; it is not irrational emotion, but rises, like a
pure spring, from the deeps of experience. Answered prayers should be
acknowledged. Do we not often fail in this duty? Would it not greatly
encourage others, and strengthen ourselves, if we faithfully recorded
divine goodness, and made a point of extolling it with our tongue? God's
mercy is not such an inconsiderable thing that we may safely venture to
receive it without so much as thanks. We should shun ingratitude, and
live daily in the heavenly atmosphere of thankful love.

[Psa 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007.md)

Here is David's declaration and confession of faith, coupled with a
testimony from his experience. "The Lord is my strength." The Lord
employs his power on our behalf, and moreover, infuses strength into us
in our hour of weakness. The Psalmist, by an act of appropriating faith,
takes the omnipotence of Jehovah to be his own. Dependence upon the
invisible God gives great independence of spirit, inspiring us with
confidence more than human. "And my shield." Thus David found both sword
and shield in his God. The Lord preserves his people from unnumbered
ills; and the Christian warrior, sheltered behind his God is far more
safe than the hero when covered with his shield of brass or triple
steel. "My heart trusted in him, and I am helped." Heart work is sure
work; heart trust is never disappointed. Faith must come before help,
but help will never be long behind. Every day the believer may say, "I
am helped," for the divine assistance is vouchsafed us every moment, or
we should go back unto perdition; when more manifest help is needed, we
have but to put faith into exercise, and it will be given us. "Therefore
my heart greatly rejoiceth; and with my song will I praise him." The
heart is mentioned twice to show the truth of his faith and his joy.
Observe the adverb "greatly," we need not be afraid of being too full of
rejoicing at the remembrance of grace received. We serve a great God,
let us greatly rejoice in him. A song is the soul's fittest method of
giving vent to its happiness, it were well if we were more like the
singing lark, and less like the croaking raven. When the heart is
glowing, the lips should not be silent. When God blesses us we should
bless him with all our heart.

[Psa 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008.md)

"The Lord is their strength." - The heavenly experience of one believer
is a pattern of the life of all. To all the militant church, without
exception, Jehovah is the same as he was to his servant David, "the
least of them shall be as David." They need the same aid and they shall
have it, for they are loved with the same love, written in the same book
of life, and one with the same anointed Head. "And he is the saving
strength of his anointed." Here behold king David as the type of our
Lord Jesus, our covenant Head, our anointed Prince, through whom all
blessings come to us. He has achieved full salvation for us, and we
desire saving strength from him, and as we share in the unction which is
so largely shed upon him, we expect to partake in his salvation. Glory
be unto the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has magnified
the power of his grace in his only begotten Son, whom he has anointed to
be a Prince and a Saviour unto his people.

[Psalms 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 28:9</span></span>

9 Save thy people, and bless thine inheritance' feed them also, and lift
them up for ever.

This is a prayer for the church militant, written in short words, but
full of weighty meaning. We must pray for the whole church, and not for
ourselves alone. "Save thy people." Deliver them from their enemies,
preserve them from their sins, succour them under their troubles, rescue
them from their temptations, and ward off from them every ill. There is
a plea hidden in the expression, "thy people;" for it may be safely
concluded that God's interest in the church, as his own portion, will
lead him to guard it from destruction. "Bless thine inheritance." Grant
positive blessings, peace, plenty, prosperity, happiness; make all thy
dearly-purchased and precious heritage to be comforted by thy Spirit.
Revive, refresh, enlarge and sanctify thy church. "Feed them also." Be a
shepherd to thy flock, let their bodily and spiritual wants be
plentifully supplied. By thy word, and ordinances, direct, rule,
sustain, and satisfy those who are the sheep of thy hand. "And lift them
up for ever." Carry them in thine arms on earth, and then lift them into
thy bosom in heaven. Elevate their minds and thoughts, spiritualise
their affections, make them heavenly, Christlike, and full of God. O
Lord, answer this our petition, for Jesus' sake.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029.md)

</div>
