<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa045)  [Next](psa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 46:0</span></span>

TITLE - To the Chief Musician - He who could sing other Psalms so well
was fitly entrusted with this noble ode. Trifles may be left to commoner
songsters, but the most skilful musician in Israel must be charged with
the due performance of this song, with the most harmonious voices and
choicest music. For the Sons of Korah. One alone cannot fulfil the
praise, there must be picked choristers under him, whose joyful
privilege it shall be to celebrate the service of song in the house of
the Lord. As to why the Sons of Korah were selected, see our remarks at
the head of [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). It may be
well to add that they were a division of the Levites who look their turn
in serving at the temple. All the works of holy service ought not to be
monopolised by one order of talent, each company of believers should in
due course enjoy the privilege. None ought to be without a share in the
service of God.

A Song upon Alamoth. Which may denote that the music was to be pitched
high for the treble or soprano voices of the Hebrew virgins. They went
forth in their dances to sing the praises of David when he smote the
Philistine, it was meet that they should make merry and be glad when the
victories of Jehovah became their theme. We need to praise God upon
virgin hearts, with souls chaste towards his fear, with lively and
exalted expressions, and gladsome strains. Or the word Alamoth may refer
to shrill-sounding instruments, as in [Ch1
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#020), where we read that Zechariah,
and Eliab, and Benaiah were to praise the Lord "with psalteries on
Alamoth." We are not always, in a slovenly manner, to fall into one key,
but with intelligence are to modulate our praises and make them
fittingly expressive of the occasion and the joy it creates in our
souls. These old musical terms cannot be interpreted with certainly, but
they are still useful because they show that care and skill should be
used in our sacred music.

Subject - Happen what may, the Lord's people are happy and secure, this
is the doctrine of the Psalm, and it might, to help our memories, be
called The Song of Holy Confidence, were it not that from the great
reformer's love to this soul-stirring hymn it will probably be best
remembered as Luther's Psalm.

Division - It is divided by inspired authority into three parts, each of
which ends with Selah.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001) - The song of faith in
troublous times.

I. Our refuge. Our only, impregnable, accessible, delightful place of
retreat is our God.

II\. Our strength. Our all-sufficient, unconquerable, honourable, and
emboldening strength is our God.

III\. Our help. Ever near, sympathising, faithful, real, and potent is
our God.

[Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001) - "A very present help in
trouble." Religion never so valuable as in seasons of trouble, sickness,
and death. God is present helping us to bear trouble, to improve it, and
to survive it. Present by gracious communications and sweet
manifestations; present most when he seems absent, restraining,
overruling, and sanctifying trouble. Trust and wait - James Smith.

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002) - The reasons, advantages,
and glory of holy courage.

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002), [Psa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003) -

I. The great and many causes for fear.

1\. What might come - mountains, waters, etc., persecution, pestilence,
etc.

2\. What must come - afflictions, death, judgment.

II\. The great and one cause for not fearing. Fearlessness under such
circumstances should be well grounded. God himself is our refuge, and we
confiding in him are fearless.

\- G. Rogers.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) - Glad tidings in sad times;
or, the city of God in the times of trouble and confusion, watered with
the river of consolation - Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) - What can this "river" be,
but that blessed covenant to which David himself repaired in the time of
trouble?.... And what are "the streams" of this river, but the outgoings
and effects of this divine constitution?

I. The blood of Jesus.

II\. The influences of the Holy Spirit.

III\. The doctrines and promises of the gospel.

IV\. The ordinances of religion.

V. All the means of grace.

\- W. Jay.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) - "Make glad the city of
God." There are four ways in which the streams of a river would gladden
the citizens.

I. The first regards prospect.

II\. The second regards traffic.

III\. The third regards fertility.

IV\. The fourth regards supply.

\- W. Jay.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004) - "City of God." The church
may be called "the city of God," because,

1\. He dwells in it (see [Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)).

2\. He founded it and built it.

3\. It derives all privileges and immunities from him.

4\. He is the chief Ruler or Governor there.

5\. It is his property.

6\. He draws the rent of it.

\- Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004), [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005) - To the church, Joy,
Establishment, Deliverance.

[Psa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006) - What man did and what God
did.

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008) - "Behold the works of the
Lord."

I. They are worth beholding, for they are all like himself; well
becoming his infinite power, wisdom, justice.

II\. Our eyes were given us for this very purpose - not for the
beholding of vanity, not for the ensnaring or wounding of the soul; but
for the use and honour of the Creator.

III\. The Lord delights to have his works beheld; he knows their
excellency and perfection, and that the more they are seen and noted the
more honour will accrue to the Maker of them.

IV\. None but we can do it; there is great reason then that we should
carefully "behold," etc.

V. This shall be of great benefit to ourselves.

\- Bishop Hall.

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008) - The desolations of the
Lord, the consolation of his saints.

I. A declaration of what has happened.

II\. A promise of what shall be achieved.

\- "Spurgeon' s Sermons," No. 190.

[Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009) - The Great Peacemaker, or
the principles of the gospel our only hope, for the total abolition of
war.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010) - "Be still, and know that
I am God." The sole consideration that God is God, sufficient to still
all objections to his sovereignty - Jonathan Edwards.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010) - "I am God."

1\. In that he is God, he is an absolutely and infinitely perfect being.

2\. As he is God he is so great, that he is infinitely above all
comprehension.

3\. As he is God, all things are his own.

4\. In that he is God, he is worthy to be sovereign over all things.

5\. In that he is God, he will be sovereign, and will act as such.

6\. In that he is God, he is able to avenge himself on those who oppose
his sovereignty.

\- Jonathan Edwards.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The lxx referring to the notion of the theme עלם, occultavit, render it
ὑπὲρ τῶν κρυφίων, for the hidden; and the Latin, pro arcanis; and the
rest of the ancient interpreters take the same course; the Chaldee
referring it to Coreh, and those that were hidden, i.e., swallowed up,
by the earth with him, whilst these sons of Coreh escaped; as if the
mention of the sons of Coreh in the title, by whom this song was to be
sung, referred the whole Psalm to that story. Accordingly, [Psa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002), when the Hebrew reads, "Though
the earth be removed," the paraphrase is, "When our fathers were changed
from the earth." - Henry Hammond.

Title

The title is peculiar, "Upon Alamoth," suggesting "a choir of virgins,"
as if this virgin-choir were selected to sing a Psalm that tells of
perils and fears and alarms abounding, in order to show that even the
feeble virgins may in that day sing without dread, because of "The
Mighty One" on their side. - Andrew A. Bonar.

Title

"Upon Alamoth." \[To be sung\] en soprano. - Armand de Mestral, quoted
by Perowne.

Whole Psalm

We sing this Psalm to the praise of God, because God is with us, and
powerfully and miraculously preserves and defends his church and his
word, against all fanatical spirits, against the gates of hell, against
the implacable hatred of the devil, and against all the assaults of the
world, the flesh and sin. - Marlin Luther.

Whole Psalm

Luther and his companions, with all their bold readiness for danger and
death in the cause of truth, had times when their feelings were akin to
those of a divine singer, who said, "Why art thou cast down, O my soul?"
But in such hours the unflinching Reformer would cheerily say to his
friend Melancthon, "Come, Philip, let us sing the [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001);" and they could sing it in
Luther's own characteristic version: -

A sure stronghold our God is He,

A timely shield and weapon;

Our help he'll be, and set us free

From every ill can happen.

\* \* \* \* \*

And were the world with devils filled,

All eager to devour us,

Our souls to fear shall little yield,

They cannot overpower us.

S. W. Christopher, in "Hymn Writers and their Hymns."

[Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)

"God is our refuge and strength," etc. It begins abruptly, but nobly; ye
may trust in whom and in what ye please; but God (Elohim) is our refuge
and strength. "A very present help." A help found to be very powerful
and effectual in straits and difficulties. The words are very emphatic:
עזרה בצרות גמצא מאד, ezrah betsaroth nimtsa meod, "He is found an
exceeding, or superlative, help in difficulties." Such we have found
him, and therefore celebrate his praise. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002)

"Though the earth be removed." John Wesley preached in Hyde-park, on the
occasion of the earthquake felt in London, March 8, 1750, and repeated
these words. Charles Wesley composed Hymn 67, Wesley's Collection, the
following lines of which illustrate this verse: -

How happy then are we,

Who build, O Lord, on thee!

What can our foundation shock?

Though the shatter'd earth remove,

Stands our city on a rock,

On the rock of heavenly love.

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002), [Psa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003)

The earth thrown into a state of wild confusion, the mountains hurled
into the mighty deep, the sea tossed into a tempest, and the everlasting
hills drifting on its foaming billows, are the vivid images by which the
divine judgments on wicked and persecuting nations are described in the
language of the prophets. - John Morison.

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002), [Psa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003), [Psa
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

Palestine was frequently subject to earthquakes, as might have been
expected from its physical character and situation; and it is a
remarkable circumstance, that although all other parts of the land seem
to have been occasionally the scene of those terrible convulsions, the
capital was almost wholly free from them. Mount Moriah, or the hill of
vision, was so called from its towering height, which made it a
conspicuous object in the distance. It stands in the centre of a group
of hills, which surround it in the form of an amphitheatre, and it was
chiefly to this position, under the special blessing of God, that it
stood firm and immovable amid the frequent earthquakes that agitated and
ravaged the Holy Land. - Paxton's Illustrations of Scripture.

[Psa 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003)

"Selah." See Notes on 3:2; 3:2, 4, 8; 39:5

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God."
What is the river that makes glad the city of God? I answer, God himself
is the river, as in the following verse, "God is in the midst of her." 1
God the Father is the river: "For my people have committed two evils;
they have forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out
cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water." [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013). 2. God the Son is the river, the
fountain of salvation: "In that day there shall be a fountain opened to
the house of David, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem for sin and for
uncleanness." [Zac 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001). 3. God the
Spirit is the river: "He that believeth on me, as the Scripture hath
said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water." "Whosoever
drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the
water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up
into everlasting life." [Joh 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038);
[Joh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014). What are the streams of
this river? Answers the perfections of God, the fulness of Christ, the
operations of the Spirit, and these running in the channel of the
covenant of promise. - Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"There is a river," etc. This is that flood which Ezekiel beheld in
vision, the waters that came down from the right side of the house, and
rising first to the ancles - then as the prophet passed onward, to the
knees - then to the loins - became afterwards a river that he could not
pass over; for the waters were risen, waters to swim in, a river that
could not be passed over. Shall we see in this, with the angelic doctor,
the river of grace which burst forth from Mount Calvary? streams
branching off hither and thither, the pelagim of the Hebrew - "to
satisfy the desolate and waste ground, and to cause the bud of the
tender herb to spring forth" Job 38. O "fountain of gardens," "well of
living waters," "streams from Lebanon," how do you, the "nether springs"
of this world, bring to us something of the everlasting loveliness and
peace of those "upper springs," by which the beautiful flock now feed
and lie down, none making them afraid! Or with S. Ambrose and S.
Bernard, understand the verse of the "river of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding from the throne of God and of the Lamb." And then
the rivers of that flood shall indeed "make glad the city of God," the
house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, where is the tree of
life, that beareth twelve manner of fruits, and yieldeth her fruit every
month; that country and that river of which the old liturgies say, "They
who rest in the bosom of Abraham are in the tabernacles of joy and rest,
in the dwellings of light, in the world of pleasure, in the church of
the true Jerusalem, where there is no place for affliction, nor way of
sadness, where there are no wars with the flesh, and no resistance to
temptation, where sin is forgotten, and past danger is only remembered
as a present pleasure." - Thomas Aquinas, Ambrose, and Bernard, in
Neale's Commentary.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"There is a river." The river of God that flows from his throne. No
enemy can cut off this stream from the church of Christ. Observe the
reference to [Isa 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa036.htm#002); [Isa
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#025), compared with [Ch2
32:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#002). These gently flowing, but full
streams, are contrasted with the roaring waves of the sea. - T. C.
Barth.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"There is a river," etc. The allusion is either to the river Kidron,
which ran by Jerusalem, or to the waters of Shiloah, which by different
courses and branches ran through the city of Jerusalem, and supplied the
several parts of it with water, to the joy and comfort of its
inhabitants. But the words are to be understood in a figurative sense,
as applicable to gospel times; and this river either designs the gospel,
the streams of which are its doctrines, which are living waters, that
went out from Jerusalem, and which publish glad tidings of great joy to
all sensible sinners; or the Spirit and his graces, which are compared
to a well and rivers of living water, in the exercises of which the
saints have much joy and peace; or else the Lord himself, who is the
place of broad rivers and streams to his people, and is both their
refreshment and protection; or rather his everlasting love to them is
here intended. - John Gill.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

Compared with the waterless deserts around, Juda and Jerusalem were well
watered, and drought pressed more severely on the besiegers than the
besieged. The allusion here is to the well-known rill and pool of
Siloam. So in [Isa 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#006), the blessing
of God's protection is represented by the waters of Siloah, which go
softly. - From "The Psalms Chronologically arranged. By Four Friends,"
1867.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"The city." The church of God is like a city, 1. Because a city is a
place of security. 2. A place of society: what one wants another
supplies; they have mutual fellowship. 3. A place of unity, that people
may therein live in peace and concord. 4. A place of trade and traffic.
Here is the market of free grace: "Ho, every one that thirsteth," etc.
Here is the pearl of great price exposed for sale. 5. A place of
freedom, and liberty, freedom from the guilt of sin, wrath of God, curse
of the law, present evil world, bondage to Satan, etc., etc. 6. A place
of order and regularity; it hath its constitutions and ordinances. 7. A
place of rest, and commodious to live in, and thus it is opposed to the
wilderness. 8. A place of privileges. 9. A place of pomp and splendour;
there is the king, the court, the throne. 10. A place of pleasure and
beauty, [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002). - Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

"God is in the midst of her." It is the real presence of Christ, and the
supernatural power of his Spirit, which makes the church mighty to the
conquest of souls. The church spreads because her "God is in the midst
of her." When at any time she has forgotten her dependence on the
invisible intercession of her Head, and the gracious energy of his
Spirit, she has found herself shorn of the locks of her great strength,
and has become the laughing-stock of the Philistines. - William Binnie,
D.D.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

"God is in the midst of her." etc. The enemies of the church may toss
her as waves but they shall not split her as rocks. She may be dipped in
water as a feather, but shall not sink therein as lead. He that is a
well of water within her to keep her from fainting, will also prove a
wall of fire about her to preserve her from falling. Tried she may be,
but destroyed she cannot be. Her foundation is the Rock of Ages, and her
defence the everlasting Arms. It is only such fabrics as are bottomed
upon the sand, that are overthrown by the wind. The adversaries of God's
people will push at them as far as their horns will go, but when they
have scoured them by persecution, as tarnished vessels, then God will
throw such wisps into the fire. - William Secker.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

When the Papists were in their ruff, and Melancthon began sometimes to
fear lest the infant Reformation should be stifled in the birth, Luther
was wont to comfort him with these words: "Si nos ruemus, ruer Christus
una, scilicet ille regnator mundi, esto ruat, malo ego cum Christo
ruere, quam cure Caesare stare; that is, If we perish, Christ must fall
too (he is in the midst of us), and if it must be so, be it so; I had
rather perish with Christ, that great Ruler of the world, than prosper
with Caesar. - John Coilings.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

"And that right early." Therefore, notice that all the great
deliverances wrought in Holy Scriptures, were wrought so early, as to
have been brought to pass in the middle of the night. So Gideon, with
his pitchers and lamps against the Midianites; so Saul, when he went
forth against Nabash, the Ammonite; so Joshua, when he went up to
succour Gibeon; so Samson, when he carried off in triumph the gates of
Gaza; so also the associate kings, under the guidance of Elisha, in
their expedition against the Moabites, when they, according to God's
command, filled the wilderness with ditches, and then beheld their
enemies drawn to their destruction, by the reflection of the rising sun
upon the water. - Michael Ayguan.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

"Right early." Rather, with the margin, when the morning appeareth. The
restoration of the Jews will be one of the first things at the season of
the second advent. It will be accomplished in the very dawning of that
day, "when the Sun of Righteousness will rise with healing on his
wings." - Samuel Horsley.

[Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)

"The Lord of hosts is with us." There be three sorts of God's special
presence, all which may be justly accounted the church's privilege.
First, his glorious presence, or his presence testified by eminent
glory, and the residence thereof. Thus God is said to be in heaven
differentially, so as he is not anywhere else; and heaven is therefore
called his throne or dwelling place ([Kg1
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#039)); as a king is nowhere so
majestically as upon his throne, or in his chair of state; and this is
so great a privilege of the church as that she comes not to enjoy it,
until she be triumphant in heaven, and therefore is not the presence
here intended. Secondly, his gracious presence or his presence testified
by tokens of his grace and favour toward a people, whether visible, as
in the temple where he chose to place his name, and wherein above all
places he would be worshipped, in which respect he is said to dwell
between the cherubim ([Sa2 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002)); or
spiritual tokens of his grace, as assistance and acceptance in the
duties of his worship, together with enjoyment and benefit of his
ordinances. Thus he is present with his church and people in times of
the gospel: "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there
am I in the midst of them." [Mat
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020). This kind of presence is a
privilege and ordinances; yet this is not the presence principally
intended here. Thirdly, the providential presence, or his presence
testified by acts of special providence, wherein the power, wisdom, or
any other of God's attributes are eminently put forth, either by way of
assistance or defence for a people. Thus the Lord was present with
Israel in the wilderness by the pillar of fire and of a cloud ([Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021)): "And the Lord went before them
by day in a pillar of cloud, to lead them the way; and by night in a
pillar of fire, to give them light." And as this presence was intended
for a guide, so was it also for a defence to his people against their
enemies, and at which their enemies the Egyptians were troubled. [Exo
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020). By this kind of presence the
Lord is with his church militant, in reference to her external regiment,
and more especially in her warfare, standing up for her and with her
against her enemies; and this is the church's privilege in these words,
"The Lord of hosts is with us." - John Strickland, B.D. (1601-1670), in
a Sermon, entitled, "Immanuel," 1644.

[Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)

"The God of Jacob." If any shall ask me, Why then the God of Jacob more
than the God of Isaac? Though it might suffice that the Spirit of God is
pleased so to speak, yet Mr. Calvin gives this reason, the covenant of
grace was more solemnly made and publicly ratified with Abraham and
Jacob, than it was with Isaac, and therefore when he will be looked upon
as a God in covenant with his people, he holds forth himself more
frequently by the name of the God of Abraham, and the God of Jacob, than
of the God of Isaac; albeit sometimes he is pleased to take upon him
that style also. - John Strickland.

[Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)

"Our refuge." Our refuge, or stronghold, where the church, as a ship in
quiet haven, may anchor and ride safe; or it may be a metaphor from the
dens or burrows, where weaponless creatures find shelter, when they are
hunted and pursued by their enemies, as [Pro
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026), "The conies are but a feeble
folk, yet make they their houses in the rocks." They are safe in the
rock if they can get thither, though never so weak in themselves. So the
church, though pursued by bloody enemies, and though weak in herself, if
yet she get under the wing of the God of Jacob, she may be fearless, for
she is safe there. He is our refuge. It were to undervalue God, if we
should fear the creatures, when he is with us. Antigonus, when he
overheard his soldiers reckoning how many their enemies were, he steps
in unto them suddenly, demanding, "And how many do you reckon me for?" -
John Strickland.

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

"Come, behold the works of the Lord." Venito, videto. God looks that his
works should be well observed, and especially when he hath wrought any
great deliverance for his people. Of all things, he cannot abide to be
forgotten. - John Trapp.

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

"What desolations he hath made in the earth." We are here first invited
to a tragical sight. We are carried into the camera di morte, to see the
ghastly visage of deaths and desolations all the world over; than which
nothing can be more horrible and dreadful. You are called out to see
piles of dead carcasses; to see whole basketfuls of heads, as was
presented to Jehu: a woeful spectacle, but a necessary one. See,
therefore what desolations the Lord hath wrought in all the earth.
Desolations by wars: how many fields have been drenched with blood, and
composted with carcasses; how many millions of men have been cut off in
all ages by the edge of the sword! Desolations by famine; wherein men
have been forced to make their bodies one another's sepulchres, and
mothers to devour their children of a span long. Desolations by plague
and pestilence; which have swept away, as our story tells us, eight
hundred thousand in one city. Desolations by inundations of waters;
which have covered the faces of many regions, and rinsed the earth of
her unclean inhabitants. Desolations by earthquakes, which have
swallowed up whole cities, and those great and populous. Desolations
wrought by the hand of his angels; as in Egypt; in the tents of the
Assyrians, one hundred and eighty-five thousand in one night; in the
camp of Israel, in David's pestilence. Desolations wrought by the hand
of men, in battles and massacres. Desolations by wild beasts; as in the
colonies of Ashur planted in Samaria. Desolations by the swarms of
obnoxious and noisome creatures; as in Egypt, and since in Africa: "He
spoke the word, and the grasshoppers came, and caterpillars
innumerable," [Psa 105:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#034). Insomuch
as, in the consulship of M. Fulvius Flaccus, after the bloody wars of
Africa, followed infinite numbers of locusts; which, after devouring of
all herbs and fruit, were, by a sudden wind, hoised into the African
Sea: infection followed upon their putrefaction, and thereupon a general
mortality: in number, four-score thousand died: upon the sea-coast
betwixt Carthage and Utica, above two-hundred thousand. Desolations
every way, and by what variety of means soever; yet all wrought by the
divine hand: "What desolations he hath wrought." Whoever be the
instrument, he is the Author. - Joseph Hall (Bishop).

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

Doth not God make great desolations, when he makes that man that counted
himself a most religious man, to confess himself not sufficient for one
good thought? As it was with Paul, does he not make wars to cease when
he turns the heart of a persecutor, earnestly to seek peace with God and
man, yea, with his very enemies? Doth he not break the bow and all
weapons of war asunder, and that in all the earth, when he proclaims
peace to all that are far off and near, professor and profane, Jews and
Gentiles? - Richard Coore.

[Psa 46:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

"Come, behold the works of the Lord." What works? ruining works. "What
desolations he hath made in the earth." God made strange work in the
world at that time. Those countries which before were as the garden of
God, became like a desolate wilderness: who was able to bear this with
patience? Yet the Spirit of God saith in the next words, it must be
patiently borne. When God lets men strive and war with one another to a
common confusion, yet no man may strive with God about it; and the
reason given why no man may, is only this (which is indeed all the
reason in the world), He is God. So it follows in the Psalm; "Be still,
and know that I am God;" as if the Lord had said, Not a word, do not
strive nor reply; whatever you see, hold your peace; know that I, being
God, give no account of any of my matters. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)

He that destroyeth all the instruments of war doth surely make peace;
and he that maketh war to cease, doth certainly make peace begin. Peace
is made two ways; first, by taking up the differences and reconciling
the spirits of men; secondly, by breaking the power and taking away all
provisions of war from men. The Lord maketh peace by both these ways, or
by either of them. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)

"He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the
chariot in the fire." When the Romans had, in their way of speaking,
given peace to a nation, by extirpating the greatest part of the
miserable inhabitants, they collected the arms of the vanquished, and
setting them on fire, reduced them to ashes. A medal, struck by
Vespasian, the Roman emperor, on finishing his wars in Italy, and other
parts of the world, represents the goddess of peace holding an olive
branch in one hand, and with a lighted torch in the other, setting fire
to a heap of armour. The custom is thus alluded to by Virgil: -

"O mihi prteritos referat si Jupiter annos!

Qualis eram cum primam aciem Prneste sub ipsa

Stravi, scutorumque incendi victor acervos."

Aen lib iii v. 1. 560.

"O that Jupiter would restore to me the years that are past! Such as I
was, when under Prneste itself, I routed the foremost rank of the enemy,
and victorious set fire to heaps of armour."

The same practice, by the command of Jehovah, prevailed among the Jews;
the first instance of it occurs in the book of [Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006). It is also celebrated in the
songs of Zion, as the attendant of peace, and the proof of its
continuance: "He maketh wars to cease," etc. - Paxton's Illustrations of
Scripture.

[Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)

"He burneth the chariot in the fire." By degrees the chariot came to be
one of the recognised forces in war, and we find it mentioned throughout
the books of Scriptures, not only in its literal sense, but as a
metaphor which every one could understand. In the Psalms, for example,
are several allusions to the war-chariot. "He maketh wars to cease unto
the end of the earth; he breaketh the bow, and cutteth the spear in
sunder; he burneth the chariot in the fire." [Psa
46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009). Again: "At thy rebuke, O God of
Jacob, both the chariot and horse are cast into a deep sleep." [Psa
76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006). And: "Some trust in chariots,
and some in horses: but we will remember the name of the Lord our God."
[Psa 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007). Now; the force of these
passages cannot be properly appreciated unless we realise to ourselves
the dread in which the war-chariot was held by the foot soldiers. Even
cavalry were much feared; but the chariots were objects of almost
superstitious fear, and the rushing sound of their wheels, the noise of
the horses' hoofs, and the shaking of the ground as the "prancing horses
and jumping chariots" ([Nah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#002)),
thundered along, are repeatedly mentioned. - J. G. Wood.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still, and know that I am God." The great works of God, wherein his
sovereignty appeared, had been described in the foregoing verses. In the
awful desolations that he made, and by delivering his people by terrible
things, he showed his greatness and dominion. Herein he manifested his
power and sovereignty, and so commands all to be still, and know that he
is God. For, says he, "I will be exalted among the heathen, I will be
exalted in the earth."

In the words may be observed, 1. A duty described, to be still before
God, and under the dispensations of his providence; which implies that
we must be still as to words; not speaking against the sovereign
dispensations of providence, or complaining of them; not darkening
counsel by words without knowledge, or justifying ourselves and speaking
great swelling words of vanity. We must be still as to actions and
outward behaviour, so as not to oppose God in his dispensations; and as
to the inward frame of our hearts, cultivating a calm and quiet
submission of soul to the sovereign pleasure of God, whatever it,nay be.

2\. We may observe the ground of this duty, namely the divinity of God.
His being God is a sufficient reason why we should be still before him,
in no wise murmuring, or objecting, or opposing, but calmly and humbly
submitting to him.

3\. How we must fulfill this duty of being still before God, namely,
with a sense of his divinity, as seeing the ground of this duty, in that
we "know" him to be God. Our submission is to be such as becomes
rational creatures. God doth not require us to submit contrary to
reason, but to submit as seeing the reason and ground of submission.
Hence, the bare consideration that God is God may well be sufficient to
still all objections and oppositions against the divine sovereign
dispensations. - Jonathan Edwards.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still, and know that I am God." This text of Scripture forbids
quarrelling and murmuring against God. Now let me apply as I go along.
There are very few, and these very well circumstanced, that find
themselves in no hazard of quarrelling with God. I think almost that if
angels were on earth, they would be in hazard of it. I will assure you,
there are none that have corruption, but they have need to be afraid of
this. But many give way to this quarrelling, and consider not the hazard
thereof. Beware of it, for it is a dreadful thing to quarrel with God:
who may say unto him, "What doest thou?" It is a good account of Aaron,
that when God made fire to destroy his sons, he held his peace. Let us
then, while we bear the yoke, "sit alone and keep silence, and put our
mouths in the dust, if so be there may be hope." [Lam
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#028), [Lam
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#029). Ye know, the murmuring of the
children of Israel cost them very dear. "Be still," that is, beware of
murmuring against me, saith the Lord. God gives not an account of his
matters to any; because there may be many things ye cannot see through;
and therefore ye may think it better to have wanted them, and much more,
for the credit of God and the church. I say, God gives not an account of
his matters to any. Beware, then, of drawing rash conclusions. - Richard
Cameron's Sermon preached July 18th, 1680, three days before he was
killed at Airsmoss.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still and know that I am God." Faith gives the soul a view of the
great God. It teacheth the soul to set his almightiness against sin's
magnitude, and his infinitude against sin's multitude; and so quencheth
the temptation. The reason why the presumptuous sinner fears so little,
and the despairing soul so much, is for want of knowing God as great;
therefore, to cure them both, the serious consideration of God, under
this notion, is propounded: "Be still, and know that I am God;" as if he
had said, Know, O ye wicked, that I am God, who can avenge myself when I
please upon you, and cease to provoke me by your sins to your own
confusion; and again, know, ye trembling souls, that I am God; and
therefore able to pardon the greatest sins, and cease to dishonour me by
your unbelieving thoughts of me. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still, and know that I am the Lord." Not everyone is a fit scholar
for God's school, but such as are purified according to the purification
of the sanctuary. Carnal men are drowned in fleshly and worldly cares,
and neither purged nor lifted up to receive the light of God, or else
indisposed by prejudice or passion, that they cannot learn at all. We
will never savingly know him, till our souls be free of these
indispositions. Among all the elements the earth is fitted to receive
seed of the sower; if he cast it into the fire, it burneth; if in the
air, it withereth; in the waters, it rotteth, the instability of that
body is for producing monsters, because it closeth not straitly the
seeds of fishes. Spirits of a fiery temper, or light in inconstancy, or
moving as waters, are not for God's lessons, but such as in stayed
humility do rest under his hand. If waters be mixed with clay in their
substance, or their surface be troubled with wind, they can neither
receive nor render any image; such unstable spirits in the school of
God, lose their time and endanger themselves. - William Struther.

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still, and know," etc. As you must come and see ([Psa
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)), so come and hear what the Lord
saith to those enemies of yours. - John Trapp.

[Psa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011)

"The Lord of hosts is with us." On Tuesday Mr. Wesley could with
difficulty be understood, though he often attempted to speak. At last,
with all he strength he had, he cried out, "The best of all is, God is
with us." Again, raising his hand, and waving it in triumph, he
exclaimed with thrilling effect, "The best of all is, God is with us."
These words seem to express the leading feature of his whole life. God
had been with him from early childhood; his providence had guided him
through all the devious wanderings of human life; and now, when he was
entering the "valley of the shadow of death," the same hand sustained
him. - From "Wesley and his Coadjutors." By Rev. W. C. Larrabee, A. M.
Edited by Rev. B. F. Tefft, D.D. Cincinnati. 1851."

[Psalms 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 46:1</span></span>

1 God is our refuge and strength, a very present help in trouble.

2 Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be removed, and though
the mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;

3 Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled, though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof. Selah.

[Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)

"God is our refuge and strength." Not our armies, or our fortresses.
Israel's boast is in Jehovah, the only living and true God. Others vaunt
their impregnable castles, placed on inaccessible rocks and secured with
gates of iron, but God is a far better refuge from distress than all
these: and when the time comes to carry the war into the enemy's
territories, the Lord stands his people in better stead than all the
valour of legions or the boasted strength of chariot and horse. Soldiers
of the cross, remember this, and count yourselves safe, and make
yourselves strong in God. Forget not the personal possessive word "our;"
make sure each one of your portion in God, that you may say, "He is my
refuge and strength." Neither forget the fact that God is our refuge
just now, in the immediate present, as truly as when David penned the
word. God alone is our all in all. All other refuges are refuges of
lies, all other strength is weakness, for power belongeth unto God: but
as God is all-sufficient, our defence and might are equal to all
emergencies. "A very present help in trouble," or in distresses he has
so been found, he has been tried and proved by his people. He never
withdraws himself from his afflicted. He is their help, truly,
effectually, constantly; he is present or near them, close at their side
and ready for their succour, and this is emphasised by the word "very"
in our version, he is more present than friend or relative can be, yea,
more nearly present than even the trouble itself. To all this
comfortable truth is added the consideration that his assistance comes
at the needed time. He is not as the swallows that leave us in the
winter; he is a friend in need and a friend indeed. When it is very dark
with us, let brave spirits say, "Come, let us sing the [Psa
46:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001)."

"A fortress firm, and steadfast rock,

Is God in time of danger;

A shield and sword in every shock,

From foe well-known or' stranger."

[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002)

"Therefore." How fond the Psalmist is of therefores! his poetry is no
poetic rapture without reason, it is as logical as a mathematical
demonstration. The next words are a necessary inference from these.
"Will not we fear." With God on our side, how irrational would fear be!
Where he is all power is, and all love, why therefore should we quail?
"Though the earth be removed," though the basis of all visible things
should be so convulsed as to be entirely changed. "And though the
mountains be carried into the midst of the sea;" though the firmest of
created objects should fall to headlong ruin, and be submerged in utter
destruction. The two phrases set forth the most terrible commotions
within the range of imagination, and include the overthrow of dynasties,
the destruction of nations, the ruin of families, the persecutions of
the church, the reign of heresy, and whatever else may at any time try
the faith of believers. Let the worst come to the worst, the child of
God should never give way to mistrust; since God remaineth faithful
there can be no danger to his cause or people. When the elements shall
melt with fervent heat, and the heavens and the earth shall pass away in
the last general conflagration, we shall serenely behold "the wreck of
matter, and the crash of worlds," for even then our refuge shall
preserve us from all evil, our strength shall prepare us for all good.

[Psa 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#003)

"Though the waters thereof roar and be troubled." When all things are
excited to fury, and reveal their utmost power to disturb, faith smiles
serenely. She is not afraid of noise, nor even of real force, she knows
that the Lord stilleth the raging of the sea, and holdeth the waves in
the hollow of his hand. "Though the mountains shake with the swelling
thereof." Alps and Andes may tremble, but faith rests on a firmer basis,
and is not to be moved by swelling seas. Evil may ferment, wrath may
boil, and pride may foam, but the brave heart of holy confidence
trembles not. Great men who are like mountains may quake for fear in
times of great calamity, but the man whose trust is in God needs never
be dismayed.

"Selah." In the midst of such a hurly-burly the music may well come to a
pause, both to give the singers breath, and ourselves time for
meditation. We are in no hurry, but can sit us down and wait while earth
dissolves, and mountains rock, and oceans roar. Ours is not the headlong
rashness which passes for courage, we can calmly confront the danger,
and meditate upon terror, dwelling on its separate items and united
forces. The pause is not an exclamation of dismay, but merely a rest in
music: we do not suspend our song in alarm, but retune our harps with
deliberation amidst the tumult of the storm. It were well if all of us
could say, "Selah," under tempestuous trials, but alas! too often we
speak in our haste, lay our trembling hands bewildered among the
strings, strike the lyre with a rude crash, and mar the melody of our
life-song.

[Psalms 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 46:4</span></span>

4 There is a river, the streams whereof shall make glad the city of God,
the holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High.

5 God is in the midst of her; she shall not be moved: God shall help
her, and that right early.

6 The heathen raged, the kingdoms were moved: he uttered his voice, the
earth melted.

7 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

[Psa 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#004)

"There is a river." Divine grace like a smoothly flowing, fertilising,
full, and never-failing river, yields refreshment and consolation to
believers. This is the river of the water of life, of which the church
above as well as the church below partakes evermore. It is no boisterous
ocean, but a placid stream, it is not stayed in its course by
earthquakes or crumbling mountains, it follows its serene course without
disturbance. Happy are they who know from their own experience that
there is such a river of God. "The streams whereof" in their various
influences, for they are many, "shall make glad the city of God," by
assuring the citizens that Zion's Lord will unfailingly supply all their
needs. The streams are not transient like Cherith, nor muddy like the
Nile, nor furious like Kishon, nor treacherous like Job's deceitful
brooks, neither are their waters "naught" like those of Jericho, they
are clear, cool, fresh, abundant, and gladdening. The great fear of an
Eastern city in time of war was lest the water supply should be cut off
during a siege; if that were secured the city could hold out against
attacks for an indefinite period. In this verse, Jerusalem, which
represents the church of God, is described as well supplied with water,
to set forth the fact, that in seasons of trial all-sufficient grace
will be given to enable us to endure unto the end. The church is like a
well-ordered city, surrounded with mighty walls of truth and justice,
garrisoned by omnipotence, fairly built and adorned by infinite wisdom:
its burgesses the saints enjoy high privileges; they trade with far-off
lands, they live in the smile of the King; and as a great river is the
very making and mainstay of a town, so is the broad river of everlasting
love and grace their joy and bliss. The church is peculiarly the "City
of God," of his designing, building, election, purchasing and
indwelling. It is dedicated to his praise, and glorified by his
presence. "The holy place of the tabernacles of the Most High." This was
the peculiar glory of Jerusalem, that the Lord within her walls had a
place where he peculiarly revealed himself, and this is the choice
privilege of the saints, concerning which we may cry with wonder, "Lord,
how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us, and not unto the
world?" To be a temple for the Holy Ghost is the delightful portion of
each saint, to be the living temple for the Lord our God is also the
high honour of the church in her corporate capacity. Our God is here
called by a worthy title, indicating his power, majesty, sublimity, and
excellency; and it is worthy of note that under this character he dwells
in the church. We have not a great God in nature, and a little God in
grace; no, the church contains as clear and convincing a revelation of
God as the works of nature, and even more amazing is the excellent glory
which shines between the cherubim overshadowing that mercy-seat which is
the centre and gathering place of the people of the living God. To have
the Most High dwelling within her members, is to make the church on
earth like the church in heaven.

[Psa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#005)

"God is in the midst of her." His help is therefore sure and near. Is
she besieged, then he is himself besieged within her, and we may be
certain that he will break forth upon his adversaries. How near is the
Lord to the distresses of his saints, since he sojourns in their midst!
Let us take heed that we do not grieve him; let us have such respect to
him as Moses had when he felt the sand of Horeb's desert to be holy, and
put off his shoes from off his feet when the Lord spake from the burning
bush. "She shall not be moved." How can she be moved unless her enemies
move her Lord also? His presence renders all hope of capturing and
demolishing the city utterly ridiculous. The Lord is in the vessel, and
she cannot, therefore, be wrecked. "God shall help her." Within her he
will furnish rich supplies, and outside her walls he will lay her foes
in heaps like the armies of Sennacherib, when the angel went forth and
smote them. "And that right early." As soon as the first ray of light
proclaims the coming day, at the turning of the morning God's right arm
shall be outstretched for his people. The Lord is up betimes. We are
slow to meet him, but he is never tardy in helping us. Impatience
complains of divine delays, but in very deed the Lord is not slack
concerning his promise. Man's haste is often folly, but God's apparent
delays are ever wise; and, when rightly viewed, are no delays at all.
Today the bands of evil may environ the church of God, and threaten her
with destruction; but ere long they shall pass away like the foam on the
waters, and the noise of their tumult shall be silent in the grave. The
darkest hour of the night is just before the turning of the morning; and
then, even then, shall the Lord appear as the great ally of his church.

[Psa 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#006)

"The heathen raged." The nations were in a furious uproar, they gathered
against the city of the Lord like wolves ravenous for their prey; they
foamed, and roared, and swelled like a tempestuous sea. "The kingdoms
were moved." A general confusion seized upon society; the fierce
invaders convulsed their own dominions by draining the population to
urge on the war, and they desolated other territories by their
devastating march to Jerusalem. Crowns fell from royal heads, ancient
thrones rocked like trees driven of the tempest, powerful empires fell
like pine uprooted by the blast: everything was in disorder, and dismay
seized on all who knew not the Lord. "He uttered his voice, the earth
melted." With no other instrumentality than a word the Lord ruled the
storm. He gave forth a voice and stout hearts were dissolved, proud
armies were annihilated, conquering powers were enfeebled. At first the
confusion appeared to be worse confounded, when the element of divine
power came into view; the very earth seemed turned to wax, the most
solid and substantial of human things melted like the fat of rams upon
the altar; but anon peace followed, the rage of man subsided, hearts
capable of repentance relented, and the implacable were silenced. How
mighty is a word from God! How mighty the Incarnate Word. O that such a
word would come from the excellent glory even now to melt all hearts in
love to Jesus, and to end for ever all the persecutions, wars, and
rebellions of men!

[Psa 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#007)

"The Lord of hosts is with us." This is the reason for all Zion's
security, and for the overthrow of her foes. The Lord rules the angels,
the stars, the elements, and all the hosts of heaven; and the heaven of
heavens are under his sway. The armies of men though they know it not
are made to subserve his will. This Generalissimo of the forces of the
land, and the Lord High Admiral of the seas, is on our side - our august
ally; woe unto those who fight against him, for they shall fly like
smoke before the wind when he gives the word to scatter them. "The God
of Jacob is our refuge." Immanuel is Jehovah of Hosts, and Jacob's God
is our high place of defence. When this glad verse is sung to music
worthy of such a jubilate, well may the singers pause and the players
wait awhile to retune their instruments; here, therefore, fitly stands
that solemn, stately, peaceful note of rest, Selah.

[Psalms 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 46:8</span></span>

8 Come, behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he hath made in
the earth.

9 He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth; he breaketh the
bow, and cutteth the spear in sunder; he burneth the chariot in the
fire.

10 Be still, and know that I am God: I will be exalted among the
heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.

11 The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge. Selah.

[Psa 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#008)

"Come, behold the works of the Lord." The joyful citizens of Jerusalem
are invited to go forth and view the remains of their enemies, that they
may mark the prowess of Jehovah and the spoil which his right hand hath
won for his people. It were well if we also carefully noted the
providential dealings of our covenant God, and were quick to perceive
his hand in the battles of his church. Whenever we read history it
should be with this verse sounding in our ears. We should read the
newspaper in the same spirit, to see how the Head of the Church rules
the nations for his people's good, as Joseph governed Egypt for the sake
of Israel. "What desolations he hath made in the earth." The destroyers
he destroys, the desolators he desolates. How forcible is the verse at
this date! The ruined cities of Assyria, Babylon, Petra, Bashan, Canaan,
are our instructors, and in tables of stone record the doings of the
Lord. In every place where his cause and crown have been disregarded
ruin has surely followed; sin has been a blight on nations, and left
their palaces to lie in heaps. In the days of the writer of this Psalm,
there had probably occurred some memorable interposition of God against
his Israel's foes; and as he saw their overthrow, he called on his
fellow citizens to come forth and attentively consider the terrible
things in righteousness which had been wrought on their behalf.
Dismantled castles and ruined abbeys in our own land stand as memorials
of the Lord's victories over oppression and superstition. May there soon
be more of such desolations.

"Ye gloomy piles, ye tombs of living men,

Ye sepulchres of womanhood, or worse;

Ye refuges of lies, soon may ye fall,

And 'mid your ruins may the owl, and bat,

And dragon find congenial resting place."

[Psa 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#009)

"He maketh wars to cease unto the end of the earth." His voice quiets
the tumult of war, and calls for the silence of peace. However remote
and barbarous the tribe, he awes the people into rest. He crushes the
great powers till they cannot provoke strife again; he give his people
profound repose. "He breaketh the bow," the sender of swift-winged death
he renders useless. "And cutteth the spear in sunder" - the lance of the
might man he shivers. "He burneth the chariot in the fire" - the proud
war-chariot with its death-dealing scythes he commits to the flames. All
sorts of weapons he piles heaps on heaps, and utterly destroys them. So
was it in Judea in the days of yore, so shall it be in all lands in eras
yet to come. Blessed deed of the Prince of Peace! when shall it be
literally performed? Already the spiritual foes of his people are
despoiled of their power to destroy; but when shall the universal
victory of peace be celebrated, and instruments of wholesale murder be
consigned to ignominious destruction? How glorious will the ultimate
victory of Jesus be in the day of his appearing, when every enemy shall
lick the dust!

[Psa 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#010)

"Be still, and know that I am God." Hold off your hands, ye enemies! Sit
down and wait in patience, ye believers! Acknowledge that Jehovah is
God, ye who feel the terrors of his wrath! Adore him, and him only, ye
who partake in the protections of his grace. Since none can worthily
proclaim his nature, let "expressive silence muse his praise." The
boasts of the ungodly and the timorous forebodings of the saints should
certainly be hushed by a sight of what the Lord has done in past ages.
"I will be exalted among the heathen." They forget God, they worship
idols, but Jehovah will yet be honoured by them. Reader, the prospects
of missions are bright, bright as the promises of God. Let no man's
heart fail him; the solemn declarations of this verse must be fulfilled.
"I will be exalted in the earth," among all people, whatever may have
been their wickedness or their degradation. Either by terror or love God
will subdue all hearts to himself. The whole round earth shall yet
reflect the light of his majesty. All the more because of the sin, and
obstinacy, and pride of man shall God be glorified when grace reigns
unto eternal life in all corners of the world.

[Psa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011)

"The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is our refuge." It was
meet to sing this twice over. It is a truth of which no believer
wearies, it is a fact too often forgotten, it is a precious privilege
which cannot be too often considered. Reader, is the Lord on thy side?
Is Emmanuel, God with us, thy Redeemer? Is there a covenant between thee
and God as between God and Jacob? If so, thrice happy art thou. Show thy
joy in holy song, and in times of trouble play the man by still making
music for thy God.

Selah. Here as before, lift up the heart. Rest in contemplation after
praise. Still keep the soul in tune. It is easier to sing a hymn of
praise than to continue in the spirit of praise, but let it be our aim
to maintain the uprising devotion of our grateful hearts, and so end our
song as if we intended it to be continued.

Selah bids the music rest,

Pause in silence soft and blest;

Selah bids uplift the strain,

Harps and voices tune again;

Selah ends the vocal praise,

Still your hearts to God upraise.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 47](psa047)

</div>
