<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa066)  [Next](psa068.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 67](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 67:0</span></span>

Title. - To the Chief Musician. Who he was matters not, and who we may
be is also of small consequence, so long as the Lord is glorified. On
Neginoth, or upon stringed instruments. This is the fifth Psalm so
entitled, and no doubt like the others was meant to be sung with the
accompaniment of "harpers harping with their harps." No author's name is
given, but he would be a bold man who should attempt to prove that David
did not write it. We will be hard pushed before we will look for any
other author upon Whom to father these anonymous odes which lie side by
side with those ascribed to David, and wear a family likeness to them. A
Psalm or Song. Solemnity and vivacity are here united. A Psalm is a
song, but all songs are not Psalms: this is both the one and the other.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md). -

I. Here is mercy in God the Father.

II\. Here is blessing as the fruit of that mercy in God the Son.

III\. Here is the experience of that blessing in the Comforts of the
Holy Ghost.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md). - The need of seeking a
blessing for ourselves.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md), [Psa
67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md). - The prosperity of the church
at home, the hope for missions abroad.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md). -

I. The way of God towards the earth.

1\. A way of mercy.

2\. Of blessing.

3\. Of comfort.

II\. The knowledge of that way.

1\. By outward means.

2\. By inward teaching.

III\. The effect of that knowledge. Salvation among all nations.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md). - What is the true health
of men?

[Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md). - Viewed.

I. As the desire of every renewed heart.

II\. As a prayer.

III\. As a prophecy.

[Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md). -

I. The reign of God in the world: it is not left to itself.

II\. The joy of the world on that account: "Let the nations," etc.

III\. The reason of that joy: "He will judge righteously."

1\. As faithful to his law.

2\. Faithful to his promises of mercy.

[Psa 67:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md). -

I. The prayer ([Psa 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005).md).

II\. The promise ([Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006).md).

1\. Of temporal good.

2\. Of spiritual good.

III\. The prediction ([Psa 67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007).md).

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md), [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md). - See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No.
819: "The Minstrelsy of Hope."

[Psa 67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md). -

I. God to man: "shall bless us,"

II\. Man to God: "Shall fear him."

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

How admirably balanced are the parts of this missionary song! The people
of God long to see all the nations participating in their privileges,
"visited with God's salvation, and gladdened with the gladness of his
nation" ([Psa 106:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#005).md). They long to
hear all the nationalities giving thanks to the Lord, and hallowing his
name; to see the face of the whole earth, which sin has darkened so
long, smiling with the brightness of a second Eden. This is not a vapid
sentiment. The desire is so expressed as to connect with it the thought
of duty and responsibility. For how do they expect that the happy times
are to be reached? They trust, in the first instance, to the general
diffusion of the knowledge of God's way, the spreading abroad of the
truth regarding the way of salvation. With a view to that, they cry for
a time of quickening from the presence of the Lord, and take
encouragement in this prayer from the terms of the divinely-appointed
benediction. As if they had said, "Hast thou not commanded the sons of
Aaron to put thy name upon us, and to say The Lord bless thee and keep
thee; the Lord cause his face to shine on thee and be gracious to thee?
Remember that sure word of thine. God be gracious unto us and bless us,
and cause his face to shine upon us. Let us be thus blessed, and we
shall in our turn become a blessing, All the families of the earth
shall, through us, become acquainted with thy salvation." Such is the
church's expectation. And who shall say it is unreasonable? If the
little company of a hundred and twenty disciples who met in the upper
chamber at Jerusalem, all of them persons of humble station, and
unconspicuous talents, were endued with such power by the baptism of the
Holy Ghost, that within three hundred years the paganism of the empire
was overthrown, one need not fear to affirm that, in order to the
evangelisation of the world, nothing more is required than that the
churches of Christendom be baptised with a fresh effusion of the same
Spirit of power. - William Binnie.

Whole Psalm

There are seven stanzas; twice three two-line stanzas, having one of
three lines in the middle, which forms the clasp or spangle of the
septiad, a circumstance which is strikingly appropriate to the fact that
the Psalm is called "the Old Testament Paternoster" in some of the old
expositors. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

"God be merciful unto us, and bless us," etc. God forgives, then he
gives; till he be merciful to pardon our sins through Christ, he cannot
bless or look kindly on us sinners. All our enjoyments are but blessings
in bullion, till gospel grace and pardoning mercy stamp and make them
current. God cannot so much as bear any good will to us, till Christ
makes peace for us: "On earth peace, good will towards men." [Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014.md). And what joy can a sinner take,
though it were to hear of a kingdom fallen to him, if he may not have it
with God's good will. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

"God be merciful unto us" - Hugo attributes these words to penitents;
"Bless us," to those setting out in the Christian life; "Cause his face
to shine upon us," to those who have attained, or the sanctified. The
first seek for pardon, the second for justifying peace, the third for
edification and the grace of contemplation. - Lorinus.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md) and [Psa
67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

Connect the last clause of [Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)
with the first of [Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md), and
observe that God made his face to shine upon Moses, and make known to
him his way. "He made known his ways unto Moses, his acts unto the
children of Israel," as if the common people could only see the deeds of
the Lord, but his way, his plans, his secrets were revealed only to him
upon whom the light of God's face had shone. - C. H. S.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

"That thy way may be known," etc. The Psalmist here supposes that there
are certain rules or principles, in accordance with which God bestows
blessings on mankind; and he prays that those rules and principles may
be everywhere made known upon the earth. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

"That thy way may be known," etc. By nature we know little of God, and
nothing of Christ, or the way of salvation by him. The eye of the
creature, therefore, must be opened to see the way of life before he can
by faith get into it. God doth not use to waft souls to heaven like
passengers in a ship, who are shut under the hatches, and see nothing
all the way they are sailing to their port; if so, that prayer might
have been spared which the Psalmist, inspired of God, breathes forth in
the behalf of the blind Gentiles: "That thy way may be known upon earth,
thy saving health among all nations." As faith is not a naked assent,
with affiance and innitency on Christ; so neither is it a blind assent,
without some knowledge. If, therefore, thou continuest still in thy
brutish ignorance, and knowest not so much as who Christ is, and what he
hath done for the salvation of poor sinners, and what thou must do to
get interest in him, thou art far enough from believing. If the day be
not broke in thy soul, much less is the Sun of Righteousness arisen by
faith in thy soul. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

"That thy way may be known." The sinful Jew, obstinate in his unbelief,
shall see and hate. He shall see, and be enraged at the salvation of the
Gentiles; but let us see and know, that is, love. For to know is often
put for to love, as in the passages - "My sheep hear my voice, and I
know them: I know mine, and am known of mine;" that is, I love my own
sheep, and they love me ... There is here a sudden transition from the
third person to the second, that in speaking of God he might not say,
"His way," or "His salvation," but "thy way," and "Thy salvation;"
setting forth the vehemence of an ardent suppliant, and the grace of God
as he reveals himself to that suppliant while still pouring forth his
prayers. - Gerhohus (1093-1169).

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

"That thy way mall be known," etc. As light, so the participation of
God's light is communicative: we must not pray for ourselves alone, but
for all others, that God's way may be known upon earth, and his saving
health among all nations. "Thy way;" that is, thy will, thy word, thy
works. God's will must be known on earth, that it may be done on earth,
as it is in heaven. Except we know our Master's will, how shall we do
it? Ergo, first pray with David here: "Let the nations be glad and sing
for joy: for thou shalt judge the people righteously, and govern the
nations upon earth;" and then, "Let all the people praise thee." God's
will is revealed in his word, and his word is his way wherein we must
walk, turning neither to the right hand nor to the left. Or, "Thy way;"
that is, thy works, as David elsewhere ([Psa
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#010).md): "All the ways of the Lord are
mercy and truth." Or, as others most fitly: "Thy way," that is, thy
Christ; "Thy saving health," that is, thy Jesus: for "I am the way,"
saith our Saviour ([Joh 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006).md): "No man
cometh unto the Father, but by me;" wherefore, "Let thy Son be known
upon earth; thy Jesus among all nations." - John Boys.

[Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md)

"Let the people praise thee." Mark the sweet order of the blessed
Spirit: first, mercy; then, knowledge; last of all, praising of God. We
cannot see his countenance except he be merciful to us; and we cannot
praise him except his way be known upon earth. His mercy breeds
knowledge; his knowledge, praise. - John Boys.

[Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md)

"Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee."
What then? "Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our
own God, shall bless us." We have comforts increased, the more we praise
God for what we have already received. The more vapours go up, the more
showers come down; as the rivers receive, so they pour out, and all run
into the sea again. There is a constant circular course and recourse
from the sea, unto the sea; so there is between God and us; the more we
praise him, the more our blessings come down; and the more his blessings
come down, the more we praise him again; so that we do not so much bless
God as bless ourselves. When the springs lie low, we pours little water
into the pump, not to enrich the fountain, but to bring up more for
ourselves. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md)

This verse is exceedingly emphatic. 1. First, by an apostrophe to God,
in the pronoun, Thee. As if he said: Let the people praise thee, not
strange gods; for thou art the only true God. 2. Secondly, inasmuch as
it is not said, Let us praise thee, O God; but let the people praise
thee, and let all the people. For here is expressed the longing of the
pious heart, and its fond desire that God should be praised and
magnified throughout all lands and by all people of the round earth. 3.
Thirdly, by the iteration, in which the same particle is repeated in
this and the [Psa 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md) no less than
four times, as if the duty could not be sufficiently inculcated. It is
not enough to have said it once; it is delightful to repeat it again. -
Wolfgang Musculus (1497-1563).

[Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md)

"For thou shalt judge the people righteously," etc. The Psalmist may
here seem to contradict himself; for if mercy make men rejoice, then
judgment occasioneth men to tremble. Answer is made, that all such as
have known the ways of the Lord, and rejoice in the strength of his
salvation, all such as have the pardon of their sins assured and sealed,
fear not that dreadful assize, because they know the judge is their
advocate. Or, (as Jerome,) let all nations rejoice, because God doth
judge righteously, being the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews.
[Act 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034.md). Or, let all nations
rejoice, because God doth govern all nations; that whereas theretofore
they wandered in the fond imaginations of their own hearts, in Wry ways,
in by-ways; now they are directed by the Spirit of truth to walk in
God's highway, which leads unto the celestial Jerusalem; now they shall
know Christ, the way, the truth, and the life. For judging is often used
for ruling. [Sa1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015.md); [Co2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010.md). So David doth here expound
himself: "thou shalt judge," that is, thou shalt "govern the nations." -
John Boys.

[Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md)

"Govern." Lead and guide them as the shepherd his flock. - Benjamin
Boothroyd.

[Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md)

"And lead (margin) the nations'" God now overrules the nations in their
ways, but surely they are led by another guide. There is a bridle in
their jaws causing them to err. They are held and shaken in the sieve of
vanity, until he come to whom the government pertains. - Arthur Pridham.

[Psa 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md), [Psa
67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

"Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee!"
What then? "Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our
own God, shall bless us." Our unthankfulness is the cause of the earth's
unfruitfulness. While man is blessing God for his mercies, He is
blessing man with his mercies. - William Seeker, in "The Nonsuch
Professor." 1660.

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

"Then shall the earth yield her increase." An increase of wealth is but
the natural result of increased piety and intelligence. There are
certain qualities essential to temporal prosperity. These are industry,
economy, moderation; and such are the qualities begotten of
godliness.... Nor is it an unreasonable expectation that our globe
should, under the reign of righteousness, yield all those temporal
advantages of which it is capable. Science, favoured by piety, may
greatly add to the earth's fruitfulness; and mechanical genius may still
further abbreviate human toil, and increase human comforts. The great
inventions and discoveries of science, by which toil is lessened and
comfort enhanced, are all the products of Christian minds.... Can we,
then, doubt that in the era to which we look forward, labour shall cease
to be a burden? Can we believe that the life of the labouring classes is
to continue to be all but a ceaseless round of toil and vexation - every
hand stretched out to procure something that is needed, or to ward off
something that is feared? Scripture predicts the mitigation of the
curse; and, in the discoveries of science and the inventions of
mechanics, we see the means by which the prediction is to be
accomplished. This consummation may still be in the distant future; but
if we do not grudge the oak years for its growth, the glory to be
revealed is surely worthy of a process as gradual. - William Reid, in
"Things to Come Practically Considered." 1871.

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

"God, even our own God, shall bless us." What a rapturous expression is
that. "God, even our own God, shall bless us!" and that, "Thy God, thy
glory!" Upon interest in God follows their interest in his glory and
blessedness; which is so much the dearer and more valuable, as it is
theirs; their glory from their God. They shall be blessed by God, their
own God; "drink waters out of their own well." How endearing a thing is
propriety! Another man's son is ingenuous, comely, personable; this may
be a matter of envy; but mine own is so, this is a joy. I read in the
life of a devout nobleman of France, that receiving a letter from a
friend in which were inserted these words: "Deus meus et omnia," my God
and my all, he thus returns back to him: "I know not what your intent
was to put into your letter these words, 'Deus meus et omnia, My God and
my all: only you invite me thereby to return the same to you, and to all
creatures. 'My God and my all; my God and my all; my God and my all.'
If, perhaps, you take this for your motto, and use it to express how
full your heart is of it, think you it possible I should be silent upon
such an invitation, and not express my sense thereof? Likewise be it
known unto you, therefore, that he is 'my God and my all;' and, if you
doubt of it, I shall speak of it a hundred times over. I shall add no
more, for anything else is superfluous to him that is truly penetrated
with 'my God and my all;' I leave you, therefore, in this happy state of
jubilation, and conjure you to beg for me, of God, the solid sense of
these words." And do we think, "my God and my all," or, "my God and my
glory," will have lost its emphasis in heaven? or that it will be less
significant among awaked souls? These things concur, then, concerning
the object; it is most excellent, even divine, entire, permanent, and
theirs: how can it but satisfy? - John Howe, in "The Blessedness of the
Righteous."

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

"Our own God." How unexpressible was the inward pleasure wherewith we
may suppose those words to have been uttered. How delightful an
appropriation! as if it were intended to be said, the blessing itself
were less significant, it could not have that Saviour with it, if it
were not from our own God. Not only, therefore, allow, but urge your
spirits thus to look towards God, that you may both delight in him as
being in himself the most excellent one, and also as being yours; for
know, you are not permitted only, but obliged to eye, accept, and
rejoice in him as such. - John Howe.

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md), [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md)

The promise refers directly to the visible fertility of the renewed
earth at the time of Israel's recovery, but it includes a fuller
reference to higher things; for the true increase yielded by any of
God's works is the revenue of praise which redounds to his holy name.
Such, then, is the promise I have to bring before you. In its widest
sense, the lower creation is now made subject to vanity, because of
man's sin; but in the kingdom of Christ this curse will be removed, and
all God's works will yield their full increase - a tribute of unmingled
honour and praise to his name.

Let us consider - 1. The preparation for this increase. 2. The increase
itself. 3. The blessing of God, which will crown it.

I. The preparations for this increase. What are the means? What is the
way of its accomplishment? Whence does it proceed? Our Psalm is full of
instruction. Consider -

1\. Its fountain: the free mercy of God. The Psalm begins, "God be
merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon us."
Whatever the details and steps of the work of redemption, all must be
traced up to this original fountain, the sovereign grace and mercy of
our God The eternal, free, unchangeable, inexhaustible mercy of our God,
revealed through his dear Son Jesus Christ; this is the fountain-head of
the blessed increase here foretold...

2\. The order in which this increase is granted may next be considered.
Salvation is given to the Jew first, and then also to the Greek. The
prayer of this Psalm is, "Cause his face to shine upon us; that thy way
may be known upon earth, thy saving health among all nations." It is the
divine plan first to choose his people and bless them, and then to make
them a blessing, as we see in Abraham, the father of the faithful. It is
through his church that God blesses the world. The same principle is
true in every revival of pure religion But all this order of divine
mercy has yet to be more fully seen in what is before us; in the
restoration of Israel, and its effect upon the world at large....

3\. The immediate precursor of this increase is the return of our Lord
from heaven, the coming of Christ to judge the earth and reign over all
nations. The Psalm calls all nations to rejoice in this: "O let the
nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the people
righteously, and govern the nations upon earth.".... The world craves,
and will crave more and more for righteous government. The Lord has
promised to supply this natural want of the human heart, though he take
vengeance on his hardened enemies. Even in the coming of the Lord to
judgment, goodness will so finally triumph that the nations are to be
glad and sing for joy.... It is the Lord judging the people and
governing the nations, and all the people praising him, that prepares
directly and immediately for the promised blessedness. "Then shall the
earth yield her increase."...

II\. The increase itself. This increase has many aspects. Let us view
them in a climax of benefits.

1\. Natural fertility. The first sentence of curse and barrenness, of
thorns and thistles, was pronounced on Adam's fall, and renewed on
Cain's murder. It seems to have been partially removed after the
deluge.... Even now, two-thirds of our world are ocean, incapable of
increase; half of the rest, and perhaps more, is almost desert, and of
the remainder the largest part is very imperfectly tilled. There is
room, even in the latter for a vast increase, when the whole earth might
become like the garden of the Lord.

2\. The redemption of art. Its activity, its talent, and discoveries are
now great and wonderful; but it is mainly turned to human
self-sufficiency and vanity, and bears little fruit to God's glory and
the highest benefit of man. But in the period predicted in this Psalm,
every creature, when redeemed to man's use, shall be also reclaimed to
God's glory.

3\. The redemption of science

4\. Society will yield its increase to God, Men now live as without God
in the world, full though it be of proofs of his wisdom and love....
What a change when every social circle shall be a fellowship of saints,
and all bent to one great purpose, the divine glory and the blessedness
of each other.

5\. The soul shall yield its increase. The earth is only the figure of
the human heart, a soil ever fertile for good or evil. Thus the apostle,
in his Epistle to the Hebrews, regards it: "For the earth which drinketh
in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs meet for
them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God: but that which
beareth thorns and briers is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose
end is to be burned. But, beloved, we are persuaded better things of
you, and things that accompany salvation, though we thus speak." Then
the thorns and briers of a crooked and perverse generation will cease
The fruits of righteousness will abound from the human race to the glory
of God. Much praise, much zeal, much reverence, much humility, will
distinguish his servants. Faith, hope, and love will all be in the
fullest exercise. Christ will be all and in all, and every power will be
consecrated to him. This is the best increase the earth yields to God.

6\. The large number of God's true servants, thus yielding themselves to
him, is another part of this blessedness....

7\. The perpetuity of this increase has to be added to this glory. This
is according to the promise made to the Wonderful, Counsellor, the
Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of Peace. - Condensed
from Edward Bickersteth's Sermon in the "Bloomsbury Lent Lectures."
1848.

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md), [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md)

Double blessings from God - temporal and spiritual; blessings peculiar
to the Jews, and blessings suited to Christians. O Lord, I refuse not
the temporal blessings it pleases thee to send me; I will receive them
with humble gratitude as the gift of thy goodness: but I entreat from
thee especially for spiritual blessings; and that thou wouldest treat me
rather as a Christian than as a Jew. - Pasquier Quesnel (1634-1719), in
"Les Psaumes de David avec des Reflexions Morales."

[Psa 67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md)

Note, how joy in God, and fear of God, are combined. By joy the sadness
and anxiety of diffidence are excluded, but by fear, contempt and false
security are banished. So [Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md),
"Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling," - Wolfgang
Musculus.

[Psalms 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 67:1</span></span>

1 O be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine upon
us. Selah.

2 That thy way maybe known upon earth, thy saving health among all
nations.

3 Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

4 O let the nations be glad and sing for joy: for thou shalt judge the
people righteously, and govern the nations upon earth. Selah.

5 Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee.

6 Then shall the earth yield her increase; and God, even our own God
shall bless us.

7 God shall bless us; and all the ends of the earth shall fear him.

[Psa 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

1\. "God be merciful unto us, and bless us; and cause his face to shine
upon us." This is a fit refrain to the benediction of the High Priest in
the name of the Lord, as recorded in [Num
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024.md), [Num
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025.md), "The Lord bless thee, and keep
thee: the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto
thee." It begins at the beginning with a cry for mercy. Forgiveness of
sin is always the first link in the chain of mercies experienced by us.
Mercy is a foundation attribute in our salvation. The best saints and
the worst sinners may unite in this petition. It is addressed to the God
of mercy, by those who feel their need of mercy, and it implies the
death of all legal hopes or claims of merit. Next, the church begs for a
blessing; "bless us" - a very comprehensive and far-reaching prayer.
When we bless God we do but little for our blessings are but words, but
when God blesses he enriches us indeed, for his blessings are gifts and
deeds. But his blessing alone is not all his people crave, they desire a
personal consciousness of his favour, and pray for a smile from his
face. These three petitions include all that we need here or hereafter.

This verse may be regarded as the prayer of Israel, and spiritually of
the Christian church. The largest charity is shown in this Psalm, but it
begins at home. The whole church, each church, and each little company,
may rightly pray, "bless us." It would, however, be very wrong to let
our charity end where it begins, as some do; our love must make long
marches, and our prayers must have a wide sweep, we must embrace the
whole world in our intercessions.

"Selah." Lift up the heart, lift up the voice. A higher key, a sweeter
note is called for.

[Psa 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

"That thy way may be known upon earth." As showers which first fall upon
the hills afterwards run down in streams into the valleys, so the
blessing of the Most High comes upon the world through the church. We
are blessed for the sake of others as well as ourselves. God deals in a
way of mercy with his saints, and then they make that way known far and
wide, and the Lord's name is made famous in the earth. Ignorance of God
is the great enemy of mankind, and the testimonies of the saints,
experimental and grateful, overcome this deadly foe. God has a set way
and method of dealing out mercy to men, and it is the duty and privilege
of a revived church to make that way to be everywhere known. "Thy saving
health among all nations," or, thy salvation. One likes the old words,
"saving health," yet as they are not the words of the Spirit but only of
our translators, they must be given up: the word Is salvation, and
nothing else. This all nations need, but many of them do not know it,
desire it, or seek it; our prayer and labour should be, that the
knowledge of salvation may become as universal as the light of the sun.
Despite the gloomy notions of some, we cling to the belief that the
kingdom of Christ will embrace the Whole habitable globe, and that all
flesh shall see the salvation of God: for this, glorious consummation we
agonize in prayer.

[Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md)

"Let the people praise thee, O God." Cause them to own thy goodness and
thank thee with all their hearts; let nations do this, and do it
continually, being instructed thy gracious way. "Let all the people
praise thee." May every man bring his music, every citizen his canticle,
every peasant his praise, every prince his Psalm. All are under
obligations to thee, to thank thee will benefit all, and praise from all
will greatly glorify thee; therefore, O Lord, give all men the grace to
adore thy grace, the goodness to see thy goodness. What is here
expressed as a prayer in out translation, may be read as a prophecy, if
we follow the original Hebrew.

[Psa 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md)

"O let the nations be glad and sing for joy," or, they shall joy and
triumph. When men know God's way and see his salvation, it brings to
their hearts much happiness, Nothing creates gladness so speedily,
surely, and abidingly as the salvation of God. Nations never will be
glad till they follow the leadership of the great Shepherd; they may
shift their modes of government from monarchies to republics, and from
republics to communes, but they will retain their wretchedness till they
bow before the Lord of all. What a sweet word is that "to sing for Joy!"
Some sing for form, others for show, some as a duty, others as an
amusement, but to sing from the heart, because overflowing joy must find
a vent, this is to sing indeed. Whole nations will do this when Jesus
reigns over them in the power of his grace. We have heard hundreds and
even thousands sing in chorus, but what will it be to hear whole nations
lifting up their voices, as the noise of many waters and like great
thunders: When shall the age of song begin? When shall groans and
murmurs be exchanged for holy hymns and joyful melodies? "For thou shalt
judge the people righteously." Wrong on the part of governors is a
fruitful source of national woe, but where the Lord rules, rectitude is
supreme. He doeth ill to none. His laws are righteousness itself. He
rights all wrongs and releases all who are oppressed. Justice on the
throne is a fit cause for national exultation. "And govern the nations
upon earth." He will lead them as a shepherd his flock, and through his
grace they shall willingly follow, then will there be peace, plenty, and
prosperity. It is great condescension on God's part to become the
Shepherd, of nations, and to govern them for their good: it is a fearful
crime when a people who know the salvation of God, apostatize and say to
the Lord depart from us. There is some cause for trembling lest our
nation should fall into this condemnation; may God forbid.

"Selah." Before repeating the chorus, the note is again elevated, that
full force may be given to the burst of song the accompaniment of harps.

"Strings and voices; hands and hearts,

In the concert bear your parts;

All that breathe your Lord adore,

Praise him, Praise him, evermore!"

[Psa 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md)

These words are no vain repetition, but are a chorus worthy to be sung
again and again. The great theme of the Psalm is the participation of
the Gentiles in the worship of Jehovah; the Psalmist is full of it, he
hardly knows how to contain ... or express his joy.

[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

"Then shall the earth yield her increase." Sin first laid a curse on the
soil, and grace alone can remove it. Under tyrannical governments lands
become unproductive; even the land which flowed with milk and honey is
almost a wilderness under Turkish rule; but, when the principles of true
religion shall have elevated mankind, and the dominion of Jesus shall be
universally acknowledged, the science of tillage shall be perfected, men
shall be encouraged to labour, industry shall banish penury, and the
soil shall be restored to more than its highest condition of fertility.
We read that the Lord turneth "a fruitful land into barrenness," for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein, and observation confirms the
truth of the divine 'threatening; but even under the law it was
promised, "the Lord God shall make thee plenteous in every work of thine
hand, in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the fruit of thy land for
good." There is certainly an intimate relation between 'moral and
physical evil, and between spiritual and physical good. Alexander notes
that the Hebrew is in the past tense, and he concludes that it is
ungrammatical to render it in the future; but to us it seems that the
prophet bard, hearing the nations praise the Lord, speaks of the
bounteous harvest as already given in consequence. On the supposition
that all the people praise Jehovah, the earth has yielded her increase.
The future in the English appears to be the clearest rendering of the
Hebrew.

"And God, even our own, God, shall bless us." He will make earth's
increase to be a real blessing. Men shall see in his gifts the hand of
that same God whom Israel of old adored, and Israel, especially, shall
rejoice in the blessing, and exult in her own God. We never love God
aright till we know him to be ours, and the more we love him the more do
we long to be fully assured that he is ours. What dearer name can we
give to him than "mine own God.": The spouse in the song has no sweeter
canticle than "my beloved is mine and I am his." Every believing Jew
must feel a holy joy at the thought that the nations shall all be
blessed by Abraham's God; but every Gentile believer also rejoices that
the whole world shall yet worship the God and Father of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, who is our Father and our God.

[Psa 67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md)

"God shall bless us." The prayer of the [Psa
67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md) is the song of [Psa
67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md). We have the same phrase twice,
and truly the Lord's blessing is manifold; he blesses and blesses and
blesses again. How many are his beatitudes! How choice his
benedictions!. They are the peculiar heritage of his chosen. He is the
Saviour of all men, but specially of them that believe. In this verse we
find a song for all future time. God shall bless us is our assured
confidence; he may smite us, or strip us, or even slay us, but he must
bless us. He cannot turn away from doing good to his elect. "And all the
ends of the earth shall fear him." The far off Shall fear. The ends of
the earth shall end their idolatry, and adore their God. All tribes,
without exception, shall 'feel a sacred awe of the God of Israel.
Ignorance shall be removed, insolence subdued, injustice banished,
idolatry abhorred, and the Lord's love, light, life, and liberty, shall
be over all, the Lord himself being King of king and Lord of lords.
Amen, and Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 68](psa068.md)

</div>
