<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa074)  [Next](psa076.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 75](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 75:0</span></span>

Title. - To the chief Musician. Here is noble work for him, for the cry
of the last Psalm is about to be heard, and the challenge of the foes of
Israel taken up by God himself. Here the virgin daughter of Zion
despises her foe, and laughs him to scorn. The destruction of
Sennacherib's army is a notable illustration of this sacred song.
Al-taschith. Here is another of the "destroy not" Psalms, and the title
may be intended as a check upon the natural fierceness of the oppressed,
or a taunt for the savage foe, who is here bitterly bidden to destroy
not, because the nation is well aware that he cannot. Here, in holy
faith, the sucking child plays at the hole of the asp, and the weaned
child puts his hand on the cockatrice den. A Psalm or Song of Asaph. For
reading or singing. A hymn to God and a song for his saints. Happy were
the people who having found a Milton in David had an almost equal
songster in Asaph; happiest of all, because these poets were not
inspired by earth's Castalian fount, but drank of "the fount of every
blessing."

Division. - The people's song of gratitude and adoration begins the hymn
in [Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md). In the next four [Psa
75:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#002.md), the Lord reveals himself as
ruling the world in righteousness. Then follows a warning voice from the
church to her enemies, [Psa 75:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md),
and a closing song anticipatory of the glory due to God and the utter
defeat of the foe.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md). - The unceasing
thanksgiving of the church, her grand cause for adoration: the nearness
of her God, and the evident proof thereof in the displays of his power.

[Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md). -

I. Do we give thanks?

II\. We do give thanks.

III\. What thanks do we give?

IV\. When do we give thanks?

V. Let us give thanks again.

[Psa 75:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#002.md). - Good resolutions
commendable, how they should be made, strengthened, and performed.

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md). - The Lord the stay of his
people under the worst circumstances.

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md). - Teacheth us that no
disorder or confusion should hinder us from doing that which God
requireth of us; nay, rather, the more things are out of order the more
readily should we labour to redress them. - Thomas Wilcocks.

[Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md). -

I. Who spoke to them? "I."

II\. Who were they? "Fools," "wicked."

III\. What did you say?

IV\. What was the good of it?

Or, Rebuke of sin, a duty.

[Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md). - The unhallowed trio: -
wickedness, folly, pride.

[Psa 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md). - Arguments against pride
in heart, appearance, and speech.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md), [Psa
75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md). - The changes of providence not
the tricks of fortune.

[Psa 75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md). - God acts as a judge and
not arbitrarily in his providential arrangements.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md). - "In the hand of the Lord
there is a cup," etc.

I. As a matter of preparation, consider it so, and thus it is "in the
hand of the Lord."

II\. By way of qualification: it is he that tempers it; it was "full of
mixture."

III\. By way of distribution, as giving to every one his share and
portion in it. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md). - The cup of wrath. Where
it is, what it is, how full it is, who brings it, who must drink it.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md). - "Full of mixture." Wrath
of God, remorse, memory of lost joy, fear of future, recriminations,
despair, shame, etc., all these are ingredients of the mingled cup.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008) (last clause.md). -

I. "The dregs" of the cup: the wrath of wrath, the gall of bitterness.

II\. The dregs of the people: "all the wicked."

[Psa 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009.md). - Our life work: to declare
and to sing.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

"Al-taschith." Destroy not. This seems to have been used by David as a
maxim during the violent persecutions of Saul, as if to remind himself
to forbear revenge, though it was often in his power to inflict it, upon
his unnatural enemy. - F. G. Hubbard, in "The Psalms Chronologically
arranged, with Historical Introductions. New York." \[1856.\]

Whole Psalm

As these words are really a prayer, while at the same time the Psalm is
thrown into the form, not of petitions, but of a thanksgiving, It ought
to be considered as a thank-prayer, uttered beforehand, and containing
petitions within it. - Berleb Bible.

[Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

"Thy name is near." The name of God is said to be near, because it had
come into public notice, and was in every mind and every tongue -
opposed to what is unknown and obscure, which is said to be far remote.
Compare [Deu 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011.md). - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

The Psalmist doubles this duty in the practice of the saints; "Unto
thee, O God, do we give thanks, we give thanks," we do it, we do it; as
if none else did it but they, or as if they had done nothing else -
Joseph Caryl, in "A Sermon before the House of Commons," entitled, "The
Saints' Thankfull Acclamation."

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md)

"I bear up the pillars of it." I prevent it from falling to pieces, as a
house, supported by columns too weak to bear its weight, would do. -
Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md)

"I bear up the pillars of it." Learn to whom the glory of bearing up the
world is due. God's providence is the true Atlas which supports the
world, and doth shoulder up the world, whilst it treads on sin and
sinners. Upon a serious view taken of providence on this wise displayed,
we may say as they said of old, "The Lord, he is the God; the Lord, he
is the God," [Kg1 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#039.md). - Thomas
Crane.

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md)

We can imagine a monarch, and especially an eastern monarch, in the
plentitude of his power, and the arrogance of his pride, as he casts his
haughty glance over the ensigns of his might, saying to himself, "I bear
up the pillars of the earth." But one could never imagine such a thought
arising in the heart, or proceeding from the lips of David or Hezekiah.
I know not who of the sons of Adam, frail and feeble at their best
estate, could have ever said, "The earth and all the inhabitants thereof
are dissolved. I bear up the pillars of it." I know of none but him who
said, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth," and who, as
he said these words, ascended up into heaven to exercise that
sovereignty, and repair that mighty ruin which had been wrought on earth
when Satan triumphed in Paradise. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md)

"Fools." The ungodly are spiritual fools. If one had a child very
beautiful, yet if he were a fool, the parent would have little joy in
him. The Scripture hath dressed the sinner in a fool's coat and let me
tell you, better be a fool void of reason, than a fool void of grace
this is the devil's fool. [Pro 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#009.md).
Is not he a fool who refuseth a rich portion? God offers Christ and
salvation, but the sinner refuseth this portion. "Israel would none of
me." [Psa 81:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#011.md). Is not he a fool who
preferreth an annuity before an inheritance? Is not he a fool who fends
this mortal part, and neglects his angelical part? As if one should
paint the wall of his house, and let the timber rot. Is not he a fool
who will feed the devil with his soul? As that emperor who fed his lion
with a pheasant. Is not he a fool who lays a snare for himself? [Pro
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#018.md). Who consults his own shame? [Hab
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#010.md). Who loves death? [Pro
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#036.md). - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md)

"Horn." The word horn was used in the Hebrew metaphorically to express
either honour, as [Psa 112:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#009.md); [Psa
132:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#018.md), etc.; or strength, [Mic
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013.md), "I will make thine horn iron."
[Deu 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017.md), etc. To humble and cast
down was often represented by the figure of breaking or cutting off the
horn, as here ([Psa 75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010).md). [Lam
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#003.md), "Cut off all the horn of Israel."
To exalt the horn of any one was to bestow honour and dignity upon him;
so also, to make it bud. [Psa 132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017.md);
[Psa 89:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#018.md); [Eze
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#021.md). Here to lift up the horn
betokens presumption. It was also somewhat later a symbol for kingdom,
[Zac 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018.md), and Daniel. - "Four
Friends."

[Psa 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md)

"Speak not with a stiff neck." Mr. Bruce has observed that the
Abyssinian kings have a horn on their diadem; and that the keeping it
erect, or in a projecting form, makes them appear as if they had a stiff
neck; and refers to this passage for the antiquity of the usage, and the
appearance also. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

"For promotion cometh neither from the east," etc. The word "promotion"
here is used in a very expressive way; it means the desire of
sell-advancement, הרים (harim), and would teach us that all our inward
schemes, and outward plans, cannot gain for us advancement, unless based
upon the fear and love of God; we look forward to improve our
circumstances, like to the ascending of a mountain, and nerve ourselves
to the effort of ascent, fondly thinking that no eye watches our
efforts; but as "shame is the promotion of fools," so disappointment is
often the return of rashness ... From the east promotion doth not come;
the word "east" here is very expressive, ממּוצא (mimmotza), the rising
of the sun, the outgoing of light, the dawning of the day, and the
manifesting or revealing of God. We look around; and in the early
dawning of youth, with high hopes, mental energies, and perhaps superior
talents, anticipate victory over our compeers, and a course of worldly
success and prosperity; but alas! how often are all these hopes blighted
and a succession of reverses humbles our spirits.

Promotion cometh not from the "west." The original is וּממּערב
(umimmagnarab) and it means duskiness, darkness, and the setting sun, -
hence the west. When the clouds of years press upon us, and darkened
shadows overtake us in various ways, such as loss of dear and early
friends, the buoyancy of youth gone by, hopes softened down to personal
ease, and the power of the constitution reduced; then God often wills
that promotion shall not come.

We now approach to the last point from whence promotion cometh not, that
is from the "south," (midbar) a waste place, the Arabian desert; hence
the south. In dry and slitary places like the sandy desert little
advancement can be looked for; like the human intellect, unless
cultivated and improved by care and education it is barren as the desert
to all holy feelings and improvement, the natural passions like sand
choke up every patch susceptible of cultivation, and close up all the
avenues to thought and devotion. A godless man is like the Arabian
desert, of no profit to himself or his neighbours; like ever-shifting
sands being tossed to and fro by his own wayward passions; heated with
the suns of turbulence, self-will and recklessness, he is a desert, a
waste where God will not vouchsafe the light of is countenance for
promotion. Like the disobedient Jews of old, [Psa
78:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#049.md), we may speak of this man
saying, "How oft did he provoke him in the wilderness and grieve him in
the desert!" Let us then cultivate the higher part of our being, and
then we may produce fruit unto holiness; let us not wreck so noble a
ship as the soul by careless steering and neglect, but trim its sails
with early good instruction, and then may we arrive at the haven where
we would be.

Having now illustrated the three points mentioned in our text, let us
turn to the one (the north) where promotion or advancement may be looked
for. Coldness is emblematical of purity, and coldness is an attribute of
the north. The pure in heart shall see God. God is the northern light
that gleams over the stillness of life's night. "He giveth snow like
wool; he scattereth the hoar frost like ashes; he casteth forth his ice
like morsels."

Be it ours to be humbly dependent upon God; for whatever station he may
choose to keep us in, godliness alone will prove our promotion and true
riches. If our anxieties are directed towards pleasing him, then shall
we prosper, and he will shew us "a pure river of water of life, clear as
crystal, proceeding out of the throne of God and of the Lamb." ([Rev
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#001)..md) - Condensed from a Sermon by
Gregory Bateman, preached March 16th, 1862, on his entering upon the
Vicarage of Ulrome.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

"For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from
the south." Here are three of the four winds specified, and it is said,
"promotion" comes from neither of them. But why is it not also said that
promotion comes not from the north? that is the question. I answer; - it
were answer enough to say, that we ought not to put questions curiously
about such things; it should satisfy us that the Spirit of God is
pleased to say it is so, and no more. Yet some tell us, the reason why
it is not said promotion cometh not from the north, is because indeed it
cometh out of the north, which, say they, is intimated in the Hebrew
word for the north, which signifies hidden or secret. Promotion comes
not from the east, nor west, nor south, but from the north. It comes
from the north in a figure or mystery, that is, it comes from some
hidden providence, or secret hand, which many take no more notice of
than we do of the furthest part of the north. God promotes many in this
world to power, and sends them great prosperity, we see not how or which
way: the causes and contrivances of it are hidden close, and in the
breast of God. This also is a truth; in that sense we may say, "Fair
weather cometh from the north." Promotion is visible, but the manner of
it is a secret; we see not the causes for which, nor the ways in which
it cometh. It is enough to touch these niceties, and to touch them can
do no hurt, while the matter arising from them hath the clear consent
of, and is harmonious with other plain places of Scripture. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

"Promotion;" or, "lifting up." The word is evidently an emphatic word in
the Psalm; it is the same which occurs in [Psa
75:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md), and again in[Psa
75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md) and [Psa
75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010.md). I have, therefore, given the
same rendering of it throughout. The rendering of the authorised version
"promotion," besides losing sight of the manifestly designed repetition
of the same word, is peculiarly unfortunate in conveying a wrong idea.
"Lifting up," in its Hebrew sense, does not mean "promotion," as we
commonly understand it, but deliverance from trouble, safety, victory.
The image, in particular, of lifting up the head or the horn (the last,
borrowed from wild beasts, such as buffaloes, etc., in whom the horn is
the symbol of strength), denotes courage, strength, and victory over
enemies. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

"Nor from the south." "From the wilderness," the great wilderness lying
in that direction. Three quarters are mentioned, the north only being
omitted. This may be accounted for, supposing the Psalm to refer to
Sennacherib, by the fact that the Assyrian army approached from the
north; and therefore it would be natural to look in all directions but
that for assistance to repel the invader. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md), [Psa
75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md)

"I thought to promote thee to great honour," said the king of Moab to
Balaam; and yet that promotion ended in a dishonoured and a bloody
death. I have often thought of many of the Lord's servants on earth, so
superciliously passed by and passed over in man's catalogue of worthies,
with what glad and grateful surprise they will at length receive that
promotion denied on earth, when their own Master shall say to them,
"Friend, come up higher;" and then as they sit down with Abraham, and
Isaac, and Jacob in the kingdom of heaven, shall they have honour of
them that sit at meat with them. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 75:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

The rise and fall of nations and empires are in this Psalm ascribed to
God. He exalts one and puts down another at his pleasure. In this he
generally uses instrumentality, but that instrumentality is always
rendered effectual by his own agency. When nations or individuals are
prosperous, and glorious, and powerful, they usually ascribe all to
themselves or to fortune. But it is God who has raised them to eminence.
When they boast he can humble them. In these verses God is considered as
the governor of the world, punishing the wicked, and pouring out
judgments on his enemies. The calamities of war, pestilence, and famine,
are all ministers of providence to execute wrath. - Alexander Carson.

[Psa 75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md)

"Here he exalts neglected worms

To sceptres and a crown;

Anon the following page he turns,

And treads the monarch down."

\- Isaac Watts.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red (which
notes fierce wrath); and it is full of mixture." This mixture is of
judgments, plagues, and punishments; "this is the portion of their cup"
([Psa 11:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001).md). But what will the Lord
do with this mixed cup 9. Who shall sip at the top of the cup he tells
us not; but he is express whose the bottom is, "he poureth out of the
same" - some drops are spilt here and there - "but the dregs thereof all
the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them." Alas,
they loathe it, their stomachs turn at it; they have not been brought up
to drink dregs; they have had their wine well refined, and sparkling
with spirits in crystal glasses; and how can they get this down?

They who have drunk so willingly and freely of the cup of sin, shall be
forced, whether they will or no, to drink the cup of judgment. And it is
not a sip or two shall serve their turns; they must drink all, dregs and
all, they shall drink it to the bottom, and yet they shall never come to
the bottom; they have loved long draughts, and now they shall have one
long enough; there is eternity to the bottom. If a cup of affliction,
which, in the effect, is a cup of salvation, be sometime, or for a time,
nauseous to the godly, how deadly sick will the ungodly be, who must for
ever, drink a cup of wrath and death. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"In the hand of the Lord there is a cup," etc. It is a "cup" well, there
is a cup that David thirsts for: "I will take the cup of salvation."
[Psa 116:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013.md). There is "wine" in it
better; for wine cheers the hearts, and puts alacrity into the spirits.
That wine is "red" better still; so it should be; this argues the lustre
and goodness of it, "Look not thou upon the wine when it is red, when it
giveth his colour in the cup," [Pro
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#031.md) : the colour adds to the
pleasure. But now it is "full of mixture" alas, this mixture spoils all.
It is compounded, brewed, made unwholesome: this changeth the condition
of the cup, of the wine, of the colour, of all. It is mixed with the
wrath of God, the malice of Satan, the anguish of soul, the gall of sin,
the tears of despair: it is "red," that is, of a sanguine colour, the
wine of blood. But yet so long as it is in the cup, they need not meddle
with it: nay, but the Lord will "pour it out;" he shall hold their
mouths to it, and make them drink it: the rankest poison in the world,
the gall of dragons, and venom of asps, is pleasant and healthful to it.
Yet be it but a little of the top, let them but taste it; nay, they must
"drink it off," to the very bottom, the sediments, dregs, lees, and all;
even the very filth of vengeance. And lest any drops should be left
behind, they shall "wring them out," and suck them down to their
confusion. The cup is all bitter, and full of sorrow, saith Augustine:
the godly do often taste the top, and feel the bitterness, but then it
is suddenly snatched from them; but the ungodly shall drink the very
grounds, and extremest poison. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"In the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red;" red with
wrath, in the day of God's wrath. "It is full of mixture :" it hath no
mixture of good, no sweetness at all in it, but all sorts of evil are
mingled in that cup. "And he poureth out of the same;" upon many
occasions he pours it out in the world; "but the dregs there of all the
wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink" they have not only
the cup, but the dregs of the cup, that is, the worst of the cup; for as
in a good cup, the deeper the sweeter; so in an evil cup, the deeper the
worse: the dregs are the worst, the bottom is the bitterest of a bitter
cup. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"A cup." There seems to be here an allusion to the cup of malediction,
as the Jews called that "mixed cup of wine" and frankincense, which used
to be given to condemned criminals before their execution, in order to
take away their senses. - Richard Mant.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"The wine is red," or "the wine foameth," i.e., as it is poured into the
cup from the wine-jar, as is expressed in the next member of the verse.
"Mixture," i.e. the aromatic herbs, etc., which were put into the wine
to make it more intoxicating. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"The wine is red." The remedy is suitable to the disease, and the
punishment to the sin: Sanguinem sitisti sanguinem vitis (as he once
says); Thou hast thirsted after blood, and blood thou shalt drink.
Because men delight in blood, therefore, blood shall be poured out unto
them; yea, their own blood shall be poured out. This is the way of God's
providence, and the manner of his dealings in the world; which because
it is filled with cruelty shall be therefore filled with blood. - Thomas
Horton.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"Red." The Hebrew word חמר rather means turbid: and it probably contains
a further allusion to the particulars above mentioned; the wine being
rendered turbid by stirring up the lees, and by the mixture of
intoxicating drugs. - Richard Mant.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"Full of mixture." There are some who think that mixture is here named
because they rarely drink pure wine in those regions, since they are so
warm; and because the wine is there more generous than in these colder
quarters. But a different signification is intended; it is that spices
are mingled with the wine. - Francis Vatablus. 1547.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"Mixture." In all the afflictions of God's people there is an
intermixture and temperament of love and favour, which shews itself in
them. As, first of all, there is a mixture of strength and patience tot
the bearing of it. Secondly, there is a mixture of comfort and goodness
as to the things themselves. God is not altogether in affliction, but he
is very much in mercy with it; and as he is pleased to exercise his
servants with several troubles, so he does likewise vouchsafe them many
blessings together with them, which he does comfort them withal. And
then, thirdly, there is another thing also which is much observable in
the afflictions of God's people, which makes this mixture complete, and
that is, a mixture of improvement and edification. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"The dregs." Now, as the cup of red wine is the Christian doctrine which
converts the soul, and in which the true believer spiritually
luxuriates, so "the dregs thereof" are those merely outward, formal, and
ceremonious circumstancials, which are nothing in themselves more than
the dregs and leavings of the signified reality and spiritual substance.
And when the text says that the wicked shall wring out the dregs of
Christian doctrine, and shall drink of them, we are led to fix our
attention upon the main peculiarity of Pharisaical religion. As God
satisfies his people with the true spiritual refreshment of genuine
Christian doctrine; so does he leave to the unenlightened spirit, who
will not seek him as he ought to do, the mere outside formalities, which
belong indeed to religion necessarily, but of it form no vital part.
They are but the refuse of the magnificent heaven-realising substance. -
T. D. Gregg. 1855.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"All the wicked." They shall all do it too, we may not omit that: "all
the wicked of the earth." As there is an universality of the judgment,
so there is universality of the sufferers; they shall drink all of it,
and they shall all of them drink it, that so no man may favour or
flatter himself with hope of escape. - Thomas Horton.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"Shall wring them out." Here is the necessity also of it; it is
unavoidable; "They shall drink it," that is, even against their minds,
whether they will or no. It is very likely that wicked men would be very
loath to come to this condition: they can be content to sin, but they
cannot endure to be punished for sin.... This cup shall not pass from
them, but they shall drink of it, even against their stomachs, where
they never so much loath it. Yea, and which is more, they shall suck it
up; God will turn the cup up to them, and will make them to take it
every jot; he will not spare them one drop of it, which they shall be
suffered to leave behind ... The Lord himself (as I may say) will stand
over them, and see them do it without any favour or indulgence. - Thomas
Horton.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

When God's people have drunk the red wine in the cup, the wicked must
drink the dregs: the cup passeth from place to place till all be drank
off. - William Greenhill.

[Psalms 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 75:1</span></span>

1 Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks, unto thee do we give thanks for
that thy name is near thy wondrous works declare.

"Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks." Not to ourselves for we were
helpless, but to Elohim who heard our cry, and replied to the taunt of
our foes. Never let us neglect thanksgiving, or we may fear that another
time our prayers will remain unanswered. As the smiling flowers
gratefully reflect in their lovely colours the various constituents of
the solar ray, so should gratitude spring up in our hearts after the
smiles of God's providence. "Unto thee do we give thanks." We should
praise God again and again. Stinted gratitude is ingratitude. For
infinite goodness there should be measureless thanks. Faith promises
redoubled praise for greatly needed and signal deliverances. "For that
thy name is near thy wondrous works declare." God is at hand to answer
and do wonders - adore we then the present Deity. We sing not of a
hidden God, who sleeps and leaves the church to her fate, but of one who
ever in our darkest days is most near, a very present help in trouble,
"Near is his name." Baal is on a journey, but Jehovah dwells in his
church. Glory be unto the Lord, whose perpetual deeds of grace and
majesty are the sure tokens of his being with us always, even unto the
end of the world.

[Psalms 75:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 75:2</span></span>

2 When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly.

3 The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved: I bear up the
pillars of it. Selah.

4 I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly: and to the wicked, Lift not
up the horn.

5 Lift not up your horn on high: speak not with a stiff neck.

[Psa 75:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#002.md)

"When I shall receive the congregation I will judge uprightly." This is
generally believed to be the voice of God, who will, when he accepts his
people, mount his judgment seat and avenge their cause in righteousness.
It is rendered by some, "I will take a set time;" and by others, "I will
seize the moment."

"God never is before his time,

He never is too late."

He determines the period of interposition, and when that arrives swift
are his blows and sure are his deliverances. God sends no delegated
judge, but sits himself upon the throne. O Lord, let thy set time come
for grace. Tarry no longer, but for the truth and the throne of Jesus be
thou speedily at work. Let the appointed assize come, O Jesus, and sit
thou on thy throne to judge the world in equity.

[Psa 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md)

"The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved." When anarchy
is abroad, and tyrants are in power, everything is unloosed, dissolution
threatens all things, the solid mountains of government melt as wax; but
even then the Lord upholds and sustains the right. "I bear up the
pillars of it." Hence, there is no real cause for fear. While the
pillars stand, and stand they must for God upholds them, the house will
brave out the storm in the day of the Lord's appearing a general melting
will take place, but in that day our covenant God will be the sure
support of our confidence.

"How can I sink with such a prop

As my eternal God,

Who bears the earth's huge pillars up,

And spreads the heavens abroad."

"Selah." Here may the music pause while the sublime vision passes before
our view; a world dissolved and an immutable God uplifting all his
people above the terrible commotion.

[Psa 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md)

"I said unto the fools, Deal not foolishly." The Lord bids the boasters
boast not, and commands the mad oppressors to stay their folly. How calm
is he, how quiet are his words, yet how divine the rebuke. If the wicked
were not insane, they would even now hear in their consciences the still
small voice bidding them cease from evil, and forbear their pride. "And
to the wicked, Lift not up the horn." He bids the ungodly stay their
haughtiness. The horn was the emblem of boastful power; only the
foolish, like wild and savage beasts, will lift it high; but they assail
heaven itself with it, as if they would gore the Almighty himself. In
dignified majesty he rebukes the inane glories of the wicked, who beyond
measure exalt themselves in the day of their fancied power.

[Psa 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md)

"Lift not up your horn on high." For their abounding pride there is a
double rebuke. A word from God soon abases the lofty. Would to God that
all proud men would obey the word here given them; for, if they do not,
he will take effectual means to secure obedience, and then woe will come
upon them, such as shall break their horns and roll their glory in the
mire for ever. "Speak not with a stiff neck." Impudence before God is
madness. The out-stretched neck of insolent pride is sure to provoke his
axe. Those who carry their heads high shall find that they will be
lifted yet higher, as Haman was upon the gallows which he had prepared
for the righteous man. Silence, thou silly boaster! Silencer or God will
answer thee. Who art thou, thou worm, that thou shouldst arrogantly
object against thy Maker's laws and cavil at his truth? Be hushed, thou
vainglorious prater, or vengeance shall silence thee to thine eternal
confusion.

[Psalms 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 75:6</span></span>

6 For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor
from the south.

7 But God is the judge he putteth down one, and setteth up another.

8 For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the wine is red; it is
full of mixture; and he poureth out of the same but the dregs thereof,
all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink them.

[Psa 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

"For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from
the south." There is a God, and a providence, and things happen not by
chance. Though deliverance be hopeless from all points of the compass,
yet God can work it for his people; and though judgment come neither
from the rising or the setting of the sun, nor from the wilderness of
mountains, yet come it will, for the Lord reigneth. Men forget that all
things are ordained in heaven; they see but the human force, and the
carnal passion, but the unseen Lord is more real far than these. He is
at work behind and within the cloud. The foolish dream that he is not,
but he is near even now, and on the way to bring in his hand that cup of
spiced wine of vengeance, one draught of which shall stagger all his
foes.

[Psa 75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md)

"But God is the judge." Even now he is actually judging. His seat is not
vacant; his authority is not abdicated; the Lord reigneth evermore "He
putteth down one, and setteth up another." Empires rise and fall at his
bidding. A dungeon here, and there a throne, his will assigns. Assyria
yields to Babylon, and Babylon, to the Medes. Kings are but puppets in
his hand; they serve his purpose when they rise and when they fall. A
certain author has issued a work called "Historic Ninepins," a fit name
of scorn for all the great ones of the earth. God only is; all power
belongs to him; all else is shadow, coming and going, unsubstantial,
misty, dream-like.

[Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

"For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup." The punishment of the
wicked is prepared, God himself holds it in readiness; he has collected
and concocted woes most dread, and in the chalice of his wrath he holds
it. They scoffed his feast of love; they shall be dragged to his table
of justice, and made to drink their due deserts. "And the wine is red."
The retribution is terrible, it is blood for blood, foaming vengeance
for foaming malice. The very colour of divine wrath is terrible; what
must the taste be? "It is full of mixture." Spices of anger, justice,
and incensed mercy are there. Their misdeeds, their blasphemies, their
persecutions have strengthened the liquor as with potent drugs:

"Mingled, strong, and mantling high:

Behold the wrath divine."

Ten thousand woes are burning in the depths of that fiery cup, which to
the brim is filled with indignation. "And he poureth out of the same."
The full cup must be quaffed, the wicked cannot refuse the terrible
draught, for God himself pours it out for them and into them. Vain are
their cries and entreaties. They could once defy him, but that hour is
over, and the time to requite them is fully come. "But the dregs
thereof, all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out, and drink
them." Even to the bitter end must wrath proceed. They must drink on and
on for ever, even to the bottom where lie the lees of deep damnation;
these they must suck up, and still must they drain the cup. Oh the
anguish and the heart-break of the day of wrath! Mark well, it is for
all the wicked; all hell for all the ungodly; the dregs for the dregs;
bitters for the bitter; wrath for the heirs of wrath. Righteousness is
conspicuous, but over all terror spreads a tenfold night, cheerless,
without a star, Oh happy they who drink the cup of godly sorrow, and the
cup of salvation; these though now despised, will then be envied by the
very men who trod them under foot.

[Psalms 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 75:9</span></span>

9 But I will declare for ever; I will sing praises to the God of Jacob.

10 All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off; but the horns of the
righteous shall be exalted.

[Psa 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009.md)

"But I will declare for ever." Thus will the saints occupy themselves
with rehearsing Jehovah's praises, while their foes are drunken with the
wrath-wine. They shall chant while the others roar in anguish and justly
so, for the former Psalm informed us that such had been the case on
earth, - "thine enemies roar in the sanctuary," the place where the
chosen praised the Lord. "I will sing praises to the God of Jacob." The
covenant God, who delivered Jacob from a thousand afflictions, our soul
shall magnify. He has kept his covenant which he made with the
patriarch, and has redeemed his seed, therefore will we spread abroad
his fame world without end.

[Psa 75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010.md)

"All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off." Power and liberty
being restored to Israel, she begins again to execute justice, by
abasing the godless who had gloried in the reign of oppression. Their
power and pomp are to be smitten down. Men wore horns in those days as a
part of their state, and these, both literally and figuratively, were to
be lopped off; for since God abhors the proud, his church will not
tolerate them any longer. "But the horns of the righteous shall be
exalted." In a rightly ordered society, good men are counted great men,
virtue confers true rank, and grace is more esteemed than gold. Being
saved from unrighteous domination, the chief among the chosen people
here promises to rectify the errors which had crept into the
commonwealth, and after the example of the Lord himself, to abase the
haughty and elevate the humble.

This memorable ode may be sung in times of great depression, when prayer
has performed her errand at the mercy-seat, and when faith is watching
for speedy deliverance. It is a song of the second advent, concerning
the nearness of the Judge with the cup of wrath.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 76](psa076.md)

</div>
