<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa088)  [Next](psa090) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 89](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 89:0</span></span>

We have now reached the majestic Covenant Psalm, which, according to the
Jewish arrangement, closes the third book of the Psalms. It is the
utterance of a believer, in presence of great national disaster,
pleading with his God, urging the grand argument of covenant
engagements, and expecting deliverance and help, because of the
faithfulness of Jehovah.

Title. - Maschil. This is most fitly called a Maschil, for it is most
instructive. No subject is more important or is so fully the key to all
theology as that of the covenant. He who is taught by the Holy Spirit to
be clear upon the covenant of grace will be a scribe well instructed in
the things of the kingdom; he whose doctrinal theory is a mingle-mangle
of works and grace is scarcely fit to be teacher of babes. Of Ethan the
Ezrahite: perhaps the same person as Jeduthun, who was a musician in
David's reign; was noted for his wisdom in Solomon's days, and probably
survived till the troubles of Rehoboam's period. If this be the man, he
must have written this Psalm in his old age, when troubles were coming
thick and heavy upon the dynasty of David and the land of Judah; this is
not at all improbable, and there is much in the Psalm which looks that
way.

Division. - The sacred poet commences by affirming his belief in the
faithfulness of the Lord to his covenant with the house of David, and
makes his first pause at [Psa 89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004). He
then praises and magnifies the name of the Lord for his power, justice,
and mercy, [Psa 89:5-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005). This leads
him to sing of the happiness of the people who have such a God to be
their glory and defence, [Psa
89:15-18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015). He rehearses the terms of
the covenant at full length with evident delight, 19-37, and then
mournfully pours out his complaint and petition, [Psa
89:38-51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038), closing the whole with a
hearty benediction and a double Amen. May the Holy Spirit greatly bless
to us the reading of this most precious Psalm of instruction.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001). -

I. Mercies celebrated.

1\. When? - "for ever."

2\. By whom? - by those who are the subjects of them.

3\. Therefore they must live for ever to celebrate them.

II\. Faithfulness declared.

1\. To our own generation.

2\. To succeeding generations by its influence upon others.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002). -

I. The Testimony.

1\. To the constancy of Mercy.

\(1\) It builds up its trophies every moment.

\(2\) It preserves them for ever.

2\. To the constancy of Faithfulness. It remains as the ordinances of
heaven.

II\. Its Confirmation. "I have said," etc., said it,

1\. Upon the ground of Scripture.

2\. of experience.

3\. of reason.

4\. of observation of others.

[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), [Psa
89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004).

I. The Covenant made.

1\. With whom? - with David and in him with David's Lord and Son. The
true David - the chosen one - the servant of the Father in redemption.

2\. For what? -

\(1\) for his seed. He should have a seed and that seed should be
established.

\(2\) for himself, "his throne," etc.

II\. The Covenant confirmed.

1\. By decree. "I have made," etc.

2\. By promise. "I will establish."

3\. By oath. "I have sworn."

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006). - We have a comparison
between God and the most excellent in heaven and earth - challenge both
worlds.

I. The true God, sovereign of heaven and earth is incomparably great in
his being and existence;

1\. because his being is of himself eternal;

2\. because he is a perfect being;

3\. because he is independent;

4\. because he is unchangeable.

II\. God is incomparably great in his attributes and perfections.

1\. In his holiness;

2\. in his wisdom and knowledge;

3\. in his power;

4\. in his justice;

5\. in his patience;

6\. in his love and goodness.

III\. God is incomparably great in his works - creation; providence;
redemption, and human salvation. - Theophilus Jones, 1830.

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006). - The Incomparableness of
God, in his Being, Attributes, Works, and Word. - Swinnock. \[Nichol's
Edition of Swinnock's Works, Vol. IV., pp. 373-508.\]

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006), [Psa
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007). -

I. In creation God is far above other beings. [Psa
89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006).

II\. In Redemption he is far above himself in creation. [Psa
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007).

[Psa 89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009), [Psa
89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010). - God's present rule in the
midst of confusion, and rebellion; and his ultimate overthrow of all
adverse forces.

[Psa 89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011). -

I. God's possession of heaven, the model of his possession of earth.

II\. God's possession of earth most certain, and its manifestation in
the future most sure.

III\. The course of action suggested to his people by the two facts.

[Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012). - The joy of creation in
its Creator.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014). -

I. The Equity of the divine government - "justice," etc. No creature can
eventually be unjustly dealt with under his dominion, and his kingdom
ruleth over all.

II\. The Sovereignty of the divine government. Truth before mercy. Mercy
founded upon truth. "Thou wilt perform the truth to Jacob and the mercy
to Abraham." The covenant made in mercy to Abraham is fulfilled in truth
to Jacob.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015). -

I. The gospel is a joyful sound. Good tidings, etc.

II\. It is a joyful sound to those who know it, hear it, believe it,
love it, obey it.

III\. They to whom it is a joyful sound are blessed. "They shall walk,"
etc.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015). -

I. There is a theoretical knowledge of the gospel.

II\. An experimental knowledge, and,

III\. A practical knowledge. - W. Dransfield, 1859.

[Psa 89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016). -

I. Exultation.

1\. "In thy name," etc., as rich in mercy as the God of salvation - of
all grace - of all consolation.

2\. At what season - "all the day," morning, noon, and night.

II\. Exaltation. "In thy righteousness," etc.

1\. How not exalted. Not in their own righteousness.

2\. How exalted. "In thy," etc. Procured for them - by a divine person
(thy) - imputed to them. Ours, though thine. The righteousness of God as
God could not exalt us, but his righteousness as God-man can. Exalted
above hell, above earth, above Paradise, above angels. Exalted to
friends of God - children of God - one with God, to heaven.

[Psa 89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016) (second clause). -
Consider,

I. What the believer is exalted above or from, by God's righteousness.

1\. It exalts him above the law.

2\. Above the world.

3\. Above the power and malice of Satan.

4\. Above death.

5\. Above all accusations ([Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),
[Rom 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#034)).

II\. To what happiness or dignity the believer is exalted by virtue of
that righteousness.

1\. To a state of peace and reconciliation with God.

2\. To sonship.

3\. To fellowship and familiarity with God, and access to him.

4\. And finally, to a state of endless glory. - E. Erskine.

[Psa 89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017). -

I. The blessedness of the righteous.

1\. Their internal glory. Reliance upon divine strength.

2\. Their internal honour. "In thy favour," etc.

II\. The participation in that blessedness. The their of the people of
God becomes our. Their strength our horn. Happy they, who, with respect
to all the privileges of the saints, can thus turn their into our.

[Psa 89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017). -

I. Consider our natural weakness.

II\. Consider our strength in God.

III\. Give God the glory of it.

[Psa 89:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#018). -

I. Jehovah - his power, self-existence, and majesty - our defence.

II\. The Holy One of Israel - his character, covenant character, and
unity - our government.

[Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019). -

I. The work required. "Help."

1\. By whom? By God himself.

2\. For what? To reconcile God to man, and man to God.

II\. The person selected for this work.

1\. Human. "Chosen out of the people."

2\. Divine. "Thy Holy One."

III\. His qualifications for the work.

1\. His own ability for the office, "One that is mighty."

2\. His appointment to it by God. "I have laid," etc. "I have chosen,"
etc.

[Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019) (last clause). - Election,
extraction, exaltation.

[Psa 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020), [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021). -

I. The Messiah would be of the seed of David. The true David.

II\. He would be a servant of the Father. "My servant."

III\. He would be consecrated to his office by God. "With my holy oil,"
etc.

IV\. He would perfectly fulfil it. "With whom my hand," etc.

V. He would be sustained in it by the Father. "Mine arm," etc.

[Psa 89:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#022), [Psa
89:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#023). -

I. A prophecy of the conflict of the Messiah with Satan. Satan could not
exact any debt or homage from him.

II\. Of his refutation of his enemies. "I will beat down," etc. The
Scribes and Pharisees were beaten down before his face.

III\. Of the destruction of their city and nation. "And plague them,"
etc.

[Psa 89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026). - Our Lord's filial
spirit, and how it was displayed.

[Psa 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029). -

I. The subjects of Messiah's reign. "His seed."

1\. For union - his seed.

2\. For resemblance.

3\. For multitude.

II\. The duration of his reign.

1\. They for ever one with him.

2\. He for ever on the throne.

[Psa 89:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030). -

I. The persons referred to. "His children." "Ye are all the children,"
etc.

II\. The supposition concerning them. "If his children forsake," etc.

1\. They may possibly - may fall, though not fall away.

2\. They will probably, because they are far from being perfect.

3\. They have actually: as David himself and others.

III\. The threatening founded upon that supposition.

1\. Specified - "the rod - stripes." They shall smart for it sooner or
later.

2\. Certified. "Then will I."

IV\. The qualification of the threatening. "Nevertheless," etc.

1\. The nevertheless characterized. Loving-kindness not removed, etc.

2\. Emphasized. The rod may seem to be in anger, nevertheless, etc.
There is,

\(1\) An if.

\(2\) A then.

\(3\) A nevertheless.

[Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039). -

I. Providences may often seem to be at variance with promises.

II\. Promises are never at variance with providences. It is the covenant
of thy servant and his crown still.

[Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039). - How the throne of King
Jesus may be profaned.

[Psa 89:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#040). -

I. What God had done. "Broken down," etc.

II\. What he had not done. Not taken away sorrow for his departure and
desire for his return.

[Psa 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043). - Cases in which the sword
of the gospel appears to have its edge turned.

[Psa 89:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#044), [Psa
89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045). -

I. A prophecy that the Messiah would be meek and lowly. "Made his glory
to cease."

II\. Would become a servant to the Father. "Cast his throne down," etc.

III\. Would be cut off in the midst of his days. "The days of his
youth," etc.

IV\. That he would die an ignominious death. "Hast covered him," etc.

[Psa 89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045). - The excellence of the
first days of Christianity, and in what respect their glory has departed
from us.

[Psa 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046). - The hand of God is to be
acknowledged.

I. In the nature of affliction. "Wilt thou hide thyself," etc.

II\. In the duration of affliction. "How long, Lord?"

III\. In the severity of affliction. Wrath burning like fire.

IV\. In the issue of affliction. How long? for ever? In all these
respects the words are applicable both to Christ and to his people.

[Psa 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046). - "Remember." The prayer
of the dying thief, the troubled believer, the persecuted Christian.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047). -

I. An appeal to divine goodness. "Remember," etc. Let not my life be all
trouble and sorrow.

II\. To divine wisdom. "Wherefore," etc. Was man made only to be
miserable? Will not man have been made in vain if his life be but short,
and that short life be nothing but sorrow?

[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052). -

I. The voice. "Blessed," etc. In himself in all his works and ways - in
his Judgments as well as in his mercies - as the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ - "for evermore."

II\. The echo, "Amen and amen." Amen, says the church on earth - says
the church in heaven - say the angels of God - says the whole holy and
happy universe - says eternity past and eternity to come.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

The present Psalm makes a pair with the preceding one. It Is a spiritual
Allegro to that Penseroso ... That Psalm was a dirge of Passion-Tide,
this Psalm is a carol of Christmas. - Christopher Wordsworth.

Whole Psalm

There are many passages in this Psalm which do clearly evidence that it
is to be interpreted of Christ; yea, there are many things in this Psalm
that can never be clearly, pertinently, and appositely applied to any
but Jesus Christ. For a taste, see [Psa
89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019), "I have laid help upon one that
is mighty," mighty to pardon, reconcile, to justify, to save, to bring
to glory; suitable to that of the Apostle, [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025), "He is able to save to the
uttermost" - that is, to all ends and purposes, perfectly, completely,
fully, continually, perpetually. Christ is a thorough Saviour, a mighty
Saviour: [Isa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), "Mighty to save."
There needs none to come after him to finish the work which he hath
begun: [Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019), "I have exalted one
chosen out of the people," which is the very title given to our Lord
Jesus: [Isa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), "Behold my servant,
whom I uphold; mine elect," or chosen one, "in whom my soul delighteth":
[Psa 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020), "I have found David my
servant." Christ is very frequently called by that name, as being most
dearly beloved of God, and most highly esteemed and valued by God, and
as being typified by him both as king and prophet of his church, [Psa
89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020), "With my holy oil have I
anointed him;" suitable to that of Christ; [Luk
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#018), "The Spirit of the Lord is upon
me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor;" and
therefore we need not doubt of the excellency, authority, certainty, and
sufficiency of the gospel, [Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027),
"I will make him my first-born, higher than the kings of the earth."
Christ is the first-born of every creature, and in all things hath the
pre-eminence: [Psa 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029), "His seed
also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the days of
heaven." This is chiefly spoken of Christ and his kingdom. The
aspectable heaven is corruptible, but the kingdom of heaven is eternal;
and such shall be Christ's seed, throne and kingdom: [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036), "His seed shall endure for
ever, and his throne as the sun before me." "Christ shall see his seed,
he shall prolong his days, and the pleasure of the Lord shall prosper in
his hand," [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010). "And his throne
as the sun before me"; that is, perpetual and glorious, as the Chaldee
explaineth it, "shall shine as the sun." Other kingdoms and thrones have
their times and their turns, their rise and their ruins, but so hath not
the kingdom and throne of Jesus Christ. Christ's dominion is "an
everlasting dominion," which shall not pass away; "and his kingdom that
which shall not be destroyed," [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014). I might give further instances
out of this Psalm, but enough is as good as a feast. Now saith God, "I
have made a covenant with him"; so then there is a covenant that God the
Father hath made with Christ the Mediator; which covenant, the Father
engages to the Son, shall stand fast, there shall be no cancelling or
disannulling of it. God the Father hath not only made a covenant of
grace with the saints in Christ, but he has also made a covenant of
redemption, as we call it for distinction sake, with Jesus Christ
himself, "My covenant shall stand fast with him;" that is, with Christ,
as we have fully and clearly demonstrated. - Thomas Brooks.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

This one short verse contains the summary, pith, and argument of the
whole long Psalm; wherein observe the Song's ditty, the lovingkindness
and truth of the Lord, manifested unto the whole world generally, to
David's house (that is, the church) especially. The Singer's duty,
magnifying the mercies of God always, even from one generation to
another. And by all means; with his mouth, for that is expressed in this
verse; with his mind, for that is implied in the next - "I have said,"
etc., that is, believed in my heart, and therefore spake it with my
tongue, [Psa 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010). "For out of the
heart's abundance the mouth speaketh," [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034). - John Boys.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"I will sing." It is to be observed that he does not say, I will speak
of the goodness of the Lord; but, I will sing. The celebration of the
divine goodness has joined with itself the joy and exultation of a pious
mind, Which cannot be poured forth better than in song. That
pleasantness and exuberance of a happy spirit, which by singing is
instilled into the ears of the listeners, has a certain wonderful power
of moving the affections; so that not in vain were pious minds taught by
the Holy Spirit to inculcate the wonderful work of God in songs composed
for this purpose, to commit them to memory and to appoint them to be
sung. - Musculus.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"I will sing." - The Psalmist has a very sad complaint to make of the
deplorable condition of the family of David at this time, and yet he
begins the Psalm with songs of praise; for we must in every thing, in
every state, give thanks. We think when we are in trouble we get ease by
complaining; but we do more, we get joy, by praising. Let our complaints
therefore be turned into thanksgiving; and in these verses we find that
which will be in matter of praise and thanksgiving for us in the worst
of times, whether upon a personal or public account. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"Sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever." S. Gregory the Great raises
the question here as to how a perpetual singing of the mercies of God is
compatible with unalloyed bliss in heaven, inasmuch as the thought of
mercy connotes the memory of sin and sorrow, which needed mercy, whereas
Isaiah saith that "the former troubles are forgotten," and "the former
things shall not be remembered, nor come upon the heart" ([Isa
65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016), [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)). And he replies that it will be
like the memory of past sickness in time of health, without stain,
without grief, and serving only to heighten the felicity of the
redeemed, by the contrast with the past, and to increase their love and
gratitude towards God. And so sings the Cluniac:

"Their breasts are filled with gladness,

Their mouths are tuned to praise,

What time, now safe for ever,

On former sins they gaze:

The fouler was the error,

The sadder was the fall,

The amplet are the praises

Of Him who pardoned all."

Note, too, that he says, "with my mouth," not with that of any deputy;
"I will make known," not secretly or timidly, not in a whisper, but
boldly preach, "Thy faithfulness," or truth, not my own opinion, far
less my own falsehood, but thy Truth, which is, thine Only-begotten Son.
- Gregory, Bernard, Hugo, and Augustine: quoted by Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"Mercies." The word may be rendered graces, kindnesses, goodnesses, and
designs the abundance of grace. - John Gill.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"The mercies." His manifold and sundry mercies; as if he should say, we
have tasted of more than one, yea, we have felt all his mercies; I will
therefore praise the same for ever. I will sing his mercy for creating
this universe, which is macrocosmos, a great world; and for making man,
which is microcosmos, a little world. 1. My song shall set forth his
kindness, for that he gave me being. 2. For adding to my being, life,
which he denieth unto stones. 3. To life, sense, which he denieth unto
plants. 4. To sense, speech and understanding, which he denieth unto
brute beasts....

I am exceeding much bound unto God for creating me when I was not; and
for preserving me under his wings ever since I was, yet I am more bound
to his mercy for redeeming me, for blessing me with all spiritual
blessings in heavenly things in Christ his Son ([Eph
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)), for his electing of me, for his
calling of me, for his justifying of me, for his sanctifying of me.
These graces are the riches of his goodness and glory, misericordiae in
aeternum, everlasting mercies, as reaching from everlasting
predestination to everlasting glorification. O Lord, I will alway sing
thy mercies in promising, and ever shew thy truth in performing thy
promise made to David, thy chosen servant, concerning thy Son, my
Saviour, saying, "Thy seed will I establish for ever." So the fathers
expound our text: I will ever sing thy mercies, in vouchsating to send
thy Son to visit thy servants, sick to death in sin. First, I will ever
sing of thy mercifulness, and then will ever be shewing thy
faithfulness. Neque enim exhiberetur veritas in impletione promissorum,
nisi precederet misericordia in remisslone peccatorum. (For truth, in
the fulfilment of the promises, would not be shown forth; unless mercy,
in the forgiveness of sins, should precede it.) And what is God's mercy
set up for ever, and his truth established in the heavens, but that
which Isaiah terms, "the sure mercies of David"; that is, as Paul
construeth Isaiah, the holy promise made to David: and the promise made
to David, is briefly this, "Thy seed will I establish for ever, and set
up thy throne from generation to generation." - John Boys.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"For ever." I know some join in etcmum to the noun misericordias, and
not to the verb cantabo, making the sense to be this: I will alway sing
thy mercies which endure for ever. But always is referred as well, if
not better, unto the verb, "I will sing:" as who would say, Lord, thy
mercies are so manifest, and so manifold, so great in their number, and
so good in their nature, that I will always, so long as I have any
being, sing praises unto thee. Haply some will object, "All flesh is
grass, and the goodliness thereof is as the flower of the field: the
grass withereth, the flower fadeth" ([Isa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006), [Isa
40:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#007)). David being persecuted by Saul,
said, "There is but a stop between me and death" ([Sa1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#003)). Nay, David, thy life is shorter
than a stride, but "a span long," as thyself witnesseth, [Psa
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#005). How can he then that begs his
bread but for a day promise to spend his breath in magnifying the Lord
for ever? Answer is made, that the prophet will not only commend the
mercies of the Lord in word, but also commit them unto writing. Ut sciat
haec aetas, posteritasque legat (that this age may know, and that
posterity may read.) As the tongue of the prophet is termed elsewhere
"the pen of a writer;" so the writing of the Prophet is here termed his
mouth, as Euthymeus upon the place ([Act
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025)), Liber Psalmorum os David (The
Book of Psalms is the mouth of David). He doth intend to note the
mercies of God, and to set forth his truth in a book, the which he will
leave behind him (as an instrument) to convey the same from generation
to generation, from the generation of Jews to the generation of
Christians. Or from the Old Testament to the New: for the blessed
Apostles in their sermons usually cite sentences out of the Psalms. S.
Peter telleth us that the gospel was preached unto the dead ([Pe1
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#006)); so may we say, that the gospel
is preached by the dead. For the most ancient fathers, and other
judicious authors, who have spent their days in writing learned
expositions and godly meditations upon the Holy Scriptures, although
they be dead, yet they "sing alway the mercies of the Lord, and shew the
truth of his word from one generation to another." It is reported in our
chronicles of Athelstan, parum aetati viait, maltum gloriae (he lived
but little of time, but much of glory). So many zealous and industrious
doctors have lived (in respect of their age) but a little, yet in
respect of their acts, a great while, shining still in their works and
writings, as lights of the world.

Or the prophet may be said to sing ever intentionally, though not
actually. For as the wicked, if he could live alway, would sin alway, so
the good man. (if God should suffer him alway to breathe on earth) would
sing alway the mercies of the Lord. - John Boys.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"With my mouth." The author has heard continual praises from a tongue
half eaten away with cancer. What use, beloved reader, are you making of
your tongue? - Philip Bennett Power.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"I have said." The word, אמרתּי, "I have said," is used, in the Book of
Psalms, to express two things; either a fixed purpose, or a settled
opinion of the person speaking. The Psalmist, therefore, delivers the
whole of this second verse in his own person, and introduces not God
speaking till the next verse. - Samuel Horsley.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"I have said," etc. The perpetuity of mercy is one eminent piece of this
Psalm, for with that he begins: "Mercy shall be built up for ever," etc.
And they are the sure mercies of our spiritual David (Christ), he means.
Now, to set forth the perpetuity hereof, he first useth words that
express firmitude, as "established ... built up for ever," [Psa 89:2, 19
89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002). Then he uses such similitudes as
are taken from things which are held most firm and inviolable amongst
men, as [Psa 89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004), foedus incidi, I
have cut or engraven my covenant (so in the Hebrew), alluding to what
was then in use, when covenants were mutually to be made, such as they
intended to be inviolate, and never to be broken; to signify so much,
they did engrave and cut them into the most durable lasting matter, as
marble, or brass, or the like. You may see this to have been the way of
writing in use, as what was to last for ever: as [Job
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#023), [Job
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#024). "Oh that my words were now
written! oh that they were printed in a book! That they were graven with
an iron pen and lead in the rock for ever!" And what is that rock or
marble here? No other than the heart itself of our gracious and most
merciful Jehovah, and his most unalterable and immovable purposes, truth
and faithfulness. This is that foundation "in the heavens," whereon
mercy is built up for ever, as [Psa
89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002), which (as the Apostle says)
"remains for ever;" and so they become "the sure mercies of David," [Isa
55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003). Again, solemn oaths amongst men
serve to ratify and make things sworn to perpetual. This also is there
specified as having been taken by God: "Once have I sworn by my
holiness," etc., and sworn by him that cannot lie, and sworn to that
end, "to show the immutability of his counsel," [Heb
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#017). And not only is the immutability
of his mercy illustrated by these things taken from what is firm on
earth, but he ascends up to the heavens, and first into the very highest
heavens: [Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002), "For I have said,
Mercy shall be built up for ever: thy faithfulness shalt thou establish
in the very heavens:" comparing them to an house built not on earth, or
upon a foundation of earth, which thieves break through, and violence
destroys, but in heaven, whither they cannot reach. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"Mercy shall be built up for ever." What is this "mercy" that is "built
up for ever"? but the glorious and the gracious scheme, the glorious and
the gracious fabric, of our salvation, founded in the eternal purpose of
God - carried into execution by the labours and the death of Jesus
Christ - and then applied and brought home to the heart by the
illuminating and converting power of the Holy Ghost? This is that
"mercy" which is "built up for ever." It was planned from everlasting,
and will know no ruin or decay, through the illimitable line of eternity
itself. Who is the builder of this fabric? Not man's free-will. Not
man's own righteousness or wisdom. Not human power nor human skill.
Every true believer will here join issue with David, that it is God, and
God alone, who builds up the temple of his Church; and who, as the
builder of it, is alone entitled to all the glory.

The elect constitute and form one grand house of mercy: an house,
erected to display and to perpetuate the riches of the Father's free
grace, of the Son's atoning merit, and of the Holy Ghost's efficacious
agency. This house, contrary to the fate of all sublunary buildings,
will never fall down, nor ever be taken down. As nothing can be added to
it, so nothing can be diminished from it. Fire cannot injure it; storms
cannot overthrow it; age cannot impair it. It stands on a rock, and is
immovable as the rock on which it stands - the three-fold rock of God's
inviolable decree of Christ's finished redemption, and of the Spirit's
never-failing faithfulness. - Augustus Montague Toplady, 1740-1778.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"Built up." Mention of a building of mercy, presupposes miserable ruins,
and denotes that this building is intended for the benefit of an elect
world ruined by Adam's fall. Free grace and love set on foot this
building for them, every stone in which, from the lowest to the highest,
is mercy to them; from top to bottom, from the foundation-stone to the
top-stone, all is free and rich mercy to them. And the ground of this
glorious building is God's covenant with his chosen: "I have made a
covenant with my chosen." - Thomas Boston.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"Built up." Former mercies are fundamental to later ones. The mercies
that we enjoy this day are founded upon the mercies of former days, such
as we ought joyfully and thankfully to recount with delight and praise;
remembering the years of the right hand of the Most High. - John Howe.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002) (last clause)

The meaning of this passage appears to be, that the constancy of the
celestial motions, the regular vicissitudes of day and night, and
alternations of the seasons, were emblems of God's own immutability. -
B. Warner, 1828.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"For I have said, Thy mercies rise,

A deathless structure, to the skies:

The heav'ns were planted by thy hand,

And, as the heav'ns, Thy truth shall stand."

\- Richard Mant.

[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003)

"I have made a covenant with my chosen." We must ponder here with pious
wonder how God has deigned to enter into a covenant with man, the
immortal with the mortal, the most powerful with the weakest, the most
just with the most unjust, the richest with the poorest, the most
blessed with the most wretched. The prophet wonders that God is mindful
of man, and visits the son of man. Of how much greater admiration, I
say, is it worthy, that they are also joined together, and that not
after a simple fashion, but by the ties of a covenant? If man had
affirmed this of himself, that God was united and bound to him by a
covenant, who is there that would not have condemned him of temerity?
Now God himself is introduced affirming this very thing of himself, that
he had made a covenant with man. What saint does not see in this thing,
how great the φιλανθρωπία of God is! - Musculus.

[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003)

"I have made a covenant with my chosen." On heaven's side is God
himself, the party proposer. Though he was the party offended, yet the
motion for a covenant comes from him The Father of mercies saith, "The
lost creatures cannot contract for themselves; and if another undertake
not for them, they must perish: they cannot choose an undertaker for
themselves. I will choose one for them, and I will make a covenant with
my chosen." On man's side is God's chosen, or chosen One, for the word
of God is singular; the Son, the last Adam. Who else as fit to be
undertaker on man's side? who else could have been the Father's choice
for this vast undertaking? No angel nor man was capable of it, but "the
Mighty One" ([Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)) whom the
Father points out to us as his chosen, [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001). - Thomas Boston.

[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003), [Psa
89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004)

"I have made a covenant with my chosen," etc. Do you suppose that this
was spoken to David, in his own person only? No, indeed; but to David as
the antitype, figure, and forerunner of Jesus Christ. Hence, the
Septuagint version renders it, I have covenanted τοις εκλεκτοις μου,
with my elect people, or with my chosen ones, i.e. with them in Christ,
and with Christ in their name. "I have sworn unto David my servant,"
unto the Messiah, who was typified by David; unto my co-eternal Son, who
stipulated to take on himself "the form of a servant"; they seed, i.e.
all those whom I have given to thee in the decree of election, all those
whom thou shalt live and die to redeem, these "will I establish for
ever," so as to render their salvation irreversible and inamissable:
"and build up thy throne," thy mediatorial throne, as King of saints and
covenant Head of the elect, "to all generations": there shall always be
a succession of favoured sinners to be called and sanctified, in
consequence of thy foederal obedience unto death; and every period of
time shall recompense thy covenant-sufferings with an increasing revenue
of converted souls, until as many as are ordained to eternal life are
gathered in.

Observe, here, that when Christ received the promise from the Father
concerning the establishment of his (i.e. of Christ's) throne to all
generations, the plain meaning is, that his people shall be thus
established; for, consider Christ in his divine capacity as the Son of
God, and his throne was already established, and had been from
everlasting, and would have continued to be established-without end,
even if he had never been incarnate at all. Therefore, the promise
imports that Christ shall reign, not simply as a person in the Godhead
(which he ever did, ever will, and ever must); but relatively,
mediatorially, and in his office-character, as the deliverer and king of
Zion. Hence it follows, that his people cannot be lost: for he would be
a poor sort of a king who had or might have no subjects to reign over.
Consequently, that "throne" of glory on which Christ sits is already
encircled in part, and will at last be completely surrounded and made
still more glorious, by that innumerable company, that general assembly
and church of the first-born, who are written in heaven. - Augustus
Montague Toplady.

[Psa 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

"The heavens," etc. Now, for this kingdom of his, the heavens are said
to praise his wonders, which is spoken of the angels, who are often
called the heavens, from their place; as in Job it is said, "The heavens
are not clean in his sight." And these knowing the wonders of that
covenant of grace, they, even they are said to praise; "The heavens
shall praise thy wonders, O Lord." In the Hebrew it is "thy wonder," or
"thy miracle," in the singular number which, in [Eph
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#010), the angels are said to adore:
and in Luke 1, to "sing glory to the Highest:" for his grace to man is
that miracle. Now the material heavens do not praise the mercy of God,
or the grace of God, or the covenant of grace, or the throne of grace
that is established in the heavens. They understand nothing of Christ;
no, they do not so much as materially give occasion to man to praise God
for these; and therefore this is meant of the angels; and most
interpreters understand the next words of them: "Thy faithfulness also
in the congregation of the saints," angels, and the holy ones made
perfect, for there the great congregation is. For even in the heavens,
who can be compared to the Lord, where all his angels thus do praise
him? "Who among the sons of the mighty," of all the powers of the earth,
"can be likened unto the Lord?" for he is the "King of kings, and he is
the Lord of lords:" God above all gods, even angels themselves, as
elsewhere the Psalmist hath it. And he says not only, "There is none
like thee;" but, "Who is like unto thee?" his excellency so exceeds. And
in [Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007), he is there presented
with all his saints and angels round about him, as one that is greatly
to be feared, or that is terrible in himself, by reason of his
greatness, in this his council and assembly of his saints, and to be had
in reverence of all that are about him. For saints and angels, they are
of his council in heaven (as might be shewn), and encompass the
manifestation of his glory there round about. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

"Thy wonders," etc. As the heavens are a proof of God's power, in
respect of his first framing them out of nothing; so are they a pattern
of God's faithfulness, in their constant and orderly motion according to
his word since their framing, "The heavens shall praise thy faithfulness
also." However the power and faithfulness of God may be seen and heard
in the work and speech of the heavens by all men, yet are they not
observed and hearkened unto except in the Church by God's children:
therefore saith he, "They shall praise thy faithfulness also in the
congregation of the saints." - David Dickson.

[Psa 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

"Thy wonders." Thy wondrousness (literally, wonder), not "Thy wondrous
works," but "Thy wonderful mysterious nature and being," as separate and
distinct from all created beings. - J. J. S. Perowne.

[Psa 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

"Thy wonders," etc. It is a wonderful salvation, it is such a salvation
as the angels desire to pry into it; and it is such a salvation, that
all the prophets desire to pry into it; it is almost six thousand years
since all the angels in heaven fell into a sea of wonder at this great
salvation; it is almost six thousand years since Abel fell into a sea of
wonder at this great salvation; and what think ye is his exercise this
day? He is even wondering at this great salvation. - Andrew Gray, 1616.

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)

"Who in the heaven?" Who in the sky? Ainsworth reads it. In the clouds,
in nubibus, equabitur, is to be equalled, saith Calvin, to Jehovah, Quis
enim In superiore nube par eestimetur Jehova. Who in the higher clouds
is equal to Jehovah, so Tremellius reads it. "Who in the heavens?" i.e.,
say some, In the starry heavens, among the celestial bodies, sun, moon,
or stars; which were adored as gods, not only by the Persians, but also
by some idolatrous Jews, because of their brightness and beauty, their
lustre and glory. Which of all those famous lamps, and heavenly
luminaries, is to be compared to the Father of lights, and Sun of
righteousness? They may glister like glowworms in the night of Paganism,
among them who are covered with the mantle of darkness, but when this
Sun ariseth, and day appeareth, they all vanish and disappear.

"Who in the heavens?" i.e., say others, in the heaven of heavens, the
highest, the third heavens, among the celestial spirits, cherubims and
scraphims, angels and archangels, principalities and powers, thrones and
dominions? Who among the innumerable company of angels? who among those
pure, those perfect spirits, who are the ancientest, the honourablest
house of the creation, is to be compared to the Father of Spirits. -
George Swinnock.

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)

"Who can be compared?" The Dutch have translated these words, "Who can
be shadowed with him?" that is, they are not worthy to be accounted
shadows unto such a comparison with him. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)

"Who among the sons of the mighty." Literally, "Who is he among the sons
of" Alim (or of Gods, as in [Psa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001)), i.e., according to Suicer, the
powerful, the princes of the earth. - Daniel Cresswell.

[Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)

"God is greatly to be feared." Ainsworth reads, "God is daunting
terrible." The original word is נערץ, from ערץ, arats, he was broken,
bruised, terrified. "An epithet of God," says Bythner, "as though
breaking all things." - Editorial Note to Calvin in loc.

[Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)

"God is greatly to be feared." The worship of God is to be performed
with great fear and reverence; "God is greatly to be feared." Piscator
translates it, Vehementer formidandus, to be vehemently feared; and
opposes it to that formal, careless, trifling, vain spirit, which too
often is found in those that approach the Lord in the duties of his
worship. - John Flavel.

[Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)

"God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints." Those
saints of his who walk close with him, have a daunting power in their
appearance. I appeal to guilty consciences, to apostates, to professors
who have secret haunts of wickedness: sometime when you come but into
the presence of one who is a truly gracious godly man or woman whom your
conscience tells you walks close with God, doth not even the very sight
of such an one terrify you? the very lustre of that holiness you see in
such an one strikes upon your conscience. Then you think, such an one
walks close with God indeed, but I have basely forsaken the Lord, and
have had such a haunt of wickedness, I have brought dreadful guilt upon
my soul since I saw him last. Ecclesiastical stories tell us of Basil,
when the officers came to apprehend him, he being then exercised in holy
duties, that there was such a majesty and lustre came from his
countenance, that the officers fell down backward (as they did who came
to apprehend Christ), they were not able to lay hold of him. Surely,
when the saints shall be raised in their holiness, when every one of
them shall have their hearts filled with holiness, it will cause
abundance of fear even in all hearts of those that converse with them. -
Jeremiah Burroughs.

[Psa 89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008)

"Thy faithfulness round about thee." For just as the tyrants of this
world move abroad surrounded by impiety, avarice, contempt of God, and
pride, as with a body-guard, so God sits on his exalted throne,
surrounded with majesty, faithfulness, mercy and equal love to all his
people, as with a vesture of gold. - J. Baptista Folengius.

[Psa 89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008)

"Thy faithfulness round about thee." Whatever he doth, he is mindful of
his faithfulness and covenant, before and behind, and on each side; he
can look no way, but that is in his eye. And though he employ angels,
and send them down into the world, and they stand round about him; yet
he hath better harbingers than these - mercy, and truth, and
faithfulness, that wait round about him. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009)

"Thou rulest the raging of the sea." Surely the Spirit of God would have
us to take notice, that though the sea be indeed such a giant, such a
monster, as will make a heart of oak shake, or a heart of brass melt,
yet what is it to God, but an infant? he can bind it and lay it to
sleep, even as a little child. And if the great sea be in the hand of
God as a little child, what is great to God I and how great is God! What
is strong to God! and how strong is God! What or who is too great, or
too strong for God to deal with? - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009)

"Thou rulest." Here under a figure taken from God's providential
government, we have an exhibition of the power of God in defeating the
efforts of the enemies of his Church. An instance of this, in the
literal sense, we have in the appeasing of the storm by our Lord. "And
he arose, and rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace, be still.
And the wind ceased, and there was a great calm." Here we see that God
reigns over the sea immediately, and alters or modifies the arrangements
of nature according to his sovereign pleasure. That which Jesus did on
one occasion is constantly done by the God of providence. He has not
left the ocean to be disturbed at random by the winds, nor to be kept in
peace by the laws of nature. He rules the raging of the sea. He raises
the waves, and he stilleth them. This exhibits a continually working
providence. And what he does in providence he does also in his kingdom
of grace. He suffers the fury of the enemy to swell against his cause,
but he stills it at his pleasure. - Alexander Carson.

[Psa 89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010)

"Broken;" "scattered." God has more ways than one to deal with his and
his church's enemies. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010)

"Rahab." The reason why Egypt is expressed in Scripture under this word,
ariseth from the two significations of it; first, it signifies strength,
for Egypt was a very strong nation, and therefore the Israelites were
reproved for going to them for help, and relying upon their strength,
which though great in itself, yet should be to them but a broken reed;
secondly, it signifieth pride, or the proud; men are usually proud of
strength, and Egypt being a strong nation, was also a very proud nation.
- Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011)

"The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine." Therefore we praise
thee, therefore we trust in thee, therefore we will not fear what man
can do against us. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012)

"The north and the south thou hast created them," etc. The heights of
Huttin, commonly fixed on by tradition as the Mount of Beatitudes,
appear a little to the west of Tiberias. Over these the graceful top of
Mount Tabor is seen, and beyond it the little Hermon, famous for its
dews; and still farther, and apparently higher, the bleak mountains of
Gilboa, on which David prayed that there might fall no dew nor rain. A
view of the position of Tabor and Hermon from such a situation as that
which we now occupied, shewed us how accurately they might be reckoned
the "umbilicus terae" - the central point of the land, and led us to
infer that this is the true explanation of the manner in which they are
referred to in [Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012). It is as if
the Psalmist had said, North, south, and all that is between - or in
other words, The whole land from north to south, to its very centre and
throughout its very marrow - shall rejoice in thy name. - R. M.
McCheyne.

[Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012)

"Tabor and Hermon." These hills, the one to the east and the other to
the west, in Canaan, were much frequented by the saints of God. David
speaks of the sacred hill of Hermon, and compares brotherly-love to the
dew of it. [Psa 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#006); [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). And Tabor, yet more eminent for
the memorable spot of Christ's transfiguration, and from whence God the
Father proclaimed his perfect love and approbation of Jesus as his dear
Son. Well might this hymn, therefore, in allusion to those glorious
events, call even the holy hills to rejoice in Jehovah's name, [Mat
17:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001). - Robert Hawker.

[Psa 89:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#013)

"Strong is thy hand"; even thy left hand; as much as to say tu polles
utraque manu, thou hast both hands alike powerful. - John Trapp.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne." As if the
Psalmist had said, "The ornaments with which God is invested, instead of
being a robe of purple, a diadem, or a sceptre, are, that he is the
righteous and impartial judge of the world, a merciful father, and a
faithful protector of his people." Earthly kings, from their having
nothing in themselves to procure for them authority, and to give them
dignity, are under the necessity of borrowing elsewhere what will invest
them therewith; but God, having in himself all-sufficiency, and standing
in no need of any other helps, exhibits to us the splendour of his own
image in his righteousness, mercy, and truth. - John Calvin.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne.". The Holy Ghost
alludeth to the thrones of earthly princes, which were underpropped with
pillars, as Solomon's throne with lions, [Kg1
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020), that were both a support and an
ornament to it. Now, saith the Psalmist, justice and judgment are the
pillars upon which God's throne standeth, as Calvin expoundeth it, the
robe and diadem, the purple and sceptre, the regalia with which God's
throne is adorned. - George Swinnock.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne." Jehovah is here
exhibited, by the sacred poet, under the character of a Sovereign, and
of a Judge, he being presented to our adoring regard as on his throne;
the throne of universal empire, and absolute dominion; as exercising his
authority, and executing his laws, with an omnipotent but impartial
hand. For "Justice and judgment are the habitation," the preparation,
the establishment, or the basis, of this throne. Our textual translation
is, habitation; the marginal, establishment; the Septuagint,
preparation; and, if I mistake not, our best modern interpreters render
the original term, basis or foundation; which, on the whole, seems most
agreeable. The basis, then, of Jehovah's government, or that on which it
rests, is "justice and judgment." By "justice," I conceive we are to
understand the attribute so called; and, by "judgment," the impartial
exercise of that attribute in the Divine administration. So that were
not the Most High to administer impartial justice in his moral
government, he might be considered, if it be lawful to use the
expression, as abdicating his throne. - Abraham Booth, 1734-1806.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Justice," which defends his subjects, and does every one right.
"Judgment," which restrains rebels, and keeps off injuries. "Mercy,"
which shows compassion, pardons, supports the weak. "Truth," that
performs whatsoever he promiseth. - William Nicholson.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Mercy and truth shall go before thy face." Note,

I. Mercy is said to go before the face of God, because God sends mercy
before judgment, that he might find less to punish: so Bellarmine.

II\. That God permits not his face to be seen before he has forgiven our
sins through mercy: so Rickelius.

III\. That no one comes to the knowledge of God - but he who has
obtained mercy beforehand.

IV\. That God comes to no one unless His grace go before Him.... Truth
goes before the face of God, because God keeps it ever before his eyes,
to mould his actions thereby. Pindar calls truth θυγατερα Διος the
daughter of God. Epaminondas the Theban general, cultivated truth so
studiously, that he is reported never to have spoken a falsehood even in
jest. In the courts of kings this is a rare virtue. - Le Blanc.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Mercy and truth." Mercy in promising; truth in performing. Truth, in
being as good as thy word; mercy, in being better. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Shall go." In his active going forth, tender mercy and goodness
announce him, and faithful truth will tell his people he is there when
he Comes forth. His activities are mercy and faithfulness, because his
will is at work and his nature is love. Yet his throne still maintains
justice and judgment. - J. N. Darby.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

"Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound." Not that hear; for
then the blessing were cheap indeed. Thousands hear the Gospel sound,
but sometimes not ten of a thousand know it. - Thomas James Judkin,
1841.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

"Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound" - viz., of the
trumpets sounded in token of joy at the great festivals, and chiefly on
the first day of the seventh month, the feast of trumpets ([Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024)), and on extraordinary
occasions, especially after the yearly atonement, on the day of jubilee,
the tenth day of the seventh month of the fiftieth year, proclaiming
liberty to bondmen, and restoration of their inheritance to them that
had forfeited it ([Lev 25:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#008)). As
the jubilee joy did not come till after the atonement, so no Gospel joy
and liberty are ours till first we know Christ as our atonement. "In the
day of the people's gladness" they blew the trumpets over their
sacrifices, "that they might be to them for a memorial before God" ([Num
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#010)). David and Israel brought up
the ark of the Lord to Zion "with shouting, and with the sound of the
trumpet" ([Sa2 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#015)). In [Num
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#021), Balaam makes it the
distinguishing glory of Israel, "The Lord his God is with him, and the
shout of a king is among them," (Compare [Psa
98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006); [Psa
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#006) margin). - A. R. Fausset.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

"People that know the joyful sound." Here it is supposed that we have
intelligence in respect of "the joyful sound." For there is knowledge
not merely of the utterances and intonations, but of the sense and
substance, of the thought and feeling, which they convey. And I suppose
this to be the meaning of Christ when he says, "My sheep hear my voice,
and they follow me; and a stranger will they not follow, for they know
not the voice of strangers." And I have often been surprised, to note
the accuracy with which persons otherwise not very intelligent, not
largely informed, not of critical acumen, will yet, when they hear a
discourse, judge, discriminate, determine; will be able to say at once -
"Truth, clear, unmixed, without a cloud upon it;" or - "Doctrine
clouded, statements confused, not the lucid Gospel;" or be able to say,
if it be so - "No Gospel at all; contradiction to the truth of Christ."
They "Know the joyful sound," as it rolls from the plentitude of God's
own voice and bosom, in his august and blessed revelations; as it is
confirmed, authenticated and sealed by the precious blood of our Lord
and Saviour Jesus Christ; as it is witnessed to by the eternal Spirit;
"the joyful sound," that there is salvation for lost and ruined men by
faith in the blood and in the obedience of him who died upon the tree,
and is now enthroned in the highest place in heaven. - James Stratten,
1845.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

"They shall walk in the light of thy countenance." Surely, next to the
love of God's heart, believers value the smiles of his face; from which,
as from the agency of the sun, arise the buddings of conscious joy, the
leaves of unsullied profession, the variegated blossom of holy tempers,
and the beneficent fruits of moral righteousness. They are totally
mistaken who suppose that "the light of God's countenance," and the
privileges of the gospel, and the comforts of the Spirit, conduce to
make us indolent and unactive in the way of duty. The text cuts up this
surmise by the roots. For, it does not say, they shall sit down in the
light of thy countenance; or, they shall lie down in the light of thy
countenance; but "they shall walk in the light of thy countenance." What
is walking? It is a progressive motion from one point of space to
another. And what is that holy walking which God's Spirit enables all
his people to observe? It is a continued, progressive motion from sin to
holiness; from all that is evil, to every good word and work. And the
self-same "light of God's countenance" in which you, O believer, are
enabled to walk, and which at first gave you spiritual feet wherewith to
walk, will keep you in a walking and in a working state, to the end of
your warfare. - Augustus Montague Toplady.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

There is the dreadful and there is the joyful sound. The dreadful sound
was at Mount Sinai. The joyful sound is from Mount Sion. When the people
heard the former they were far from beholding the glory of God's face.
Moses only was admitted to see his "back-parts;" the people were kept at
a distance, and the light of God's glory that they saw was so terrible
to them, that they could not abide it. But they that know the "joyful
sound," they shall be admitted near, nearer than Moses, so as to see the
glory of God's face or brightness of his countenance, and that not only
transiently, as Moses saw God's back-parts, but continually. The light
of God's glory shall not be terrible to them, but easy and sweet, so
that they may dwell in it and walk in it; and it shall be to them
instead of the light of the sun; for the sun shall no more be their
light by day, nor the moon by night, but God shall be their everlasting
light. Compare this with [Isa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#005),
and. [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023), [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024) and [Rev
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#004), [Rev
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005). - Jonathan Edwards.

[Psa 89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016)

"And in thy righteousness shall they be exalted." In these words briefly
we may notice,

I. The believer's promotion; he is "exalted." In the first Adam we were
debased unto the lowest hell, the crown having fallen from our heads;
but in Christ, the second Adam, we are again exalted; yea, exalted as
high as heaven, for we "sit together with him in heavenly places," says
the apostle. This is an incredible paradox to a blind world, that the
believer who is sitting at this moment upon the dunghill of this earth,
should at the same time be sitting in heaven in Christ, his glorious
Head and representative, [Eph 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#006).

II\. We have the ground of the believer's preferment and exaltation; it
is "in thy righteousness." It is not in any righteousness of his own;
no, this he utterly disclaims, reckoning it but "dung and loss," "filthy
rags," dogs' meat: but it is in thy righteousness; that is, the
righteousness of God, as the apostle calls it: [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), Phil. 3:0. The righteousness of
God is variously taken in Scripture. Sometimes for the infinite
rectitude and equity of his nature: [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007), "The righteous Lord loveth
righteousness." Sometimes for his rectoral equity, or distributive
justice which he exerciseth in the government of the world, rewarding
the good and punishing evil-doers: [Psa
97:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#002), "Righteousness and judgment are
the habitation of his throne." Sometimes it is put for his veracity and
faithfulness in accomplishing his word of promise, or in executing his
word of threatening: [Psa 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#005), [Psa
36:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#006), "Thy faithfulness reacheth unto
the clouds: thy righteousness is like the great mountains." Sometimes it
is put for the perfect righteousness which Christ the Son of God, as our
Surety and Mediator, brought in, by his obedience to the law, and death
on the cross, for the justification of guilty sinners: and this as I
said, is frequently called the righteousness of God; and in this sense I
understand it here in the text: "In thy righteousness shall they be
exalted." - Ebenezer Erskine.

[Psa 89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017)

"In thy favour our horn shall be exalted." A man of lofty bearing is
said to carry his horn very high. To him who is proudly interfering with
the affairs of another it will be said, "Why show your kombu," "horn ...
here?" "See that fellow, what a fine horn he has; he will make the
people run." "Truly, my lord, you have a great horn." "Chinnan has lost
his money; ay, and his horn-ship too." "Alas! alas! I am like the deer,
whose horns have fallen off." - Joseph Roberts' "Oriental
Illustrations."

[Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019) (second clause)

\[New Translation\] "A mighty chief have I supplied with help."
Literally, "I have equalized help," that is, I have laid or given
sufficient help, "upon a mighty one." The verb denotes "to equalize," or
"make one thing equal or equiponderant to another," as a means to the
end, or vice versa. - Richard Mant.

[Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)

"Chosen" has here its strict sense, but not without allusion to its
specific use as signifying a young warrior. - J. A. Alexander.

[Psa 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)

"With my holy oil have I anointed him." As the literal David was thrice
anointed king, once by Samuel in Jesse's house at Bethlehem; once at
Hebron, after the death of Saul, as king over Judah; and again at seven
years' end, as ruler over all Israel: so also "God anointed Jesus of
Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power" in his nativity at
Bethlehem; a second time over his Church at his resurrection, when the
tyrant who sought his life was overcome, and then only over the small
"confederation" (which Hebron means) of his Jewish disciples; but a
third time in his ascension to the heavenly Jerusalem, the Vision of
Peace, where he, now crowned as King of Glory, was anointed over all
heaven and earth, supreme over all the princes of God. He was thrice
anointed in another sense also, once as Prophet, once as Priest, and
once as King. - Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 89:20-24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)

"I have Found David," God exclaims. When sin brought death into the
world, and annihilated the hopes of mankind from the first covenant, I -
the Almighty - in my care for them, sought out a Redeemer. I sought for
him in the Divine Nature; and I "found" him in my Only Son. I endowed
him with ample powers, and I covenanted that, in the weakness of his
Incarnation, "my hand" and "arm" should "strengthen" him. I declared
that Satan "the enemy." should "not exact upon him;" nor should Judas -
"the son of wickedness" - be enabled to "afflict him." The Jews, "his
foes," shall fall before him; they shall be "smitten down" in their
rejection of him; they shall perish from off their land, and be
dispersed abroad among the nations. My "truth" shall be ever with him;
and acting in my "name" and power, he shall be exalted and glorified
amongst men. - William Hill Tucker.

[Psa 89:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#022)

"The enemy shall not exact upon him." The allusion appears to us to be
made to a cruel and unjust creditor, who exacts not only his just debts,
but some exaggerated demand, with usurious interest, which was not
permitted. - Williams, quoted by Ed. of Calvin.

[Psa 89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025)

"I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers."
That is, he should reign from the Mediterranean to the Euphrates;
figuratively expressed by his left hand being extended to the sea, and
his right hand to the rivers. A similar expression is used, according to
Curtius, by the Scythian ambassadors to Alexander. "if," said they, "the
gods had given thee a body as great as thy mind, the whole world would
not be able to contain thee. Thou wouldst reach with one hand to the
east, and with the other to the west." - Kitto's Pictorial Bible.

[Psa 89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025)

"I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers."
A certain artist was in the habit of saying that he should represent
Alexander in such a manner, that in one hand he should hold a city and
from the other pour a river. Christ is represented here as of immense
stature, higher than all mountains, with one hand holding the earth, and
the other the sea, while from Eastern sea to Western he extends his
arms. - Le Blanc.

[Psa 89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)

"He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father." When did David call God his
Father? It is striking that we do not find anywhere in the Old Testament
that the patriarchs or prophets called God their Father. You do not find
them addressing him as Father: they did not know him as such. This verse
is unintelligible in reference to David; but in regard to the True David
it is exactly what he did say, - "My Father, and your Father; my God,
and your God." Never until Christ uttered these words, never until he
appeared on earth in humanity as the Son of God, did any man or any
child of humanity address God in this endearing character. It was after
Christ said, "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father," that believers
were enabled to look up to God and to say, "Abba, Father." Here you see
distinctly that this applies to Christ. He was the first to say this:
David did not say it. If there were no other proof in the whole Psalm,
that one clause would be a demonstration to me that no other man than
the Lord Jesus Christ can be here spoken of. - Capel Molyneux, 1855.

[Psa 89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)

"My Father." Christ commenced his labours by referring to his Father,
for in Luke 2 he says, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's
business?" and his last words were, "Father, into thy hands I commend my
spirit;" and through his whole life he most constantly addressed God as
his Father. "He shall cry unto me, Thou art my Father," as far as my
divinity is concerned. "My God," as far as my humanity is concerned;
"the support of my salvation," as regards my mortality. - Bellarmine.

[Psa 89:26-28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)

Christ had a command to be a sufferer, and a body prepared him for that
purpose; so he had likewise a command to be an advocate, and a life
given him, and a throne prepared for him at the right hand of God to
that end. This commission is contained in the words before us; and this
after his exaltation, [Psa 89:24, 19
89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024). Yet for the full completing of
it, [Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027), the matter of the plea
is then mentioned, "Thou art the rock of my salvation," the foundation,
the first cause, of all thy salvation I have wrought in the world, being
the first mover of it, and promising the acceptance of me in the
performance of what was necessary for it. As he hath authority to cry to
God, so he hath an assurance of the prevalency of his cry, in regard of
the stability of the covenant of mediation, which shall stand fast with
him, or be faithful to him; "my mercy will I keep for him for evermore,"
[Psa 89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028). The treasures of my mercy
are reserved only to be opened and dispensed by him; and the enjoying of
his spiritual seed for ever, and the establishing of his own throne
thereby, is the promised fruit of this cry, [Psa
89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028). - Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)

"I will make him my first-born." First, because he is first in the order
of predestination; for it is through him, as through the head, that we
are predestinated, as we read in Ephes. 1. Secondly, because he is first
in the second generation to life everlasting, whence he is called
(Colos. 1) "the firstborn from the dead"; and in Rev. 1, "the
first-begotten of the dead"; and, thirdly, because he had the rights of
the first-born; for "he was appointed heir of all things"; and he was
made not only first-born, but also, "high above the kings of the earth";
that is, Prince of the kings of the earth, and King of kings. -
Bellarmine.

[Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)

"Also I will make him my first-born, higher than the kings of the
earth." This promise plainly implies superiority of a nature similar to
what was enjoyed of old by the eldest son of a family - the birth-right
privileges and blessings, which consisted principally in three important
particulars; First, A double portion of the parent's earthly
possessions, [Deu 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017); Secondly,
Rule or authority over the younger branches of the family, [Ch2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#003); and, Thirdly, The exercise of
the priesthood, because God claimed all the first-born as his, and in
their stead he appointed the Levites to do the priest's office, [Num
8:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#014). But, whilst it is literally
true that Jesus was the first-born son of his virgin mother, and on that
account entitled to the customary privileges, the promise in the 89th
Psalm gives intimation of something specific and unusual. David was the
youngest son of Jesse, the lowest on the list of a numerous family, -
the very last individual among them who could have expected exaltation
over all others. But, notwithstanding these natural disadvantages, he
was God's choice; and by referring to the Scripture history it would be
easy to show, in a variety of particulars, how the promise made to
David, "I will make him my first-born," was literally and remarkably
fulfilled in the son of Jesse. In like manner Jesus, to all human
appearance, entering the world as heir-apparent only to the poverty of
Mary and her espoused husband, was far removed from every prospect of
realizing that combination of royal and sacerdotal prerogative, which
nevertheless was made sure to him by the promise of his heavenly Father,
"I will make him my first-born." The pronoun "my" gives great emphasis
to the promise, but this word is interpolated; and however truly it
conveys an idea of the unspeakable superiority which belongs to Jesus
Christ as the result of his relationship with God, still we shall find
that, even without this important pronoun, the promise simply of being
"first-born" has a sublimity and grandeur about it which needs neither
ornament nor addition. The great Jehovah, the Maker and the Owner and
the Ruler of the universe, hath said respecting his Christ, "I will make
him my first-born"; that is, I will constitute him the chief of all
creatures, and the depository of all power, and the possessor of all
privileges, and the heir of all creation. By way of excellence, he is
the first-born, "higher than all the kings of the earth," - enjoying
priority in point of time, and precedence in point of place. - David
Pitcairn, in "The Anointed Saviour," 1846.

[Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)

"My firstborn." In the Hebrew idiom all kings were the sons of God: but
David is the chief of these, God's first-born. The Greeks had a similar
mode of expressing themselves. Kings were the nurslings of Jupiter. -
Alexander Geddes.

[Psa 89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028)

"My mercy will I keep for him for evermore." How will he keep his mercy
for Christ for evermore? Very simply, I think. Is not Christ the
Fountain of all mercy to us? Is it not the mercy of God the Father
flowing to us through Christ that we enjoy? Is he not the Depository of
it all? God says, then, I will keep it for him; for ever and ever shall
it be lodged in Christ, and his people shall enjoy it throughout
eternity. - Capel Molyneux.

[Psa 89:28-30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028)

Here is comfort to those who are true branches, and continue to bring
forth fruit in the midst of all the trials that befall them, that God
will not suffer them to be cut off by their corruption. If anything in
them should provoke God to do it, it must be sin. Now for that, you see
how Christ promiseth that God will take order therewith, and will purge
it out of them. This is the covenant made with David (as he was a type
of Christ, with whom the same covenant is made sure and firm), that "if
his seed forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments," - What!
presently turn them out of doors, and cut them off, as those he meant to
have no more to do with? What! nothing but utter rejection? Is there no
means of reclaiming them? Never a rod in the house? Yes - "then will I
visit their transgression with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes," whip out their stubbornness and sinfulness; "but my
lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him" as I did from Saul, as
it is in [Ch1 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#013).

Let the saints consider this, that they may return when they are fallen,
and submit to him and his nature, and suffer him to do what he will with
them, and endure cutting, and lancing, and burning, so long as he cuts
them not off; endure chastening, and all his dealings else, knowing that
all the fruit is but to take away the sin, to make them "partakers of
his holiness;" and "if by any means," as Paul speaks of himself ([Phi
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#011)), be the means what it will, it
is no matter. And God, if at any time he seems to cut thee off, yet it
is but as the incestuous Corinthian was cut off, that 'the flesh might
be destroyed, and the spirit saved.' - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029)

"His seed" and "throne" are coupled together, as if his throne could not
stand if his seed did fail. If his subjects should perish, what would he
be king of? If his members should consume, what would he be head of? -
Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

"If his children forsake my law." An objection is supposed, 'Suppose
this seed who are included in the covenant fall into transgression, how
shall the covenant stand fast then?' The covenant, with the seed, shall
stand for ever, but the seed must be a holy seed. Then the objector
supposes - 'Suppose the seed become unholy?' Well, God explains. - "If
his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments" - that is, if
the seed practically fall away - "If they break my statutes, and keep
not my commandments; then will I visit their transgression with the rod,
and their iniquity with stripes. Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I
not take from him, nor suffer my faithfulness to fail." Mark the case.
What is it that God will do? The case supposed is that the seed of
Christ forsakes the law and breaks his statutes. I need not say to you
that that is realized every day. These are not the ungodly or the
unconverted that are spoken of, but God's own children. Do you say, 'Can
they be guilty of breaking God's statutes, and forsaking God's law?' We
do it every day. There is no single day of our lives that we do not do
it....

How astonished many would be, if they knew what the real case was of
those perhaps whom they admire, and think highly advanced and exalted in
the Divine life, if they were to know the falls, the wretched falls,
falls in heart, in word and in practice; if they were to know the deep
distress that the children of God, who are far advanced as they suppose
in the Divine life, are continually suffering from the effect of such
transgression! That is exactly what God says; he comes and contemplates
such a case, and he says, "If they break my statutes, and keep not my
commandments, then" - what? What will God do? Some people say, "Then God
will leave them." Those who object to the doctrine of final perseverance
say this, "It is true he will preserve the believer from the toils of
the Devil and the temptations of the world, but not from the breaking
forth of his own natural evil. He may be betrayed by that, and finally
lost." God exactly meets that case; he contemplates the worst case -
actual transgression. He says, "If a child of mine breaks my law." He
does not say anything about the Devil, or the outward temptations of the
world; but he says, "If they forsake my law and break my statutes." Let
us be instructed by God. He does not say he will leave them and forsake
them. Mark what he will do! He says - "I will visit their transgression
with the rod, and their iniquity with stripes." That is the provision
which God has made in his covenant: and it is delightful to see how God
has contemplated our case to the uttermost. There is nothing in our
history that God has not met in the covenant with Christ. If you are in
union with Christ, and a partaker of the covenant, your case is met in
every conceivable emergency. Nothing can befall you which is not
contemplated - nothing which God has not provided for. Even if you fall,
God has provided for it; but take heed; the provision involves much that
will be terrible and desperately painful to your mind. There is nothing
to encourage sin about it; there is nothing to give us license, nothing
to lead a man to boast, "I am safe at last." Be it so: but safe how? How
will God secure their safety? "I will visit their transgression with the
rod, and their iniquity with stripes." - Capel Molyneux.

[Psa 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

"If his children forsake my law." If they fall into sins of commission;
if they shoot beyond the mark. "And walk not in my judgments." If they
fall into sins of omission, and shoot short. Where note that "every
transgression and disobedience (that is, every commission and omission)
receiveth a just recompence of reward," [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002). - John Trapp.

[Psa 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

"His children," בּניו, his sons, i.e. Christians, born through the
griefs of Christ on the cross, like the pangs of one in travail. -
Geier.

[Psa 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

A man may forsake the doctrines of the Gospel. He may fall into great
errors, great aberrations from Truth; he may forsake the ordinances of
the Lord's house, though he sees God's word is clear upon the point. He
esteems those things as nothing worth, which the Lord esteems so well,
that he has given them to his church as a sacred deposit, which she is
to convey down to the latest posterity till time shall be no more. And
what is still more - a man may forsake for a time the principles of the
precious Gospel of the living God. But I can imagine a state still more
solemnly affecting than even this. It is a part of God's wisdom, (and it
is for our good that it is so - all God's wisdom is for his people's
good) - It is a part of the wisdom of God, that sin should lead to sin;
that one neglect shall pave the way to another; that that which is bad
shall lead to that which is worse, and that which is worse shall prepare
the way for that which is worst.... The longer I live, the more I am
brought to this - to know that there is not a sin that ever was
committed, but I need the grace of God to keep me from it. - James
Harrington Evans.

[Psa 89:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

God here says two things; first, that he will chastise them, next, that
he will not, on that account, cast them out of his covenant. O wonderful
tempering of the kindness and severity of God! in which he finds his own
glory, and believers their safety! The heavenly Father loves the blood
and the marks of his Christ which he sees upon them, and the remains of
faith and godliness which are preserved hidden in the depth of their
heart; this is why he will not cast them off. On the other hand, he
considers that it accords neither with his wisdom nor his holiness to
bestow his grace and salvation upon those who do not repent for having
cast off his law and given themselves up to iniquity. In order to
harmonize these opposite desires, he takes the rod, and chastises them,
to arouse their conscience, and to excite their faith; to restore them,
by the repentance which his discipline produces, to such a state, as
that he maybe able to bestow upon them, without shame, the blessings he
has promised to the children of his Son; just as a wise parent, by
moderate and judicious correction gradually draws back his son from
those irregularities of life into which he has plunged; and thereby
preserves his honour, and himself the pleasure of being able to love and
please him without misgiving. Or, as a skilful surgeon, by the pain
which his knife, or cautery, or bitter potions, cause his patient, saves
his life, and wards off death. - Jean Daill.

[Psa 89:30-34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

When our heavenly Father is, as it were, forced to put forth his anger,
he then makes use of a father's rod, not an executioner's axe. He will
neither break his children's bones, nor his own covenant. He lashes in
love, in measure, in pity, and compassion. - Thomas Lye, 1621-1684.

[Psa 89:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#032)

"Then will I visit their transgression with the rod," etc. He does not
simply say, I will smite them; but, I will visit with the rod. It is one
thing merely to smite, it is another thing to smite by visiting. For
visitation implies oversight and paternal care. The metaphor is taken
from those who undertake to watch over the sick, or train up children,
or tend sheep. He does not say, I will visit them with the rod; but, I
will visit their transgression with the rod. We ought to think
perpetually, what it is the rod of God visits in us, that we may confess
our transgressions, and amend our lives. - Musculus.

[Psa 89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)

"Nevertheless my lovingkindness," etc. Except the covenant of grace, had
this article in it for remission of sin and for fatherly correction, to
drive unto repentance, that the penitent person coming to God by faith
might have sin forgiven him and lovingkindness shown to him; this
covenant should fail us no less than the covenant of works. - David
Dickson.

[Psa 89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)

"I will not utterly take from him." Why "from him"? Because all God's
lovingkindness to his people is centred in Christ. Does God love you? it
is because he loves Christ; you are one with Christ. Your transgressions
are your own; they are separate from Christ; but God's love is not your
own; it is Christ's: you receive it because you are one with him. How
beautifully that is distinguished here - "If they transgress, I will
punish them; but my lovingkindness will I not take from him" - in whom
alone they find it; and in union with whom alone they enjoy it. - Capel
Molyneux.

[Psa 89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)

"From him." The words, "Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not
utterly take from him," are worthy of consideration; for the question
being about those who are chastised, it would appear that he should have
written, from them, and not from him. But the prophet has thus worded
it, because, being the children and members of his Christ, the favours
which God bestows upon us belong to him in some manner; and it seems
that the Psalmist wishes to show us hereby, that it is in Jesus Christ,
and for love of him alone, that God bestows favours on us. And that
which follows, in [Psa 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034), agrees
herewith, - "My covenant will I not break" - for it is properly to Jesus
Christ, on account of his admirable obedience, that God the Father has
promised to be merciful to our iniquities, and never to leave one of
those to perish who are in covenant with him. - Jean Daill.

[Psa 89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)

"Nor suffer my faithfulness to fail." Man's faith may fail him some; but
God's faithfulness never fails him: God will not suffer his faithfulness
to fail. God's operations may have an aspect that way; the devil's
temptations, and our unbelieving hearts, may not only make us think so,
but persuade us it is so, whereas it cannot be so, for the Lord will not
suffer it, he will not make a lie in his truth or faithfulness; so the
Hebrew is: he is a God that cannot lie, he is Truth, speaks truth, and
not one of his promises can or shall fail; which may afford strong
consolation unto all that are under any promise of God. - William
Greenhill.

[Psa 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034)

"My covenant will I not break." He had said above, "If the children of
David break my statutes;" and now, alluding to that breach, he declares
that he will not requite them as they requite him, "My covenant will I
not break," implying, that although his people may not altogether act in
a manner corresponding to their vocation, as they ought to do, he will
not suffer his covenant to be broken and dis-annulled on account of
their fault, because he will promptly and effectually prevent this in
the way of blotting out their sins by a gratuitous pardon. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)

"Once have I sworn by my holiness." He lays here his holiness to pledge
for the assurance of his promise, as the attribute most dear to him,
most valued by him, as though no other could give an assurance parallel
to it, in this concern of an everlasting redemption, which is there
spoken of. He that swears, swears by a greater than himself. God having
no greater than himself, swears by himself; and swearing here by his
holiness seems to equal that single to all his other attributes, as if
he were more concerned in the honour of it than of all the rest. It is
as if he should have said, Since I have not a more excellent perfection
to swear by than that of my holiness, I lay this to pawn for your
security, and bind myself by that which I will never part with, were it
possible for me to be stripped of all the rest. It is a tacit
imprecation of himself, If I lie unto David, let me never be counted
holy, or thought righteous enough to be trusted by angels or men. This
attribute he makes most of. - Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036)

"His seed shall endure for ever." They shall continue for ever in three
senses. First. In the succession of their race to the end of the world.
It will never be cut off. - "The Church is in danger!" What Church?
"Upon this rock," says he, "I will build my Church; and the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it." Yea, his people shall continue to
increase in number and excellency. We shall leave the world better than
we entered it: and so will our children; till Jerusalem shall be
established, and be made a praise in the whole earth. Secondly. In their
religious character to the end of their own life. If left to themselves,
we could not be sure of their persevering to the end of a day or an
hour. But they are kept by the power of God, through faith, unto
salvation. He upholdeth them with his hand. They shall hold on their
way. In all their dangers they shall be more than conquerors. Thirdly.
In their glorified state, through eternal ages. The world passeth away
and the lusts thereof; but he that doeth the will of God abideth for
ever. All other greatness is only for life: it is frequently less
durable - at death it ends. But then, the Christian's greatness - I will
not say, begins; for it began the moment he prayed - but then it
continues, increases, and is perfected. - William Jay.

[Psa 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)

"It shall be established for ever as the moon." This clause Kimchi
expounds not only of the perpetuity, but of the quality and condition of
David's Kingdom, after this fashion: If his children be good, they shall
be like the moon, when full and shining; if bad, like the moon waning
and obscure. Nevertheless the kingdom itself shall not cease, just as
the moon does not go out of existence, whilst it is obscure, but lasts
perpetually. - Musculus.

[Psa 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)

"And as a faithful witness in heaven." \[New Translation\] "And as the
rainbow's faithful sign." The rainbow is not expressly mentioned in the
original, which speaks only of "the faithful witness in heaven." Some
commentators understand the "witness" thus mentioned to be no other than
the moon itself. I prefer however the interpretation that fixes it on
the rainbow, which God after the deluge appointed as a "sign" or
"witness" of his mercy in Christ. [Gen
9:12-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#012). Conformably to this
appointment, the Jews, when they behold the rainbow, are said to bless
God, who remembers his covenant and is faithful to his promise. And the
tradition of this its designation to proclaim comfort to mankind was
strong among the heathens: for, according to the mythology of the
Greeks, the "rainbow" was the daughter of "wonder, a sign to mortal
men," and regarded, upon its appearance, as a messenger of the celestial
deities. Thus Homer with remarkable conformity to the Scripture account
speaks of the "rainbow," which "Jove hath set in the cloud, a sign to
men." - Richard Mant.

[Psa 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)

"But thou hast cast off," etc. The complainings of the saints meanwhile
are so exaggerated, that carnal feeling makes itself more apparent in
them, than faith.... Yet such is the goodness of God, he is not offended
with these complaints, provided faith is not altogether extinguished, or
succumbs. - Mollerus.

[Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039)

"Thou hast profaned his crown," etc. The crown of a king (like that of
the high priest, on which was inscribed "holiness to the Lord") ([Exo
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#036)) was a sacred thing, and
therefore to cast it in the dust was to profane it. - A. R. Fausset.

[Psa 89:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#040)

"Hedges" and "strong holds." Both of these may refer to the appointments
of a vineyard in which the king was the vine. It was usually fenced
around with a stone wall, and in it was a small house or tower, wherein
a keeper was set to keep away intruders. When the wall, or hedge, was
thrown down, every passer by plucked at the fruit, and when the tower
was gone the vineyard was left open to the neighbours who could do as
they would with the vines. When the church is no longer separated from
the world, and her divine Keeper has no more a dwelling-place within
her, her plight is wretched indeed. - C. H. S.

[Psa 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043)

"Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword," etc. The arms and
military prowess of thy people are no longer of any use to them; Thou
art against them, and therefore they are fallen. In what a perilous and
hopeless situation must that soldier be who, defending his life against
his mortal foe, has his sword broken, or its edge turned; or, in modern
warfare, whose gun misses fire! The Gauls, when invaded by the Romans,
had no method of hardening iron; at every blow their swords bended, so
that they were obliged, before they could strike again, to put them
under their foot or over their knee, to straighten them; and in most
cases, before this could be done, their better armed foe had taken away
their life! The edge of their sword was turned, so that they could not
stand in battle; and hence the Gauls were conquered by the Romans. -
Adam Clarke.

[Psa 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043)

"Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword," that it cannot do
execution as it has done; and what is worse, thou hast "turned the edge"
of his spirit, and taken off his courage, and hast not made him "to
stand," as he used to do, "in the day of battle." The spirit of men is
what the Father and Former of spirits makes them; nor can we stand with
any strength or resolution, farther than God is pleased to uphold us. If
men's hearts fail them, it is God that dispirits them; but it is sad
with the church when those cannot stand that should stand up for it. -
Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045)

"The days of his youth hast thou shortened." Our kings have not reigned
half their days, nor lived out half their lives. The four last kings of
Judea reigned but a short time, and either died by the sword or in
captivity. Jehoahaz reigned only three months, and was led captive to
Egypt, where he died. Jehoiakim reigned only eleven years, and was
tributary to the Chaldeans, who put him to death, and cast his body into
the common sewer. Jehoiachim reigned three months and ten days, and was
led captive to Babylon, where he continued in prison to the time of
Evil-merodach, who, though he loosed him from prison, never invested him
with any power. Zedekiah, the last of all, had reigned only eleven years
when he was taken, his eyes put out, was loaded with chains, and thus
carried to Babylon. Most of these kings died a violent and premature
death. Thus the "days of their youth" - of their power, dignity, and
life, "were shortened," and they themselves "covered with shame."
"Selah;" so it most incontestably is. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045)

"Thou hast covered him with shame. Selah." Thou hast wrapped him up in
the winding-sheet of shame. Lord, this is true. - John Trapp.

[Psa 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046), [Psa
89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

This undoubtedly sounds like the voice of one who knows no hereafter.
The Psalmist speaks as if all his hopes were bound by the grave; as if
the overthrow of the united kingdom of Judah and Ephraim had bereft him
of all his joy; and as if he knew no future kingdom to compensate him
with its hopes. But it would be doing cruel injustice to take him thus
at his word. What we hear is the language of passion, not of sedate
conviction. This is well expressed by John Howe in a famous sermon. "The
expostulation (he observes) was somewhat passionate, and did proceed
upon the sudden view of this disconsolate case, very abstractly
considered, and by itself only; and the Psalmist did not, at that
instant, look beyond it to a better and more comfortable scene of
things. An eye bleared with present sorrow sees not far, nor comprehends
so much at one view, as it would at another time, or as it doth
presently when the tear is wiped out and its own beams have cleared it
up."

It would be unwarrantable, therefore, to infer from Ethan's
expostulation, that the saints who lived under the early kings were
strangers to the hope of everlasting life. I am inclined to go further,
and to point to this very complaint as affording a presumption that
there was in their hearts an irrepressible sentiment of immortality. The
bird that frets and wounds itself on the bars of its cage shews thereby
that its proper home is the free air. When inveterate sensuality has
succeeded in quenching in a man's heart the hope of a life beyond the
grave, the dreary void which succeeds utters itself, not in solemn
complaints like Ethan's, but in songs of forced mirth - dismal
Anacreontic songs: "Let us eat and drink for to-morrow we die."

"'Tis time to live if I grow old,

'Tis time short pleasures now to take,

Of little life the best to make,

And manage wisely the last stake."

\- William Binnie.

[Psa 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046)

"Shall thy wrath burn like fire?" an element that hath no mercy. -
William Nicholson.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

"Wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?" If I should demand of any,
for what cause especially man came into the world; he would answer with
the Psalmist, God did not create man in vain. Did He create man to heap
up wealth together? no, for the apostle saith, "we brought nothing into
this world, and it is certain, that we can carry nothing out. And,
having food and raiment, let us be therewith content." [Ti1
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#006), [Ti1
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#007), [Ti1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#008). Did he create him to hawk after
power and principality? no, for Nebuchadnezzar lusting after these, lost
no less than a kingdom. Did he create him to eat, drink and play? no,
for Seneca, though an heathen saith, major sum, etc., I am greater, and
born to greater things, than that I should be a vile slave of my senses.
What then is the proper end of man? That we should live to the praise of
the glory of his grace wherewith he hath made us freely accepted in his
Beloved. [Eph 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#006). - William Pulley.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

"Wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?" If we think that God hath
made man "in vain," because so many have short lives, and long
afflictions in this world, it is true that God "hath made" them so; but
it is not true, that therefore they are "made in vain." For those whose
days are few and full of trouble, yet may glorify God, and do some good,
may keep their communion with God, and go to heaven, and then they are
not made in vain. If we think that God has made men in vain, because the
most of men neither serve him nor enjoy him, it is true, that as to
themselves, they were made in vain, better for them they had not be on
born, than not be "born again"; but it was not owing to God, that they
were made in vain, it was owing to themselves; nor are they made in vain
as to him; for he has "made all things for himself, even the wicked for
the day of evil," and those whom he is not glorified by he will be
glorified upon. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

"Wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?" When I add to the
consideration of my short time, that of dying mankind, and behold a dark
and deadly shade universally overspreading the world, the whole species
of human creatures vanishing, quitting the stage round about me, and
disappearing almost as soon as they show themselves; have I not a fair
and plausible ground for that (seemingly rude) challenge? Why is there
so unaccountable a phenomenon? such a creature made to no purpose; the
noblest part of this inferior creation brought forth into being without
any imaginable design? I know not how to untie the knot, upon this only
view of the case, or avoid the absurdity. It is hard sure to design the
supposal, (or what it may yet seem hard to suppose), "that all men were
made in vain." - John Howe.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

"Wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?" Two thoughts crush us - Man
was made to mourn, and man was made in vain. Yes, this thought is
painfully pressed upon us, - man is "made in vain!" In how many
particulars, especially when we survey that large range of characters to
which we may give the denomination of wasted lives; there to behold
peerless genius frittering itself away upon unworthy attainments, upon
worthless performances; imagination that might adorn truth, if that were
possible; wit, that might select and discriminate the true from the
false; and eloquence that might enforce the true; - where do we find
these? Unsatisfactory and miserable world, may we well exclaim, where
nothing is real, and nothing is realised; when I consider how our lives
are passed in the struggle for existence; when I consider the worry of
life, where it is not a woe - the woe, where it is not a worry; when I
consider how the millions pass their time in a mere toil for sensual
objects, and that those to whom the sad contradiction of life never
comes, are the most wretched of all, did they but know it; when I
consider the millions of distorted existences; and the many millions! -
the greater number of the world by far - who wander Christless,
loveless, hopeless, over the broad highway of it; when I consider life
in many of the awakened as a restless dream, as children beating the
curtain and crying in the night; when I consider how many questions
recur for ever to us; and will not be silenced, and cannot be answered;
when I consider the vanity of the philosopher's inquisitiveness, and the
end of Royalty in the tomb; when I look round on the region of my own
joys, and know how short their lease is, and that their very
ineffableness is a blight upon them; when I consider how little the best
can do, and that none can do anything well; and, finally, when I
consider the immeasurable immensity of thought within, unfulfilled, and
the goading restlessness, I can almost exclaim with our unhappy poet
\[Byron\] -

"Count all the joys thine hours have seen,

Count all thy days from anguish free,

And know, whatever thou hast been,

'Twere something better not to be."

\- E. Paxton Hood, in "Dark Sayings on a Harp," 1865.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047), [Psa
89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

In these verses, the fundamental condition of Israel's blessedness is
found to be an acknowledgment of the total unprofitableness of the
flesh. Resurrection is the basis upon which the sure mercies of David
rest availably for faith ([Act 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#034)).
This is rather implied than directly stated in the present Psalm. -
Arthur Pridham.

[Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

"What man." Mi gheber, says the original; it is not Ishe, which is the
first name of man, in the scriptures, and signifies nothing but a sound;
a voice, a word, a musical air which dies, and evaporates; what wonder
if man, that is but Ishe, a sound, should die too? It is not Adam, which
is another name of man, and signifies nothing but red earth; let it be
earth red with blood, (with that murder which we have done upon
ourselves,) let it be earth red with blushing, (so the word is used in
the original,) with a conscience of our own infirmity, what wonder if
man, that is but Adam, guilty of this self-murder in himself, guilty of
this in-born frailty in himself, die too? It is not Enos, which is also
a third name of man, and signifies nothing but a wretched and miserable
creature; what wonder that man, that is but earth, that is a burden to
his neighbours, to his friends, to his kindred, to himself, to whom all
others, and to whom myself desires death, what wonder if he die? But
this question is framed upon more of these names; not Ishe, not Adam,
not Enos; but it is Mi gheber, Quis vir; which is the word always
signifying a man accomplished in all excellences, a man accompanied with
all advantages; fame, and a good opinion justly conceived, keeps him
from being Ishe, a mere sound, standing only upon popular acclamation;
innocency and integrity keeps him from being Adam, red earth, from
bleeding, or blushing at anything he hath done; that holy and religious
art of arts, which St. Paul professed. That he knew how to want, and how
to abound, keeps him from being Enos, miserable or wretched in any
fortune; he is gheber, a great man, and a good man, a happy man, and a
holy man, and yet Mi gheber, Quis homo, this man must see death. - John
Donne.

[Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

This Psalm is one of those twelve that are marked in the forehead with
Maschil; that is, a Psalm giving instruction. It consisteth of as many
verses as the year doth of weeks, and hath, like the year, its summer
and winter. The summer part is the former; wherein, the church having
reaped a most rich crop (the best blessings of heaven and earth) the
Psalmist breaketh forth into the praises of their gracious Benefactor,
"I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever": so he beginneth, and
so he goeth on a great way. Who now would expect anything but mercies,
and singing, and summer all the way? But summer ceaseth, and winter
commenceth, at [Psa 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038), "But thou
hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine anointed."
Mercies and singing are now turned into troubles and mourning. But
nothing shall you hear but bitter querimonies and expostulations till
you come to [Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052). There the good
man's come to himself again. Though God were angry with his people, he
cannot part with God in discontent. Though God had laden them with
crosses, he lifts up his head, and presents God with blessing; "Blessed
be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen." He blesseth him as well for
winter as for summer, for troubles as for mercies. And thus [Psa
89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052) having as much affinity with
[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001) in matter, as the last day
of the year hath with the first in season; if we circle the Psalm, and
bring both ends together, we find a fit resemblance between the year and
it.

The text is one of the Psalmist's winter-drops; a black line from that
pen, which erstwhile was so filled with joy, and wrote nothing but
rubrics. He complaineth in [Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047),
of the brevity of his own life (it was like a winter's day, very short);
in this, of the instability of man's life; as though he had said, I am
not the only mortal. Other men's lives, though haply clothed with more
comforts than mine, are altogether as mortal as mine; for his
interrogations are equivalent to strong negations. As to see sleep is to
sleep; so to see or taste death is to die. There is no surviving such a
sight. Death says, as God once to Moses, "There shall no man see me and
live." [Exo 33:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020). - Thomas Du-gard,
in a Funeral Sermon, 1648.

[Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

Death spares no rank, no condition of men. Kings as well as subjects,
princes as well as the meanest rustics are liable to this fatal stroke.
The lofty cedars and low shrubs; palaces and cottages are alike here.
Indeed, we read that Julius Caesar bid the master of the ship wherein he
was sailing, take courage notwithstanding the boisterous tempest,
because he had Caesar and his fortunes embarked in his vessel, as much
as to say, the element on which they then were could not prove fatal to
an emperor, to so great a one as he was. Our William surnamed Rufus
said, he never heard of a king that was drowned. And Charles the fifth,
at the Battle of Tunis, being advised to retire when the great ordnance
began to play, told them that it was never known that an emperor was
slain with great shot, and so rushed into the battle. But this we are
sure of, it was never known or heard that any king or crowned head
escaped the blow of death at last. The sceptre cannot keep off 'the
arrows that fly by day, and the sickness which wastes at noon-day;' it
is no screen, no guard against the shafts of death. We have heard of
great tyrants and usurpers who vaunted that they had the power of life
and death, and as absolutely disposed of men as Domitian did of flies;
but we have heard likewise that in a short time (and generally the
shorter the more furious they have been) their sceptres are fallen out
of their hands; their crowns are toppled off their heads, and they are
themselves snatched away by the King of Terrors. Or, if we speak of
those royal personages that are mild anti gentle, and like Vespasian are
the darlings and delight of the people, yet these no less than others
have their fatal hour, and their regal honour and majesty are laid in
the dust. The King doth not die, may be a Common-law maxim, but it is a
falsehood according to the laws of God and Nature, and the established
constitution of heaven. For God himself who hath said, "Ye are gods,"
hath also added, "Ye shall die like men." In the Escurial the palace of
the Kings of Spain, is their cemetery too; there their royal ashes lie.
So in the place where the kings and queens of England are crowned, their
predecessors are entombed: to tell them, as it were, that their crowns
exempt them not from the grave, and that there is no greatness and
splendour that can guard them from the arrest of death. He regards the
rich and wealthy no more than the poor and necessitous: he snatches
persons out of their mansion-houses and hereditary seats, as well as out
of almshouses and hospitals. His dominion is over masters as well as
servants, parents as well as children, superiors as well as inferiors. -
John Edwards.

[Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

"The boast of heraldry, the pomp of power,

And all that beauty, all that wealth e'er gave,

Await alike th' inevitable hour -

The paths of glory lead but to the grave.

"Can storied urn, or animated bust,

Back to its mansions call the fleeting breath

Can Honour's voice provoke the silent dust,

Or Flatt'ry soothe the dull cold ear of Death?"

\- Thomas Gray, 1716-1771.

[Psa 89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050)

"How I do bear in my bosom the reproach," etc. I take the reproaches of
thy servants and thine anointed, (1) as if they reproached me in mine
own particular; or, (2) in that they lie so heavy upon my heart; or, (3)
in that I am resolved quietly to endure them, and to swallow them down
in silence, as not being indeed able to shake them off; because in the
eye of reason our condition is at present so contrary to what we waited
for; or, (4) in that their reproaches came not to his ears by hearsay
only, but were openly to his face cast as it were into his bosom. -
Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050)

"I do bear in my bosom the reproach," etc. The reproach of religion and
of the godly doth lie near, and should lie near, the heart of every
lively member of the church. - David Dickson.

[Psa 89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)

"They have reproached the footsteps of thine anointed." This phrase is
obscure in diction, and therefore variously interpreted.

I. Some by the footsteps of Christ, judge that his advent in the flesh
is meant others refer the words to David, and take the meaning to be,
imitation of him. The first exposition yields this sense: Be mindful, O
Lord, of the reproach of thy enemies, wherewith they insult our
expectation of thy Anointed, and scoff at his advent as if it would
never come.

II\. The second interpretation is this. Recollect, O Lord, what contempt
thy enemies heap upon us on account of thy servant David, because we
fondly cherish his memory and his example, and nourish the hope of thy
Covenant with him, clinging tenaciously thereto.

III\. Thirdly, this clause may be so interpreted that by עקּבות, that
is, the heel, we may understand the extremities of the Kingdom of
Christ, of David. Thus we may imagine the enemies of God threw this in
the teeth of the people of Israel, that they had already come to the end
and extremity of the Kingdom of David. - Musculus.

[Psa 89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051) (second clause)

The Chaldee has, "They have scoffed at the tardiness of Thy Messiah's
footsteps." So Kimchi. "He delays so long, they say He will never come."
Compare [Pe2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004), [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009). The Arabic qaba is used in the
sense of delaying." - William Kay.

[Psa 89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)

"The footsteps," or foot soles, that is, the ways, life, actions, and
sufferings, [Psa 56:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#006) and [Psa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#005). This referred to Christ,
respecteth the oracle, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), that
the Serpent should bruise the foot-sole of the woman's seed; referred to
Christians which follow his footsteps, in suffering and dying with him,
that we may be glorified with him ([Pe1
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#021); [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017)); it noteth the scandal of the
Cross of Christ, "to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness." ([Co1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023); [Pe1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#013), [Pe1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#014).) The Chaldee understands it of
the slackness of the footsteps." - Henry Ainsworth.

[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052)

"Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen." Victory begins to
shine in the phrase, Blessed be Jehovah for evermore. Amen, and Amen.
Some think that these words are not the words of the Psalmist, because
they are of opinion that they do not agree with the preceding, but were
written by another, or added by the Collector of the Psalms as a
concluding doxology; or if the Psalmist wrote them, he did so merely in
finishing his prayer. But it is a matter of the greatest moment; for it
indicates the victory of faith, since he observes that after that grief,
the reproach of the heel is gloriously removed that the Messiah may
remain a victor for ever, having bruised the serpent's head, and taken
away from him in perpetuity all his power of hurting. That this should
certainly take place, he adds the seal of faith again and again: "Amen,
and Amen." - James Alting, 1618-1670.

[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052)

This doxology belongs alike to all the Psalms of the Third Book, and
ought not to be treated as if it were merely the last verse of the Psalm
to which it adjoins. It ought to be set forth in such a shape as would
enable and invite God's people to sing it as a separate formula of
praise, or in connection with any other Psalm. - William Binnie.

[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052)

As to the words Amen, and Amen, I readily grant that they are here
employed to mark the end of the third book of the Psalms. - John Calvin.

[Psalms 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 89:1</span></span>

1 I will sing of the mercies of the Lord forever: with my mouth will I
make known thy faithfulness to all generations.

2 For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever; thy faithfulness
shalt thou establish in the very heavens.

3 I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant,

4 Thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up thy throne to all
generations. Selah.

[Psa 89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001)

"I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever." A devout resolve, and
very commendable when a man is exercised with great trouble on account
of an apparent departure of the Lord from his covenant and promise.
Whatever we may observe abroad or experience in our own persons, we
ought still to praise God for his mercies, since they most certainly
remain the same, whether we can perceive them or not. Sense sings but
now and then, but faith is an eternal songster. Whether others sing or
not, believers must never give over; in them should be constancy of
praise, since God's love to them cannot by any possibility have changed,
however providence may seem to frown. We are not only to believe the
Lord's goodness, but to rejoice in it evermore; it is the source of all
our joy; and as it cannot be dried up, so the stream ought never to fail
to flow, or cease to flash in sparkling crystal of song. We have not
one, but many mercies to rejoice in, and should therefore multiply the
expressions of our thankfulness. It is Jehovah who deigns to deal out to
us our daily benefits, and he is the all-sufficient and immutable God;
therefore our rejoicing in him must never suffer diminution. By no means
let his exchequer of glory be deprived of the continual revenue which we
owe to it. Even time itself must not bound our praises - they must leap
into eternity; he blesses us with eternal mercies - let us sing unto him
for ever. "With my mouth will I make known thy faithfulness to all
generations." The utterances of the present will instruct future
generations. What Ethan sung is now a text-book for Christians, and will
be so as long as this dispensation shall last. We ought to have an eye
to posterity in all that we write, for we are the schoolmasters of
succeeding ages. Ethan first spoke with his mouth that which he recorded
with his pen - a worthy example of using both means of communication;
the mouth has a warmer manner than the pen, but the pen's speech lives
longest, and is heard farther and wider. While reading this Psalm, such
is the freshness of the style, that one seems to hear it gushing from
the poet's mouth; he makes the letters live and talk, or, rather, sing
to us. Note, that in this second sentence he speaks of faithfulness,
which is the mercy of God's mercies - the brightest jewel in the crown
of goodness. The grace of an unfaithful God would be a poor subject for
music, but unchangeable love and immutable promises demand everlasting
songs. In times of trouble it is the divine faithfulness which the soul
hangs upon; this is the bower anchor of the soul, its holdfast, and its
stay. Because God is, and ever will be, faithful, we have a theme for
song which will not be out of date for future generations; it will never
be worn out, never be disproved, never be unnecessary, never be an idle
subject, valueless to mankind. It will also be always desirable to make
it known, for men are too apt to forget it, or to doubt it, when hard
times press upon them. We cannot too much multiply testimonies to the
Lord's faithful mercy - if our own generation should not need them
others will: sceptics are so ready to repeat old doubts and invent new
ones that believers should be equally prompt to bring forth evidences
both old and new. Whoever may neglect this duty, those who are highly
favoured, as Ethan was, should not be backward.

[Psa 89:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#002)

"For I have said, Mercy shall be built up for ever." His heart was
persuaded of it, and he had affirmed it as an indisputable truth. He was
certain that upon a sure foundation the Lord intended to pile up a
glorious palace of goodness - a house of refuge for all people, wherein
the Son of David should for ever be glorified as the dispenser of
heavenly grace. "Thy faithfulness shalt thou establish in the very
heavens." This divine edifice, he felt assured, would tower into the
skies, and would be turreted with divine faithfulness even as its
foundations were laid in eternal love. God's faithfulness is no thing of
earth, for here nothing is firm, and all things savour of the changes of
the moon and the fickleness of the sea: heaven is the birthplace of
truth, and there it dwells in eternal rigour. As the blue arch above us
remains unimpaired by age, so does the Lord's truth; as in the firmament
he hangs his covenant bow, so in the upper heavens the faithfulness of
God is enthroned in immutable glory. This Ethan said, and this we may
say; come what will, mercy and faithfulness are built up by "the Eternal
Builder," and his own nature is the guarantee for their perpetuity. This
is to be called to mind whenever the church is in trouble, or our own
spirits bowed down with grief.

[Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003)

"I have made a covenant with my chosen, I have sworn unto David my
servant." This was the ground of the Psalmist's confidence in God's
mercy and truth, for he knew that the Lord had made a covenant of grace
with David and his seed, and confirmed it by an oath. Here he quotes the
very words of God, which were revealed to him by the Holy Spirit, and
are a condensation of the original covenant in 2 Samuel 7. Well might he
write in the former verse, "I have said," when he knew that Jehovah had
said, "I have sworn." David was the Lord's elect, and with him a
covenant was made, which ran along in the line of his seed until it
received a final and never-ending fulfilment in "the Son of David."
David's house must be royal: as long as there was a sepulchre in Judah,
David's seed must be the only rightful dynasty; the great "King of the
Jews" died with that title above his head in the three current languages
of the then known world, and at this day he is owned as king by men of
every tongue. The oath sworn to David has not been broken, though the
temporal crown is no longer worn, for in the covenant itself his kingdom
was spoken of as enduring for ever. In Christ Jesus there is a covenant
established with all the Lord's chosen, and they are by grace led to be
the Lord's servants, and then are ordained kings and priests by Christ
Jesus. How sweet it is to see the Lord, not only making a covenant, but
owning to it in after days, and bearing witness to his own oath; this
ought to be solid ground for faith, and Ethan, the Ezra-bite, evidently
thought it so. Let the reader and writer both pause over such glorious
lines, and sing of the mercies of the Lord, who thus avows the bonds of
the covenant, and, in so doing, gives a renewed pledge of his
faithfulness to it. "I have," says the Lord, and yet again "I have," as
though he himself was nothing loath to dwell upon the theme. We also
would lovingly linger over the ipsissima verba of the covenant made with
David, reading them carefully and with joy. They are thus recorded in
[Sa2 7:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012), "And when thy days be
fulfilled, and thou shalt sleep with thy fathers. I will set up thy seed
after thee, which shall proceed out of thy bowels, and I will establish
his kingdom. He shall build an house for my name, and I will stablish
the throne of his kingdom for ever. I will be his father and he shall be
my son. If he commit iniquity, I will chasten him with the rod of men,
and with the stripes of the children of men, But my mercy shall not
depart away from him, as I took it from Saul, whom I put away before
thee. And thine house and thy kingdom shall be established for ever
before thee: thy throne shall be established for ever." After reading
this, let us remember that the Lord has said to us by his servant
Isaiah, "I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even the sure
mercies of David."

[Psa 89:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#004)

"Thy seed will I establish for ever." David must always have a seed, and
truly in Jesus this is fulfilled beyond his hopes. What a seed David has
in the multitude which have sprung from him who was both his Son and his
Lord. The Son of David is the Great Progenitor, the second Adam, the
Everlasting Father, he sees his seed, and in them beholds of the travail
of his soul. "And build up thy throne to all generations." David's
dynasty never decays, but on the contrary, is evermore consolidated by
the great Architect of heaven and earth. Jesus is a king as well as a
progenitor, and his throne is ever being built up - his kingdom comes -
his power extends.

Thus runs the covenant; and when the church declines, it is ours to
plead it before the ever faithful God, as the Psalmist does in the
latter verses of this sacred song. Christ must reign, but why is his
name blasphemed and his gospel so despised? The more gracious Christians
are, the more will they be moved to jealousy by the sad estate of the
Redeemer's cause, and the more will they argue the case with the great
Covenant-maker, crying day and night before him, "Thy kingdom come."

"Selah." It would not be meet to hurry on. Rest, O reader, at the
bidding of this Selah, and let each syllable of the covenant ring in
thine ears; and then lift up the heart and proceed with the sacred poet
to tell forth the praises of the Lord.

[Psalms 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 89:5</span></span>

5 And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord: thy faithfulness
also in the congregation of the saints.

6 For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord? who among the
sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?

7 God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints, and to be
had in reverence of all them that are about him.

8 Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? or to thy
faithfulness round about thee?

9 Thou rulest the raging of the sea: when the waves thereof arise, thou
stillest them.

10 Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou hast
scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm.

11 The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine: as for the world and
the fulness thereof, thou hast founded them.

12 The north and the south thou hast created them: Tabor and Herman
shall rejoice in thy name.

13 Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right
hand.

14 Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne: mercy and
truth shall go before thy face.

[Psa 89:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#005)

"And the heavens shall praise thy wonders, O Lord." Looking down upon
what God had done, and was about to do, in connection with his covenant
of grace, all heaven would be filled with adoring wonder. The sun and
moon, which had been made tokens of the covenant, would praise God for
such an extraordinary display of mercy, and the angels and redeemed
spirits would sing, "as it were, a new song." "Thy faithfulness also in
the congregation of the saints." By which is probably intended the holy
ones on earth. So that the "whole family in heaven and earth" would join
in the praise. Earth and heaven are one in admiring and adoring the
covenant God: Saints above see most clearly into the heights and depths
of divine love, therefore, they praise its wonders; and saints below,
being conscious of their many sins and multiplied provocations of the
Lord, admire his faithfulness. The heavens broke forth with music at the
wonders of mercy contained in the glad tidings concerning Bethlehem, and
the saints who came together in the temple magnified the faithfulness of
God at the birth of the Son of David. Since that auspicious day, the
general assembly on high and the sacred congregation below have not
ceased to sing unto Jehovah, the Lord that keepeth covenant with his
elect.

[Psa 89:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#006)

"For who in the heaven can be compared unto the Lord;" therefore all
heaven worships him, seeing none can equal him. "Who among the sons of
the mighty can be likened unto the Lord?" - therefore the assemblies of
the saints on earth adore him, seeing none can rival him. Until we can
find one equally worthy to be praised, we will give unto the Lord alone
all the homage of our praise. Neither among the sons of the morning nor
the sons of the mighty can any peer be found for Jehovah, yea none that
can be mentioned in the same day; therefore he is rightly praised. Since
the Lord Jesus, both as God and as man, is far above all creatures, he
also is to be devoutly worshipped. How full of poetic fire is this
verse! How bold is the challenge! How triumphant the holy boasting! The
sweet singer dwells upon the name of Jehovah with evident exultation; to
him the God of Israel is God indeed and God alone. He closely follows
the language long before rehearsed by Miriam, when she sang, "Who is
like unto thee, O Jehovah, among the gods? Who is like thee?" His
thoughts are evidently flying back to the days of Moses and the marvels
of the Red Sea, when God was gloriously known by his incommunicable
name; there is a ring of timbrels in the double question, and a sound as
of the twinkling feet of rejoicing maidens. Have we no poets now? Is
there not a man among us who can compose hymns flaming with this spirit?
O, Spirit of the living God, be thou the inspirer of some master minds
among us!

[Psa 89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007)

"God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints." The holiest
tremble in the presence of the thrice Holy One; their familiarity is
seasoned with the pro-foundest awe. Perfect love casts out the fear
which hath torment, and works in lieu thereof that other fear which is
akin to joy unutterable. How reverent should our worship be! Where
angels veil their faces, men should surely bow in lowliest fashion. Sin
is akin to presumptuous boldness, but holiness is sister to holy fear.
"And to be had in reverence of all them that are about him." The nearer
they are the more they adore. If mere creatures are struck with awe, the
courtiers and favourites of heaven must be yet more reverent in the
presence of the Great King. God's children are those who most earnestly
pray "hallowed be thy name." Irreverence is rebellion. Thoughts of the
covenant of grace tend to create a deeper awe of God, they draw us
closer to him, and the more his glories are seen by us in that nearer
access, the more humbly we prostrate ourselves before his Majesty.

[Psa 89:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#008)

"O Lord God of hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee?" Or Jehovah,
God of Hosts, who is like thee, Mighty Jah. Alexander remarks, that the
infinite superiority of God to men and angels is here expressed, or
rather indicated, by an accumulation of descriptive titles. Here we have
the name which displays his self-existence, the title which denotes his
dominion over all his creatures, and an adjective which sets forth the
power with which he exercises his sovereignty. Yet this great and
terrible God has entered into covenant with men! Who would not reverence
him with deepest love? "Or to thy faithfulness round about thee." He
dwells in faithfulness; it is said to be the girdle of the loins of his
only-begotten Son, who is the express image of his person. None in all
creation is faithful as he is; even his angels might prove faithless if
he left them to themselves, but he cannot "lie unto David," or forget to
keep his oath. Men often fail in truth because their power is limited,
and then they find it easier to break their word than to keep it; but
the strong Jehovah is equal to all his engagements, and will assuredly
keep them. Unrivalled might and unparalleled truth are wedded in the
character of Jehovah. Blessed be his name that it is so.

[Psa 89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009)

"Thou rulest the raging of the sea." Always, even in the hour of ocean's
maddest fury, the Lord controls it. At the Red Sea the foaming billows
saw their God and stood upright in awe. "When the waves thereof arise,
thou stillest them." None else can do this; to attempt it would be
madness, but the Lord's "hush" silences the boisterous storm. So did the
Lord's Anointed calm the storms of Galilee, for he is Lord of all: so
also does the great Ruler of Providence evermore govern the fickle wills
of men, and quiet the tumults of the people. As a mother stills her babe
to sleep, so the Lord calms the fury of the sea, the anger of men, the
tempest of adversity, the despair of the soul, and the rage of hell.
"The Lord sitteth upon the floods, yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever,"
and in all his ruling and over-ruling he has respect unto his covenant;
therefore, although our house be not so with God as our hearts would
wish, yet we will rejoice in his covenant ordered in all things and
sure, and delight in him as all our salvation and all our desire.

[Psa 89:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#010)

"Thou hast broken Rahab in pieces as one that is slain." Egypt was
crushed like a corpse beneath the chariot wheels of the destroyer: its
pomp and glory were broken like the limbs of the dead in battle. Egypt
was Israel's ancient foe, and its overthrow was a theme to which devout
minds constantly reverted, as to a subject fit for their most exulting
songs. We, too, have seen our Rahab broken, our sins o'er thrown, and we
cannot but unite in the ascription of praise unto the Lord. "Thou hast
scattered thine enemies with thy strong arm." Thy strength has strewn
thy foes dead upon the plain, or compelled them to flee hither and
thither in dismay. Jehovah has overthrown his enemies with his own right
arm, unaided and alone. Proud Rahab, swelling in her fury like the sea,
was utterly broken and scattered before the Lord of Hosts.

[Psa 89:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#011)

"The heavens are thine, the earth also is thine." All things are alike
God's - rebellious earth as well as adoring heaven. Let us not despair
of the kingdom of truth; the Lord has not abdicated the throne of earth
or handed it over to the sway of Satan. "As for the world and the
fulness thereof, thou hast founded them." The habitable and cultivated
earth, with all its produce, owns the Lord to be both its Creator and
Sustainer, builder and upholder.

[Psa 89:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#012)

"The north and the south thou hast created them." North and south,
opposite poles, agree in this - that Jehovah fashioned them. "Tabor and
Hermon shall rejoice in thy name," that is to say, east and west are
equally formed by thee, and therefore give thee praise. Turn to all
points of the compass, and behold the Lord is there. The regions of snow
and the gardens of the sun are his dominions: both the land of the
dawning and the home of the setting sun rejoice to own his sway. Tabor
was on the west of Jordan and Hermon on the east, and it seems natural
to consider these two mountains as representatives of the east and west.
Keble paraphrases the passage thus: -

"Both Hermon moist, and Tabor lone,

They wait on thee with glad acclaim."

[Psa 89:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#013)

"Thou hast a mighty arm," omnipotence is thine in smiting or uplifting;
"strong is thy hand," thy power to create and grasp is beyond conception
great; "and high is thy right hand" - thy skill is incomparable, thy
favour ennobling, thy working glorious. The power of God so impressed
the Psalmist that in many ways he repeated the same thought: and indeed
the truth of God's omnipotence is so full of refreshment to gracious
hearts that it cannot be too much dwelt upon, especially when viewed in
connection with his mercy and truth, as in the following verse.

[Psa 89:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#014)

"Justice and judgment are the habitation of thy throne." They are the
basis of the divine government, the sphere within which his sovereignty
moves. God as a sovereign is never unjust or unwise. He is too holy to
be unrighteous, too wise to be mistaken; this is constant matter for joy
to the upright in heart. "Mercy and truth shall go before thy face."
They are the harbingers and heralds of the Lord; he calls these to the
front to deal with guilty and changeful man; he makes them, in the
person of the Lord Jesus, to be his ambassadors, and so poor, guilty man
is enabled to endure the presence of his righteous Lord. If mercy had
not paved the way, the coming of God to any man must have been swift
destruction.

Thus has the poet sung the glories of the covenant God. It was meet that
before he poured forth his lament he should record his praise, lest his
sorrow should seem to have withered his faith. Before we argue our case
before the Lord it is most becoming to acknowledge that we know him to
be supremely great and good, whatever may be the appearance of his
providence; this is such a course as every wise man will take who
desires to have an answer of peace in the day of trouble.

[Psalms 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 89:15</span></span>

15 Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound: they shall walk, O
Lord, in the light of thy countenance,

16 In thy name shall they rejoice all the day: and in thy righteous
shall they be exalted.

17 For thou art the glory of their strength: and in thy favour our how
shall be exalted.

18 For the Lord is our defence; and the Holy One of Israel is our king.

[Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015)

"Blessed is the people that know the joyful sound." He is a blessed God
of whom the Psalmist has been singing, and therefore they are a blessed
people who partake of his bounty, and know how to exult in his favour.
Praise is a peculiarly joyful sound, and blessed are those who are
familiar with its strains. The covenant promises have also a sound
beyond measure precious, and they are highly favoured who understand
their meaning and recognise their own personal interest in them, There
may also be a reference here to the blowing of trumpets and other
gladsome noises which attended the worship of Jehovah, who, unlike the
gods of the heathen was not adored by the shrieks of wretched victims,
or the yells and outcries of terror-stricken crowds, but by the joyful
shouts of his happy people. "They shall walk, O Lord, in the light of
thy countenance." For them it is joy enough that Jehovah is favourable
to them; all day long this contents them and enables them with vigour to
pursue their pilgrimage. Only a covenant God could look with favour upon
men, and those who have known him in that relationship learn to rejoice
in him, yea, to walk with him in fellowship, and to continue in
communion with him we give God our ear and hear the joyful sound, he
will shew us his face and make us glad. While the sun shines, men walk
without stumbling as to their feet, and when the Lord smiles on us we
live without grief as to our souls.

[Psa 89:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#016)

"In thy name shall they rejoice all the day." And good cause they have
for so doing, for to the soul which, in Christ Jesus, has entered into
covenant with God, every attribute is a fountain of delight. There is no
hour in the day, and no day in our life, in which we may not rejoice in
the name, person, and character of the Lord. We need no other reason for
rejoicing. As philosophers could make merry without music, so can we
rejoice without carnal comforts; the Lord All-sufficient is an
all-sufficient source of joy. "And in thy righteousness, shall they be
exalted." By the Lord's righteous dealings the saints are uplifted in
due time, however great may have been the oppression and the depression
from which they may have suffered. In the righteousness which the
covenant supplies, which is entirely of the Lord, believers are set on
high, in a secure and blessed position, so that they are full of sacred
happiness. If God were unjust, or if he regarded us as being without
righteousness, we must be filled with misery, but as neither of these
things is so, we are exalted indeed, and would extol the name of the
Lord.

[Psa 89:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#017)

"For thou art the glory of their strength." Surely in the Lord Jehovah
have we both righteousness and strength. He is our beauty and glory when
we are strong in him, as well as our comfort anti sustenance when we
tremble because of conscious weakness in ourselves. No man whom the Lord
makes strong may dare to glory in himself, he must ascribe all honour to
the Lord alone; we have neither strength nor beauty apart from him. "And
in thy favour our horn shall be exalted." By the use of the word our the
Psalmist identifies himself with the blessed people, and this indicates
how much sweeter it is to sing in the first person than concerning
others. May we have grace to claim a place among those in covenant with
God, in Christ Jesus, for then a sense of divine favour will make us
also bold and joyous. A creature full of strength and courage lifts up
its horn, and so also does a believer become potent, valiant, and
daring. The horn was an eastern ornament, worn by men and women, or at
least is so at this day, and by the uplifting of this the wearer showed
himself to be in good spirits, and in a confident frame of mind: we wear
no such outward vanities, but our inward soul is adorned and made
bravely triumphant when the favour of God is felt by us. Worldly men
need outward prosperity to make them lift up their heads, but the saints
find more than enough encouragement in the secret love of God.

[Psa 89:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#018)

"For the Lord is our defence." Whoever else may defend us, he is our
ultimate Defender and Shield. "And the Holy One of Israel is our king."
He who protects should govern, our defender should be acknowledged as
our king. Kings are called the shields of nations, and the God of Israel
is both our Ruler and Defence. Another sense may be that Israel's
defender and king was of the Lord, belonging to him and sent by him;
even the protectors of the land being themselves protected by the Lord.
The title "the Holy One of Israel" is peculiarly delightful to the
renewed heart. God is one, we worship none beside. He is holiness
itself, the only being who can be called "the Holy One," and in his
perfection of character we see the most excellent reason for our faith.
He who is holy cannot break his promises, or act unjustly concerning his
oath and covenant. Moreover, he is the Holy One of Israel, being
specially the God of his own elect, ours by peculiar ties, ours for ever
and ever. Who among the saints will not rejoice in the God of election?
Are they not indeed a people greatly blessed who can call this God their
God for ever and ever?

[Psalms 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 89:19</span></span>

19 Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one, and saidst, I have laid
help upon one that is mighty; I have exalted one chosen out of the
people.

20 I have found David my servant; with my holy oil have I anointed him:

21 With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall
strengthen him.

22 The enemy shall not exact upon him, nor the son of wickedness afflict
him.

23 And I will beat down his foes before his face, and plague them that
hate him

24 But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him: and in my name
shall his horn be exalted.

25 I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the
rivers.

26 He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father, my God, and the rock of my
salvation.

27 Also I will make him my firstborn, higher than the kings of the
earth.

28 My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall
stand fast with him

29 His seed also will I make to endure for ever, and his throne as the
days of heaven.

30 If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments;

31 If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments;

32 Then will I visit their transgression with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes.

33 Nevertheless my lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him, nor
suffer my faithfulness to fail.

34 My covenant will I not break, nor alter the thing that is gone out of
my lips.

35 Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David.

36 His seed shall endure for ever, and his throne as the sun before me.

37 It shall be established for ever as the moon, and as a faithful
witness in heaven. Selah.

[Psa 89:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#019)

"Then thou spakest in vision to thy holy one." The Psalmist returns to a
consideration of the covenant made with David. The holy one here meant
may be either David or Nathan the prophet, but most probably the latter,
for it was to him that the word of the Lord came by night. [Sa2
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#004), [Sa2
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005). God condescends to employ his
gracious ministers to be the means of communication between himself and
his favoured ones, - even to King David the covenant was revealed by
Nathan the prophet; thus the Lord puts honour upon his ministers. "I
have laid help upon one that is mighty." The Lord had made David a
mighty man of valour, and now he covenants to make him the helper and
defender of the Jewish state. In a far fuller sense the Lord Jesus is
essentially and immeasurably mighty, and on him the salvation of his
people rests by divine appointment, while his success is secured by
divine strength being engaged to be with him. Let us lay our faith where
God has laid our help. "I have exalted one chosen out of the people."
David was God's elect, elect out of the people, as one of themselves,
and elect to the highest position in the state. In his extraction,
election, and exaltation, he was an eminent type of the Lord Jesus, who
is the man of the people, the chosen of God, and the king of his church.
Whom God exalts let us exalt. Woe unto those who despise him, they are
guilty of contempt of court before the Lord of Hosts, as well as of
rejecting the Son of God.

[Psa 89:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#020)

"I have found David my servant." David was discovered by the Lord among
the sheepfolds and recognised as a man of gracious spirit, full of faith
and courage, and therefore fit to be leader in Israel. "With my holy oil
have I anointed him." By the hand of Samuel, David was anointed to be
king long before he ascended the throne. The verse must also be
expounded of the Prince Emanuel; he became the servant of the Lord for
our sakes, the Father having found for us in his person a mighty
deliverer, therefore upon him rested the Spirit without measure, to
qualify him for all the offices of love to which he was set apart. We
have not a Saviour self-appointed and unqualified, but one sent of God
and divinely endowed for his work. Our Saviour Jesus is also the Lord's
Christ, or anointed. The oil with which he is anointed is God's own oil,
and holy oil; he is divinely endowed with the Spirit of holiness.

[Psa 89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021)

"With whom my hand shall be established," or, "with whom my hand shall
ever be present." The almightiness of God abides permanently with Jesus
in his work as Redeemer and ruler of his people. "Mine arm also shall
strengthen him." The fulness of divine power shall attend him. This
covenant promise ought to be urged in prayer before the Lord, for the
great lack of the church at this time is power. We have everything
except the divine energy, and we must never rest content until we see it
in full operation among us. Jesus must be among us, and then there will
be no lack of force in any of our church agencies.

[Psa 89:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#022)

"The enemy shall not exact upon him;" he shall not be vexed and
persecuted as a helpless debtor by an extortionate creditor. "Nor the
son of wickedness afflict him." Graceless men shall no longer make his
life a burden. David had in his earlier history been hunted by Saul like
a partridge on the mountains, and though he had striven in all things to
act justly towards Saul, because he was the Lord's anointed, yet Saul
was never content with his displays of loyalty, but persecuted him
relentlessly. The covenant, therefore, engaged that his life of hardship
and oppression should come to an end for ever; it did so in David's own
person, and more remarkably still in the life of Solomon his son. Who
does not in all this see a type of the Lord Jesus, who though he was
once seized for our debts, and also evil entreated by the ungodly, is
now so exalted that he can never be exacted upon any more, neither can
the fiercest of his enemies vex him again. No Judas can now betray him
to death, no Pilate can deliver him to be crucified. Satan cannot tempt
him, and our sins cannot burden him.

[Psa 89:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#023)

"And I will beat down his foes before his face" - crushing them and
their plans. God himself thus fights the battles of his Son, and
effectually overturns his foes. "And plague them that hate him," or
smite his haters. May none of us learn the terror of this threatening,
which is surely being fulfilled upon all those unbelievers who have
rejected the Son of God, and died in the hardness of their hearts. The
prophecy is also having another fulfilment in the overthrow of systems
of error, and the vexation caused to their promoters. There is no such
plague to bad men as the prosperity of the cause of Jesus.

[Psa 89:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#024)

"But my faithfulness and my mercy shall be with him." These were the two
attributes of which the Psalmist began to sing in [Psa
89:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#001) of the Psalm, doubtless because
he saw them to be most prominent in the covenant which he was about to
plead with God. To David and his seed, God was gracious and faithful,
and though through their sin the literal kingdom lost all its glory and
the dynasty became obscure, yet the line remained unbroken and more than
all its former glory was restored by the enthronisation of him who is
Prince of the kings of the earth, with whom the Lord's mercy and
faithfulness remain for ever. All who are in Jesus should rejoice, for
they shall prove in their own experience the faithful mercy of the Lord.
"And in my name shall his horn be exalted." Gloriously does the Lord
Jesus lift up his head, raised to the highest place of honour by the
mandate of the Father. David and Solomon in their dignity were but faint
types of the Lord Jesus, who is far above all principalities and powers.
The fullest exaltation of the horn of Jesus is yet to come in that
millenial period which is hastening on.

[Psa 89:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#025)

"I will set his hand also in the sea, and his right hand in the rivers."
He shall reach far beyond the little rivers which stand for boundaries
in Palestine; he shall by his power embrace all lands from sea to sea.
He shall lave his hand in the ocean and his right hand in earth's
mightiest streams. As monarchs hold in their hands a globe to set forth
their dominion over the earth, he shall grasp the more unconquerable
sea, and be Lord of all. This power is to be given him of the Lord, and
is to be abiding; so we understand the words "I will set." The verse has
in it a voice of good cheer concerning sailors and all dwellers on the
waters; the hand of Jesus is over them, and as he found his first
apostles by the sea, so we trust he still finds earnest disciples there.

[Psa 89:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#026)

"He shall cry unto me, Thou art my father." David's seed would be a
praying race, and so in the main they were, and when they were not they
smarted for it. The Lord Jesus was pre-eminent in prayer, and his
favourite mode of address was "Father." Never was there a son more
filial in his cries than "the Firstborn among many brethren." God had
one Son without sin, but he never had a son who lived without prayer.
"My God," so our Lord called his Father when upon the cross. "And the
rock of my salvation." It was to his Father that he turned for help when
in sore anguish in Gethsemane, and to him he committed his spirit in the
article of death. In this filial crying the true sons should imitate
him. This is the common language of the elect family: adoption,
reverence, trust, must all speak in their turns, and will do if we are
heirs according to promise. To say to God "Thou art my father" is more
than learning and talent can teach us; the new birth is essential to
this. Reader, hast thou the nature of a child and the spirit of one who
can cry, "Abba, Father"?

[Psa 89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027)

"Also I will make him my firstborn." Among the kings the seed of David
were to be most favoured and indulged with most love and paternal regard
from God: but in Jesus we see this in the highest degree verified, for
he has pre-eminence in all things, inasmuch as by inheritance he has a
more glorious name than any other, and is "higher than the kings of the
earth." Who can rival heaven's Firstborn? The double portion and the
government belong to him. Kings are honoured when they honour him, and
those who honour him are kings! In the millenial glory it shall be seen
what the covenant stores up for the once despised Son of. David, but
even now faith sees him exalted as King of kings and Lord of lords. Lo,
we bow before thee, thou Heir of all things! Our sheaves do obeisance to
thy sheaf. All thy mother's children call thee blessed. Thou art he whom
thy brethren shall praise. Jesus is no servant of princes, nor would he
have his bride, the church, degrade herself by bowing before kings and
eating the bread of a pensioner at their hands. He and his kingdom are
higher than the kings of the earth. Let the great ones of the earth be
wise and submit to him, for he is Lord, and he is the governor among the
nations.

[Psa 89:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#028)

"My mercy will I keep for him for evermore." The kings of David's line
needed mercy, and mercy prevented their house from utterly perishing
until the Son of Mary came. He needs no mercy for himself, but he is a
representative man, and the mercy of God is required for those who are
in him: for such mercy is kept for ever. "And my covenant shall stand
fast with him." With Jesus the covenant is ratified both by blood of
sacrifice and by oath of God; it cannot be cancelled or altered, but is
an eternal verity, resting upon the veracity of one who cannot lie. What
exultation fills our hearts as we see that the covenant of grace is sure
to all the seed because it stands fast with him with whom we are
indissolubly united.

[Psa 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029)

"His seed also will I make to endure for ever." David's seed lives on in
the person of the Lord Jesus, and the seed of Jesus in the persons of
believers. Saints are a race that neither death nor hell can kill: Rome
and its priests, with their inquisition and other infernal cruelties,
have laboured to exterminate the covenant seed, but "vain is their rage,
their efforts vain." As long as God lives, his people must live. "And
his throne as the days of heaven." Jesus reigns on, and will reign till
the skies shall fall, yea, and when the heavens shall pass away with a
great noise, and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, his throne
shall stand. What a blessed covenant is this! Some commentators talk of
conditions, but we fail to see any; the promises are as absolute as they
can possibly be, and if any conditions as to the conduct of the favoured
individuals can be conceived, they are disposed of in the succeeding
verses.

[Psa 89:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#030)

"If his children forsake my law, and walk not in my judgments." It was
possible, terribly possible, that David's posterity might wander from
the Lord; indeed they did so, but what then? Was the mercy of God to
pass away from David's seed? - far from it. So, too, the seed of the Son
of David are apt to start aside, but are they therefore cast away? Not a
single word gives liberty for such an idea, but the very reverse.
Expositors in their fear of Calvinistic doctrine shake off the fear of
adding to the word of God, or else they would not have spent their time
in talking about "the conditions" of this absolutely unconditional
covenant.

[Psa 89:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#031)

"If they break my statutes, and keep not my commandments." The dreadful
"if" is suggested again, and the sad case is stated in other forms, But
if it should be so, what then? Death and rejection? Ah, no; Blessed be
God, No! If their sin be negative or positive, if it be forsaking or
profanation; if either judgments or commandments or both be violated,
yet there is not a word as to final destruction, but the very reverse.
Legalism will import its ifs, but the Lord slays the ifs as fast as they
rise. Eternal shalls and wills make glorious havoc among the and buts.

[Psa 89:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#032)

"Then will I visit their transgression with the rod." Not with the
sword, not with death and destruction; but still with a smarting,
tingling, painful rod. Saints must smart if they sin, God will see to
that. He hates sin too much not to visit it, and he loves his saints too
well not to chasten them. God never plays with his rod, he lays it well
home to his children, he visits them with it in their houses, bodies,
and hearts, and makes them know that he is grieved with their ways. He
smites home and chastens "their iniquity with stripes," which are either
many or few in proportion as the heart is properly affected by them. The
rod is a covenant blessing, and is meant to be used. As sin is so
frequent, the rod never rests long together; in God's family the rod is
not spared, or the children would be spoiled.

[Psa 89:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#033)

"Nevertheless." And a glorious nevertheless too! "Nevertheless my
lovingkindness will I not utterly take from him." O glorious
fear-killing sentence! This crowns the covenant with exceeding glory.
Mercy may seem to depart from the Lord's chosen, but it shall never
altogether do so. Jesus still enjoys the divine favour, and we are in
him, and therefore under the most trying circumstances the Lord's
lovingkindness to each one of his chosen will endure the strain. If the
covenant could be made void by our sins it would have been void long ere
this; and if renewed its tenure would not be worth an hour's purchase if
it had remained dependant upon us. God may leave his people, and they
may thereby suffer much and fall very low, but utterly and altogether he
never can remove his love from them; for that would be to cast a
reflection upon his own truth, and this he will never allow, for he
adds, "nor suffer my faithfulness to fail." Man fails in all points but
God in none. To be faithful is one of the eternal characteristics of
God, in which he always places a great part of his glory: his truth is
one of his peculiar treasures and crown jewels, and he will never endure
that it should be tarnished in any degree. This passage sweetly assures
us that the heirs of glory shall not be utterly cast off. Let those deny
the safety of the saints who choose to do so, we have not so learned
Christ. We believe in the gospel rod, but not in the penal swats for the
adopted sons.

[Psa 89:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#034)

"My covenant will I not break." It is his own covenant. He devised it
drew up the draft of it, and voluntarily entered into it; he therefore
thinks much of it. It is not a man's covenant, but the Lord claims it as
his own. It is an thing among men for one to be a "covenant-breaker,"
and such an opprobrious epithet shall never be applicable to the Most
High. "Nor alter the thing that is gone out of my lips." Alterations and
afterthoughts belong to short-sighted beings who meet with unexpected
events which operate upon them to change their minds, but the Lord who
sees everything from the beginning has no such reason for shifting his
ground. He is besides immutable in his nature and designs, and cannot
change in heart, and therefore not in promise. A word once given is
sacred; once let a promise pass our lips and honesty forbids that we
should recall it, - unless indeed the thing promised be impossible, or
wicked, neither of which can happen with the promises of God. How
consoling it is to see the Lord thus resolute. He, in the words before
us, virtually reasserts his covenant and rehearses his engagements. This
he does at such length, and with such reiteration, that it is evident he
takes pleasure in that most ancient and solemn contract. If it were
conceivable that he had repented of it, he would not be found dwelling
upon it, and repeating it with renewed emphasis.

[Psa 89:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#035)

"Once have I sworn by my holiness that I will not lie unto David."
Because he could swear by no greater he swore by himself, and by that
peculiar attribute, which is his highest glory being the subject of
threefold adoration by all the hosts of heaven. God here pledges the
crown of his kingdom, the excellent beauty of his person, the essence of
his nature. He does as good as say that if he ceases to be true to his
covenant he will have forfeited his holy character. What more can he
say? In what stronger language can he express his unalterable adherence
to the truth of his promise? An oath is the end of all strife; it ought
to be the end of all doubt on our part. We cannot imagine that God could
lie, yet he puts it so - that if the covenant were not kept by him, he
would regard it as a lie. Here is ground for strong confidence; may our
faith be of such a nature as these assurances will warrant.

[Psa 89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036)

"His seed shall endure for ever." David's line in the person of Jesus is
an endless one, and the race of Jesus, as represented in successive
generations of believers, shows no sign of failure. No power, human or
Satanic, can break the Christian succession; as saints die others shall
rise up to fill their places, so that till the last day, the day of
doom, Jesus shall have a seed to serve him. "And his throne as the sun
before me." In our Lord Jesus the dynasty of David remains upon the
throne. Jesus has never abdicated, nor gone into banishment. He reigns,
and must reign so long as the sun continues to shine upon the earth. A
seed and a throne are the two great promises of the covenant, and they
are as important to us as to our Lord Jesus himself; for we are the seed
who must endure for ever, and we are protected and ennobled by that King
whose royalties are to last for ever.

[Psa 89:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#037)

"It shall be established for ever as the moon." The kingdom may wax and
wane to mortal eyes, but it shall still abide as long as the moon walks
in her silver beauty. "And as a faithful witness in heaven." The most
stable part of the universe is selected as a type of Messiah's kingdom,
and both sun and moon are made to be symbols of its long endurance.
Whatever else there is in the sky which faithfully witnesses to the
unbending course of nature is also called upon to be a sign of the
Lord's truth. When heaven and earth witness, and the Lord himself
swears, there remains no excuse for doubting, and faith joyfully reposes
in confident expectation.

[Psalms 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 89:38</span></span>

38 But thou hast cast off and abhorred, thou hast been wroth with thine
anointed.

39 Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant: thou hast pro-faned
his crown by casting it to the ground.

40 Thou hast broken down all his hedges; thou hast brought his strong
holds to ruin.

41 All that pass by the way spoil him: he is a reproach to his
neighbours.

42 Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries; thou hast made
all his enemies to rejoice.

43 Thou hast also turned the edge of his sword, and hast not made him to
stand in the battle.

44 Thou hast made his glory to cease, and cast his throne down to the
ground.

45 The days of his youth hast thou shortened: thou hast covered him with
shame. Selah.

46 How long, Lord? wilt thou hide thyself for ever? shall thy wrath burn
like fire?

47 Remember how short my time is: wherefore hast thou made all men in
vain?

48 What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death? shall he deliver
his soul from the hand of the grave? Selah.

49 Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth?

50 Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants; how I do bear in my
bosom the reproach of all the mighty people.

51 Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord; wherewith they have
reproached the footsteps of thine anointed.

52 Blessed be the Lord for evermore. Amen, and Amen.

[Psa 89:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#038)

"But thou hast cast off and abhorred." The Lord had promised not to cast
off the seed of David, and yet it looked as if he had done so, and that
too in the most angry manner, as if he loathed the person of the king.
God's actions may appear to us to be the reverse of his promises, and
then our best course is to come before him in prayer and put the matter
before him just as it strikes our apprehension. We are allowed to do
this, for this holy and inspired man did so unrebuked, but we must do it
humbly and in faith. "Thou hast been wroth with thine anointed." He
deserved the wrath, doubtless, but the Psalmist's point is, that this
appeared to him to conflict with the gracious covenant. He puts the
matter plainly, and makes bold with the Lord, and the Lord loves to have
his servants so do; it shows that they believe his engagements to be
matters of fact.

[Psa 89:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#039)

"Thou hast made void the covenant of thy servant." The dispensations of
providence looked as if there had been a disannulling of the sacred
compact, though indeed it was not so. "Thou hast profaned his crown by
casting it to the ground." The king had been subject to such sorrow and
shame that his diadem had been as it were taken from his head, dashed on
the earth, and rolled in the mire. He was a theocratic monarch, and the
Lord, who gave him his crown, took it from him and treated it with
contempt, - at least so it seemed. In these sad days also we may utter
the same plaint, for Jesus is not acknowledged in many of the churches,
and usurpers have profaned his crown. When we hear of kings and queens
set up as "heads of the church," and a priest styled "The Vicar of
Christ," while parliaments and courts take upon themselves to legislate
for the church of God, we may bitterly lament that things should come to
so wretched a pass. Few are there who will acknowledge the crown rights
of King Jesus, the very subject is considered to be out of date. O Lord
how long!

[Psa 89:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#040)

"Thou hast broken down all his hedges." He was no longer sheltered from
the slanderous assaults of contemptuous tongues; the awe which should
guard the royal name had ceased to separate him from his fellows. The
"divinity which doth hedge a king" had departed. Hitherto, the royal
family had been like a vine within an enclosure, but the wall was now
laid low, and the vine was unprotected. It is sorrowfully true that in
many places the enclosures of the church have been destroyed, the line
of demarcation between the church and the world has almost vanished, and
godless men fill the sacred offices. Alas, O Lord God, shall it be
always so? Shall thy true vine be deserted by thee, thou great
Husbandman? Set up the boundaries again, and keep thy church as a
vineyard reserved for thyself. "Thou hast brought his strongholds to
ruin." The forts of the land were in the possession of the enemy and
were dismantled, the defences of the kingdom were overthrown. Thus has
it happened that precious truths, which were the bulwarks of the church,
have been assailed by heresy, and the citadels of sound doctrine have
been abandoned to the foe. O God, how canst thou suffer this? As the God
of truth, wilt thou not arise and tread down falsehood?

[Psa 89:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#041)

"All that pass by the way spoil him." Idle passers-by, who have nothing
else to do, must needs have a pluck at this vine, and they do it without
difficulty, since the hedges are gone. Woe is the day when every petty
reasoner has an argument against religion, and men in their cups are
fluent with objections against the gospel of Jesus. Although Jesus on
the cross is nothing to them, and they pass him by without inquiring
into what he has done for them, yet they can loiter as long as you will,
if there be but the hope of driving another nail into his hands and
helping to crucify the Lord afresh. They will not touch him with the
finger of faith, but they pluck at him with the hand of malice. "He is a
reproach to his neighbours," David's successors had unneighbourly
neighbours, who were a reproach to good fellowship, because they were so
ready to reproach their neighbour. The Jews were much taunted by the
surrounding Gentiles when at any time they fell into trouble. At this
time the people of God, who follow the Lord fully, are subject to a
thousand reproaches, and some of them of the most bitter kind. These
reproaches are really the reproach of Christ, and, at bottom, are meant
for him. Shall it always be so? Shall he, who deserves to be universally
adored, be subject to general scorn? Where, then, O God, is thy
faithfulness to thy covenant.

[Psa 89:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#042)

"Thou hast set up the right hand of his adversaries." Thou hast done it,
thou, who hast sworn to give him help and victory, thou hast, instead
thereof sided with his enemies, and lent them thy strength, so that they
have gained the supremacy. "Thou hast made all his enemies to rejoice."
They are boasting over him, and are glorying in his defeat, and this is
done by thyself. O God, - how is this? Where is the covenant? Hast thou
forgotten thine own pledges and promises?

[Psa 89:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#043)

"Also turned the edge of his sword." When he goes to war he is as
unsuccessful as though his sword refused to cut, and gave way like a
sword of lead. His weapons fail him. "And hast not made him to stand in
the battle." His heart fails him as well as his sword - he wavers, he
falls. This has happened even to naturally brave men - a terrible dread
has unmanned them. At this present the church has few swords of true
Jerusalem metal; her sons are pliable, her ministers yield to pressure.
We need men whose edge cannot be turned, firm for truth, keen against
error, sharp towards sin, cutting their way into men's hearts. Courage
and decision are more needed now than ever, for charity towards heresy
is the fashionable vice, and indifference to all truth, under the name
of liberal-mindedness, is the crowning virtue of the age. The Lord send
us men of the school of Elias, or, at least, of Luther and Knox.

[Psa 89:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#044)

"Thou hast made his glory to cease." The brightness of his reign and the
prosperity of his house are gone, his fame is tarnished, his honour
disgraced. "And cast his throne down to the ground." He has lost his
power to govern at home or to conquer abroad. This happened to kings of
David's line, and, more grievous to tell, it is happening in these days
to the visible kingdom of the Lord Jesus. Where are the glories of
Pentecost? Where is the majesty of the Reformation? Where does his
kingdom come among the sons of men? Woe is unto us, for the glory has
departed, and the gospel throne of Jesus is hidden from our eyes!

[Psa 89:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#045)

"The days of his youth hast thou shortened." The time of the king's
energy was brief, he grew feeble before his time. "Thou hast covered him
with shame." Shame was heaped upon him because of his premature decay
and his failure in arms. This was very grievous to the writer of this
Psalm, who was evidently a most loyal adherent of the house of David. In
this our day we have to bemoan the lack of rigour in religion - the
heroic days of Christianity are over, her raven locks are sprinkled with
untimely grey. Is this according to the covenant? Can this be as the
Lord has promised? Let us plead with the righteous Judge of all the
earth, and beseech him to fulfil his word wherein he has promised that
those who wait upon him shall renew their strength.

Selah. The interceding poet takes breath amid his lament, and then turns
from describing the sorrows of the kingdom to pleading with the Lord.

[Psa 89:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#046)

"How long, Lord?" The appeal is to Jehovah, and the argument is the
length of the affliction endured. Chastisement with a rod is not a
lengthened matter, therefore he appeals to God to cut short the time of
tribulation. "Wilt thou hide thyself for ever?" Hast thou not promised
to appear for thy servant - wilt thou then for ever forsake him? "Shall
thy wrath burn like fire?" Shall it go on and on evermore till it
utterly consume its object? Be pleased to set a bound! How far wilt thou
go? Wilt thou burn up the throne which thou hast sworn to perpetuate?
Even thus we would entreat the Lord to remember the cause of Christ in
these days. Can he be so angry with his church as to leave her much
longer? How far will he suffer things to go? Shall truth die out, and
saints exist no more? How long will he leave matters to take their
course? Surely he must interpose soon, for, if he do not, true religion
will be utterly consumed, as it were, with fire.

[Psa 89:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#047)

"Remember how short my time is." If so brief, do not make it altogether
bitter. If thine anger burn on it will outlast this mortal life, and
then there will be no time for thy mercy to restore me. Some expositors
ascribe these words, and all the preceding verses, to the state of the
Lord Jesus in the days of his humiliation, and this gives an instructive
meaning; but we prefer to continue our reference all through to the
church, which is the seed of the Lord Jesus, even as the succeeding
kings were the seed of David. We, having transgressed, are made to feel
the rod, but we pray the Lord not to continue his stripes lest our whole
life be passed in misery. "Wherefore hast thou made all men in vain?" If
the Lord do not shine upon his work we live for nothing - we count it no
longer life if his cause does not prosper. We live if the King lives,
but not else. Everything is vanity if religion be vanity. If the kingdom
of heaven should fail, everything is a failure. Creation is a blot,
providence an error, and our own existence a hell, if the faithfulness
of God can fail and his covenant of grace can be dissolved. If the
gospel system can be disproved, nothing remains for us or any other of
the sons of men, which can render existence worth the having.

[Psa 89:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#048)

"What man is he that liveth, and shall not see death?" All must die.
None of our race can answer to the question here propounded except in
the negative; there is none that can claim to elude the arrows of death.
"Shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave?" Neither by
strength, wisdom, nor virtue can any man escape the common doom, for to
the dust return we must. Since then we must all die, do not make this
life all wretchedness, by smiting us so long, O Lord. Thy Son our
covenant Head died, and so also shall we; let us not be so deserted of
thee in this brief span that we shall be quite unable to testify to thy
faithfulness; make us not feel that we have lived in vain. Thus the
brevity of life and the certainty of death are turned into pleas with
the Most High. "Selah." Here we rest again, and proceed to further
pleadings.

[Psa 89:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#049)

"Lord, where are thy former lovingkindnesses, which thou swarest unto
David in thy truth?" Here he comes to grand pleading, hand to hand work
with the covenant angel. We may remind the Lord of his first deeds of
love, his former love to his church, his former favour to ourselves.
Then may we plead his oath, and beg him to remember that he has sworn to
bless his chosen; and we may wrestle hard also, by urging upon him his
own character, and laying hold upon his inviolable truth. When things
look black we may bring forth our strong reasons, and debate the case
with our condescending God, who has himself said, "Come now, and let us
reason together."

[Psa 89:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#050)

"Remember, Lord, the reproach of thy servants." By reason of their great
troubles they were made a mock of by ungodly men, and hence the Lord's
pity is entreated. Will a father stand by and see his children insulted?
The Psalmist entreats the Lord to compassionate the wretchedness brought
upon his servants by the taunts of their adversaries, who jested at them
on account of their sufferings. "How I do bear in my bosom the reproach
of all the mighty people." The Psalmist himself laid the scorn of the
great and the proud to heart. He felt as if all the reproaches which
vexed his nation were centred in himself, and therefore in sacred
sympathy with the people he poured out his heart. We ought to weep with
those that weep; reproach brought upon the saints and their cause ought
to burden us: if we can hear Christ blasphemed, and see his servants
insulted, and remain unmoved, we have not the true Israelite's spirit.
Our grief at the griefs of the Lord's people may be pleaded in prayer,
and it will be acceptable argument.

There is one interpretation of this verse which must not be passed over;
the original is, "Remember my bearing in my bosom all the many nations;"
and this may be understood as a pleading of the church that the Lord
would remember her because she was yet to be the mother of many nations,
according to the prophecy of Ps. 77. She was as it were ready to give
birth to nations, but how could they be born if she herself died in the
meanwhile? The church is the hope of the world; should she expire, the
nations would never come to the birth of regeneration, but must abide in
death.

[Psa 89:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#051)

"Wherewith thine enemies have reproached, O Lord." Here is another
forcible point; the scoffers are the Lord's enemies as well as ours, and
their reproach falls upon him as well as upon us; therefore we cry for
the Lord's interposition. When Jehovah's own name is in the quarrel,
surely he will arise. "Wherewith they have reproached the footsteps of
thine anointed." Tracking him and finding occasion to blaspheme at every
turn; not only watching his words and actions, but even his harmless
steps. Neither Christ nor his church can please the world, whichever way
we turn scoffers will rail. Does this verse refer to the oft-repeated
sarcasm - "Where is the promise of his coming?" Is the reproach aimed at
the delays of the Messiah, those long-expected footfalls which as yet
are unheard? O Lord, how long shall this thread-bare taunt continue? How
long? How long?

"Come, for creation groans

Impatient of thy stay,

Worn out with these long years of ill,

These ages of delay.

"Come, in thy glorious might,

Come with the iron rod,

Scattering thy foes before thy face.

Most Mighty Son of God."

[Psa 89:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#052)

"Blessed be the Lord for evermore." He ends where he began; he has
sailed round the world and reached port again. Let us bless God before
we pray, and while we pray, and when we have done praying, for he always
deserves it of us. If we cannot understand him, we will not distrust
him. When his ways are beyond our judgment we will not be so foolish as
to judge; yet we shall do so if we consider his dealings to be unkind or
unfaithful. He is, he must be, he shall be, for ever, our blessed God.
"Amen, and Amen." All our hearts say so. So be it, Lord, we wish it over
and over again. Be thou blessed evermore.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 90](psa090)

</div>
