<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa001)  [Next](psa003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 2:0</span></span>

Title - We shall not greatly err in our summary of this sublime Psalm if
we call it The Psalm of Messiah the Prince; for it sets forth as in a
wondrous vision the tumult of the people against the Lord's anointed,
the determinate purpose of God to exalt his own Son, and the ultimate
reign of that Son over all his enemies. Let us read it with the eye of
faith, beholding, as in a glass, the final triumph of our Lord Jesus
Christ over all his enemies. Lowth has the following remarks upon this
Psalm: "The establishment of David upon his throne, notwithstanding the
opposition made to it by his enemies, is the subject of the Psalm. David
sustains in it a twofold character, literal and allegorical. If we read
over the Psalm, first with an eye to the literal David, the meaning is
obvious, and put beyond all dispute by the sacred history. There is
indeed an uncommon glow in the expression and sublimity in the figures,
and the diction is now and then exaggerated, as it were on purpose to
intimate, and lead us to the contemplation of higher and more important
matters concealed within. In compliance with this admonition, it we take
another survey of the Psalm as relative to the person and concerns of
the spiritual David, a noble series of events immediately rises to view,
and the meaning becomes more evident, as well as more exalted. The
colouring which may perhaps seem too bold and glaring for the king of
Israel, will no longer appear so when laid upon his great Antitype.
After we have thus attentively considered the subjects apart, let us
look at them together, and we shall behold the full beauty and majesty
of this most charming poem. We shall perceive the two senses very
distinct from each other, yet conspiring in perfect harmony, and bearing
a wonderful resemblance in every feature and lineament, while the
analogy between them is so exactly preserved, that either may pass for
the original from whence the other was copied. New light is continually
cast upon the phraseology, fresh weight and dignity are added to the
sentiments, till, gradually ascending from things below to things above,
from human affairs to those that are Divine, they bear the great
important theme upwards with them, and at length place it in the height
and brightness of heaven."

Division - This Psalm will be best understood if it be viewed as a
four-fold picture. (In [Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md), [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md), [Psa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003).md) the Nations are raging; ([Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md) to [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006).md) the Lord in heaven derides them;
([Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md) to [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009).md) the Son proclaims the decree; and
(from [Psa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010) to end.md) advice is
given to the kings to yield obedience to the Lord's anointed. This
division is not only suggested by the sense, but is warranted by the
poetic form of the Psalm, which naturally falls into four stanzas of
three verses each.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm - Shows us the nature of sin, and the terrible results of it
if it could reign.

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md) - Nothing is more irrational
than irreligion. A weighty theme.

The reasons why sinners rebel against God, stated, refuted, lamented,
and repented of.

The crowning display of human sin in man's hatred of the Mediator.

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md) and [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md) - Opposition to the gospel,
unreasonable and ineffectual - Two sermons by John Newton.

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md) and [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md) - These verses show that all trust
in man in the service of God is vain. Inasmuch as men oppose Christ, it
is not good to hang our trust upon the multitude for their number, the
earnest for their zeal, the mighty for their countenance, or the wise
for their counsel, since all these are far oftener against Christ than
for him.

[Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md) - "Spurgeon's Sermons," No,
495, "The Greatest Trial on Record."

[Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003.md) - The true reason of the
opposition of sinners to Christ's truth, viz.: their hatred of the
restraints of godliness.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md) - God's derision of, the
rebellious, both now and hereafter.

[Psa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005.md) - The voice of wrath. One of
a series of sermons upon the voices of the divine attributes.

[Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md) - Christ's sovereignty.

1\. The opposition to it: "yet."

2\. The certainty of its existence: "Yet have I set."

3\. The power which maintains it: "have I set."

4\. The place of its manifestation: "my holy hill of Zion."

5\. The blessings flowing from it.

[Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md) - The divine decree
concerning Christ, in connection with the decrees of election and
providence. The Sonship of Jesus.

This verse teacheth us faithfully to declare and humbly to claim, the
gifts and calling that God hath bestowed upon us. - Thomas Wilcocks.

[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md) - Christ's inheritance -
William Jay.

Prayer indispensable. - Jesus must ask.

[Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009.md) - The ruin of the wicked.
Certain, irresistible, terrible, complete, irretrievable, "like a
potter's vessel."

The destruction of systems of error and oppression to be expected. The
gospel an iron rod quite able to break mere pots of man's making.

[Psa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md) - True wisdom, fit for kings
and judges, lies in obeying Christ.

The gospel, a school for those who would learn how to rule and judge
well. They may consider its principles, its exemplar, its spirit, etc.

[Psa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011.md) - Mingled experience. See
the case of the women returning from the sepulchre. [Mat
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#008.md). This maybe rendered a very
comforting subject, if the Holy Spirit direct the mind of the preacher.

True religion; compound of many virtues and emotions;

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md) - An earnest invitation.

1\. The command

2\. The argument.

3\. The benediction upon the obedient.

"Spurgeon's Sermon," No. 260.

Last clause - Nature, object, and blessedness of saying faith.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

"Why do nations make a noise," tumultuate or rage? The Hebrew verb is
not expressive of an internal feeling, but of the outward agitation
which denote it. There may be an allusion to the rolling and roaring of
the sea, often used as an emblem of popular commotion, both in the
Scriptures and the classics. The past tense of this verb (why have they
raged?) refers to the commotion as already begun, while the future in
the next clause expresses its continuance. - J. A. Alexander, D.D.,
1850.

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

"Rage." The word with which Paul renders this in the Greek denotes rage,
pride, and restiveness, as of horses that neigh, and rush into the
battle. Εφρύαξαυ, from Φρυάσσω, to snort or neigh, properly applied to a
high-mettled horse. See [Act 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025.md).

[Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

"A vain thing." A medal was struck by Diocletian, which still remains
bearing the inscription, "The name of Christians being extinguished."
And in Spain, two monumental pillars were raised, on which were written:
- I. "Diocletian Jovian. Maximian Herculeus Cζsares Augusti, for having
extended the Roman Empire in the east and the west, and for having
extinguished the name of Christians, who brought the Republic to ruin."
II. "Diocletian Jovian Maximian Herculeus Cζsares Augusti, for having
adopted Galerius in the east, for having everywhere abolished the
superstition of Christ, for having extended the worship of the gods." As
a modern writer has elegantly observed: "We have here a monument raised
by Paganism, over the grave of its vanquished foe. But in this, the
people imagined a vain thing; so far from being deceased, Christianity
was on the eve of its final and permanent triumph, and the stone guarded
a sepulchre empty as the urn which Electra washed with her tears.
Neither in Spain, nor elsewhere, can be pointed out the burial place of
Christianity; it is not, for the living have no tomb."

[Psa 2:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

Herod, the fox, plotted against Christ, to hinder the course of his
ministry and mediatorship, but he could not perform his enterprise; 'tis
so all along, therefore it is said, "Why do the heathen imagine a vain
thing?" A vain thing, because a thing successless, their hands could not
perform it. It was vain, not only because there was no true ground of
reason why they should imagine or do such a thing, but vain also because
they laboured in vain, they could not do it, and therefore it follows,
"He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them in
derision." The Lord see what fools they, are, and men (yea, themselves)
shall see it. The prophet gives us an elegant description to this
purpose. [Isa 59:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#005.md), [Isa
59:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#006.md). "They weave the spider's web....
Their webs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover
themselves with their works." As if he had said, they have been devising
and setting things in a goodly frame to catch flies; they have been
spinning a fine thread out of their brains, as the spider doth out of
her bowels; such is their web, but when they have their web they cannot
cut it out, or make it up into a garment. They shall go naked and cold,
notwithstanding all their spinning and weaving, all their plotting and
devising. The next broom that comes will sweep away all their webs and
the spiders too, except they creep apace. God loves and delights to
cross worldly proverbs and worldly craft. - Joseph Caryl, 1647.

[Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md)

The many had done their part, and now the mighty show themselves. - John
Trapp.

[Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md)

"They banded themselves against the Lord, and against his Anointed." But
why did they band themselves against the Lord, or against his Anointed?
What was their desire of him? To have his goods? No, he had none for
himself; but they were richer than he. To have his liberty? Nay, that
would not suffice them, for they had bound him before. To bring the
people into dislike of him? Nay, that would not serve them, for they had
done so already, until even his disciples were fled from him. What would
they have then? his blood? Yea, "they took counsel," saith Matthew, "to
put him to death." They had the devil's mind, which is not satisfied but
with death. And how do they contrive it? He saith, "they took counsel
about it." - Henry Smith, 1578.

[Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md)

"Against Jehovah and against his Anointed." What an honour it was to
David to be thus publicly associated with Jehovah! And, because he was
his anointed, to be an object of hatred and scorn to the ungodly world!
If this very circumstance fearfully augmented the guilt, and sealed the
doom of these infatuated heathen, surely it was that which above
everything else would preserve the mind of David calm and serene, yea,
peaceful and joyful notwithstanding the proud and boastful vauntiness of
his enemies.... When writing this Psalm David was like a man in a storm,
who hears only the roaring of the tempest, or sees nothing but the
raging billows threatening destruction on every side of him. And yet his
faith enabled him to say, "The people imagine a vain thing." They cannot
succeed. They canot defeat the counsels of heaven. They cannot injure
the Lord's Anointed. - David Pitcairn, 1851.

[Psa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#003.md)

Resolved they were to run riot as lawless, and aweless, and therefore
they slander the sweet laws of Christ's kingdom as bonds and thick
cords, which are signs of slavery. [Jer
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#002.md), [Jer
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#006.md), [Jer
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#007.md). But what saith our Saviour? "My
yoke is easy, and my burden is light." It is no more burden to a
regenerate man than wings to a bird. The law of Christ is no more as
bands and cords, but as girdles and garters which gird up his loins and
expedite his course. - John Trapp.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

"He that sitteth in the heavens." Hereby it is clearly intimated, (1)
that the Lord is far above all their malice and power, (2) that he seeth
all their plots, looking down on all; (3)that he is of omnipotent power,
and so can do with his enemies as he lists. "Our God is in the heavens:
he hath done whatsoever he pleased." [Psa
115:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#003.md). - Arthur Jackson, 1643.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

"He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh," etc. Sinners' follies are
the just sport of God's infinite wisdom and power; and those attempts of
the kingdom of Satan, which in our eyes are formidable, in his are
despicable. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

"He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh." They scoff at us, God
laughs at them. Laugh? This seems a hard word at the first view: are the
injuries of his saints, the cruelties of their enemies, the derision,
the persecution of all that are round about us, no more but matter of
laughter? Severe Cato thought that laughter did not become the gravity
of Roman consuls; that it is a diminution of states, as another told
princes; and is it attributed to the Majesty of heaven? According to our
capacities, the prophet describes God, as ourselves would be in a merry
disposition, deriding vain attempts. He laughs, but it is in scorn; he
scorns, but it is with vengeance. Pharaoh imagined that by drowning the
Israelite males, he had found a way to root their name from the earth;
but when at the same time, his own daughter, in his own court, gave
princely education to Moses, their deliverer, did not God laugh?

Short is the joy of the wicked. Is Dagon put up to his place again?
God's smile shall take off his head and his hands, and leave him neither
wit to guide nor power to subsist.... We may not judge of God's works
until the fifth act: the case, deplorable and desperate in outward
appearance, may with one smile from heaven find a blessed issue. He
permitted his temple to be sacked and rifled, the holy vessels to be
profaned and caroused in; but did not God's smile make Belshazzar to
tremble at the handwriting on the wall? Oh, what are his frowns, if his
smiles be so terrible! - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

The expression, "He that sitteth in the heavens," at once fixes our
thoughts on a being infinitely exalted above man, who is of the earth,
earthly. And when it is said, "He shall laugh," this word is designed to
convey to our minds the idea, that the greatest confederacies amongst
kings and peoples, and their most extensive and vigorous preparations,
to defeat his purposes or to injure his servants, are in his sight
altogether insignificant and worthless. He looks upon their poor and
puny efforts, not only without uneasiness or fear, but he laughs at
their folly; he treats their impotency with derision. He knows how he
can crush them like a moth when he pleases, or consume them in a moment
with the breath of his mouth, How profitable it is for us to be reminded
of truths such as these! Ah! it is indeed "a vain thing" for the
potsherds of the earth to strive with the glorious Majesty of Heaven. -
David Pitcairn.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

"The Lord," in Hebrew, Adonai, mystically signifieth my stays, or my
sustainers - my pillars. Our English word "Lord" hath much the same
force, being contracted of the old Saxon word "Llaford," or "Hlafford,"
which cometh from "Laef," to sustain, refresh, cherish. - Henry
Ainsworth.

[Psa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

"He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh at them: the Lord shall have
them in derision." This tautology or repetition of the same thing, which
is frequent in the Scriptures, is a sign of the thing being established:
according to the authority of the patriarch Joseph ([Gen
41:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#032).md), where, having interpreted the
dreams of Pharaoh he said, "And for that the dream was doubled unto
Pharaoh twice; it is because the thing is established by God, and God
will shortly bring it to pass." And therefore, here also, "shall laugh
at them," and "shall have them in derision," is a repetition to show
that there is not a doubt to be entertained that all these things will
most surely come to pass. And the gracious Spirit does all this for our
comfort and consolation, that we may not faint under temptation, but
lift up our heads with the most certain hope; because" he that shall
come will come, and will not tarry." [Heb
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037.md). - Martin.Luther.

[Psa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005.md)

"Vex them;" either by horror of conscience, or corporal plagues; one way
or the other he will have his pennyworths of them, as he always has had
of the persecutors of his people. - John Trapp.

[Psa 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005.md), [Psa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009.md)

It is easy for God to destroy his foes.... Behold Pharaoh, his wise men,
his hosts, and his horses plouting and plunging, and sinking like lead
in the Red Sea. Here is the end of one of the greatest plots ever formed
against God's chosen. Of thirty Roman emperors, governors of provinces,
and others high in office, who distinguished themselves by their zeal
and bitterness in persecuting the early Christians, one became speedily
deranged after some atrocious cruelty, one was slain by his own son, one
became blind, the eyes of one started out of his head, one was drowned,
one was strangled, one died in a miserable captivity, one fell dead in a
manner that will not bear recital, one died of so loathsome a disease
that several of his physicians were put to death because they could not
abide the stench that filled his room, two committed suicide, a third
attempted it, but had to call for help to finish the work, five were
assassinated by their own people or servants, five others died the most
miserable and excruciating deaths, several of them having an untold
complication of diseases, and eight were killed in battle, or after
being taken prisoners, Among these was Julian the apostate. In the days
of his prosperity he is said to have pointed his dagger to heaven
defying the Son of God, whom he commonly called the Galilean. But when
he was wounded in battle, he saw that all was over with him, and he
gathered up his clotted blood, and threw it into the air, exclaiming,
"Thou hast conquered, O thou Galilean." Voltaire has told us of the
agonies of Charles IX of France, which drove the blood through the pores
of the skin of that miserable monarch, after his cruelties and treachery
to the Huguenots. - William S. Plummer, D.D., LL.D., 1867.

[Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md)

"Yet have I set my King." Notice - 1. The royal office and character of
our glorious Redeemer: he is a King, "This name he hath on his vesture
and on his thigh." [Rev 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016.md). 2. The
authority by which he reigns; he is "my King," says God the Father, and
I have set him up from everlasting: "The Father judgeth no man; but hath
committed all judgment unto the Son." The world disowns his authority,
but I own it; I have set him, I have "given him to be head over all
things to the church." 3. His particular kingdom over which he rules; it
is over "my holy hill of Zion" - an eminent type of the gospel church.
The temple was built upon Mount Zion and therefore called a holy hill.
Christ's throne is in his church, it is his headquarters, and the place
of his peculiar residence. Notice the firmness of the divine purpose
with respect unto this matter. "Yet have I set" him "King;" i.e.,
whatever be the plots of hell and earth to the contrary, he reigns by
his Father's ordination - Stephen Charnode, 1628-1680.

[Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md)

"Yet have I set my King," etc. - Jesus Christ is a threefold King.
First, his enemies' King; secondly, his saints' King; thirdly, his
Father's King;

First. Christ is his enemies' King, that is, he is King over his
enemies. Christ is a King above all kings. What are all the mighty men,
the great, the honourable men of the earth to Jesus Christ? They are but
like a little bubble in the water; for if all the nations, in comparison
to God, be but as the drop of the bucket, or the dust of the balance, as
the prophet speaks in [Isa 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015.md), how
little then must be the kings of the earth! Nay, beloved, Christ Jesus
is not only higher than kings, but he is higher than the angels; yea, he
is the head of angels; and, therefore, all the angels in heaven are
commanded to worship him. [Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012.md)
[Heb 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#006.md).... He is King over all
kingdoms, over all nations, over all governments, over all powers, over
all people [Dan 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014.md).... The very
heathen are given to Christ, and the uttermost parts of the earth for
his possession. [Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md).

Secondly. Jesus Christ is his saints' King. He is King of the bad, and
of the good; but as for the wicked, he rules over them by his power and
might; but the saints, he rules in them by his Spirit and graces. Oh!
this is Christ's spiritual kingdom, and here he rules in the hearts of
his people, here he rules over their consciences, over their wills, over
their affections, over their judgments and understandings, and nobody
hath anything to do here but Christ. Christ is not only the King of
nations, but the King of saints; the one he rules over, the other he
rules in.

Thirdly. Jesus Christ is his Father's King too, and so his Father calls
him: "I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion." Well may he be our
King, when he is God's King. But you may say, how is Christ the Father's
King? Because he rules for his Father. There is a twofold kingdom of God
committed to Jesus Christ; first, a spiritual kingdom, by which he rules
in the hearts of his people, and so is King of saints; and, secondly, a
providential kingdom, by which he rules the affairs of this world, and
so he is King of nations. - Condensed from William Dyer's Christ's
Famous Titles, 1665.

[Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md)

"Zion." The name "Zion" signifies a "distant view" (speculam.) And the
church is called "a distant view" (specula), not only because it views
God and heavenly things by faith (that is, afar off), being wise unto
the things that are above, not unto those that are on the earth: but
also, because there are within her true viewers, or seers, and watchmen
in the spirit, whose office it is to take charge of the people under
them, and to watch against the snares of enemies and sins; and such are
called in the Greek bishops ( ἐπίσκοποι), that is, spyers or seers; and
you may for the same reason give them, from the Hebrew, the appellation
of Zionians of Zioners. Martin Luther.

[Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md)

The dispute concerning the eternal filiation of our Lord betrays more of
presumptuous curiosity than of reverent faith. It is an attempt to
explain where it is far better to adore. We could give rival expositions
of this verse, but we forbear. The controversy is one of the most
unprofitable which ever engaged the pens of theologians. - C.H.S.

[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md)

"Ask of me." The priesthood doth not appear to be settled upon, Christ
by any other expression than this, "Ask of me." The Psalm speaks of his
investiture in his kingly office; the apostle refers this to his
priesthood, his commission, for both took date at the same time; both
bestowed, both confirmed by the same authority. The office of asking is
grounded upon the same authority as the honour of king. Ruling belonged
to his royal office, asking to his priestly. After his resurrection, the
Father gives him a power and command of asking. - Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md)

As the limner looks on the person whose picture he would take, and draws
his lines to answer him with the nearest similitude that he can, so God
looks on Christ as the archetype to which he will Conform the saint, in
suffering, in grace, in glory; yet so that Christ hath the pre-eminence
in all. Every saint must suffer, because Christ suffered: Christ must
not have a delicate body under a crucified head; yet never any suffered,
or could, what he endured. Christ is holy, and therefore so shall every
saint be, but in an inferior degree; an image cut in clay cannot be so
exact as that engraved on gold. Now, our conformity to Christ appears,
that as the promises made to him were performed upon his prayers to his
Father, his promises made to his saints are given to them in the same
way of prayer: "Ask of me," saith God to his Son, "and I shall give
thee." And the apostle tells us, "Ye have not, because ye ask not." God
hath promised support to Christ in all his conflicts. [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md). "Behold my servant, whom I
uphold;" yet he prayed "with strong cries and tears," when his feet
stood within the shadow or death. A seed is promised to him, and victory
over his enemies, yet for both these he prays. Christ towards us acts as
a, king, but towards his Father as a priest. All he speaks to God is by
prayer and intercession. So the saints, the promise makes them kings
over their lusts, conquerors over their enemies; but it makes them
priests towards God, by prayer humbly to sue out those great things
given in the promise. - William Gurnall, 1617-1679.

[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md)

It will be observed in our Bible that two words of verse eight are in
italics, intimating that they are not translations of the Hebrew, but
additions made for the purpose of elucidating the meaning. Now if the
"thee" and the "for" are left out, the verse will read thus, "Ask of me,
and I shall give the heathen, thine inheritance, and thy possession, the
uttermost parts of the earth." And this reading is decidedly preferable
to the other. It implies that by some previous arrangement on the part
of God, he had already assigned an inheritance of the heathen, and the
possession of the earth, to the person of whom he says, "Thou art my
Son." And when God says, "I will give," etc., he reveals to his
Anointed, not so much in what the inheritance consisted, and what was
the extent of possession destined for him, as the promise of his
readiness to bestow it. The heathen were already "the inheritance," and
the ends of the earth "the possession," which God had purposed to give
to his Anointed. Now he says to him, "Ask of me," and he promises to
fulfil his purpose. This is the idea involved in the words of the text,
and the importance of it will become more apparent, when we consider its
application to the spiritual David, to the true Son of God, "whom he
hath appointed the heir of all things."

[Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009.md)

The "rod" has a variety of meanings in Scripture, It might be of
different materials, as it was employed for different purposes. At an
early period, a wooden rod came into use as one of the insignia of
royalty, under the name of sceptre. By degrees the sceptre grew in
importance, and was regarded as characteristic of an empire, or of the
reign of some particular king. A golden sceptre denoted wealth and pomp.
The right, or straight sceptre of which we read in [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006.md), is expressive of the justice and
uprightness, the truth and equity, which shall distinguish Messiah's
reign, after his kingdom on earth has been established. But when it is
said in [Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015.md), that he, "whose
name is called the Word of God," will smite the nations, and "rule them
with a rod of iron," if the rod signifies "his sceptre," then the "iron"
of which it is made must be designed to express the severity of the
judgments which this omnipotent "King of kings" will inflict on all who
resist his authority. But to me it appears doubtful whether the "rod of
iron" symbolizes the royal sceptre of the Son of God at his second
advent. It is mentioned in connection with "a sharp sword," which leads
me to prefer the opinion that it also ought to be regarded as a weapon
of war; at all events, the "rod of iron" mentioned in the Psalm we are
endeavouring to explain, is evidently not the emblem of sovereign power,
although represented as in the hands of a king, but an instrument of
correction and punishment. In this sense the word "rod" is often
used.... When the correcting rod, which usually was a wand or cane, is
represented, as in the[Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md), to
be of "iron" it only indicates how weighty, how severe, how effectual
the threatened chastisement will be - it will not merely bruise, but it
will break. "Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron."

Now it is just such a complete breaking as would not readily be effected
excepting by an iron rod, that is more fully expressed in the following
clause of the verse, "Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's
vessel." The completeness of the destruction, however, depends on two
things. Even an iron rod if gently used, or used against a hard and firm
substance, might cause little injury; but, in the case before us, it is
supposed to be applied with great force, "Thou shalt dash them;" and it
is applied to what will prove as brittle and frangible as "a potter's
vessel" - "Thou shalt dash them in pieces." ... Here, as is other
respects, we must feel that the predictions and promises of this Psalm
were but very partially fulfilled in the history of the literal David.
Their real accomplishment, their awful completion, abides the day when
the spiritual David shall come in glory and in majesty as Zion's King,
with a rod of iron to dash in pieces the great antichristian confederacy
of kings and peoples, and to take possession of his long-promised and
dearly-purchased inheritance. And the signs of the times seem to
indicate that the coming of the Lord draws nigh. - David Pitcairn.

[Psa 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md)

"Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings," etc. As Jesus is King of kings and
Judge of judges, so the gospel is the teacher of the greatest and
wisest. If any are so great as to spurn its admonitions, God will make
little of them; and if they are so wise as to despise its teachings,
their fancied wisdom shall make fools of them. The gospel takes a high
tone before the rulers of the earth, and they who preach it should, like
Knox and Melville, magnify their office by bold rebukes and manly
utterances even in the royal presence. A clerical sycophant is only fit
to be a scullion in the devil's kitchen. - C.H. S.

[Psa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011.md)

"Serve the Lord with fear." This fear of God qualifies our joy. If you
abstract fear from joy, joy will become light and wanton; and if you
abstract Joy from fear, fear then will become slavish. - William Bates,
D.D., 1625-1699.

[Psa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011.md)

"Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling." There are two
kinds of serving and rejoicing in God. First, a serving in security, and
a rejoicing in the Lord without fear; these are peculiar to hypocrites,
who are secure, who please themselves, and who appear to themselves to
be not unuseful servants, and to have great merit on their side,
concerning whom it is said ([Psa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005).md), "Thy Judgments are far above
out of his sight;" and also afterwards ([Psa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001).md), "There is no fear of God before
his eyes." These do righteousness without judgment at all times; and
permit not Christ to be the Judge to be feared by all, in whose sight no
man living is justified. Secondly, a serving with fear and a rejoicing
with trembling; these are peculiar to the righteous who do righteousness
at all times, and always rightly attemper both; never being without
judgments, on the one hand, by which they are terrified and brought to
despair of themselves and of all their own works; nor without that
righteousness, on the other, on which they rest., and in which they
rejoice in the mercy of God. It is the work of the whole lives of these
characters to accuse themselves in all things, and in all things to
justify and praise God. And thus they fulfil that word of Proverbs,
"Blessed is the man that feareth alway" ([Pro
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#014).md); and also that of [Phi
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#004.md), "Rejoice in the Lord alway."
Thus, between the upper and nether mill-stone ([Deu
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#006).md), they are broken in pieces and
humbled, and the husks thus being bruised off, they come forth the all
pure wheat of Christ. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#011.md)

The fear of God promotes spiritual joy; it is the morning star which
ushers in the sunlight of comfort. "Walking in the fear of God, and in
the comfort of the Holy Ghost." God mingles joy with fear, that fear may
not be slavish. - Thomas Watson, 1660.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"Kiss," a sign of love among equals: [Gen
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#004.md); [Sa1
20:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1020.htm#041.md); [Rom
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md); [Co1
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#020.md). Of subjection in inferiors:
[Sa1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001.md). Of religious adoration in
worshippers: [Kg1 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md); [Job
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#027.md). - John Richardson, Bishop of
Ardagh, 1655.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"Kiss the Son, lest he be angry." From the Person, the Son, we shall
pass to the act (Osculamini, kiss the Son); in which we shall see, that
since this is an act which licentious men have depraved (carnal men do
it, and treacherous men do it - Judas betrayed his Master by a kiss),
and yet God commands this, and expresses love in this; everything that
hath, or may be abused, must not therefore be abandoned; the turning of
a thing out of the way, is not a taking of that thing away, but good
things deflected to ill uses by some, may be by others reduced to their
first goodness. Then let us consider and magnify the goodness of God,
that hath brought us into this distance, that we may kiss the Son, that
the expressing of this love lies in our hands, and that, whereas the
love of the church, in the Old Testament, even in the Canticle, went no
farther but to the Osculatur me (O that he would kiss me with the kisses
of his mouth! [Sol 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001).md), now, in the
Christian church, and in the visitation of a Christian soul, he hath
invited us, enabled us to kiss him, for he is presentially amongst us.
This leads us to give an earnest persuasion and exhortation to kiss the
Son, with all those affections, which we shall there find to be
expressed in the Scriptures, in that testimony of true love, a holy
kiss. But then lest that persuasion by love should not be effectual and
powerful enough to us, we shall descend from that duty, to the danger,
from love, to fear, "lest he be angry;" and therein see first, that God,
who is love, can be angry; and then, that this God who is angry here, is
the Son of God, he that hath done so much for us, and therefore in
justice may be angry; he that is our Judge, and therefore in reason we
are to fear his anger: and then, in a third branch, we shall see how
easily this anger departs - a kiss removes it.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"Kiss the Son." That is, embrace him, depend upon him all these ways: as
thy kinsman, as thy sovereign; at thy going, at thy coming; at thy
reconciliation, in the truth of religion in thyself, in a peaceable
unity with the church, in a reverent estimation of those men, and those
means whom he sends. Kiss him, and be not ashamed of kissing him; it is
that which the spouse desired, "I would kiss thee, and not be despised."
[Sol 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001.md). If thou be despised for
loving Christ in his gospel, remember that when David was thought base,
for dancing before the ark, his way was to be more base. If thou be
thought frivolous for thrusting in at service, in the forenoon, be more
frivolous, and come again in the afternoon: "Tanto major requies, quanto
ab amore Jesu nulla requies;""The more thou troublest thyself, or art
troubled by others for Christ, the more peace thou hast in Christ."
..."Lest he be angry." Anger, as it is a passion that troubles, and
disorders, and discomposes a man, so it is not in God; but anger, as it
is a sensible discerning of foes from friends, and of things that
conduce or disconduce to his glory, so it is in God. In a word, Hilary
hath expressed it well: "Pna patientis, ira decernentis;" "Man's
suffering is God's anger." When God inflicts such punishments as a king
justly incensed would do, then God is thus angry. Now here, our case is
heavier; it is not this great, and, almighty, and majestical God, that
may be angry - that is like enough; but even the Son, whom we must kiss,
may be angry; it is not a person whom we consider merely as God, but as
man; nay, not as man neither, but a worm, and no man, and he may be
angry, and angry to our ruin.... "Kiss the Son,": and he will not be
angry; if he be, kiss the rod, and he will be angry no longer - love him
lest he be; fear him when he is angry: the preservative is easy, and so
is the restorative too: the balsamum of this kiss is all, to suck
spiritual milk out of the left breast, as well as out of the right, to
find mercy in his judgments, reparation in his ruins, feasts in his
lents, joy in his anger. - From Sermons of John Donne, D.D., Dean of St.
Paul's, 1621-1631.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"Kiss the Son." To make peace with the Father, kiss the Son. "Let him
kiss me," was the church's prayer. [Sol
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002.md). Let us kiss him - that be our
endeavour. Indeed, the Son must first kiss us by his mercy, before we
can kiss him by our piety. Lord, grant in these mutual, kisses and
interchangeable embraces now, that we may come to the plenary, Wedding
supper, hereafter; when the choir of heaven, even the voices of angels,
shall sing epithalamiums, nuptial songs, at the bridal of the spouse of
the Lamb. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"If his wrath be kindled but a tittle;" the Hebrew is, if his nose or
nostril be kindled but a little; the nostril, being an organ of the body
in which wrath shows itself, is put for wrath itself, Paleness and
snuffing of the nose are symptoms of anger. In our proverbials, to take
a thing in snuff, is to take it in anger. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012.md)

"His wrath." Unspeakable must the wrath of God be when it is kindled
fully, since perdition may come upon the kindling of it but a little. -
John Newton

[Psalms 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 2:1</span></span>

1 Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing?

2 The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel
together, against the Lord, and against his anointed, saying,

3 Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.

We have, in these first three verses, a description of the hatred of
human nature against the Christ of God. No better comment is needed upon
it than the apostolic song in [Act
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027.md), [Act
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028.md) : "For of a truth against thy
holy child Jesus, whom thou hast anointed, both Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered
together, for to do whatsoever thy hand and thy counsel determined
before to be done." The Psalm begins abruptly with an angry
interrogation; and well it may: it is surely but little to be wondered
at, that the sight of creatures in arms against their God should amaze
the psalmist's mind. We see the heathen raging, roaring like the sea,
tossed to and fro with restless waves, as the ocean in a storm; and then
we mark the people in their hearts imagining a vain thing against God.
Where there is much rage there is generally some folly, and in this case
there is an excess of it. Note, that the commotion is not caused by the
people only, but their leaders foment the rebellion. "The kings of the
earth set themselves." In determined malice they arrayed themselves in
opposition against God. It was not temporary rage, but deep-seated hate,
for they set themselves resolutely to withstand the Prince of Peace.
"And the rulers take counsel together." They go about their warfare
craftily, not with foolish haste, but deliberately. They use all the
skill which art can give. Like Pharaoh, they cry, "Let us deal wisely
with them." O that men were half as careful in God's service to serve
him wisely, as his enemies are to attack his kingdom craftily. Sinners
have their wits about them, and yet saints are dull. But what say they?
what is the meaning of this commotion? "Let us break their bands
asunder." "Let us be free to commit all manner of abominations. Let us
be our own gods. Let us rid ourselves of all restraint." Gathering
impudence by the traitorous proposition of rebellion, they add - "let us
cast away;" as if it were an easy matter, - "let us fling off 'their
cords from us.'" What! O ye kings, do ye think yourselves Samsons? and
are the bands of Omnipotence but as green withs before you? Do you dream
that you shall snap to pieces and destroy the mandates of God - the
decrees of the Most High - as if they were but tow? And do ye say, "Let
us cast away their cords from us?" Yes! There are monarchs who have
spoken thus, and there are still rebels upon thrones. However mad the
resolution to revolt from God, it is one in which man has persevered
ever since his creation, and he continues in it to this very day. The
glorious reign of Jesus in the latter day will not be consummated, until
a terrible struggle has convulsed the nations. His coming will be as a
refiner's fire, and like fuller's soap, and the day thereof shall burn
as an oven. Earth loves not her rightful monarch, but clings to the
usurper's sway: the terrible conflicts of the last days will illustrate
both the world's love of sin and Jehovah's power to give the kingdom to
his only Begotten. To a graceless neck the yoke of Christ is
intolerable, but to the saved sinner it is easy and light. We may judge
ourselves by this, do we love that yoke, or do we wish to cast it from
us?

[Psalms 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 2:4</span></span>

4 He that sitteth in the heavens shall laugh: the Lord shall have them
in derision.

Let us now turn our eyes from the wicked council-chamber and raging
tumult of man; to the secret place of the majesty of the Most High. What
doth God say? What will the King do unto the men who reject his
only-begotten Son, the Heir of all things?

Mark the quiet dignity of the Omnipotent One, and the contempt which he
pours upon the princes and their raging people, He has not taken the
trouble to rise up and do battle with them - he despises them, he knows
how absurd, how irrational, how futile are their attempts against him -
he therefore laughs at them.

[Psalms 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 2:5</span></span>

5 Then shall he speak unto them in his wrath, and vex them in his sore
displeasure.

6 Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.

After he has laughed he shall speak; he needs not smite; the breath of
his lips is enough. At the moment when their power is at its height, and
their fury most violent, then shall his Word go forth against them. And
what is it that he says? - it is a very galling sentence - "Yet," says
he, "despite your malice, despite your tumultuous gatherings, despite
the wisdom of your counsels, despite the craft of your lawgivers, 'yet
have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion.'" Is not that a grand
exclamation! He has already done that which the enemy seeks to prevent.
While they are proposing, he has disposed the matter. Jehovah's will is
done, and man's will frets and raves in vain. God's Anointed is
appointed, and shall not be disappointed. Look back through all the ages
of infidelity, hearken to the high and hard things which men have spoken
against the Most High, listen to the rolling thunder of earth's volleys
against the Majesty of heaven, and then think that God is saying all the
while, "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion." Yet Jesus
reigns, yet he sees of the travail of his soul, and "his unsuffering
kingdom yet shall come" when he shall take unto himself his great power,
and reign from the river unto the ends of the earth. Even now he reigns
in Zion, and our glad lips sound forth the praises of the Prince of
Peace. Greater conflicts may here be foretold, but we may be confident
that victory will be given to our Lord and King. Glorious triumphs are
yet to come; hasten them, we pray thee, O Lord! It is Zion's glory and
joy that her King is in her, guarding her from foes, and filling her
with good things. Jesus sits upon the throne of grace, and the throne of
power in the midst of his church. In him is Zion's best safeguard; let
her citizens be glad in him.

"Thy walls are strength, and at thy gates

A guard of heavenly warriors waits;

Nor shall thy deep foundations move,

Fixed on his counsels and his love.

Thy foes in vain designs engage;

Against his throne in vain they rage,

Like rising waves, with, angry roar,

That dash and die upon the shore."

[Psalms 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 2:7</span></span>

7 I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my
son; this day have I begotten thee.

8 Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.

9 Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in
pieces like a potter's vessel.

This Psalm wears something of a dramatic form, for now another person is
introduced as speaking. We have looked into the counsel-chamber of the
wicked, and to the throne of God, and now we behold the Anointed
declaring his rights of sovereignty, and warning the traitors of their
doom.

God has laughed at the counsel and ravings of the wicked, and now Christ
the Anointed himself comes forward, as the Risen Redeemer, "declared to
be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by
the resurrection from the dead." [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004.md). Looking into the angry faces of
the rebellious kings, the Anointed One seems to say, "If this sufficeth
not to make you silent, 'I will declare the decree.'" Now this decree is
directly in conflict with the device of man, for its tenour is, the
establishment of the very dominion against which the nations are raving.
"Thou art my Son." Here is a noble proof of the glorious Divinity of our
Immanuel. "For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my
Son, this day have I begotten thee?" What a mercy to have a Divine
Redeemer in whom to rest our confidence I "This day have I begotten
thee." If this refers to the Godhead of our Lord, let us not attempt to
fathom it, for it is a great truth, a truth reverently to be received,
but not irreverently to be scanned it may be added, that if this relates
to the Begotten One in his human nature, we must here also rejoice in
the mystery, but not attempt to violate its sanctity by intrusive prying
into the secrets of the Eternal God. The things which are revealed are
enough, without venturing into vain speculations. In attempting to
define the Trinity, or unveil the essence of Divinity, many men have
lost themselves: here great ships have foundered. What have we to do in
Such a sea with our frail skiffs?

"Ask of me." It was a custom among great kings to give to favoured ones
whatever they might ask. (See [Est
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#006.md); [Mat
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#007)..md) So Jesus hath but to ask and
have. Here he declares that his very enemies are his inheritance. To
their face he declares this decree, and "Lo! here," cries the Anointed
One, as he holds aloft in that once pierced hand the sceptre of his
power, "He hath given me this, not only the right to be a king, but the
power to conquer." Yes! Jehovah hath given to his Anointed a rod of iron
with which he shall break rebellious nations in pieces, and, despite
their imperial strength, they shall be but as potters' vessels, easily
dashed into shivers, when the rod of iron is in the hand of the
omnipotent Son of God. Those who will not bend must break, Potters'
vessels are not to be restored if dashed in pieces, and the ruin of
sinners will be hopeless if Jesus shall smite them.

"Ye sinners seek his grace,

Whose wrath ye cannot bear;

Fly to the shelter of his cross,

And find salvation there."

[Psalms 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 2:10</span></span>

10 Be wise now therefore, O ye kings: be instructed, ye judges of the
earth

11 Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling.

12 Kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way, when his
wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their trust
in

The scene again changes, and counsel is given to those who have taken
counsel to rebel. They are exhorted to obey, and give the kiss of homage
and affection to him whom they have hated.

"Be wise." - It is always wise to be willing to be instructed,
especially when such instruction tends to the salvation of the soul. "Be
wise now, therefore;" delay no longer, but-let good reason weigh with
you. Your warfare cannot succeed, therefore desist and yield cheerfully
to him who will make you bow if you refuse his yoke. O how wise, how
infinitely wise is obedience to Jesus,, and how dreadful is the folly of
those who continue to be his enemies! "Serve the Lord with fear;" let
reverence and humility be mingled with your service. He is a great God,
and ye are but puny creatures; bend ye, therefore, in lowly worship, and
let a filial fear mingle with all your obedience to the great Father of
the Ages. "Rejoice with trembling." - There must ever be a holy fear
mixed with the Christian's joy. This is a sacred compound, yielding a
sweet smell, and we muss see to it that we burn no other upon the altar.
Fear, without joy, is torment; and joy, without holy fear, would be
presumption. Mark the solemn argument for reconciliation and obedience.
It is an awful thing to perish in the midst of sin, in the very way of
rebellion; and yet how easily could his wrath destroy us suddenly. It
needs not that his anger should be heated seven times hotter; let the
fuel kindle but a little, and we are consumed. O sinner! Take heed of
the terrors of the Lord; for "our God is a consuming fire." Note the
benediction with which the Psalm closes "Blessed are all they that put
their trust in him." Have we a share in this blessedness? Do we trust in
him? Our faith my be slender as a spider's thread; but if it be real, we
are in our measure blessed. The more we trust, the more fully shall we
know this blessedness. We may therefore close the Psalm with the prayer
of the apostles: - "Lord, increase our faith."

The[Psa 1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md) was a contrast between
the righteous man and the sinner; the[Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md) is a contrast between the
tumultuous disobedience of the ungodly world and the sure exaltation of
the righteous Son of God. In the[Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md), we saw the wicked driven away
like chaff; in the[Psa 2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md), we see
them broken in pieces like a potter's vessel. In the[Psa
1:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md), we beheld the righteous like a
tree planted by the rivers of water; and here, we contemplate Christ,
the Covenant Head of the righteous, made better than a tree planted by
the rivers of water, for he is made king of all the islands, and all the
heathen bow before him and kiss the dust; while he himself gives a
blessing to all those who put their trust in him. The two Psalms are
worthy of the very deepest attention; they are, in fact, the preface in
the entire Book of Psalms, and were by some of the ancients, joined into
one. They are, however, two Psalms; for Paul speaks of this as the[Psa
2:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md). ([Act
13:33](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#033),.md) The first shows us the
character and lot of the righteous; and the next teaches us that the
Psalms are Messianic, and speak of Christ the Messiah - the Prince who
shall reign from the river even unto the ends of the earth. That they
have both a far-reaching prophetic outlook we are well assured, but we
do not feel competent to open up that matter, and must leave it to abler
hands.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 3](psa003.md)

</div>
