<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa011)  [Next](psa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 12:0</span></span>

Title - This Psalm is headed, "To the Chief Musician upon Sheminith, a
Psalm of David," which title is identical with that of the[Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001), except that Neginoth is here
omitted. We have nothing new to add, and therefore refer the reader to
our remarks on the dedication of [Psa
6:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001). As Sheminith signifies the
eight, the Arabic version says it is concerning the end of the world,
which shall be the eighth day, and refers it to the coming of the
Messiah without accepting so fanciful an interpretation, we may read
this song of complaining faith in the light of His coming who shall
break in pieces the oppressor. The subject will be the better before the
mind's eye if we entitle this Psalm: "Good Thoughts is Bad Times." It is
supposed to have been written while Saul was persecuting David, and
those who favoured his cause.

Division - In the first and second verses David spreads his plaint
before the Lord concerning the treachery of his age; [Psa
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003) and [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004) denounce judgments upon proud
traitors; in [Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005), Jehovah
himself thunders out his wrath against oppressors; hearing this, the
Chief Musician sings sweetly of the faithfulness of God and his care of
his people, in [Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006) and [Psa
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007); but closes on the old key of
lament in [Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008), as he observes
the abounding wickedness of his times. Those holy souls who dwell in
Mesech, and sojourn in the tents of Kedar, may read and sing these
sacred stanzas with hearts in full accord with their mingled melody of
lowly mourning and lofty confidence.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) - "Help, Lord."

I. The Prayer itself, short, suggestive, seasonable, rightly directed,
vehement.

II\. Occasions for its use.

III\. Modes of its answer.

IV\. Reasons for expecting gracious reply.

First two clauses - Text for funeral of an eminent believer.

Whole verse

I. The fact bewailed - describe godly and faithful, and show how they
fail.

II\. The feeling excited. Mourning the loss, fears for church, personal
need of such companions, appeal to God.

III\. The forebodings aroused. Failure of the cause, judgments
impending, etc.

IV\. The faith remaining: "Help, Lord."

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) - Intimate connection
between yielding honour to God and honesty to man, since they decline
together.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002) (first clause) - A discourse
upon the prevalence and perniciousness of vain talk.

The whole verse - Connection between flattery and treachery.

"A double heart." Right and wrong kinds of hearts, and the disease of
duplicity.

[Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003) - God's hatred of those twin
sins of the lips - Flattery and Pride (which is self flattery). Why he
hates them. How he shows his hatred. In whom he hates them most. How to
be cleansed from them.

[Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003), [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004) -

I. The revolt of the tongue. Its claim of power, serf-possession, and
liberty. Contrast between this and the believer's confession, "we are
not our own."

II\. The method of its rebellion - "flattery, and speaking proud
things."

III\. The end of its treason - "cut off."

[Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005) - The Lord aroused - How!
Why! What to do! When!

Last clause. - Peculiar danger of believers from those who despise them
and their special safety. Good practical topic.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006) - The purity, trial, and
permanency of the words of the Lord.

Seven crucibles in which believers try the word. A little thought will
suggest these.

[Psa 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007) - Preservation from one's
generation in life and for ever. A very suggestive theme.

[Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008) - Sin in high places
specially infectious. Call to the rich and prominent to remember their
responsibility. Thankfulness for honourable rulers. Discrimination to be
used in choice of our representatives, or civic magistrates.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

"Help, Lord." 'Twas high time to call to heaven for help, when Saul
cried, "Go, kill me up the priests of Jehovah" (the occasion as it is
thought of making this Psalm), and therein committed the sin against the
Holy, as some grave divines are of opinion. [Sa1
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#017). David, after many sad thoughts
about that slaughter, and the occasion of it, Doeg's malicious
information, together with the paucity of his fast friends, and the
multitude of his sworn enemies at court, breaks forth abruptly into
these words, "Help Lord," help at a dead lift. The Arabic version hath
it, Deliver me by main force, as with weapons of war, for "the Lord is a
man of war." [Exo 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#003). - John Trapp.

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

"The faithful." "A faithful man," as a parent, a reprover, an adviser,
one "without guile," "who can find?" [Pro
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#006). Look close, view thyself in the
glass of the word. Does thy neighbour or thy friend, find thee faithful
to him? What does our daily intercourse witness? Is not the attempt to
speak what is agreeable oft made at the expense of truth? Are not
professions of regard sometimes utterly inconsistent with our real
feelings? In common life, where gross violations are restrained, a
thousand petty offences are allowed, that break down the wall between
sin and duty, and, judged by the divine standard, are indeed guilty
steps upon forbidden ground. - Charles Bridges, 1850.

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

A "faithful" man must be, first of all, faithful to himself; then, he
must be faithful to God; and then, he must be faithful to others,
particularly the church of God. And this, as it regards ministers, is of
peculiar importance. - Joseph Irons, 1840.

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

Even as a careful mother, seeing her child in the way when a company of
unruly horses run through the streets in full career, presently whips up
her child in her arms and taketh him home; or as the hen, seeing the
ravenous kite over her head, clucks and gathers her chickens under her
wings; even so when God hath a purpose to bring a heavy calamity upon a
land, it hath been usual with him to call and cull out to himself, such
as are his dearly beloved. He takes his choice servants from the evil to
come. Thus was Augustine removed a little before Hippo (wherein he
dwelt) was taken; Parœus died before Heidelburg was sacked; and Luther
was taken off before Germany was overrun with war and bloodshed. - Ed.
Dunsterville in a Sermon at the Funeral of Sir Sire. Harcourt, 1642.

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

"Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth," etc.: -

Back then, complainer, loathe thy life no more,

Nor deem thyself upon a desert shore,

Because the rocks the nearer prospect close.

Yet in fallen Israel are there hearts and eyes,

That day by day in prayer like thine arise;

Thou knowest them not, but their Creator known.

Go, to the world return, nor fear to cast

Thy bread upon the waters, sure at last

In joy to find it after many days.

John Keble, 1792-1866.

[Psa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001), [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002), [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

Consider our markets, our fairs, our private contracts and bargains, our
shops, our cellars, our weights, our measures, our promises, our
protestations, our politic tricks and villainous Machiavelism, our
enhancing of the prices of all commodities, and tell, whether the[Psa
12:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001) may not as fitly be applied to
our times as to the days of the man of God; in which the feigning, and
lying, and facing, and guile, and subtlety of men provoked the psalmist
to cry out, "Help, Lord; for there is not a godly man left: for the
faithful are Jailed from among the children of men: they speak
deceitfully every one with his neighbour, flattering with their lips,
and speak with a double heart, which have said, With our tongue we will
prevail; our lips are our own: who is Lord over us?" - R. Wolcombe.
1612.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips
and with a double heart do they speak." The reigned zeal is just like a
waterman, that looks one way and rows another way; for this man pretends
one thing and intends another thing; as Jehu pretended the zeal of God's
glory, but his aim was at his master's kingdom; and his zeal to God's
service was but to bring him to the sceptre of the kingdom. So Demetrius
professed great love unto Diana, but his drift was to maintain the
honour of his profession; and so we have too many that make great show
of holiness, and yet their hearts aim at other ends; but they may be
sure, though they can deceive the world and destroy themselves, yet not
God, who knoweth the secrets of all hearts. - Gr. Williams, 1636.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"They speak vanity." -

Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies!

Justice is fled, and truth is now no more!

Virgil' s neid, IV. 373.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"With a double heart." Man is nothing but insincerity, falsehood, and
hypocrisy, both in regard to himself and in regard to others. He does
not wish that he should be told the truth, he shuns saying it to others;
and all these moods, so inconsistent with justice and reason, have their
roots in his heart. - Blaise Pascal.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"With flattering lips and with a double heart do they speak." There is
no such stuff to make a cloak of as religion; nothing so fashionable,
nothing so profitable: it is a livery wherein a wise man may serve two
masters, God and the world, and make a gainful service by either. I
serve both, and in both myself, by prevaricating with both. Before man
none serves his God with more severe devotion: for which, among the best
of men, I work my own ends, and serve myself. In private, I serve the
world; not with so strict devotion, but with more delight; where
fulfilling of her servants' lusts, I work my end and serve myself. The
house of prayer who more frequents than I? In all Christian duties who
more forward than I? I fast with those that fast, that I may eat with
those that eat. I mourn with those that mourn. No hand more open to the
cause than mine, and in their families none prays longer and with louder
zeal. Thus when the opinion of a holy life hath cried the goodness of my
conscience up, my trade can lack no custom, my wares can want no price,
my words can need no credit, my actions can lack no praise. If I am
covetous it is interpreted providence; if miserable, it is counted
temperance; if melancholy, it is construed godly sorrow; if merry, it is
voted spiritual joy; if I be rich, it is thought the blessing of a godly
life; if poor, supposed the fruit of conscionable dealing; if I be well
spoken of, it is the merit of holy conversation; if ill, it is the
malice of malignants. Thus I sail with every wind, and have my end in
all conditions. This cloak in summer keeps me cool, in winter warm, and
hides the nasty bag of all my secret lusts. Under this cloak I walk in
public fairly with applause, and in private sin securely without
offence, and officiate wisely without discovery. I compass sea and land
to make a proselyte; and no sooner made, but he makes me. At a fast I
cry Geneva, and at a feast I cry Rome. If I be poor, I counterfeit
abundance to save my credit; if rich, I dissemble poverty to save
charges. I most frequent schismatical lectures, which I find most
profitable; from thence learning to divulge and maintain new doctrines;
they maintain me in suppers thrice a week. I use the help of a lie
sometimes, as a new stratagem to uphold the gospel; and I colour
oppression with God's judgments executed upon the wicked. Charity I hold
an extraordinary duty, therefore not ordinarily to be performed. What I
openly reprove abroad, for my own profit, that I secretly act at home,
for my own pleasure. But stay, I see a handwriting in my heart which
damps my soul. It is charactered in these said words, "Woe be to you,
hypocrites." [Mat 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013). - Francis
Quarles' "Hypocrite's Soliloquy."

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"With flattering lips," etc. The world indeed says that society could
not exist if there were perfect truthfulness and candour between man and
man; and that the world's propriety would be as much disturbed if every
man said what he pleased as it was in those days of Israelitish history,
when every man did that which was right in his own eyes. The world is
assuredly the best judge of its own condition and mode of government,
and therefore I will not say what a libel does such a remark contain,
but oh, what a picture does it present of the social edifice, that its
walls can be cemented and kept together only by flattery and falsehood.
- Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"Flattering lips." The philosopher Bion being asked what animal he
thought the most hurtful, replied, "That of wild creatures a tyrant, and
of tame ones a flatterer." The flatterer is the most dangerous enemy we
can have. Raleigh, himself a courtier, and therefore initiated into the
whole art of flattery, who discovered in his own career and fate its
dangerous and deceptive power, its deep artifice and deeper falsehood,
says, "A flatterer is said to be a beast that biteth smiling. But it is
hard to know them from friends - they are so obsequious and full of
protestations; for, as a wolf resembles a dog, so doth a flatterer a
friend." - The Book of Symbols, 1844.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

"They speak with a double heart." The original is, "A heart and a
heart:" one for the church, another for the change; one for Sundays,
another for working-days; one for the king, another for the pope. A man
without a heart is a wonder, but a man with two hearts is a monster. It
is said of Judas "There were many hearts in one man;" and we read of the
saints, "There was one heart in many men." [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032). Dabo illis cor unum; a special
blessing. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

When men cease to be faithful to their God, he who expects to find them
so to each other will be much disappointed. The primitive sincerity will
accompany the primitive piety in her flight from the earth; and then
interest will succeed conscience in the regulation of human conduct,
till one man cannot trust another farther than he holds him by that tie.
Hence, by the way, it is, that though many are infidels themselves, yet
few choose to have their families and dependants such; as judging, and
rightly judging, that true Christians are the only persons to be
depended on for the exact discharge of social duties. - George Horne.

[Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)

"The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips," etc. They who take
pleasure in deceiving others, will at the last find themselves most of
all deceived, when the Sun of truth, by the brightness of his rising,
shall at once detect and consume hypocrisy. - George Horne.

[Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)

"Cut off lips and tongues." May there not be here an allusion to those
terrible but suggestive punishments which Oriental monarchs were wont to
execute on criminals? Lips were cut off and tongues torn out when
offenders were convicted of lying or treason. So terrible and infinitely
more so are the punishments of sin. - C. H. S.

[Psa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003), [Psa
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

It need not now seem strange to tell you that the Lord is the owner of
our bodies, that he has so much propriety therein that they are more his
than ours. The apostle tells us as much. [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020). "Glorify God in your bodies
which are his." Our bodies and every member thereof, are his: for if the
whole be so, no part is exempted. And therefore they spake proud things,
and presumptuously usurped the propriety of God, who said, "Our lips are
our own;" as though their lips had not been his who is Lord and owner of
all, but they had been lords thereof, and might have used them as they
list. This provoked God to show what right he had to dispose of such
lips and tongues, by cutting them off. - David Clarkson.

[Psa 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

"Who have said, With our tongues will we prevail; who is Lord over us?"
So it was: twelve poor and unlearned men on the one side, all the
eloquence of Greece and Rome arrayed on the other. From the time of
Tertullus to that of Julian the apostate, every species of oratory,
learning, wit, was lavished against the church of God; and the result,
like the well-known story of that dispute between the Christian peasant
and the heathen philosopher, when the latter, having challenged the
assembled fathers of a synod to silence him, was put to shame by the
simple faith of the former "In the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, I
command thee to be dumb." Who is Lord over us? "Who is the Lord, that I
should obey his voice to let Israel go?" [Exo
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002). "What is the Almighty, that we
should serve him?" [Job 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#015). "Who is
that God that shall deliver you?" [Dan
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#015). - Michael Ayguan, in J. M.
Neale's Commentary.

[Psa 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

"Our lips are our own." If we have to do with God, we must quit claim to
ourselves and look on God as our owner; but this is fixed in the hearts
of men, We will be our own; we will not consent to the claim which God
makes to us: "Our lips are our own." Wicked men might as well say the
same thing of their whole selves; our bodies, strength, time, parts,
etc., are our own, and who is Lord over us? - John Howe.

[Psa 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

From the faults of the wicked we must learn three contrary lessons; to
wit: 1. That nothing which we have is our own. But, 2. Whatsoever is
given to us of God is for service to be done to him. 3. That whatsoever
we do or say, we have a Lord over us to whom we must be answerable when
he calleth us to account. - David Dickson.

[Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

"For the oppression of the poor," etc. When oppressors and persecutors
do snuff and puff at the people of God, when they defy them, and scorn
them, and think that they can with a blast of their breath blow them
away, then God will arise to judgment, as the Chaldee has it; at that
very nick of time when all seems to be lost, and when the poor,
oppressed, and afflicted people of God can do nothing but sigh and weep,
and weep and sigh, then the Lord will arise and ease them of their
oppressions, and make their day of extremity a glorious opportunity to
work for his own glory and his people's good. [Mat
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#006), [Mat
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007). "And the remnant took his
servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them. But when the
king heard thereof, he was wroth: and he sent forth his armies and
destroyed those murderers, and burned up their city." - Thomas Brooks.

[Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

Fear ye, whosoever ye be, that do wrong the poor; you have power and
wealth, and the favour of the judges, but they have the strongest
weapons of all, sighings and groanings, which fetch help from heaven for
them. These weapons dig down houses, throw up foundations, overthrow
whole nations. - Chrysostom.

[Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

"For the sighing of the needy, now will I arise, saith the Lord." God is
pleased to take notice of every grace, even the least and lowest, and
every gracious inclination in any of his servants. To fear his name is
no great matter, yet these have a promise. To think on his name less,
yet set down in a "book of remembrance." God sets down how many good
thoughts a poor soul hath had. As evil thoughts in wicked men are taken
notice of - they are the first fruits of the evil heart ([Mat
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)) - so good thoughts are they
which lie uppermost, and best discover a good heart. A desire is a small
matter, especially of the poor man, yet God regards the desire of the
poor, and calls a good desire the greatest kindness; "The desire of a
man is his kindness." A tear makes no great noise, yet hath a voice,
"God hath heard the voice of my weeping." It is no pleasant water, yet
God bottles it up. A groan is a poor thing, yet is the best part of a
prayer sometimes ([Rom 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)); a sigh
is less, yet God is awakened and raised up by it. [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005). A look is less than all these,
yet this is regarded ([Jon 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004));
breathing is less, yet ([Lam 3:56](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#056)),
the church could speak of no more; panting is less than breathing, when
one is spent for lack of breath, yet this is all the godly can sometimes
boast of. [Psa 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001). The description
of a godly man is ofttimes made from his least quod sic. Blessed are the
poor, the meek, they that mourn, and they who hunger and thirst. Never
did Hannah pray better than when she could get out never a word, but
cried, "Hard, hard heart." Nor did the publican, than when he smote his
breast and cried, "Lord, be merciful to me a sinner." Nor Mary
Magdalene, than when she came behind Christ, sat down, wept, but kept
silence. How sweet is music upon the waters! How fruitful are the lowest
valleys! Mourning hearts are most musical, lowest most fruitful. The
good shepherd ever takes most care of his weak lambs and feeble sheep.
The father makes most of the least, and the mother looks most after the
sick child. How comfortable is that of our Saviour, "It is not the will
of your Father which is in heaven that one of these little ones should
perish!" And that heaven is not to be entered but by such as are like
the little child. - John Sheffield, 1654.

[Psa 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

"The oppression of the poor." Insolent and cruel oppressing of the poor
is a sin that brings desolating and destroying judgments upon a people.
God sent ten wasting judgments one after another upon Pharaoh, his
people, and land, to revenge the cruel oppression of his poor people.
"Rob not the poor, because he is poor: neither oppress the afflicted in
the gate: for the Lord will plead their cause." [Pro
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#022), [Pro
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#023). To rob and oppress the rich is
a great sin; but to rob and oppress the poor is a greater; but to rob
and oppress the poor because he is poor, and wants money to buy justice,
is the top of all inhumanity and impiety. To oppress any one is sin; but
to oppress the oppressed is the height of sin. Poverty, and want, and
misery, should be motives to pity; but oppressors make them the
whetstones of their cruelty and severity, and therefore the Lord will
plead the cause of his poor oppressed people against their oppressors
without fee or fear; yea, he will plead their cause with pestilence,
blood, and fire. Gog was a great oppressor of the poor ([Eze
38:8-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#008)), and God pleads against him
with pestilence, blood, and fire ([Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022)); "and I will plead against him,
with pestilence and with blood; and I will rain upon him, and upon his
bands, and upon the many people that are with him, an overflowing rain,
and great hailstones, fire and brimstone." - Thomas Brooks.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

"The words o/ the Lord are pure words," etc. How beautifully is this
verse introduced, by way of contrast to what was said before concerning!
Do sinners talk of vanity? let saints then speak of Jesus and his
gospel. Do they talk impure words? then let the faithful use the pure
words of God, which like silver, the more used, the more melted in the
fire, the more precious will they be. It is true, indeed, despisers will
esteem both God and his word as trifling; but oh, what an unknown
treasure doth the word, the promises, the covenant relation of the
divine things of Jesus contain! They are more to be desired than gold,
yea, than pure gold; sweeter also than honey and the honeycomb. - Robert
Hawker.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

"The words of the Lord are pure words," etc. They that purify silver to
the purpose, use to put it in the fire again and again, that it may be
thoroughly tried. So is the truth of God; there is scarce any truth but
hath been tried over and over again, and still if any dross happen to
mingle with it, then God calls it in question again. If in former times
there have been Scriptures alleged that have not been pertinent to prove
it, that truth shall into the fire again, that what is dross may be
burnt up; the Holy Ghost is so curious, so delicate, so exact, he cannot
bear that falsehood Should be mingled with the truths of the gospel.
That is the reason, therefore, why that God doth still, age after age,
call former things in question, because that there is still some dross
one way or other mingled with them; either in the stating the opinions
themselves, or else in the Scriptures that are brought and alleged for
them, that have passed for current, for he will never leave till he have
purified them. The doctrine of God's free grace hath been tried over,
and over, and over again. Pelagius begins, and he mingles his dross with
it: he saith, grace is nothing but nature in man. Well, his doctrine was
purified, and a great deal of dross purged out. Then come the
semi-Pelagians, and they part stakes; they say, nature can do nothing
without grace, but they make nature to concur with grace, and to have an
influence as well as grace; and the dross of that was burnt up. The
Papists, they take up the same quarrel, but will neither be Pelagians
nor semi-Pelagians, yet still mingle dross. The Arminians, they come,
and they refine popery in that point anew; still they mingle dross. God
will have this truth tried seven times in the fire, till he hath brought
it forth as pure as pure may be. And I say it is because that truth is
thus precious. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

The Scripture is the sun; the church is the clock. The sun we know to be
sure, and regularly constant in his motions; the clock, as it may fall
out, may go too fast or too slow. As then we should condemn him of folly
that should profess to trust the clock rather than the sun, so we cannot
but justly tax the credulity of those who would rather trust to the
church than to the Scripture. - Bishop Hall.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

"The words of the Lord are pure words." Men may inspect detached
portions of the Book, and please themselves with some things, which, at
first view, have the semblance of conniving at what is wrong. But let
them read it, let them read the whole of it; let them carry along in
their minds the character of the persons to which the different portions
of it were addressed; the age of the world, and the circumstances under
which the different parts of it were written, and the particular objects
which even those portions of it have in view, which to an infidel mind
appear the most exceptionable; and they may be rationally convinced
that, instead of originating in the bosom of an impostor, it owes its
origin to men who wrote "as they were moved by the Holy Ghost." Let them
scrutinise it with as much severity as they please; only let their
scrutiny be well informed, wisely directed, and with a fair and
ingenuous mind, and we have no fears for the issue. There are portions
of it on which ignorance and folly have put constructions that are
forced and unnatural, and which impure minds have viewed in shadows
reflected from their own impurity. Montesquieu said of Voltaire, Lorsque
Voltaire lit un livre, il le fait, puis il crit contre ce qu'il a fait:
"When Voltaire reads a book, he makes it what he pleases, and then
writes against what he has made." It is no difficult matter to besmear
and blot its pages, and then impute the foul stains that men of corrupt
minds have cast upon it, to its stainless Author. But if we honestly
look at it as it is, we shall find that like its Author, it is without
blemish and without spot. - Gardiner Spring, D.D.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

"The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, purified seven times." The expression may import two things:
first, the infallible certainty of the word; and, secondly, the exact
purity. First, the infallible certainty of the word, as gold endureth in
the fire when the dross is consumed. Vain conceits comfort us not in a
time of trouble; but the word of God, the more it is tried, the more you
will find the excellency of it - the promise is tried, as well as we are
tried, in deep afflictions; but, when it is so, it will be found to be
most pure, "The word of the Lord is tried; he is a buckler to all those
that trust in him" ([Pro 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#005)); as pure
gold suffers no loss by the fire, so the promises suffer no loss when
they are tried, but stand to us in our greatest troubles. Secondly, it
notes the exact perfection of the word: there is no dross in silver and
gold that hath been often refined; so there is no defect in the word of
God. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

Fry thus translates this verse: -

The words of Jehovah are pure words -

Silver refined in the crucible -

Gold, seven times washed from the earth.

כוּקק though sometimes applied to express the purity of silver, is more
strictly an epithet of gold, from the peculiar method made use of in
separating it from the soil by repeated washings and decantations. -
John Fry, in loc.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

"Seven times." I cannot but admit that there may be a mystic meaning in
the expression "seven times," in allusion to the seven periods of the
church, or to that perfection, implied in the figure seven, to which it
is to be brought at the revelation of Jesus Christ. This will be more
readily allowed by those who admit of the prophetic interpretation of
the seven epistles of the Book of Revelation. - W. Wilson, D.D., in loc.

[Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)

"When the vilest men are exalted'" Heb., vilities, οὐτίδανοι, the
abstract for the concrete, quisquiliae, οὐτίδανοι. Oft, empty vessels
swim aloft, rotten posts are gilt with adulterate gold, the worst weeds
spring up bravest. Chaff will get to the top of the fan, when good corn,
as it lieth at the bottom of the heap, so it falls low at the feet of
the fanner. The reason why wicked men "walk" on every side, are so
brisk, so busy (and who but they?) is given to be this, because losels
and rioters were exalted. See [Pro
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#012), [Pro
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#018), and [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002). As rheums and catarrhs fall from
the head to the lungs and cause a consumption of the whole body, so it
is in the body politic. As a fish putrefies first in the head and then
in all the parts, so here. Some render the text thus, "When they (that
is, the wicked) are exalted," it is a "shame for the sons of men," that
other men who better deserve preferment, are not only slighted but
vilely handled by such worthless ambitionists, who yet the higher they
climb, as apes, the more they discover their deformities." - John Trapp.

[Psa 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)

Good thus translates this verse: -

Should the wicked advance on every side;

Should the dregs of the earth be uppermost?

The original is given literally, ולּזּח means "fœces, fœculences,
dregs." כּזם is here an adverb, and imports uppermost, rather than
exalted. - J. Mason Good, in loc.

[Psalms 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 12:1</span></span>

1 Help, Lord; for the godly man ceaseth; for the faithful fail from
among the children of men.

2 They speak vanity every one with his neighbour: with flattering lips
and with a double heart do they speak.

"Help, Lord." A short, but sweet, suggestive, seasonable, and
serviceable prayer; a kind of angel's sword, to be turned every way, and
to be used on all occasions. Ainsworth says the word rendered "help," is
largely used for all manner of saving, helping, delivering, preserving,
etc. Thus it seems that the prayer is very full and instructive. The
Psalmist sees the extreme danger of his position, for a man had better
be among lions than among liars; he feels his own inability to deal with
such sons of Belial, for "he who shall touch them must be fenced with
iron;" he therefore turns himself to his all-sufficient Helper, the
Lord, whose help is never denied to his servants, and whose aid is
enough for all their needs. "Help, Lord," is a very useful ejaculation
which we may dart up to heaven on occasions of emergency, whether in
labour, learning, suffering, fighting, living, or dying. As small ships
can sail into harbours which larger vessels, drawing more water, cannot
enter, so our brief cries and short petitions may trade with heaven when
our soul is wind-bound, and business-bound, as to longer exercises of
devotion, and when the stream of grace seems at too low an ebb to float
a more laborious supplication. "For the godly man ceaseth;" the death,
departure, or decline of godly men should be a trumpet-call for more
prayer, They say that fish smell first at the head, and when godly men
decay, the whole commonwealth will soon go rotten. We must not, however,
be rash in our judgment on this point, for Elijah erred in counting
himself the only servant of God alive, when there were thousands whom
the Lord held in reserve. The present times always appear to be
peculiarly dangerous, because they are nearest to our anxious gaze, and
whatever evils are rife are sure to be observed, while the faults of
past ages are further off, and are more easily overlooked. Yet we expect
that in the latter days, "because iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold," and then we must the more thoroughly turn from
man, and address ourselves to the Churches' Lord, by whose help the
gates of hell shall be kept from prevailing against us. "The faithful
fail from among the children of men;" when godliness goes, faithfulness
inevitably follows; without fear of God, men have no love of truth.
Common honesty is no longer common, when common irreligion leads to
universal godlessness. David had his eyes on Doeg, and the men of Ziph
and Keilah, and perhaps remembered the murdered priests of Nob, and the
many banished ones who consorted with him in the cave of Adullam, and
wondered where the state would drift without the anchors of its godly
and faithful men. David, amid the general misrule, did not betake
himself to seditious plottings, but to solemn petitionings; nor did he
join with the multitude to do evil, but took up the arms of prayer to
withstand their attacks upon virtue.

"They speak vanity every one with his neighbour." They utter that which
is vain to hear, because of its frivolous, foolish, want of worth; vain
to believe, because it was false and lying; vain to trust to, since it
was deceitful and flattering; vain to regard, for it lifted up the
hearer, filling him with proud conceit of himself. It is a sad thing
when it is the fashion to talk vanity. "Ca' me, and I'll ca' thee," is
the old Scotch proverb; give me a high-sounding character, and I will
give you one. Compliments and fawning congratulations are hateful to
honest men; they know that if they take they must give them, and they
scorn to do either. These accommodation-bills are most admired by those
who are bankrupt in character. Bad are the times when every man thus
cajoles and cozens his neighbour. "With flattering lips and with a
double heart do they speak." He who puffs up another's heart, has
nothing better than wind in his own. If a man extols me to my face, he
only shows me one side of his heart, and the other is black with
contempt for me, or foul with intent to cheat me. Flattery is the sign
of the tavern where duplicity is the host. The Chinese consider a man of
two hearts to be a very base man, and we shall be safe in reckoning all
flatterers to be such.

[Psalms 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 12:3</span></span>

3 The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the tongue that
speaketh proud things:

4 Who have said, With our tongue will we prevail; our lips are our own:
who is lord over us?

Total destruction shall overwhelm the lovers of flattery and pride, but
meanwhile how they hector and fume! Well did the apostle call them
"raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame." Free-thinkers
are generally very free-talkers, and they are never more at ease than
when railing at God's dominion, and arrogating to themselves unbounded
license. Strange is it that the easy yoke of the Lord should so gall the
shoulders of the proud, while the iron bands of Satan they bind about
themselves as chains of honour: they boastfully cry unto God, "Who is
lord over us?" and hear not the hollow voice of the evil one, who cries
from the infernal lake, "I am your Lord, and right faithfully do ye
serve me." Alas, poor fools, their pride and glory shall be cut off like
a fading flower! May God grant that our soul may not be gathered with
them. It is worthy of observation that flattering lips, and tongues
speaking proud things, are classed together: the fitness of this is
clear, for they are guilty of the same vice, the first flatters another,
and the second flatters himself, in both cases a lie is in their right
hands. One generally imagines that flatterers are such mean parasites,
so cringing and fawning, that they cannot be proud; but the wise man
will tell you that while all pride is truly meanness, there is in the
very lowest meanness no small degree of pride. Csar's horse is even more
proud of carrying Csar, than Csar is of riding him. The mat on which the
emperor wiped his shoes, boasts vaingloriously, crying out, "I cleaned
the imperial boots." None are so detestably domineering as the little
creatures who creep into office by cringing to the great; those are bad
times, indeed, in which these obnoxious beings are numerous and
powerful. No wonder that the justice of God in cutting off such
injurious persons is matter for a Psalm, for both earth and heaven are
weary of such provoking offenders, whose presence is a very plague to
the people afflicted thereby. Men cannot tame the tongues of such
boastful flatterers; but the Lord's remedy if sharp is sure, and is an
unanswerable answer to their swelling words of vanity.

[Psalms 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 12:5</span></span>

5 For the oppression of the poor, for the sighing of the needy, now will
I arise, saith the Lord; I will set him in safety from him that puffeth
at him.

In due season the Lord will hear his elect ones, who cry day and night
unto him, and though he bear long with their oppressors, yet will he
avenge them speedily. Observe that the mere oppression of saints,
however silently they bear it, is in itself a cry to God: Moses was
heard at the Red Sea, though he said nothing; and Hagar's affliction was
heard despite her silence. Jesus feels with his people, and their smarts
are mighty orators with him. By-and-by, however, they begin to sigh and
express their misery, and then relief comes post-haste. Nothing moves a
father like the cries of his children; he bestirs himself, wakes up his
manhood, overthrows the enemy, and sets his beloved in safety. A puff is
too much for the child to bear, and the foe is so haughty, that he
laughs the little one to scorn; but the Father comes, and then it is the
child's turn to laugh, when he is set above the rage of his tormentor.
What virtue is there in a poor man's sighs, that they should move the
Almighty God to arise from his throne. The needy did not dare to speak,
and could only sigh in secret, but the Lord heard, and could rest no
longer, but girded on his sword for the battle. It is a fair day when
our soul brings God into her quarrel, for when his bare arm is seen,
Philistia shall rue the day. The darkest hours of the Church's night are
those which precede the break of day. Man's extremity is God's
opportunity. Jesus will come to deliver just when his needy ones shall
sigh, as if all hope had gone for ever. O Lord, set thy now near at
hand, and rise up speedily to our help. Should the afflicted reader be
able to lay hold upon the promise of this verse, let him gratefully
fetch a fulness of comfort from it. Gurnal says, "As one may draw out
the wine of a whole hogshead at one tap, so may a poor soul derive the
comfort of the whole covenant to himself through one promise, if he be
able to apply it." He who promises to set us in safety, means thereby
preservation on earth, and eternal salvation in heaven.

[Psalms 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 12:6</span></span>

6 The words of the Lord are pure words: as silver tried in a furnace of
earth, purified seven times.

7 Thou shalt keep them, O Lord, thou shalt preserve them from this
generation for ever.

[Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

What a contrast between the vain words of man, and the pure words of
Jehovah. Man's words are yea and nay, but the Lord's promises are yea
and amen. For truth, certainty, holiness, faithfulness, the words of the
Lord are pure as well-refined silver. In the original there is an
allusion to the most severely-purifying process known to the ancients,
through which silver was passed when the greatest possible purity was
desired; the dross was all consumed, and only the bright and precious
metal remained; so clear and free from all alloy of error or
unfaithfulness is the book of the words of the Lord. The Bible has
passed through the furnace of persecution, literary criticism,
philosophic doubt, and scientific discovery, and has lost nothing but
those human interpretations which clung to it as alloy to precious ore.
The experience of saints has tried it in every conceivable manner, but
not a single doctrine or promise has been consumed in the most excessive
hear. What God's words are, the words of his children should be. If we
would be Godlike in conversation, we must watch our language, and
maintain the strictest purity of integrity and holiness in all our
communications.

[Psa 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)

To fall into the hands of an evil generation, so as to be baited by
their cruelty, or polluted by their influence, is an evil to be dreaded
beyond measure; but it is an evil foreseen and provided for in the text.
In life many a saint has lived a hundred years before his age, as though
he had darted his soul into the brighter future, and escaped the mists
of the beclouded present: he has gone to his grave unreverenced and
misunderstood, and lo! as generations come and go, upon a sudden the
hero is unearthed, and lives in the admiration and love of the excellent
of the earth; preserved for ever from the generation which stigmatised
him as a sower of sedition, or burned him as a heretic. It should be our
daily prayer that we may rise above our age as the mountain-tops above
the clouds, and may stand out as heaven-pointing pinnacle high above the
mists of ignorance and sin which roll around us. O Eternal Spirit,
fulfil in us the faithful saying of this verse! Our faith believes those
two assuring words, and cries, "Thou shalt, thou shalt."

[Psalms 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 12:8</span></span>

8 The wicked walk on every side, when the vilest men are exalted.

Here we return to the fount of bitterness, which first made the Psalmist
run to the wells of salvation, namely, the prevalence of wickedness.
When those in power are vile, their underlings will be no better. As a
warm sun brings out noxious flies, so does a sinner in honour foster
vice everywhere. Our turf would not so swarm with abominables if those
who are styled honourables did not give their countenance to the craft.
Would to God that the glory and triumph of our Lord Jesus would
encourage us to walk and work on every side; as like acts upon like,
since an exalted sinner encourages sinners, our exalted Redeemer must
surely excite, cheer, and stimulate his saints. Nerved by a sight of his
reigning power we shall meet the evils of the times in the spirit of
holy resolution, and shall the more hopefully pray, "Help, Lord."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 13](psa013)

</div>
