<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa059)  [Next](psa061.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 60](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 60:0</span></span>

Title. - Here is a lengthy title, but it helps us much to expound the
Psalm. To the Chief Musician upon Shushan-eduth, or the Lily of
Testimony. The forty-fifth was on the lilies, and represented the kingly
warrior in his beauty going forth to War; here we see him dividing the
spoil and bearing testimony to the glory of God. Tunes have strange
names apparently, but this results from the fact that we do not know
what was in the composer's mind, else they might seem to be touchingly
appropriate; perhaps the music or the musical instruments have more to
do with this title than the Psalm itself. Yet in war-songs roses and
lilies are often mentioned, and one remembers Macaulay's Song of the
Huguenots, though perhaps we err in mentioning so carnal a verse -

"Now by the lips of those ye love, fair gentlemen of France.

Charge for the golden lillies now, upon them with the lance."

Michtam of David, to teach. David obeyed the precept to teach the
children of Israel; he recorded the Lord's mighty acts that they might
be rehearsed in the ears of generations to come. Golden secrets are to
be told on the house-tops; these things were not done in a corner and
ought not to be buried in silence. We ought gladly to learn what
inspiration so beautifully teaches. When he strove with Aram-naharaim
and with Aram-zobah. The combined Aramean tribes sought to overcome
Israel, but were signally defeated. When Joab returned. He had been
engaged in another region, and the enemies of Israel took advantage of
his absence, but on his return with Abishai the fortunes of war were
changed. And smote of Edom in the Valley of salt twelve thousand. More
than this appear to have fallen according to [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012.md), but this commemorates one
memorable part of the conflict. Terrible must have been the baffle, but
decisive indeed were the results, and the power of the enemy was utterly
broken. Well did the Lord deserve a song from his servant.

Divisions. - Properly the song may be said to consist of three parts:
the complaining verses, [Psa 60:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md);
the gladsome, [Psa 60:4-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md); the
prayerful, [Psa 60:9-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md). We have
divided it as the sense appeared to change.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md). - Prayer of a church in low
condition.

I. Complaint.

1\. Left of God's Spirit.

2\. Scattered.

II\. Cause. Something displeasing to God. Neglect or actual sin; a
subject for self-examination.

III\. Cure. The Lord's return to us and ours to him. In our version it
is a prayer; in the Septuagint an expression of faith - "Thou wilt
return."

[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002.md). - The perturbation, the
prayer, the plea. - G. R.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md). - That God does afflict his
people severely, and that he has good reason for the same.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md). - "The wine of
astonishment." A purgative, a tonic. Astonishing sin followed by
astonishing chastisements, discoveries of corruption, of the
spirituality of the law, of the terror of divine wrath, and by
astonishing depressions, temptations, and conflicts.

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md). - The banner of the gospel.

I. Why a banner? A rallying point, meant to fight under, etc.

II\. By whom given. "Thou."

III\. To whom. "To them that fear thee."

IV\. What is to be done with it. "To be displayed."

V. For what cause. "Because of the truth." Truth promotes truth.

[Psa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005.md). - The deliverance of the
elect needs a saving God, a mighty God ("right hand"), and a
prayer-hearing God.

[Psa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005) (last clause.md). "Save ... and
hear." The remarkable order of these words - 1. In the purpose of God.
2. In the first works of grace. 3. Often under trial. 4. And specially
in fierce temptations, God's saving precedes man's praying.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md). - God's holy promise,
ground for present joy, and for boldly taking possession of the promised
good.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md). - "Gilead is mine, and
Manasseh is mine." How, and in what respect, this world is the
Christians.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md). - "Judah is my lawgiver."
The believer owning no law but that which comes from Christ.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md). - "Moab is my washpot." How
we may make sinners subservient to our sanctification. We are warned by
their sin, and punishment, etc. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 983, "Moab
is my washpot."

[Psa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md). - The soulwinners question.

I. The object of attack; the strong city of man's heart, barricaded by
depravity, ignorance, prejudice, custom, etc.

II\. Our main design. To penetrate, to reach the citadel for Jesus.

III\. Our great enquiry. Eloquence, learning, wit, none of these can
force the gate, but there is One who can.

[Psa 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012.md). - Divine operation a
reason for human activity.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

There are some difficulties attendant upon the title of this Psalm, when
it is compared with the contents. We naturally expect after such an
inscription, joy, congratulation, and praise for victory; but the
Psalmist breaks out into lamentations and bitter complaints: his strains
are, however, changed, when he has proceeded as far as [Psa
60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md), where he begins to feel
confidence, and to employ the language of exultation and triumph. The
best means of removing this discrepancy seems to be by remarking, that
this Psalm was written after some of the battles of which mention is
made in the title, but that the author does not restrict himself to
those events without taking a wider range, so as to embrace the
afflicted condition both of Israel and Judah during the latter part of
Saul's life, and the former years of David's reign. In the concluding
years of Saul, the Philistines obtained a superiority over him, and
finally destroyed him with his army. Subsequently to these events the
whole land was in a very disturbed and agitated condition, arising out
of the contentions between the partisans of Saul's family, and those who
were attached to David. The nations which inhabited the regions adjacent
to the land of Canaan were at all times inimical to the Jews, and seized
every opportunity of attacking and injuring them. But when David had
succeeded in uniting the whole nation under his authority, he proceeded
to avenge the injuries and insults that had been inflicted on his
countrymen by the Philistines, Edomites, Moabites, and Syrians; and God
was pleased to give him signal success in his undertakings. He appears,
therefore, to have combined all these transactions, and made them the
subject of this Psalm. - William Walford.

Title

"Shushan-eduth." The lilies of the testimony - means, that this Psalm
has for its chief subject something very lovely and cheering in the law:
namely, the words of promise quoted in the beginning of [Psa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md), according to which the land of
Canaan belonged to the Israelites, upon which is thus established the
confidence expressed in [Psa 60:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md),
with respect to their right of property over the land, and their
possession of it. This promise, not to cite many other passages which
occur in the Five Books of Moses, and even so early as the patriarchs,
is contained in Genesis 49, and Deut. 33. It is evident of what value
and importance this promise was, and particularly the remembrance of it
at this time. - T. C. Barth's "Bible Manual," 1865.

Title

The only other "eduth" or "testimony" in the Psalter, Psalm 80, makes
mention by name of the tribes of Ephraim, Benjamin, and Manasseh, and is
a witness against those tribes for forsaking the Shepherd of Israel who
had brought them up out of the land of Egypt. - Joseph Francis Thrupp,
M.A., in "An Introduction to the Study and Use of the Psalms," 1860.

Title

Aram-naharaim. - The name Aram corresponds to Syria in its widest and
vaguest sense, and is joined with other names to designate particular
parts of that large country. It even includes Mesopotamia, which is a
term of physical rather than political geography, and denotes the space
between the Tigris and Euphrates, corresponding to Aram-Naharaim, or
Syria of the Two Rivers, in the verse before us. The king of this
country was tributary to the king of Aram-Zobah, as appears from the
account of David's second Aramean war ([Sa2
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#016.md), [Sa2
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#019).md). - Joseph Addison Alexander.

Title

"When he strove with Aram-naharaim and with Aram-zobah." An insult
offered to David's ambassadors by Hanun, king of the Ammonites, led to a
serious war. Hanun obtained mercenaries from Syria to reinforce his
army, Joab and Abishai his brother, David's generals, gave them battle.
Joab, opposed to the Syrians, gained the first success, and the
Ammonites, seeing their allies routed, took to flight into their town.
But this defeat provoked a great coalition, embracing all the people
between the Jordan and the Euphrates. David, however, fearlessly marched
against them at the head of his army; he vanquished all his enemies, and
made himself master of the small Aramaean kingdoms of Damascus, Zobah,
and Hamath, and subjugated the Eastern Idumaeans, who met their final
defeat in the Valley of Salt. - Francois Lenormant and E. Chevallier, in
"A Manual of the Ancient History of the East," 1869.

Title

"Joab returned, and smote of Edom in the valley of salt twelve
thousand," compared with [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013.md),
"David gat him a name when he returned from smiting of the Syrians in
the valley of salt, being eighteen thousand men," and [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012.md), where this very service was
performed by Abishai. Answer. It is one thing to attribute the victory
for the honour of the king that was the cause. But the mentioning of
these chief generals, by whom the service was performed, is another.
David, under God, must have the honour of the work, for the increase of
his name, being set for the typing out of Christ, who must have all the
glory of the day, whatever conquest he gets by instruments of that
service here, who likewise are typed out in David's worthies, of whom
Joab and Abishai were chief. By these he obtained that great victory
over Hadadezer. In returning from which Joab found his brother Abishai
engaged "in the valley of salt" against eighteen thousand Edomites or
Syrians (all one), whose valour the Almighty so looked on, as he
attributes the whole slaughter to him, because first attempting it.
Joab, it seems, took this in his return from the former slaughter, and
fell in for the assistance of his brother Abishai (for that was their
usual course: though they divided their armies, they did not divide
their hearts). But if the enemies were too strong, one would help the
other. [Ch1 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#012.md). And of this
eighteen thousand attributed to David and Abishai before, Joab slew
twelve thousand of them; the memory of which service is here embalmed
with a Psalm; first showing the extremes they were in, doubtful at first
they should not get the victory. Secondly, applying it to the kingdom of
Christ. Lastly, ascribing all the honour of the conquest to God; saying,
through God this valiant service was done; it was he that trod down our
enemies; and will do (last verse) - William Streat, in "The Dividing of
the Hoof," 1654.

Title

"The Valley of Salt." The ridge of Usdum exhibits more distinctly its
peculiar formation; the main body of the mountain being a solid mass of
rock salt ... We Could at first hardly believe our eyes, until we had
several times approached the precipices, and broken off pieces to
satisfy ourselves, both by the touch and taste. The salt, where thus
exposed, is everywhere more or less furrowed by the rains. As we
advanced, large lumps and masses, broken off from above, lay like rocks
along the shore, or were fallen down as debris. The very stones beneath
our feet were wholly of salt The position of this mountain, at the south
end of the sea, enables us also to ascertain the place of "The Valley of
Salt" mentioned in Scripture, where the Hebrews under David, and again
under Amaziah, gained decisive victories over Edom. This valley could
have been no other than the Ghr south of the Dead Sea, adjacent to the
mountain of salt; it separates indeed the ancient territories of Judah
and Edom. - Edward Robinson's "Biblical Researches in Palestine."

Title

The historic record mentions eighteen thousand slain, and here but
twelve thousand. The greater of course includes the less. The
discrepancy may be explained by supposing that the title contains the
numbers slain by one division of the army, or that the twelve thousand
were slain in the battle, and the residue in the flight. Or an error may
have crept into the text. Every scholar admits that there is sometimes
serious difficulty in settling the numbers of the Old Testament. In this
place Calvin has two and twenty thousand, the common version twelve
thousand, while the original is two ten thousand, which taken in one way
would mean twenty thousand, i.e., two tens of thousands. Hammond refers
the numbers slain to different battles, and so avoids the difficulty. -
William S. Plumer.

[Psa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md)

"O God, thou hast cast us off." The word here used means properly to be
foul, rancid, offensive; and then, to treat anything as if it were foul
or rancid; to repel, to spurn, to cast away. It is strong language,
meaning that God had seemed to treat them as if they were loathsome or
offensive to him. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002.md)

"Heal the breaches thereof; for it shaketh." They pray that this may be
done with the utmost speed, because there was danger in delay, for the
kingdom was already pressed down with a heavy calamity, and on the brink
of ruin, which is signified by the word מטּה whose origin is in a very
strong and tremulous inclination to one side, properly from the
application of a lever, and is applied to those who are leaning so far
to one side that they are just on the point of falling; figuratively,
therefore, it expresses a most perilous condition, in which one is on
the edge of destruction. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002.md)

"Heal the breaches thereof." Even Israel is subject to "breaches." So it
was with the literal typical Israel, David's kingdom; so it may be with
spiritual mystical Israel, the kingdom of Christ, the church of God upon
earth. There are "breaches" from without, and "breaches" from within. I
will invert the order. From without, by open persecution; from within,
by intestine and home-bred divisions. Of both these the church of God in
all ages hath had sufficient experience. Look we upon the primitive
times, during the infancy of the church, however the soundest and
entirest church that ever was, yet how was it broken! Broken, as by
foreign persecutions, so by home-bred divisions. Both these ways was the
church during the apostles' times broken, distressed by enemies from
without who persecuted it. - John Brinsley (1600-1665), in "The Healing
of Israel's Breaches."

[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002.md)

"It shaketh." That is, presaging nothing but ruin and downfall, unless
it be speedily underpropped, and "the breaches thereof" made up and
"healed." Thus did David look upon Israel's disease, and hereupon it was
that he was so deeply affected with it, so earnestly desiring the cure
of it. The reference, as interpreters conceive, is to those home-bred
divisions, those civil wars betwixt the two houses of Saul and David,
after the death of Saul; then did the "earth," the land, that land of
Israel (as the Chaldee explains it), quake and tremble, being broken,
riven (as the word in the original signifieth): even as the earth
sometimes by earthquakes is riven, and torn asunder with prodigious
chasms, openings, or gapings: so was that kingdom divided in those civil
commotions, the nobles and commons taking parts and siding, some with
David, some with Ishbosheth. - John Brinsley.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md)

"Thou hast showed thy people hard things," God will be sure to plough
his own ground, whatsoever becometh of the waste; and to weed his own
garden, though the rest of the world should be let alone to grow wild. -
John Trapp.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md)

"Thou hast given us to drink infatuation, or bewilderment, as men drink
wine." So Hupfeld explains the construction, referring to [Psa
80:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#005.md), "Thou hast made them feed upon
weeping like bread;" [Kg1 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#027.md), "Feed
him, with affliction as bread, and with affliction as water" (וּמים
לּחץ); [Isa 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#020.md). But the apposition
is capable of being explained in another way, for the second noun may in
fact be a predicate further defining the first: "Thou hast given us wine
to drink which is (not wine, but) bewilderment." - J. J. Stewart
Perowne.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md)

"The wine of astonishment." "Intoxicating wine." Hebrew, "Wine of
staggering," that is, which causeth staggering, or, in other words,
intoxicating. Some render, "wine of stupor," or stupefying. Symmachus,
"wine of agitation," and this sense I have adopted, which is also that
of the Syriac. - Benjamin Boothroyd.

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

"Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee." Perhaps the delivery
of a banner was anciently esteemed an obligation to protect, and that
the Psalmist might consider it in this light, when, upon a victory over
the Syrians and Edomites, after the public affairs of Israel had been in
a bad state, he says, "Thou hast shewed thy people hard things," etc.
"Thou hast given a banner to them that fear thee." Though thou didst for
a time give up thine Israel into the hands of their enemies, thou hast
now given them an assurance of thy having received them under thy
protection. - Thomas Harmer (1715-1788), in "Observations on Divers
Passages of Scripture."

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

"Thou hast given a banner," etc. Thou hast given us by the recent
victory, after our prostrate condition, a banner of triumph to lift up
(so the Hebrew), because of thy faithfulness to thy promise. "The truth"
here answers to God's "holiness" ([Psa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006).md). So long as soldiers see their
banner uplifted, they flock round it with confidence. But when it is
prostrate their spirits and hopes fall. The "banner" is a pledge of
safety, and a rallying point to those who fight under it. - A. R.
Fausset.

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

"Thou hast given a banner," etc. The Psalmist compares the salvation
which the Lord bestows upon his people to a highly excellent "banner,"
which serves as a signal to one lying prostrate in his misery, to rise
up, with an allusion perhaps to [Num
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#008.md). "And the Lord said to Moses,
Make thee a serpent and set it upon a standard-pole; and it happened
that every one who was bitten, and looked at it, lived." At any rate,
that passage in which the serpent is a symbol of the healing power of
God, may serve to illustrate the passage before us. Compare "heal its
breaches." - E. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

"A banner," which is a sign or instrument: - 1. Of union. This people,
who were lately divided and under several banners, thou hast now
gathered together and united under one banner; to wit, under my
government. 2. Of battle. Thou hast given us an army and power to oppose
our enemies. We had our banner to set against theirs. 3. Of triumph. We
have not lost our banner but gained theirs, and brought it away in
triumph. Comp. [Psa 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005.md). - Matthew
Pool.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"God hath spoken in his holiness." That is, by Samuel he hath promised,
as he is an holy God, and true of his word, that I should be king of all
Israel, and now he hath performed it. ([Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)..md) Yet Calvin speaks of it as not
yet performed; but the course of the history makes it plain that David
was now king over the parts of which he here speaketh. "I will divide
Shechem," as subject to me, as Joshua having the land under him, divided
it amongst his people: so David being king over all the parts of the
land, divides to his followers such portions as belonged unto them by
inheritance, from which happily some of them had been expelled in the
time of Ish-bosheth his reign; or some families in the time of those
wars might be utterly wasted away, and so the king having free power to
dispose of their lands, might give them amongst his men, and take part
to himself. - John Mayer.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"God hath spoken in his holiness." That is, he hath given out his word
from heaven, the habitation of his holiness and of his glory; or, he
hath spoken it certainly, there is nothing but holiness in his word (and
that is the strength of words). David having received this word stands
assured, that as Shechem and Succoth, Gilead and Manasseh, Ephraim and
Judah would willingly submit to him and yield obedience: so, also, that
Moab, Edom, and Philistia, who were his professed enemies, should be
subdued to him. He expected to conquer and triumph over them, to put
them to the basest offices, as his vassals, because God had decreed and
spoken it in his holiness. God hath spoken the word, saith he, therefore
it shall be done, yea, 'tis done; and therefore David cried, All's mine,
Gilead is mine, Manasseh is mine, Moab and Edom are mine, as soon as God
had spoken the word. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"I will divide Shechem." It is as much as if he should say, I will not
look to have my share measured out by others, but I will divide it, and
measure myself, and will be the right owner and possessor thereof. -
Thomas Wilcocks.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"I will divide Shechem," etc. Of Shechem and the Valley of Succoth, or
booths, so called from Jacob's making booths, and leading his cattle
there. (See [Gen 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#017.md), [Gen
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#018)..md) By these are meant Samaria;
and David's dividing or meting them out, is a phrase to express his
dominion over them, in being part of the regal power to distribute his
province into cities and regions, and place judges and magistrates over
them. To these the addition of Gilead (which contains the whole region
of Bashan, etc., on the other side of Jordan), and then the mention of
Manasseh and Ephraim, are designed, as by so many parts, to denote the
kingdom of Israel, or the ten tribes; and their being his, and "the
strength of his head," notes him to be the Lord over them, and to make
use of their strength of his wars, for the defending or enlarging his
dominions. And then "Judah (מחוקקי) is my lawgiver;" as it refers to
Jacob's prophecy of the sceptre and lawgiver not departing from Judah,
denoting that to be the royal tribe; so by it is signified the kingdom
of Judah (under which Benjamin is comprehended), that David is possessed
of that also. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"Succoth." If the preceding views are correct, we may rest in the
result, that the present Sâkût represents the name and site of the
ancient Succoth ... We passed obliquely along the northern slope of the
same broad swell, where the ground was covered only by a thick crop of
thistles. On our right was a region of lower ground to which we
gradually descended; full of grass, wild oats, and thistles, with an
occasional thornbush. The soil was like that of an Ohio bottom. The
grass, intermingled with tall daisies and the wild oats, reached to the
horses' backs; while the thistles sometimes overtopped the riders'
heads. All was now dry; and in some places it was difficult to make our
way through the exuberant growth. At last we came to the cause of this
fertility, a fine brook winding along the bottom. We crossed it, and
passed up again obliquely over another like swell, covered as before
only with thistles. Here was an ancient oil vat, very large and of a
single stone; it was evidently brought hither, and indicates the former
growth of the olive in these parts. We struck the same stream again at
its source, called 'Ain el-Beida, a large and fine fountain surrounded
with gardens of cucumbers, and watering an extensive tract. We were here
on the edge of the higher portion of the Ghr, where low ridges and
swells project out from the foot of the western mountains, and form a
rolling plain or plateau, which is well watered, arable, and very
extensively cultivated for wheat, The tract further east, which we had
now crossed, may be said to extend to the high bank of the lower Jordan
valley. It is less elevated, is more generally level, though crossed by
low swells between the water-courses, and has little tillage. The
inhabitants of Tbs are divided into three hostile parties; and they
carry their divisions into their agriculture in the Ghr. One party sows
at 'Ain el-Beida, where we now were; another around 'Ain Mak-hz, more in
the north; and the third at Ridghah, Skt, and further south. The people
of Teysr also sow on the south of Mlih; the water of which is used for
irrigation. The whole tract north of Wady Mlih was said to be farmed
from the government by one of the Sheikhs of the Jenr family, who live
at Jeba, and in its neighbourhood. By him it is again let to the
different villages. - Robinson's "Biblical Researches In Palestine."

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md), [Psa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

The chief and principal places where the seditious party had their
residence and abode, were those which the Psalmist mentioneth in the
[Psa 60:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md), namely Schechem, a city
in the tribe of Ehpraim; Succoth, a city in the tribe of Gad; Gilead and
Manasseh, the utmost borders of the land of Canaan, beyond Jordan. These
were some of the chief places which sided with Ish-bosheth whilst he
lived, as you may see, 2 Sam 2; and, as it seemeth, they still cleaved
to the house of Saul after he was dead, not acknowledging David for
their king. - John Brinsley.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

"Gilead is mine and Manasseh is mine." That is to say, I will possess
myself of them and rule over them; not as a conqueror over slaves, but
as a lord over subjects, as a father over children, owning and
acknowledging them as mine. They are my inheritance, and shall be my
people, my subjects. - John Brinsley.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

"Ephraim also is the strength of mine head." The strong and warlike
tribe of Ephraim being to the state what the helmet is to the warriors
in battle; or, perhaps the allusions is to [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017.md) : "His glory is like the
firstling of his bullock, and his horns are like the horns of unicorns:
with them he shall push the nations." - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

"Judah is (or shall be) my lawgiver," i.e., all his subjects should be
brought under one Head, one governor, who should give them laws,
according to which they should be ordered or governed, which power and
authority belonged to the tribe of Judah, according to that prophecy of
Jacob ([Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010).md), to which the
Psalmist here alludeth. No way, no means to bring the people unto unity,
to bring them into one body, but by bringing them under one head, one
lawgiver, by whose laws they may be regulated and governed. Now in the
church, and in matters of religion, this one Head is Christ, even that
"Lion of the tribe of Judah," as he is called ([Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005).md). He is the Law-giver of his
church, and let him so be. This will be found one, ay, and the only
means to breed an holy and religious unity, and bring home straying,
wandering sheep. - John Brinsley

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

No government could stand which was not resident in Judah. - John
Calvin.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

"Moab is my washpot." Implying that Moab should be reduced to slavery,
it being the business of a slave to present the wash-hand basin to his
master. With the Greeks, πλύνειν τινά, to wash down any one, was a slang
term, signifying to ridicule, abuse, or beat; hence we have the word
washpot applied to the subject of such treatment.

"You don't appear to be in your right senses, who make a washpot of me
in the presence of many men." Aristophanes. - Thomas S. Millington, in
"The Testimony of the Heathen to the Truths of Holy Writ," 1863.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008) (second clause.md)

When, keeping in view the idea of washing the feet, a person throws his
shoes, which he has taken off, to any one to betaken away or to be
cleaned - השׁליך with על and also with אל, [Kg1
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019.md) is "to throw to any one" - the
individual to whom it belongs to perform such an office must be a slave
of the lowest kind. - E. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

"Over Edom will I cast out my shoe," which notes either contempt of
them, as if he had said, I look upon them as worthy only to scrape and
make clean my shoes. Or secondly, conquest over them - I will walk
through Edom and subdue it. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

"Over Edom will I cast out my shoe." By extension, immission, or
projection of the shoe either upon the necks of people, Or over their
countries, is meant nothing else but to overcome, subdue, bring under
power, possess, and subject to vileness such men and such countries. The
very vulgar acceptation of the word possession, in the grammatical
sense, importeth as much; for the etymology of possessio is no more but
pedum positio. This manner of speaking hath also allusion to the
positive law recorded in Deuteronomy ([Deu
25:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#006).md); for the letter of the law
is, that if the kinsman would not marry the brother's widow and raise up
seed unto his brother; the widow loosing his shoe, and spitting in his
face, he lost the claim and interest of such possessions as belonged to
the woman in right of her husband. And the house of such a man was
called domus discalceati, that is to day, "The house of him that hath
his shoe loosed." The practice also of this law we find recorded in the
book of Ruth, in the case of Elimelech's land, between Boaz and the
kinsman, about the widow Ruth, who had her interest by right of her
husband in the said land. Moreover the frequent use of this phrase
meeting us very often in the book of God, makes this to be the meaning
of the words, as clear as the day. This king elsewhere singing his
trophies, saith, "They are fallen under my feet." "Caleb the son of
Jephunneh; he shall see it, and to him will I give the land that he hath
trodden upon." But the people must "not meddle with Mount Seir; for God
would not give them thereof so much as a foot's breadth;" yet even the
place whereon the soles of their feet should tread, from the wilderness
of Lebanon and from the river Euphrates unto the utmost sea, should be
theirs. [Psa 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#038.md); [Deu
1:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#036.md); [Deu
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#005.md). - William Loe, in "A sermon
before the King at Theobalds," entitled, "The King's Shoe, made and
ordained to trample on, and to tread down enemies," 1623

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

"Over Edom will I cast out my shoe." Turnus, having slain Pallas -

"Bestrode the corpse, and pressed it with his foot."

Virgil.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

Of the Philistines he says, Over Philistia it is mine to boast; for so I
would translate, and not, as is usual, Philistia, triumph thou over me,
which does not yield a consistent meaning. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008) (last clause.md)

Let not our adversaries triumph over our breaches. "Rejoice not against
me, O mine enemy." Or, if they will, let them triumph: "Triumph thou, O
Philistia, because of me, or, over me." - John Brinsley.

[Psa 60:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

Moab in the East, Edom in the South, and Philistia in the West (the
North is not mentioned, because the banner of David had already been
victorious there). - Augustus F. Tholuck.

[Psa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md)

"Who will lead me into Edom?" The entrance of Petra is by a narrow
gorge, lined by lofty precipices, formed by the channel of a rivulet.
This defile is nearly two miles in length. At some places the
overhanging rocks approach so near to each other that only two horsemen
can proceed abreast. - Dr. Tweedie, in "Ruined Cities of the East,"
1859.

[Psa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md)

The believer, when he promiseth to himself great things, must neither be
senseless of the difficulties of opposition which he is to meet with,
nor of his own inability to overcome difficulties; but being sensible of
both, most look to God for assistance and furniture to overcome; for
when David considered the strength of the fenced royal cities of the
enemy, he saith, "Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead
me into Edom? Wilt not thou, O God?" - David Dickson.

[Psa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011.md)

"For vain is the help of man." As they had lately experimented in Saul,
a king of their own choosing, but not able to save them from those proud
Philistines. - John Trapp.

[Psa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011.md)

So long as sight and reason find footing in matters, there is no place
for faith and hope; the abundance of human helps puts not grace to
proof, but the strength of faith is in the absence of them all. A man is
stronger when he goeth on his feet alone, than when he standeth by a
grip in his infancy, or leaneth on a staff in his old age the two feet
of faith and hope serve us best when we are fixed on the Rock of Sion
alone. - William Struther.

[Psa 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012.md)

"Through God we shall do," etc. In war these two must be joined, and
indeed in all actions: He, we; God and man. 1. "We shall do valiantly,"
for God helps not remiss, or cowardly, or negligent men. 2. And yet,
that being done, the work is his.... "He shall tread down;" the blow and
the overthrow are not to be attributed to us, but to him. - Adam Clarke.

[Psalms 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 60:1</span></span>

1 O God, thou hast cast us off, thou hast scattered us, thou hast been
displeased; O turn thyself to us again.

2 Thou hast made the earth to tremble; thou hast broken it: heal the
breaches thereof, for it shaketh.

3 Thou hast showed thy people hard things: thou hast made us to drink
the wine of astonishment.

[Psa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001.md)

Before the days of Saul, Israel had been brought very low; during his
government it had suffered from internal strife, and his reign was
closed by an overwhelming disaster at Gilboa. David found himself the
possessor of a tottering throne, troubled with the double evil of
faction at home, and invasion from abroad. He traced at once the evil to
its true source, and began at the fountainhead. His were the politics of
piety, which after all are the wisest and most profound. He knew that
the displeasure of the Lord had brought calamity upon the nation, and to
the removal of that displeasure he set himself by earnest prayer. "O
God, thou hast cut us off." Thou hast treated us as foul and offensive
things, to be put away; as mean and beggarly persons, to be shunned with
contempt; as useless dead boughs to be torn away from the tree which
they disfigure. To be cast off by God is the worst calamity that can
befal a man or a people; but the worst form of it is when the person is
not aware of it and is indifferent to it. When the divine desertion
causes mourning and repentance, it will be but partial and temporary.
When a cast-off soul sighs for its God it is not indeed cast off at all.
"Thou hast scattered us." David clearly sees the fruits of the divine
anger, he traces the flight of Israel's warriors, the breaking of her
power, the division in her body politic, to the hand of God. Whoever
might be the secondary agent of these disasters, he beholds the Lord's
hand as the prime moving cause, and pleads with the Lord concerning the
matter. Israel was like a city with a breach made in its wall, because
her God was wroth with her. These first two verses, with their
depressing confession, must be regarded as greatly enhancing the power
of the faith which in the after verses rejoices in better days, through
the Lord's gracious return unto his people. "Thou hast been displeased."
This is the secret of our miseries. Had we pleased thee, thou wouldst
have pleased us; but as we have walked contrary to thee, thou hast
walked contrary to us. "O turn thyself to us again." Forgive the sin and
smile once more. Turn us to thee, turn thou to us. Aforetime thy face
was towards thy people, be pleased to look on us again with thy favour
and grace. Some read it, "Thou wilt turn to us again," and it makes but
slight difference which way we take it, for a true-hearted prayer brings
a blessing so soon that it is no presumption to consider it as already
obtained. There was more need for God to turn to his people than for
Judah's troops to be brave, or Joab and the commanders wise. God with us
is better than strong battalions; God displeased is more terrible than
all the Edomites that ever marched into the valley of salt, or all the
devils that ever opposed the church. If the Lord turn to us, what care
we for Aram-naharaim or Aram-zobah, or death, or hell? but if he
withdraw his presence we tremble at the fall of a leaf.

[Psa 60:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#002.md)

"Thou hast made the earth to tremble." Things were as unsettled as
though the solid earth had been made to quake; nothing was stable; the
priests had been murdered by Saul, the worst men had been put in office,
the military power had been broken by the Philistines, and the civil
authority had grown despicable through insurrections and intestine
contests. "Thou hast broken it." As the earth cracks, and opens itself
in rifts during violent earthquakes, so was the kingdom rent with strife
and calamity. "Heal the breaches thereof." As a house in time of
earthquakes is shaken, and the walls begin to crack, and gape with
threatening fissures, so was it with the kingdom. "For it shaketh." It
tottered to a fall; if not soon propped up and repaired it would come
down in complete ruin. So far gone was Israel, that only God's
interposition could preserve it from utter destruction. How often have
we seen churches in this condition, and how suitable is the prayer
before us, in which the extremity of the need is used, as an argument
for help. The like may be said of our own personal religion, it is
sometimes so tried, that like a house shaken by earthquake it is ready
to come down with a crash, and none but the Lord himself can repair its
breaches, and save us from utter destruction.

[Psa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#003.md)

"Thou hast showed thy people hard things." Hardships had been heaped
upon them, and the Psalmist traces these rigorous providences to their
fountainhead. Nothing had happened by chance, but all had come by divine
design and with a purpose, yet for all that things had gone hard with
Israel. The Psalmist claims that they were still the Lord's own people,
though in the first verse he had said, "thou hast cast us off." The
language of complaint is usually confused, and faith in time of trouble
ere long contradicts the desponding statements of the flesh. "Thou hast
made us to drink the wine of astonishment." Our afflictions have made us
like men drunken with some potent and bitter wine; we are in amazement,
confusion, delirium; our steps reel, and we stagger as those about to
fall. The great physician gives his patients potent potions to purge out
their abounding and deep-seated diseases. Astonishing evils bring with
them astonishing results. The grapes of the vineyard of sin produce a
wine which fills the most hardened with anguish when justice compels
them to quaff the cup. There is a fire-water of anguish of soul which
even to the righteous makes a cup of trembling, which causes them to be
exceeding sorrowful almost unto death. When grief becomes so habitual as
to be our drink, and to take the place of our joys, becoming our only
wine, then are we in an evil case indeed.

[Psalms 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 60:4</span></span>

4 Thou has given a banner to them that fear thee, that it may be
displayed because of the truth, Selah.

5 That thy beloved may be delivered; save with thy right hand, and hear
me.

[Psa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#004.md)

Here the strain takes a turn. The Lord has called back to himself his
servants, and commissioned them for his service, presenting them with a
standard to be used in his wars. "Thou hast given a banner to them that
fear thee." Their afflictions had led them to exhibit holy fear, and
then being fitted for the Lord's favour, he gave them an ensign, which
would be both a rallying point for their hosts, a proof that he had sent
them to fight, and a guarantee of victory. The bravest men are usually
intrusted with the banner, and it is certain that those who fear God
most have less fear of man than any others. The Lord has given us the
standard of the gospel, let us live to uphold it, and if needful die to
defend it. Our right to contend for God, and our reason for expecting
success, are found in the fact that the faith has been once committed to
the saints, and that by the Lord himself. "That it may be displayed
because of the truth." Banners are for the breeze, the sun, the battle.
Israel might well come forth boldly, for a sacred standard was borne
aloft before them. To publish the gospel is a sacred duty, to be ashamed
of it a deadly sin. The truth of God was involved in the triumph of
David's armies, he had promised them victory; and so in the proclamation
of the gospel we need feel no hesitancy, for as surely as God is true he
will give success to his own Word. For the truth's sake, and because the
true God is on our side, let us in these modern days of warfare emulate
the warriors of Israel, and unfurl our banners to the breeze with
confident joy. Dark signs of present or coming ill must not dishearten
us; if the Lord had meant to destroy us he would not have given us the
gospel; the very fact that he has revealed himself in Christ Jesus
involves the certainty of victory. Magna est veritas et praevalebit.

"Hard things thou hast upon us laid,

And made us drink most bitter wine;

But still thy banner we've displayed,

And borne aloft thy truth divine.

"Our courage fails not, though the night

No earthly lamp avails to break,

For thou wilt soon arise in might,

And of our captors captives make."

"Selah." There is so much in the fact of a banner being given to the
hosts of Israel, so much of hope, of duty, of comfort, that a pause is
fitly introduced. The sense justifies it, and the more joyful strain of
the music necessitates it.

[Psa 60:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005.md)

"That thy beloved may be delivered." David was the Lord's beloved, his
name signifies "dear, or beloved," and there was in Israel a remnant
according to the election of grace, who Were the beloved of the Lord;
for their sakes the Lord wrought great marvels, and he had an eye to
them in all his mighty acts. God's beloved are the inner seed, for whose
sake he preserves the entire nation, which acts as a husk to the vital
part. This is the main design of providence, "That thy beloved may be
delivered;" if it were not for their sakes he would neither give a
banner nor send victory to it. "Save with thy right hand, and hear me."
Save at once, before the prayer is over; the case is desperate unless
there be immediate salvation. Tarry not, O Lord, till I have done
pleading: save first and hear afterwards. The salvation must be a right
royal and eminent one, such as only the omnipotent hand of God linked
with his dexterous wisdom can achieve. Urgent distress puts men upon
pressing and bold petitions such as this. We may by faith ask for and
expect that our extremity will be God's opportunity: special and
memorable deliverances will be wrought out when dire calamities appear
to be imminent. Here is one suppliant for many, even as in the case of
our Lord's intercession for his saints. He, the Lord's David, pleads for
the rest of the beloved, beloved and accepted in him the Chief Beloved;
he seeks salvation as though it were for himself, but his eye is ever
upon all those who are one with him in the Father's love. When divine
interposition is necessary for the rescue of the elect it must occur,
for the first and greatest necessity of providence is the honour of God,
and the salvation of his chosen. This is fixed fate, the centre of the
immutable decree, the inmost thought of the unchangeable Jehovah.

[Psalms 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 60:6</span></span>

6 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechern, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

7 Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of
mine head; Judah is my lawgiver;

8 Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe: Philistia,
triumph thou because of me.

[Psa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#006.md)

"God hath spoken in his holiness," Faith is never happier than when it
can fall back upon the promise of God. She sets this over against all
discouraging Circumstances; let outward providences say what they will,
the voice of a faithful God drowns every sound of tear. God had promised
Israel victory, and David the kingdom: the holiness of God secured the
fulfilment of his own covenant, and therefore the king spake
confidently. The goodly land had been secured to the tribes by the
promise made to Abraham, and that divine grant was an abundantly
sufficient warrant for the belief that Israel's arms would be successful
in battle. Believer make good use of this, and banish doubts while
promises remain. "I will rejoice," or "I will triumph." Faith regards
the promise not as fiction but fact, and therefore drinks in joy from
it, and grasps victory by it. "God hath spoken; I will rejoice;" here is
a fit motto for every soldier of the cross. "I will divide Shechem." As
a victor David would allot the conquered territory to those to whom God
had given it by lot. Shechem was an important portion of the country
which as yet had not yielded to his government; but he saw that by
Jehovah's help it would be, and indeed was all his own. Faith divides
the spoil, she is sure of what God has promised, and enters at once into
possession. "And mete out the valley of Succoth." As the east So the
west of Jordan should be allotted to the proper persons. Enemies should
be expelled, and the landmarks of peaceful ownership Set Up. Where Jacob
had pitched his tent, there his rightful heirs should till the soil.
When God has spoken, his divine shall, our "I will,", becomes no idle
boast, but the fit echo of the Lord's decree. Believer, up and take
possession of covenant mercies, "Divide Shechem, and mete out the valley
of Succoth." Let not Canaanitish doubts and legalisms keep thee out of
the inheritance of grace. Live up to thy privileges, take the good which
God provides thee.

[Psa 60:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#007.md)

"Gilead is mine, and Manasseh is mine." He claims the whole land on
account of the promise. Two other great divisions of the country he
mentions, evidently delighting to survey the goodly land which the Lord
had given him. All things are ours, whether things present or things to
come; no mean portion belongs to the believer, and let him not think
meanly of it. No enemy shall withhold from true faith what God has given
her, for grace makes her mighty to wrest it from the foe. Life is mine,
death is mine, for Christ is mine, "Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head." All the military power of the valiant tribe was at the command of
David, and he praises God for it. God will bow to the accomplishment of
his purposes all the valour of men: the church may cry, "the prowess of
armies is mine," God will overrule all their achievements for the
progress of his cause. "Judah is my lawgiver." There the civil power was
concentrated: the king being of that tribe sent forth his laws out of
her midst. We know no lawgiver, but the King who came out of Judah. To
all the claims of Rome, or Oxford, or the councils of men, we pay no
attention; we are free from all other ecclesiastical rule, but that of
Christ; but we yield joyful obedience to him: "Judah is my lawgiver."
Amid distractions it is a great thing to have good and sound
legislation, it was a balm for Israel's wounds, it is our joy in the
church of Christ.

[Psa 60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008.md)

Having looked at home with satisfaction, the hero-king now looks abroad
with exultation. "Moab," so injurious to me in former years, "is my
washpot." The basin into which the water falls when it is poured from an
ewer upon my feet. A mere pot to hold the dirty water after my feet have
been washed in it. Once she defiled Israel, according to the counsel of
Balaam, the son of Beor; but she shall be no longer able to perpetrate
such baseness; she shall be a washpot for those whom she sought to
pollute. The wicked as we see in them the evil, the fruit, and the
punishment of sin, shall help on the purification of the saints. This is
contrary to their will, and to the nature of things, but faith finds
honey in the lion, and a washpot in filthy Moab. David treats his foes
as but insignificant and inconsiderable; a whole nation he counts but as
a footbath for his kingdom. "Over Edom will I cast out my shoe." As a
man when bathing throws his shoes on one side, so would he obtain his
dominion over haughty Esau's descendants as easily as a man casts a
shoe. Perhaps he would throw his shoe as nowadays men throw their glove,
as a challenge to them to dare dispute his way. He did not need draw a
sword to smite his now crippled and utterly despondent adversary, for if
he dared revolt he would only need to throw his slipper at him, and he
would tremble. Easily are we victors when Omnipotence leads the way. The
day shall come when the church shall with equal ease subdue China and
Ethiopia to the sceptre of the Son of David. Every believer also may by
faith triumph over all difficulties and reign with him who hath made us
kings and priests. "They overcame through the blood of the Lamb," shall
yet be said of all who rest in the power of Jesus. "Philistia, triumph
thou because of me." Be so subdued as to rejoice in my victories over my
other foes. Or does he mean, I who smote thy champion have at length so
subdued thee that thou shalt never be able to rejoice over Israel again;
but if thou must needs triumph it must be with me, and not against me;
or rather is it a taunting defiance, a piece of irony? O proud
Philistia, where are thy vaunts? Where now thy haughty looks, and
promised conquests? Thus dare we defy the last enemy, "O death, where is
thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" So utterly hopeless is the
cause of hell when the Lord comes forth to the battle, that even the
weakest daughter of Zion may shake her head at the enemy, and laugh him
to scorn. O the glorying of faith! There is not a grain of vainglory in
it, but yet her holy boastings none can hinder. When the Lord speaks the
promise, we will not be slow to rejoice and glory in it?

[Psalms 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 60:9</span></span>

9 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

10 Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off? and thou, O God, which
didst not go out with our armies?

[Psa 60:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#009.md)

As yet the interior fortresses of Edom had not been subdued. Their
invading bands had been slain in the valley of salt, and David intended
to push his conquests even to Petra the city of the rock, deemed to be
impregnable. "Who will bring me into the strong city?," It was all but
inaccessible, and hence the question of David. When we have achieved
great success it must be a stimulus to greater efforts, but it must not
become a reason for self, confidence. We must look to the strong for
strength as much at the close of a campaign as at its beginning. "Who
will lead me into Edom?" High up among the stars stood the city of
stone, but God could lead his servant up to it. No heights of grace are
too elevated for us, the Lord being our leader, but we must beware of
high things attempted in self-reliance. Excelsior is well enough as a
cry, but we must look to the highest of all for guidance. Joab could not
bring David into Edom. The veterans of the valley of salt could not
force the passage, yet was it to be attempted, and David looked to the
Lord for help. Heathen nations are yet to be subdued. The-city of the
seven hills must yet hear the gospel. Who will give the church the power
to accomplish this? The answer is not far to seek.

[Psa 60:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#010.md)

"Wilt not thou, O God, which hadst cast us off?" Yes, the chastising God
is our only hope. He loves us still. For a small moment does he forsake,
but with great mercy does he gather his people. Strong to smite, he is
also strong to save. He who proved to us our need of him by showing us
what poor creatures we are without him, will now reveal the glory of his
help by conducting great enterprises to a noble issue. "And thou, O God,
which didst not go out with out armies?" The self-same God art thou, and
to thee faith cleaves. Though thou slay us, we trust in thee, and look
for thy merciful help.

[Psalms 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 60:11</span></span>

11 Give us help from trouble; for vain is the help of man.

12 Through God we shall do valiantly: for he it is that shall tread down
our enemies.

[Psa 60:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#011.md)

"Give us help from trouble." Help us to overcome the disasters of civil
strife and foreign invasion; save us from further incursions from
without and division within. Do thou, O Lord, work this deliverance,
"lot Vain is the help of man." We have painfully learned the utter
impotence of armies, kings, and nations without thine help. Our banners
trailed in the mire have proven our weakness without thee, but yonder
standard borne aloft before us shall witness to our valour now that thou
hast come to our rescue. How sweetly will this verse suit the tried
people of God as a frequent ejaculation. We know how true it is.

[Psa 60:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#012.md)

"Through God we shall do valiantly." From God all power proceeds, and
all we do well is done by divine operation; but still we, as soldiers of
the great king, are to fight, and to fight valiantly too. Divine working
is not an argument for human inaction, but rather is it the best
excitement for courageous effort, Helped in the past, we shall also be
helped in the future, and being assured of this we resolve to play the
man. "For he it is that shall tread down our enemies." From him shall
the might proceed, to him shall the honour be given. Like straw on the
thrashing-floor beneath the feet of the oxen shall we tread upon our
abject foes, but it shall rather be his foot which presses them down
than ours; his hand shall go out against them so as to put them down and
keep them in subjection. In the case of Christians there is much
encouragement for a resolve similar to that of the first clause. "We
shall do valiantly." We will not be ashamed of our colours, afraid of
our foes, or fearful of our cause. The Lord is with us, omnipotence
sustains us, and we will not hesitate, we dare not be cowards. O that
our King, the true David, were come to claim the earth, for the kingdom
is the Lord's, and he is the governor among the nations.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 61](psa061.md)

</div>
