<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa097)  [Next](psa099.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 98](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 98:0</span></span>

Title and Subject. - This sacred ode, which bears simply the title of "A
Psalm," follows fitly upon the last, and is evidently an integral part
of the series of royal Psalms. If [Psa
97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001.md) described the publication of the
gospel, and so the selling up of the kingdom of heaven, the present
Psalm is a kind of coronation hymn, officially proclaiming the
conquering Messiah as Monarch over the nations, with blast of trumpets,
clapping of hands, and celebration of triumphs. It is a singularly bold
and lively song. The critics have fully established the fact that
similar expressions occur in Isaiah, but we see no force in the
inference that therefore it was written by him; on this principle half
the books in the English language might be attributed to Shakespeare.
The fact is that these associated Psalms make up a mosaic, in which each
one of them has an appropriate place, and is necessary to the
completeness of the whole; and therefore we believe them to be each and
all the work of one and the same mind. Paul, if we understand him
aright, ascribes [Psa 95:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#001.md) to David,
and as we believe that the same writer must have written the whole
group, we ascribe this also to the son of Jesse. However that may be,
the song is worthy to rank among the most devout and soul-stirring of
sacred lyrics.

Division. - We have here three stanzas of three verses each. In the
first, [Psa 98:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md), the subject of
praise is announced; in the second, [Psa
98:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md), the manner of that praise is
prescribed; and in the third, [Psa
98:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md), the universal extent of it is
proclaimed.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md). - "A new song." The duty,
beauty, and benefit of maintaining freshness in piety, service, and
worship.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md). - "He hath done marvellous
things."

I. He hath created a marvellous universe.

II\. He has established a marvellous government.

III\. He hath bestowed a marvellous gift.

IV\. He hath provided a marvelous redemption.

V. He hath inspired a marvellous book.

VI\. He hath opened a marvellous fulness.

VII\. He hath effected a marvellous transformation. - W. Jackson.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md). - "The victory." The
victories of God in judgment, and in mercy: especially the triumphs of
Christ on the cross, and by his Spirit in the heart, and in and by the
church at large.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md). - "The Lord hath made known
his salvation."

I. The contents of which it is composed.

II\. The reasons for which it has been provided.

III\. The price at which it has been procured.

IV\. The terms on which it shall be imparted.

V. The way in which it must be propagated.

VI\. The manner in which its neglect will be punished. - W. J.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002) (first clause.md). -

I. What is salvation?

II\. Why it is called the Lord's: - "Salvation is of the Lord."

III\. How he has made it known.

IV\. For what purpose.

V. With what results. - E. G. Gange.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md). - The great privilege of
knowing the gospel.

I. In what it consists.

1\. Revelation by the Bible.

2\. Declaration by the minister.

3\. Illumination by the Spirit.

4\. Illustration in daily providence.

II\. To what it has led.

1\. We have believed it.

2\. We have so far understood it as to growingly rejoice in it.

3\. We are able to tell it to others.

4\. We abhor those who mystify it.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md). - Salvation's glory.

I. It is divine - "his salvation."

II\. It is consistent with justice - "his righteousness."

III\. It is plain and simple - "openly showed."

IV\. It is meant for all sorts of men - "heathen."

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003) (first clause.md). - The Lord's
memory of his covenant. Times in which he seems to forget it; ways in
which even in those times he proves his faithfulness; great deeds of
grace by which at other times he shows his memory of his promises; and
reasons why he must ever be mindful of his covenant.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003) (last clause.md). - "All the
ends of the earth."

I. Literally. Missionaries have visited every land.

II\. Spiritually. Men ready to despair, to perish.

III\. Prophetically. Dwell on the grand promises concerning the future,
and the triumphs of the church. - E. G. G.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md). - "All the ends of the
earth have seen," &c.

I. The greatest foreigners have seen it; many have "come from the east
and the west;" Greeks, Peter's hearers, the Eunuch, Greenlanders, South
Sea Islanders, Negroes, Red Indians, &c., &c.

II\. The ripest saints have seen it; they are at the right end of the
earth, stepping out of the wilderness into Canaan, &c.

III\. The vilest sinners have seen it; those who have wandered so far
that they could get no farther without stepping into hell. The dying
thief. The woman who was a sinner. Those whom Whitfield called "the
devil's castaways." - W. J.

[Psa 98:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md). - The right use of noise.

I. "Make a noise." Awake, O sleeper. Speak, O dumb.

II\. "Make a joyful noise." The shout of deliverance, of gratitude, of
gladness.

III\. "Make a loud noise, all the earth." Nature with her ten thousand
voices. The church with myriad saints.

IV\. "Make a joyful noise unto God." Praise him alone. Praise him for
ever. - E. G. G.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md). - Joy a needful ingredient
of praise. The Lord as King, an essential idea in adoration. Expression
in various ways incumbent upon us, when praising Joyfully such a King.

[Psa 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md), [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md). - Nature at worship. The
congregation is -

I. Vast. Sea, earth, rivers, hills.

II\. Varied. Diverse in character, word, aspect, each from the other,
constant and alike in this alone, that all, always worship God.

III\. Gladsome. In tins like the worshippers in heaven, and for the same
reason - sin is absent. - E. G. G.

[Psa 98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md). - The song of the sea, and
the hallelujah of the hills.

[Psa 98:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009.md). - The last judgment as a
theme for thankfulness.

[Psa 98:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009.md). - "Before the Lord." Where
we are, where our joy should be, where all our actions should be felt to
be, where we shall be - "before the Lord." Enquire - What are we before
the Lord? What shall we be when he cometh?

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The inscription of the Psalm in Hebrew is only the single word מזמור
Mizmor, "Psalm" (whence probably the title "orphan Mizmor" in the
Talmudic treatise Avodah Zara). - J. J. S. Perowne.

Title

Hengstenberg remarks, "This is the only Psalm which is entitled simply
'a Psalm.' This common name of all the Psalms cannot be employed here in
its general sense, but must have a peculiar meaning." He considers that
it indicates that this is the lyric accompaniment of the more decidedly
prophetical Psalm which precedes it, - in fact, the Psalm of that
prophecy. He also notes that in the original we have in [Psa
98:5-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md) words akin to the title brought
into great prominence, and perhaps this may have suggested it.

Title

It is at least interesting to notice that a song of Zion which so exults
in the king's arrival should be called pre-eminently מזמור Mizmor; as if
the Psalm of Psalms were that which celebrates Israel, and the earth at
large, blessed in Messiah's Advent. - Andrew A. Bonar.

Whole Psalm

A noble, spirit-stirring Psalm. It may have been written on the occasion
of a great national triumph at the time; but may, perhaps, afterwards be
taken up at the period of the great millennial restoration of all
things. The victory here celebrated may be in prophetic vision, and that
at Armageddon. Then will salvation and righteousness be openly
manifested in the sight of the hostile nations. Israel will be exalted;
and the blessed conjunction of mercy and truth will gladden and assure
the hearts of all who at that time are Israelites indeed. Godliness will
form the reigning characteristic of the whole earth. - Thomas Chalmers.

Whole Psalm

The subject of the Psalm is the praise of Jehovah. It consists of three
strophes of three verses each. The first strophe shows why, the second
how Jehovah is to be praised; and the third who are to praise him. -
Frederick Fysh.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is an evident prophecy of Christ's coming to save the world;
and what is here foretold by David is, in the Blessed Virgin's Song,
chanted forth as being accomplished. David is the Voice, and Mary is the
Echo.

1\. David. "O sing unto the Lord a new song." (The Voice.)Mary. "My soul
doth magnify the Lord." (The Echo.)

2\. David. "He hath done marvellous things." (The Voice.)Mary. "He that
is mighty hath done great things." (The Echo.)

3\. David. "With his own right hand and holy arm hath he gotten himself
the victory." (The Voice.)Mary. "He hath showed strength with his arm,
and scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts." (The Echo.)

4\. David. "The Lord hath made known his salvation; his righteousness
hath he openly showed," &c. (The Voice.)Mary. "His mercy is on them that
fear him, from generation to generation." (The Echo.)

5\. David. "He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house
of Israel." (The Voice.)Mary. "He hath holpen his servant Israel, in
remembrance of his mercy." (The Echo.)

These parallels are very striking; and it seems as if Mary had this
Psalm in her eye when she composed her song of triumph. And this is a
farther argument that the whole Psalm, whether it record the deliverance
of Israel from Egypt, or the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, is yet
to be ultimately understood of the redemption of the world by Jesus
Christ, and the proclamation of his gospel through all the nations of
the earth: and taken in this view, no language can be too strong, nor
poetic imagery too high, to point out the unsearchable riches of Christ.
- Adam Clarke.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"O sing unto the Lord a new song." This is man's end, to seek God in
this life, to see God in the next; to be a subject in the kingdom of
grace, and a saint in the kingdom of glory. Whatsoever in this world
befalleth us, we must sing: be thankful for weal, for woe: songs ought
always to be in our mouth, and sometimes a new song; for so David here,
"sing a new song" that is, let us put off the old man, and become new
men, new creatures in Christ: for the old man sings old songs: only the
new man sings a new song: he speaketh with a new tongue, and walks in
new ways, and therefore doth new things, and sings new songs; his
language is not of Babylon or Egypt, but of Canaan; his communication
doth edify men, his song glorify God. Or a new song, that is, a fresh
song, nova res, novum canticum, new for a new benefit, [Eph
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020.md), "Give thanks always for all
things." It is very gross to thank God only in gross, and not in parcel.
Hast thou been sick and now made whole? praise God with the leper, Luke
17: sing a new song for this new salve. Dost thou hunger and thirst
after righteousness, whereas heretofore thou couldst not endure the
words of exhortation and doctrine? sing a new song for this new grace.
Doth Almighty God give thee a true sense of thy sin, whereas heretofore
thou didst draw iniquity with cords of vanity, and sin as it were with
cart ropes, and wast given over to work all uncleanness with greediness?
O sing, sing, sing, a new song for this new mercy.

Or new, that is, no common or ordinary song; but as God's mercy toward
us is exceeding marvellous and extraordinary, so our thanks ought to be
most exquisite, and more than ordinary: not new in regard of the matter,
for we may not pray to God or praise God otherwise than he hath
prescribed in his word, which is the old way, but new in respect of the
manner and making, that as occasion is offered, we may bear our wits
after the best fashion to be thankful.

Or, because this Psalm is prophetical, a new song, that is, the song of
the glorious angels at Christ's birth, "Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, good will toward men," ([Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014).md); a song which the world never
heard before: that the seed of the woman should bruise the serpent's
head is an old song, the first that ever was sung; but this was no plain
song, till Christ did manifest himself in the flesh. In the Old
Testament there were many old songs, but in the New Testament a new
song. That "unto us is born a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord," is in
many respects a new song; for whereas Christ was but shadowed in the
Law, he is showed in the Gospel; and new, because sung of new men, of
all men. For the sound of the Gospel is gone through all the earth, unto
the ends of the world ([Rom 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018).md);
whereas in old time God's old songs were sung in Jewry: "His name is
great in Israel. In Salem also is his tabernacle, and his dwelling place
in Zion," [Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md), [Psa
76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md). - John Boys.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"A new song." O ye who are new in Christ, though formerly old in the Old
Adam, sing ye to the Lord. - Psalter of Peter Lombard, 1474.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"He hath done marvellous things." He has opened his greatness and
goodness in the work of redemption. What marvels has not Christ done?

1\. He was conceived by the Holy Ghost.

2\. Born of a virgin.

3\. Healed all manner of diseases.

4\. Fed thousands with a few loaves and fishes.

5\. Raised the dead.

6\. And what was more marvellous, died himself.

7\. Rose again by his own power.

8\. Ascended to heaven.

9\. Sent down the Holy Ghost.

10\. And made his apostles and their testimony the instruments of
enlightening, and ultimately converting, the world. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"His right hand." Since the Psalmist says, that Christ hath gotten him
the victory by his right hand and his arm, it is not only a
demonstration of his divine and infinite power, but also excludes all
other means, as the merits of saints and their meretricious works. -
Martin Luther.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"Holy arm." The creation was the work of God's fingers: "When I consider
thy heavens, the work of thy fingers," [Psa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#003.md); redemption a work of his arm;
"His holy arm hath gotten him the victory": yea, it was a work of his
heart, even that bled to death to accomplish it. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

A clergyman in the county of Tyrone had, for some weeks, observed a
little ragged boy come every Sunday, and place himself in the centre of
the aisle, directly opposite the pulpit, where he seemed exceedingly
attentive to the services. He was desirous of knowing who the child was,
and for this purpose hastened out, after the sermon, several times, but
never could see him, as he vanished the moment service was over, and no
one knew whence he came, or anything about him. At length the boy was
missed from his usual situation in the church for some weeks. At this
time a man called on the minister, and told him a person very ill was
desirous of seeing him; but added, "I am really ashamed to ask you to go
so far; but it is a child of mine, and he refuses to have any one but
you; he is altogether an extraordinary boy, and talks a great deal about
things that I do not understand." The clergyman promised to go, and
went, though the rain poured down in torrents, and he had six miles of
rugged mountain country to pass. On arriving where he was directed, he
saw a most wretched cabin indeed, and the man he had seen in the morning
was waiting at the door. He was shown in, and found the inside of the
hovel as miserable as the outside. In a corner, on a little straw, he
beheld a person stretched out, whom he recognised as the little boy who
had so regularly attended his church. As he approached the wretched bed
the child raised himself up, and, stretching forth his arms, said, "His
own right hand and his holy arm hath gotten him the victory," and
immediately he expired. - K. Arvine.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md)

"The Lord hath made known his salvation." By the appearance of his Son
in the flesh, and the wonders which he did. "His righteousness hath he
openly shewed," etc., in the gospel, to all men; that righteousness
which is called the "righteousness of God," and which is enjoyed by
faith of Jesus Christ, unto all and upon all them that believe; for
there is no difference. [Rom 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022.md). -
B. Boothroyd.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md)

"The Lord hath made known," etc. The word חדיץ denotes not only a
publication and promulgation, but also a clear and certain demonstration
which produces conviction and causes the matter to be laid up in the
mind and memory and preserved: for the proper signification of the root
ידע is to lay up what is to be preserved. The word גלה is added, which
properly means to uncover, to be uncovered, hence he revealed or
uncovered, that it might be both naked and clear, for the purpose of
more fully illustrating the character of the manifestation of the
Gospel, opposed to what is obscure, involved in shadows and types, and
veiled in legal ceremonies. Of which the apostle treats expressly in 2
Cor. 3. Lastly, when it is added, that in the sight of the nations this
uncovering is done, it signifies that this salvation pertains to them
also, that it comes to them without distinction, since the Gospel is
nakedly and clearly announced. From which it also clearly appears, that
the matter and reason of the new song are found in such a singular
event, since God who formerly permitted the nations to walk in their own
ways, now under Messiah calls all without distinction to salvation
through faith and newness of life. - Venema.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md)

"Made known:" He says not, He shewed, but He made known. Adam knew him,
and predicted concerning him, "A man shall leave father and mother, and
shall cleave to his wife, and they twain shall be one flesh." Abel knew
him, who offered the lamb; Seth knew him, and called upon him; Noah knew
him, and saved all the race in the ark; Abraham knew him, and offered up
his son to him. But because the world had forgotten him and worshipped
idols, the Lord made his Jesus known, when he sent the Word in flesh to
the Jews, and revealed his righteousness to the nations, when he
justified them through faith. Wherefore did he reveal him to the
nations? Because of his mercy. Wherefore did he make him known to the
Jews? Because of his truth, that is, his promise. - Honorius, the
Continuator of Gerhohus.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md)

"He hath remembered his mercy and his truth." The Psalmist very properly
observes, that God in redeeming the word "remembered his truth," which
he had given to Israel his people - language, too, which implies that he
was influenced by no other motive than that of faithfully performing
what he had himself promised. The more clearly to show that the promise
was not grounded at all on the merit or righteousness of man, he
mentions the "mercy" of God first and afterwards his "faithfulness"
which stood connected with it. The cause, in short, was not to be found
out of God himself, (to use a common expression,) but in his mere good
pleasure, which had been testified long before to Abraham and his
posterity. The word "remembered" is used in accommodation to man's
apprehension; for what has been long suspended seems to have been
forgotten. Upwards of two thousand years elapsed from the time of giving
the promise to the appearance of Christ, and as the people of God were
subjected to many afflictions and calamities, we need not wonder that
they should have signed, and given way to ominous fears regarding the
fulfilment of this redemption. - John Calvin.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md)

"He hath remembered his mercy and his truth." His mercy moved him to
make his promise, and his truth hath engaged him to perform it; and he
hath been mindful of both, by scattering the blessed influences of his
light and bounty over the face of the whole earth, and causing all
nations to see and partake of the salvation of God. - Matthew Hole ( -
1730).

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md)

"All the ends of the earth have seen," etc. O unhappy Judea, the ends of
the earth have seen the salvation of God, every land is moved to joy,
the whole globe is glad, the floods clap their hands, the hills rejoice;
yet the evil hearts of the Jews believe not, but are smitten with the
penalty of unbelief in the darkness of their blindness. - Gregory, in
Lorinus.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md)

"Have seen." There is a degree of point in the expression "have seen;"
it implies actual faith, united with knowledge, that moves the will to
love and to desire; for they cannot be said to have seen God's
salvation, who, content with nominal faith, never bestow a thought on
the Saviour. - Bellarmine.

[Psa 98:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md)

"Make a joyful noise." Bless God for a Christ. The Argive when delivered
by the Romans from the tyranny of the Macedonians and Spartans, Quae
guadia, quae vociferationes fuerunt! quid florum in Consulem
profuderunt! what great joys expressed they! what loud outcries made
they! The very birds that flew over them fell to the ground, astonied at
their noises. The crier at the Nemean games was forced to pronounce the
word Liberty, iterumque, iterumque, again, and again. - John Trapp.

[Psa 98:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md)

Wherewith is God to be praised? In a literal sense with all kind of
music: vocal, "sing unto the Lord:" chordal, "Praise him upon the harp:"
pneumatical, "with trumpets," etc. In an allegorical exposition (as
Euthymius interprets it) we must praise God in our actions, and praise
him in our contemplation; praise him in our words, praise him in our
works; praise him in our life, praise him at our death; being not only
temples (as Paul), but (as Clemens Alexandrinus call us) timbrels also
of the Holy Ghost. - John Boys.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md)

"With the harp, with the harp." The repetition made use of is
emphatical, and implies that the most ardent attempts men might make to
celebrate the great work of the world's redemption would fall short of
the riches of the grace of God. - John Calvin.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md)

"The voice of a Psalm." The sound of the Zimrah, זמרה, here, as in [Psa
81:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#002.md), is certainly the name of some
musical instrument. But what the particular instrument might be, which
went by that name, is quite uncertain. - Samuel Horsley.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md)

"The voice of a Psalm." With Psalms Jehoshaphat and Hezekiah celebrated
their victories. Psalms made glad the heart of the exiles who returned
from Babylon. Psalms gave courage and strength to the Maccabees in their
brave struggles to heir country's independence, and were the repeated
expression of their thanksgivings. The Lord of Psalmists and the Son of
David, by the words of a Psalm proved himself to be higher than David;
and sang Psalms with his apostles on the night before he suffered, when
he instituted the holy supper of his love. With Psalms Paul and Silas
praised God in the prison at midnight, when their feet were made fast in
the stocks, and sang so loud that the prisoners heard them. And after
his own example the apostle exhorts the Christians at Ephesus and
Colossae to teach and admonish one another with Psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs. Jerome tells us that in his day the Psalms were to be
heard in the fields and vineyards of Palestine, and that they fell
sweetly on the ear, mingling with the songs of birds, and the scent of
flowers in spring. The ploughman as he guided his plough chanted the
hallelujah, and the reaper, the vine dresser, and the shepherd sang the
songs of David. "These," he says, "are our love songs, these the
instruments of our agriculture." Sidonius Apollinaris makes his boatmen,
as they urge their heavily-laden barge up stream, sing Psalms, till the
river banks echo again with the hallelujah, and beautifully applies the
custom, in a figure, to the voyage of the Christian life. - J. J. S.
Perowne.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md)

"The voice of a Psalm." In D'Israeli's, "Curiosities of Literature"
there is a very curious piece upon Psalm-singing, in which he mentions
the spread of the singing of Psalms in France, which was first started
among the Romanists by the version of Clement Marot, the favoured bard
of Francis the First. In Marot's dedication occur the following lines: -

"Thrice happy they, who may behold,

And listen in that age of gold!

As by the plough the labourer strays,

And carman 'mid the public ways,

And tradesman in his shop shall swell

Their voice in Psalm or canticle,

Singing to solace toil; again

From woods shall come a sweeter strain!

Shepherd and shepherdess shall vie

In many a tender Psalmody;

And the Creator's name prolong,

As rock and stream return their song!

Begin then, ladies fair! begin

The age renew'd that knows no sin!

And with light heart, that wants no wing,

Sing! from this holy song-book, sing!"

The singing of these Psalms became so popular that D'Israeli suggests
that "it first conveyed to the sullen fancy of the austere Calvin the
project" of introducing the singing of Psalms into his Genevan
discipline. "This infectious frenzy of Psalm-singing," as Warton almost
blasphemously describes it, rapidly propagated itself through Germany as
well as France, and passed over to England. D'Israeli says, with a
sneer, that in the time of the Commonwealth, "Psalms were now sung at
Lord-Mayor's dinners and city feasts; soldiers sang them on their march
and at parade; and few houses which had windows fronting the streets,
but had their evening Psalms." We can only add, would to God it were so
again. - C.H.S.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md), [Psa
98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

These were, literally, the instruments most in use among the Jews, and a
spiritual signification has been attached to each instrument. They seem
to me to represent the cardinal virtues, the harp implying prudence; the
psaltery, justice; the trumpet, fortitude; and the cornet, temperance. -
Bellarmine.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md), [Psa
98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

It is evident that the Psalmist here expresses the vehement and ardent
affection which the faithful ought to have in praising God, when he
enjoins musical instruments to be employed for this purpose. He would
have nothing omitted by believers which tends to animate the minds and
feelings of men in singing God's praises. The name of God, no doubt,
can, properly speaking, be celebrated only by the articulate voice; but
it is not without reason that David adds to this those aids by which
believers were wont to stimulate themselves the more to this exercise;
especially considering that he Was speaking to God's ancient people.
There is a distinction, however, to be observed here, that we may not
indiscriminately consider as applicable to ourselves everything which
was formerly enjoined upon the Jews. I have no doubt that playing upon
cymbals, touching the harp and the viol, and all that kind of music
which is so frequently mentioned in the Psalms, was a part of the
education; that is to say, the puerile instruction of the law: I speak
of the stated service of the temple. For even now, if believers choose
to cheer themselves with musical instruments, they should, I think, make
it their object not to dissever their cheerfulness from the praises of
God. But when they frequent their sacred assemblies, musical instruments
in celebrating the praises of God would be no more suitable than the
burning of incense, the lighting up of lamps, and the restoration of the
other shadows of the law. The Papists, therefore, have foolishly
borrowed this, as well as many other things from the Jews. Men who are
fond of outward pomp may delight in that noise; but the simplicity which
God recommends to us by the apostle is far more pleasing to him. Paul
allows us to bless God in the public assembly of the saints only in a
known tongue, [Co1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#016.md). The voice of
man, although not understood by the generality, assuredly excels all
inanimate instruments of music; and yet we see what Paul determines
concerning speaking in an unknown tongue. What shall we then say of
chanting, which fills the ears with nothing but an empty sound? Does any
one object that music is very useful for awakening the minds of men and
moving their hearts? I own it; but we should always take care that no
corruption creep in, which might both defile the pure worship of God and
involve men in superstition. Moreover, since the Holy Spirit expressly
warns us of this danger by the mouth of Paul, to proceed beyond what we
are there warranted by him, is not only, I must say, unadvised zeal, but
wicked and perverse obstinacy. - John Calvin.

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md), [Psa
98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

The song and the stringed instruments belonged to the Levites, and the
trumpets to the priests alone. Kitto says the trumpets did not join in
the concert, but were sounded during certain regulated pauses in the
vocal and instrumental music. The harps and voices made the sweetness,
while the trumpets and horns added the strength; melody and energy
should combine in the worship of God. - C. H. S.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"Trumpets." חצצרות, Chatsotseroth; here only in the Psalter. These were
the straight trumpets (such as are seen on the Arch of Titus) used by
the priests for giving signals. [Num
10:2-10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002.md); [Ch1
15:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#024.md), [Ch1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#028.md), etc. The shofar, שׁופר
(cornet), was the ordinary curved trumpet, cornet, or horn. - William
Kay.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"Trumpets." The word here used is uniformly rendered trumpets in the
Scriptures, [Num 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002.md), [Num
10:8-10](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#008.md); [Num
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#006.md); et al. The trumpet was mainly
employed for convening a public assembly for worship, or for assembling
the hosts for battle. The original word, חצצרח chatsotserah, is supposed
to have been designed to imitate "the broken pulse-like sound of the
trumpet, like the Latin, taratantara." So the German trarara, and the
Arabic, hadddera. The word here used was given to the long, straight
trumpet. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"Trumpets." The trumpet served the same purpose, in a religious and
civil sense, as bells among Christians, and the voice among Mohammedans.
Indeed, it is understood that Mohammed directed the voice to be
employed, in order to mark a distinction between his own sect and the
Jews with their trumpets and the Christians with their bells. - Kitto's
Pictorial Bible.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"With trumpets." Origen calls the writings of the evangelists and the
apostles trumpets, at whose blast all the structures of idolatry and the
dogmas of the philosophers were utterly overthrown. He teaches likewise
that by the sound of the trumpets is prefigured the trumpet of the
universal judgment, at which the world shall fall in ruin, and whose
sound shall be joy to the just, and lamentation to the unjust. -
Lorinus.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"Before the Lord, the King." Since it is distinctly added before Jehovah
the King, and the words, with trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful
noise, are used, there seems to be a reference to that public rejoicing
commonly manifested at the coronation of kings, or the celebration of
undertakings for the public safety. This idea is not foreign to the
present passage, since Jehovah is represented as King and Saviour of the
people. - Venema.

[Psa 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md), [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

"Let the Sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein. Let the floods clap their hands."

And thou, majestic main!

A secret world of wonders in thyself,

Sound his stupendous praise, whose greater voice

Or bids you roar, or bids your roarings fall.

\- James Thomson.

[Psa 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md), [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

These appeals to nature in her great departments - of the sea in its
mighty amplitude, and the earth with its floods and hills - form, not a
warrant, but a call on Christian ministers to recognise God more in
their prayers and sermons as the God of Creation, instead of restricting
themselves so exclusively to the peculiar doctrines of Christianity. Do
the one, and not leave the other undone. - Thomas Chalmers.

[Psa 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md), [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

The setting forth the praise of Christ for the redemption of sinners,
may not only furnish work to all reasonable creatures; but also if every
drop of water in the sea, and in every river and flood, every fish in
the sea, every fowl of the air, every living creature on the earth, and
whatsoever else is in the world; if they all had reason and ability to
express themselves; yea, and if all the hills were able by motion and
gesticulation to communicate their joy one to another; there is work for
them all to set out the praise of Christ. - David Dickson.

[Psa 98:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md)

Matthew Henry on these verses quotes from Virgil's 4th Eclogue the
verses (of which we subjoin Dryden's translation) in which the poet, he
says, "either ignorantly or basely applies to Asinius Pollio the ancient
prophecies which at that time were expected to be fulfilled;" adding
that Ludovicus Vives thinks that these and many other things which
Virgil says of this long looked-for child "are applicable to Christ."

O of celestial seed! O foster son of Jove!

See, lab'ring Nature calls thee to sustain

The nodding frame of heav'n, and earth, and main!

See to their base restor'd, earth, seas, and air;

And joyful ages, from behind, in crowding ranks appear.

[Psa 98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

"Let the floods clap their hands." The clapping of the hands being a
token of delight and approbation, and the striking or dashing of the
water in a river being, for the noise of it, a resemblance of that, the
rivers are here said to clap their hands. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

Though the language be figurative, so far as it gives a voice to the
inanimate creation in its various departments, yet, like all the
figurative language of Scripture, it expresses a truth - that which the
Apostle has stated without a metaphor in the express revelation that the
"creation shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the
glorious liberty of the children of God." And this because the reason of
that bondage will no more exist. It is the consequence of sin, but when
the world shall be subjected to the righteous rule of its coming King
(as predicted in [Psa 98:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009).md), then
earth and all creation shall own its present Lord, and join its tribute
of praise to that of Israel and the nations, and the redeemed and
glorified church. - William De Burgh.

[Psa 98:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009.md)

The Psalter is much occupied in celebrating the benign fruits which
Christ's reign is to yield in all the earth. It will be a reign of
Holiness. This is its proper and distinctive nature. Under it, the ends
of the earth will fear God, and rejoice in his salvation. It will be a
reign of Justice. Under it, the wars and oppressions and cruelties, the
unequal laws and iniquitous institutions that have so long vexed and
cursed the world, shall find a place no more. This happy reformation is
usually foretold in the form of a proclamation that the Lord is coming
"to judge the earth." It is important, therefore, to keep in mind the
true sense and intention of that oft-repeated proclamation. It does not
refer, as an unwary reader might suppose, to the Judgment of the Great
Day. There is no terror in it. The Psalms that have it for their
principal burden are jubilant in the highest degree. The design of the
proclamation is to announce Christ in the character of a Peaceful Prince
coming to administer equal laws with an impartial hand, and so to cause
wrong and contention to cease in the earth. This is Christ's manner of
judging the earth. What he has already done in this direction enables us
to form a clear conception of what he will yet set himself to do. When
he designs to accomplish great and salutary reforms in the political and
social institutions of a people, he begins by dislodging bad principles
from men's minds and planting Scriptural principles in their stead; by
purging evil passions from men's hearts, and baptizing them with the
Spirit of truth and justice, godliness and lovingkindness. A sure
foundation having been thus laid for a better order of things, he will
by some storm of controversy, or of revolution sweep away the
institutions in which injustice has entrenched itself, and will thus
make it possible for righteousness to have free course. Oh what a store
of comfort for the down-trodden, the enslaved, the needy, is laid up in
the announcement that the Lord is coming to be the avenger of all such!
Well may all the creatures be invited to clap their hands for Joy at the
thought that he has taken this work in hand; that he sitteth upon the
floods; and that the storms that agitate the nations are the chariot in
which he rides to take possession of the earth, and make it an abode of
righteousness peace. - William Binnie.

[Psalms 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 98:1</span></span>

1 O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things:
his right hand, and his holy arm, hath gotten him the victory.

2 The Lord hath made known his salvation: his righteousness hath he
openly shewed in the sight of the heathen.

3 He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel:
all the ends of the earth have seen the salvation: of our God.

[Psa 98:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#001.md)

"O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he hath done marvellous things."
We had a new song before ([Psa
96:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001).md) because the Lord was coming,
but now we have another new song because he has come, and seen and
conquered. Jesus, our King, has lived a marvellous life, died a
marvellous death, risen by a marvellous resurrection, and ascended
marvellously into heaven. By his divine power he has sent forth the Holy
Spirit doing marvels, and by that sacred energy his disciples have also
wrought marvellous things and astonished all the earth. Idols have
fallen, superstitions have withered, systems of error have fled, and
empires of cruelty have perished. For all this he deserves the highest
praise. His acts have proved his Deity, Jesus is Jehovah, and therefore
we sing unto him as the Lord. "His right hand, and his holy arm, hath
gotten him the victory"; not by the aid of others, but by his own
unweaponed hand his marvellous conquests have been achieved. Sin, death,
and hell fell beneath his solitary prowess, and the idols and the errors
of mankind have been overthrown and smitten by his hand alone. The
victories of Jesus among men are all the more wonderful because they are
accomplished by means to all appearance most inadequate; they are due
not to physical but to moral power - the energy of goodness, justice,
truth; in a word, to the power of his holy arm. His holy influence has
been the sole cause of success. Jesus never stoops to use policy, or
brute force; his unsullied perfections secure to him a real and lasting
victory over all the powers of evil, and that victory will be gained as
dexterously and easily as when a warrior strikes his adversary with his
right hand and stretches him prone upon the earth. Glory be unto the
Conqueror, let new songs be chanted to his praise. Stirred by
contemplating his triumphs, our pen could not forbear to praise him in
the following hymn:

Forth to the battle rides our King;

He climbs his conquering car;

He fits his arrows to the string,

And smites his foes afar.

Convictions pierce the stoutest hearts,

They bleed, they faint, they die;

Slain by Immanuel's well-aimed darts,

In helpless heaps they lie.

Behold, he bares his two-edged sword,

And deals almighty blows,

His all-revealing, killing word

'Twixt joints and marrow goes.

Anon arrayed in robes of grace

He rides the trampled plain,

With pity beaming from his face,

And mercy in his train.

Mighty to save he now appears,

Mighty to raise the dead,

Mighty to stanch the bleeding wound,

And lift the fallen head.

Victor alike in love and arms,

Myriads before him bend;

Such are the Conqueror's matchless charms,

Each foe becomes his friend.

They crown him on the battle-field

Of all the nations King;

With trumpets and with cornets loud

They make the welkin ring.

The salvation which Jesus has accomplished is wrought out with wonderful
wisdom, hence it is ascribed to his right hand; it meets the
requirements of justice, hence we read of his holy arm; it is his own
unaided work, hence all the glory is ascribed to him; and it is
marvellous beyond degree, hence it deserves a new song.

[Psa 98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002.md)

"The Lord hath made known his salvation" by the coming of Jesus and by
the outpouring of the Holy Ghost, by whose power the gospel was preached
among the Gentiles. The Lord is to be praised not only for effecting
human salvation, but also for making it known, for man would never have
discovered it for himself; nay, not so much as one single soul would
ever have found out for himself the way of mercy through a Mediator; in
every case it is a divine revelation to the mind and heart. In God's own
light his light is seen. He must reveal his Son in us, or we shall be
unable to discern him. "His righteousness hath he openly shewed in the
sight of the heathen." This word "righteousness" is the favourite word
of the apostle of the Gentiles; he loves to dwell on the Lord's method
of making man righteous, and vindicating divine justice by the atoning
blood. What songs ought we to render who belong to a once heathen race,
for that blessed gospel which is the power of God unto salvation, "for
therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith." This
is no close secret; it is clearly taught in Scripture, and has been
plainly preached among the nations. What was hidden in the types is
"openly shewed" in the gospel.

[Psa 98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003.md)

"He hath remembered his mercy and his truth toward the house of Israel."
To them Jesus came in the flesh, and to them was the gospel first
preached; and though they counted themselves unworthy of eternal life,
yet the covenant was not broken, for the true Israel were called into
fellowship and still remain so. The mercy which endureth for ever, and
the fidelity which cannot forget a promise, secure to the chosen seed
the salvation long ago guaranteed by the covenant of grace. "All the
ends of the earth have seen the salvation of our God." Not to Abraham's
seed alone after the flesh, but to the elect among all nations, has
grace been given; therefore, let the whole church of God sing unto him a
new song. It was no small blessing, or little miracle, that throughout
all lands the gospel should be published in so short a time, with such
singular success and such abiding results. Pentecost deserves a new song
as well as the Passion and the Resurrection; let our hearts exult as we
remember it. Our God, our own far ever blessed God, has been honoured by
those who once bowed down before dumb idols; his salvation has not only
been heard of but seen among all people, it has been experienced as well
as explained; his Son is the actual Redeemer of a multitude out of all
nations.

[Psalms 98:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 98:4</span></span>

4 Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth; make a loud noise,
and rejoice, and sing praise.

5 Sing unto the Lord with the harp; with the harp, and the voice of a
Psalm.

6 With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise before the Lord,
the King.

In these three verses we are taught how to praise the Lord.

[Psa 98:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#004.md)

"Make a joyful noise unto the Lord, all the earth." Every tongue must
applaud, and that with the vigour which joy of heart alone can arouse to
action. As men shout when they welcome a king, so must we. Loud
hosannas, full of happiness, must be lifted up. If ever men shout for
joy it should be when the Lord comes among them in the proclamation of
his gospel reign. John Wesley said to his people, "Sing lustily, and
with a good courage. Beware of singing as if you were half dead or half
asleep; but lift up your voice with strength. Be no more afraid of your
voice now, nor more ashamed of its being heard, than when you sung the
songs of Satan." "Make a loud noise, and rejoice, and sing praise;" or
"Burst forth, and sing, and play." Let every form of exultation be used,
every kind of music pressed into the service till the accumulated praise
causes the skies to echo the joyful tumult. There is no fear of our
being too hearty in magnifying the God of our salvation, only we must
take care that the song comes from the heart, otherwise the music is
nothing but a noise in his ears, whether it be caused by human throats,
or organ pipes, or far-resounding trumpets. Loud let our hearts ring out
the honours of our conquering Saviour; with all our might let us extol
the Lord who has vanquished all our enemies, and led our captivity
captive. He will do this best who is most in love with Jesus: -

"I've found the pearl of greatest price,

My heart doth sing for joy;

And sing I must, a Christ I have,

Oh, what a Christ have!"

[Psa 98:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#005.md)

"Sing unto the Lord with the harp." Skill in music should not be
desecrated to the world's evil mirth, it should aid the private
devotions of the saint, and then, like George Herbert, he will sing, -

"My God, my God,

My music shall find thee,

And every string

Shall have his attribute to sing."

Martin Luther was thus wont to praise the Lord, whom he loved so well.
God's praises should be performed in the best possible manner, but their
sweetness mainly lies in spiritual qualities. The concords of faith and
repentance, the harmonies of obedience and love are true music in the
ear of the Most High, and better please him than "heaving bellows taught
to blow," though managed by the noblest master of human minstrelsy.
"With the harp." A very sweet instrument of music, and capable of great
expression. The repetition of the word is highly poetical, and shows
that the daintiest expressions of poetry are none too rich for the
praise of God. His worship should be plain, but not uncouth, if we can
compass elegancies of expression there are occasions upon which they
will be most appropriate; God, who accepts the unlettered ditty of a
ploughman, does not reject the smooth verse of a Cowper, or the sublime
strains of a Milton. All repetitions are not vain repetitions, in sacred
song there should be graceful repeats, they render the sense emphatic,
and help to fire the soul; even preachers do not amiss when they dwell
on a word and sound it out again and again, till dull ears feel its
emphasis. "And the voice of a Psalm," or with a musical voice, as
distinguished from common speech. Our voice has in it many modulations;
there is the voice of conversation, the voice of complaint, the voice of
pleading, the voice of command, and there ought to be with each of us
the voice of a Psalm. Man's voice is at its best when it sings the best
words in the best spirit to the best of Beings. Love and war must not
monopolise the lyric muse; the love of God and the conquests of Immanuel
should win to themselves man's sweetest strains. Do we sing enough unto
the Lord? May not the birds of the air rebuke our sullen and ungrateful
silence.

[Psa 98:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md)

"With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful noise." God's worship
should be heartily loud. The far resounding trump and horn well
symbolise the power which should be put forth in praise. "Before the
Lord, the King." On coronation days, and when beloved monarchs ride
abroad, the people shout and the trumpets sound till the walls ring
again. Shall men be more enthusiastic for their earthly princes than for
the divine King? Is there no loyalty left among the subjects of the
blessed and only Potentate? King Jehovah is his name; and there is none
like it, have we no joyful noise for him? Let but the reigning power of
Jesus be felt in the soul and we shall cast aside that chill mutter,
drowned by the pealing organ, which is now so commonly the substitute
for earnest congregational singing.

Say, if your hearts are tuned to sing,

Is there a subject greater?

Harmony all its strains may bring,

But Jesus' name is sweeter.

Who of his love doth once partake,

He evermore rejoices:

Melody in our hearts we make,

Melody with our voices.

[Psalms 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 98:7</span></span>

7 Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the world, and they that
dwell therein.

8 Let the floods clap their hands; let the hills be joyful together

9 Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth; with righteousness
shall he judge the world, and the people with equity.

[Psa 98:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#007.md)

"Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof" Even its thunders will not
be too grand for such a theme. Handel, in some of his sublime choruses,
would have been glad of its aid to express his lofty conceptions, and
assuredly the inspired Psalmist did well to call in such infinite
uproar. The sea is his, let it praise its Maker. Within and upon its
bosom it bears a wealth of goodness, why should it be denied a place in
the orchestra of nature? Its deep bass will excellently suit the mystery
of the divine glory. "The world, and they that dwell therein." The land
should be in harmony with the ocean. Its mountains and plains, cities
and villages, should prolong the voice of jubilee which welcomes the
Lord of all. Nothing can be more sublime than this verse; the muses of
Parnassus cannot rival the muse of Zion, the Castalian fount never
sparkled like that "fount of every blessing" to which sacred bards are
wont to ascribe their inspiration. Yet no song is equal to the majesty
of the theme when Jehovah, the King, is to be extolled.

[Psa 98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md)

"Let the floods clap their hands." The rolling rivers, the tidal
estuaries, the roaring cataracts, are here summoned to pay their homage,
and to clap their hands, as men do when they greet their sovereigns with
acclamation. "Let the hills be joyful together," or in concert with the
floods. Silent as are the mighty mountains, let them forget themselves,
and burst forth into a sublime uproariousness of mirth, such as the poet
described when he wrote those vivid lines -

"Far along,

From peak to peak, the rattling crags among,

Leaps the live thunder! Not from one lane cloud,

But every mountain now hath found a tongue,

And Jura answers, through her misty shroud,

Back to the joyous Alps, who car to her aloud."

[Psa 98:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#009.md)

"Before the Lord; for he cometh to judge the earth." Stiller music such
as made the stars twinkle with their soft kind eyes suited his first
coming at Bethlehem, but his second advent calls for trumpets, for he is
a judge; and for all earth's acclamations, for he has put on his royal
splendour. The rule of Christ is the joy of nature. All things bless his
throne, yea, and the very coming of it. As the dawn sets the earth
weeping for joy at the rising of the sun, till the dewdrops stand in her
eyes, so should the approach of Jesu's universal reign make all creation
glad. "With righteousness shall he judge the world, and the people with
equity." This is the joy of it. No tyrant and no weakling is he, to
oppress the good or to indulge the vain, his law is good, his action
right, his government the embodiment of justice. If ever there was a
thing to rejoice in upon this poor, travailing earth, it is the coming
of such a deliverer, the ascension to the universal throne of such a
governor. All hail, Jesus! all hail! Our soul faints with delight at the
sound of thine approaching chariots, and can only cry, "Come quickly.
Even so, come quickly, Lord Jesus!"

Keble's version of [Psa 98:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#006.md) is so
truly beautiful that we cannot deny our readers the luxury of perusing
it: -

"Ring out, with horn and trumpet ring,

In shouts before the Lord the King:

Let ocean with his fulness swing

In restless unison:

"Earth's round and all the dwellers there,

The mighty floods the burden bear,

And clap the hand: in choral air

Join every mountain lone.

"Tell out before the Lord, that he

Is come, the Judge of earth to be,

To judge the world in equity,

Do right to realm and throne."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 99](psa099.md)

</div>
