<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa051)  [Next](psa053) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 52:0</span></span>

Title - To the Chief Musician - Even short Psalms, if they record but
one instance of the goodness of the Lord, and rebuke but briefly the
pride of man, are worthy of our best minstrelsy. When we see that each
Psalm is dedicated to "the chief musician," it should make us value our
Psalmody, and forbid us to praise the Lord carelessly. Maschil. An
instructive. Even the malice of a Doeg may furnish instruction to a
David. A Psalm of David. He was the prime object of Doeg's doggish
hatred, and therefore the most fitting person to draw from the incident
the lessons concealed within it. When Doeg the Edomite came and told
Saul, and saith unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech. By
this deceitful tale-bearing, he procured the death of all the priests at
Nob: though it had been a crime to have succoured David as a rebel, they
were not in their intent and knowledge guilty of the fault. David felt
much the villany of this arch-enemy, and here he denounces him in
vigorous terms; it malt be also that he has Saul in his eye.

Division - We shall follow the sacred pauses marked by the Selahs of the
poet.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001) - The confidence of faith.

I. The circumstances were distressing.

1\. David was misjudged.

2\. David exiled.

3\. A bad man in power.

4\. God's priests slain.

II\. The consolation was abiding.

1\. There is a God.

2\. He is good.

3\. His goodness continues.

4\. Good will, therefore, overcome.

III\. The rejoinder was triumphant, "Why boastest thou?"

1\. The mischief did not touch the main point.

2\. It would be overruled.

3\. It would recoil.

4\. It would expose the perpetrators to scorn.

[Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003) - In what cases men clearly
love evil more than good.

[Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007), [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008) - The worldling like an uprooted
tree, the believer a vigorous, well-planted olive.

[Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008) - The believer's character,
position, confidence, and continuance.

[Psa 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009) - The double duty, and the
double reason: the single heart and its single object.

[Psa 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009) - What God has done, what we
will do, and why.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

That Maschil means a sacred composition, is evident from the[Psa
47:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007)of the 47th Psalm, where the
passage which we render, "Sing ye praises with understanding," is
literally, "Sing ye a Maschil," or song of instruction. This word occurs
as a title in thirteen places; and six times is prefixed to compositions
of David's. In several instances it occurs in consecutive Psalms; i.e.,
in the [Psa 42:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001)(of which the [Psa
43:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#001)is the sequel), the 44th and
45th, the [Psa 52:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001), [Psa
53:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001), [Psa
54:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001), and 55th, the 88th and 89th. A
circumstance which favours the notion that the term was one peculiarly
used by some particular editor or collector of a certain portion of the
Psalter. - John Jebb.

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001) (first clause)

Why doth he glory in malice that is mighty? that is, he, that in malice
is mighty, why doth he glory? There is need that a man be mighty but in
goodness, not in malice. Is it any great thing to glory in malice? To
build a house doth belong to few men, any ignorant man you please can
pull down. To sow wheat, to dress the crop, to wait until it ripen, and
in that fruit on which one has laboured to rejoice, doth belong to few
men: with one spark any man you please can burn all the crop.... What
art thou about to do, O mighty man, what art thou about to do, boasting
thyself much? Thou art about to kill a man.: this thing also a scorpion,
this also a fever, this also a poisonous fungus can do. To this is thy
mightiness reduced, that it be made equal to a poisonous fungus! -
Augustine.

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

By "mischief" is understood not simply what evil he had done, but the
prosperity which he now enjoyed, obtained through mischief; as is clear
both from the word boasting and from the seventh verse.... Formerly he
was the chief of Saul's shepherds ([Sa1
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#008)), but by that wicked destruction
of the priests of God by Saul, and the execution of the cruel sentence,
he obtained the chief place near to the king (ibid. [Sa1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009)). - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

"O mighty man." These words may be added either by way of irony, as if
he had said, A great deal of valour and prowess you have shown in
slaying a company of unarmed men, the priests of the Lord, yea, women
and children, no way able to resist you; or else to imply the ground of
his vain boasting, to wit, either his present greatness, as being a man
in great place, and of great power with Saul; or the great preferments
he expected from Saul. - Arthur Jackson.

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

"The goodness of God endureth continually." He contrasts the goodness of
God with the wealth and might of Doeg, and the foundation of his own
confidence as widely different from that of Doeg, his own placed upon
the goodness of God, enduring for ever and showing itself effectual. It
is as if he had said, The goodness of God to which I trust, is most
powerful and the same throughout all time, and in it I shall at all
times most surely rejoice that goodness of God, since now it sustains
me, so it will exalt me in its own good time; it therefore is, and will
be above me.... Not without emphasis does he say the goodness אל of the
strong God, a contrast to Doeg the hero, and the ruinous foundation of
his fortune. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)

"Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs, like a sharp razor, working
deceitfully." Thus our version. But I do not very well understand the
propriety of the tongue's devising mischief, and devising it like a
sharp razor. But we may easily avoid this harsh comparison by rendering
the words: Thou contrivest mischiefs with thy tongue, as with a sharp
razor, O thou dealer in deceit: i.e., Thou contrivest with thy smooth
and flattering tongue to wound the reputation and character of others,
as though thou wast cutting their throats with a smooth razor. - Samuel
Chandler.

[Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)

"Like a sharp razor," that instead of shaving the hair lanceth the
flesh; or missing the beard cutteth the throat. - John Trapp.

[Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)

The smooth, adroit manner of executing a wicked device neither hides nor
abates its wickedness. Murder with "a sharp razor" is as wicked as
murder with a meat-axe or a bludgeon. A lie very ingeniously framed and
rehearsed in an oily manner, is as great a sin, and in the end will be
seen to be as great a folly as the most bungling attempt at deception. -
William S. Plumer.

[Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003)

"Thou lovest evil more than good." - "Thou hast loved evil," he says,
"more than good," not by simply preferring it, but by substituting it;
so that in the stead of good he hath done evil, and that from the inmost
love of his soul, bent upon evil; wherefore he does not say that he
admitted, but loved evil, not moral only, but physical, for the
destruction of his neighbours; so to have loved it, that he willed
nothing but evil, being averse to all good. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)

"Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue." - He was all
tongue; a man of words: and these the most deceitful and injurious. -
Adam Clarke.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

"God shall destroy thee for ever," etc. There are four words the
Psalmist makes use of to denote the utter vengeance that awaited this
deceitful and bloody wretch, all of them having a very strong meaning.
The first תּצך from גתץ, signifies to pull down, and break utterly into
pieces; as when an altar is demolished. ([Jdg
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#030); [Jdg
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#009).) The second, יחתּך from the root
חתה, which signifies to twist anything, or pluck it up by twisting it
round, as trees are sometimes twisted up. The third, ימּהך from גמח,
which properly signifies utterly to sweep away anything like dust or
chaff; and the expression ימּחך מאהל means not sweep thee away from thy
tent, but, sweep thee away, that thou mayest be no longer a tent;
thyself, thy family, thy fortune, shall be wholly and entirely swept
away, and dissipated for ever; to which the fourth word, שׁרשׁך,
answers, eradicabit re, he shall root thee out from the land of the
living. 'Tis impossible words can express a more entire and absolute
destruction. - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

"God shall likewise destroy thee for ever." Here are quot verba tot
tonotrua, so many words, so many thunderclaps. As thou hast destroyed
the Lord's priests, and their whole city, razing and harassing it; so
God will demolish and destroy thee utterly as an house pulled down to
the ground, so that one stone is not left upon another ([Lev
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#045)); so shall God pull down Doeg
from that high preferment, which he by sycophancy hath got at court. -
John Trapp.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

Wonderful is the force of the verbs in the original, which convey to us
the four ideas of laying prostrate, dissolving as by fire, sweeping away
as with a besom, and totally extirpating root and branch, as a tree is
eradicated from the spot on which it grew. If a farther comment be
wanted, it may be found in the history of David's enemies, and the
crucifiers of the son of David; but the passage will be fully and
finally explained by the destruction of the world of the ungodly at the
last day. - George Horne.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

The poet accumulates dire and heavy words, and mingles various metaphors
that he might paint the picture of this man's destruction in more lively
colours. Three metaphors appear to be joined together, the first taken
from a building, the second from a tent, the third from a tree, if
attention is given to the force and common acceptation of the words. -
Hermann Venema.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

"He shall take thee away;" or, seize thee, as coals are taken with the
tongs. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

"The righteous also shall see," etc. That is, to use the apt words of
Gejerus, "This shall not be a secret judgment, or known only to a few,
but common fame shall spread abroad throughout the kingdom, or city, the
notable punishment of the ungodly. The righteous also shall not pass by
such an event with indifference but with earnest eyes shall contemplate
it," etc. I add, and hence shall they take joy, and turn it to their own
use, to the greater fearing of God.... The righteous, upon whose
destruction the ungodly man was intent, shall survive and spend their
lives safe in the favour of God; they shall see with attentive mind,
they shall consider; nor, as worldlings are accustomed, shall they pass
it by without reflection or improvement, they shall see and fear,
namely, God the just judge; and instructed in his judgment by this
instance, they shall be the more careful to abstain from all designs and
crimes of the kind. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

"And shall laugh at him;" or over him - over the wicked man thus cast
down - they shall laugh. Such exultation, to our modern sensibilities,
seems shocking, because we can hardly conceive of it, apart from the
gratification of personal vindictiveness. But there is such a thing as a
righteous hatred, as a righteous scorn. There is such a thing as a shout
of righteous joy at the downfall of the tyrant and the oppressor, at the
triumph of righteousness and truth over wrong and falsehood. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)

"Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength." David having
showed (in [Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005), [Psa
52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)) the wicked man, by the righteous
judgment of God rooted out of the land of the living, shows us in the
next verse, the righteous man at once fearing and laughing at this
sight, as also pointing at him saying, "Lo this is the man that made not
God his strength." The words are a divine but cutting sarcasm. The
original is geber, which signifieth a strong, valiant man: as we say in
English, Lo, this is the brave and gallant man you wot of! But who was
this for a man? He was one, saith he, that "trusted in the abundance of
his riches." Oh! 'tis hard to abound in riches and not to trust in them.
Hence that caution ([Psa 62:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#010)): "If
riches increase, set not your heart upon them." Now, what is the setting
the heart upon riches but our rejoicing and trusting in them? And
because the heart of man is so easily persuaded into this sinful trust
upon riches, therefore the apostle is urgent with Timothy to persuade
all rich men - not only mere worldly rich men, but godly rich men -
against it; yea, he urgeth Timothy to persuade rich men against two
sins, which are worse than all the poverty in the world, yet the usual
attendants of riches - pride and confidence: "Charge them that are rich
in this world, that they be not highminded." [Ti1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017). - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007), [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)

Perhaps some of you have been long professors, and yet come to little
growth in love to God, humility, heavenly-mindedness, mortification; and
it is worth the digging to see what lies at the root of your profession,
whether there be sot a legal principle that hath too much influenced
you. Have you not thought to carry all with God from your duties and
services, and too much laid up your hopes in your own actings? Alas!
this is as so much dead earth, which must be thrown out, and gospel
principles laid in the room thereof. Try but this course, and try
whether the spring of thy grace will not come on apace. David gives an
account how he came to stand and flourish when some that were rich and
mighty, on a sudden withered and came to nothing. "Lo," saith he, "this
is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the abundance
of his riches." "But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I
trust in the mercy of God for ever and ever." While others trust in the
riches of their own righteousness and services, and make not Christ
their strength, do thou renounce all, and trust in the mercy of God in
Christ, and thou shalt be like a green olive when they fade and wither.
- William Gurnall.

[Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008) (first clause)

"But I an olive charged with fruit

In fertile soil that grows."

This appears to express the meaning of the Hebrew words, which our
translators render, "like a green olive tree," but which in reality have
no reference to the colour, but to the flourishing, vigorous, and
thriving state of the plant; just as Homer gives it the epithet of
"luxuriant," and "flourishing;" and Ovid that of "every-flourishing."
The fact is, the colour of the leaves of this tree is not a bright,
lively green; but a dark, disagreeable, or yellowish one. Scheuchzen
describes the leaves, as "superne coloris atrovirentis, vel in virdi
flavescentis." An English traveller writing from Italy, thus expresses
his disappointment about the olive tree: - "The fields, and indeed the
whole face of Tuscany, are in a manner covered with olive trees; but the
olive tree does not answer the character I had conceived of it. The
royal Psalmist and some of the sacred writers, speak with rapture of the
'green olive tree,' so that I expected a.beautiful green; and I confess
to you, I was wretchedly disappointed to find its hue resembling that of
our hedges when they are covered with dust." I have heard other
travellers express the same feeling of disappointment. "The true way of
solving the difficulty," as Harmer properly remarks, "is to consider the
word translated 'green,' not as descriptive of colour, but of some other
property; youthfulness, vigour, prosperity, or the like." - Richard
Mant.

[Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)

"Green olive tree in the house of God." - Several expositors fancifully
imagine that olive trees grew in certain of the courts of the
Tabernacle; but the notion must not be endured, it would have been too
near an approach to the groves of the heathen to have been tolerated, at
least in David's time. The text should surely be read with some
discretion; the poet does not refer to olive trees in God's house, but
compares himself in the house of God to an olive tree. This reminds us
of the passage, "Thy children like olive plants around thy table," where
some whose imaginations have been more lively than their judgments, have
seen a table surrounded, not with children, but with olive plants.
Whoever, in the realms of common sense ever heard of olive plants round
a table? If, as Thrupp supposes, Nob was situated upon the Mount of
Olives, we can, without any conjecture, see a reason for the present
reference to a flourishing olive tree. - C. H. S.

[Psa 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009)

He compares himself (1) With an olive tree, a tree always green, lasting
long and fruitful, whose fruit is most useful and grateful: so he paints
his future state as joyful, glorious, lasting and useful and pleasing to
men: plainly a reference is made to the royal and prophetic office, in
both of which he represents himself as an olive tree, by supplying
others with oil through his rule and instruction: (2) With the olive
growing luxuriantly, and abounding in spreading boughs, and so spacious
and large....(3) But why does he add in the house of God? That he might
indicate, unless I am deceived: (a) That he should possess a dwelling in
that place where the house of God was, whence he was now exiled through
the calumnies of Doeg and the attacks of Saul stirred up thereby: (b)
That he should perform distinguished service to the house of God, by
adorning it, and by restoring religion, now neglected, and practising it
with zeal: (c) That he should derive from God and his favour, whose that
house was, all his prosperity: (d) That he, like a son of God, should
rejoice in familiarity with him, and should become heir to his
possessions and promises. - Hermann Venema.

[Psalms 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 52:1</span></span>

1 Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man? the goodness of
God endureth continually.

2 Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs; like a sharp razor, working
deceitfully.

3 Thou lovest evil more than good; and lying rather than to speak
righteousness. Selah.

[Psa 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#001)

"Why boastest thou thyself in mischief, O mighty man?" Doeg had small
matter for boasting in having procured the slaughter of a band of
defenceless priests. A mighty man indeed to kill men who never touched a
sword! He ought to have been ashamed of his cowardice. He had no room
for exultation! Honourable titles are but irony where the wearer is mean
and cruel. If David alluded to Saul, he meant by these words pityingly
to say, "How can one by nature fitted for nobler deeds, descend to so
low a level as to find a theme for boasting in a slaughter so heartless
and mischievous?" "The goodness of God endureth continually." A
beautiful contrast. The tyrant's fury cannot dry up the perennial stream
of divine mercy. If priests be slain their Master lives. If Doeg for
awhile triumphs the Lord will outlive him, and right the wrongs which he
has done. This ought to modify the proud exultations of the wicked, for
after all, while the Lord liveth, iniquity has little cause to exalt
itself.

[Psa 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#002)

"Thy tongue deviseth mischiefs." Thou speakest with an ulterior design.
The information given was for Saul's assistance apparently, but in very
deed in his heart the Edomite hated the priests of the God of Jacob. It
is a mark of deep depravity, when the evil spoken is craftily intended
to promote a yet greater evil. "Like a sharp razor, working
deceitfully." David represents the false tongue as being effectual for
mischief, like a razor which, unawares to the person operated on, is
making him bald; so softly and deftly do Oriental barbers perform their
work. Or he may mean that as with a razor a man's throat may be cut very
speedily, under the pretence of shaving him, even thus keenly, basely,
but effectually Doeg destroyed the band of the priests. Whetted by
malice, and guided by craft, he did his cruel work with accursed
thoroughness.

[Psa 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003)

"Thou lovest evil more than good." He loved not good at all. If both had
been equally profitable and pleasant, he would have preferred evil. "And
lying rather than to speak righteousness." He was more at home at lying
than at truth. He spake not the truth except by accident, but he
delighted heartily in falsehood. "Selah." Let us pause and look at the
proud, blustering liar. Doeg is gone, but other dogs bark at the Lord's
people. Saul's cattle-master is buried, but the devil still has his
drovers, who fain would hurry the saints like sheep to the slaughter.

[Psalms 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 52:4</span></span>

4 Thou lovest all devouring words, O thou deceitful tongue.

5 God shall likewise destroy thee for ever, he shall take thee away, and
pluck thee out of thy dwelling place, and root thee out of the land of
the living. Selah.

[Psa 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#004)

"Thou lovest.", Thou hast a taste, a gusto for evil language. "All
devouring words." There are words that, like boa constrictors, swallow
men whole, or like lions, rend men to pieces; these words evil minds are
fond of. Their oratory is evermore furious and bloody. That which will
most readily provoke the lowest passions they are sure to employ, and
they think such pandering to the madness of the wicked to be eloquence
of a high order. "O thou deceitful tongue." Men can manage to say a
great many furious things, and yet cover all over with the pretext of
justice. They claim that they are jealous for the right, but the truth
is they are determined to put down truth and holiness, and craftily go
about it under this transparent pretence.

[Psa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#005)

"God shall likewise destroy thee for ever." Fain would the persecutor
destroy the church, and therefore God shall destroy him, pull down his
house, pluck up his roots, and make an end of him. "He shall take thee
away." God shall extinguish his coal and sweep him away like the ashes
of the hearth; he would have quenched the truth, and God shall quench
him. "And pluck thee out of thy dwelling place," like a plant torn from
the place where it grew, or a captive dragged from his home. Ahimelech
and his brother priests were cut off from their abode, and so should
those be who compassed and contrived their murder. "And root thee out of
the land of the living." The persecutor shall be eradicated, stubbed up
by the root, cut up root and branch. He sought the death of others and
death shall fall upon him. He troubled the land of the living, and he
shall be banished to that land where the wicked cease from troubling.
Those who will not "let live" have no right to "live." God will turn the
tables on malicious men, and mete to them a portion with their own
measure. "Selah." Pause again, and behold the divine justice proving
itself more than a match for human sin.

[Psalms 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 52:6</span></span>

6 The righteous also shall see, and fear, and shall laugh at him:

7 Lo, this is the man that made not God his strength; but trusted in the
abundance of his riches, and strengthened himself in his wickedness.

8 But I am like a green olive tree in the house of God: I trust in the
mercy of God for ever and ever.

9 I will praise thee for ever, because thou hast done it: and I will
wait on thy name; for it is good before thy saints.

[Psa 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#006)

"The righteous" - the object of the tyrant's hatred - shall outlive his
enmity, and "also shall see," before his own face, the end of the
ungodly oppressor. God permits Mordecai to see Haman hanging on the
gallows. David had brought to him the tokens of Saul's death on Gilboa.
"And fear." Holy awe shall sober the mind of the good man; he shall
reverently adore the God of providence. "And shall laugh at him." If not
with righteous joy, yet with solemn contempt. Schemes so far-reaching
all baffled, plans so deep, so politic, all thwarted. Mephistopheles
outwitted, the old serpent taken in his own subtlety. This is a goodly
theme for that deep-seated laughter which is more akin to solemnity than
merriment.

[Psa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#007)

"Lo." Look ye here, and read the epitaph of a mighty man, who lorded it
proudly during his little hour, and set his heel upon the necks of the
Lord's chosen. "This is the man that made not God his strength." Behold
the man! The great vainglorious man. He found a fortress, but not in
God; he gloried in his might, but not in the Almighty. Where is he now?
How has it fared with him in the hour of his need? Behold his ruin, and
be instructed. "But trusted in the abundance of his riches, and
strengthened himself in his wickedness." The substance he had gathered,
and the mischiefs he had wrought, were his boast and glory. Wealth and
wickedness are dreadful companions; when combined they make a monster.
When the devil is master of money bags, he is a devil indeed. Beelzebub
and Mammon together heat the furnace seven times hotter got the child of
God, but in the end they shall work out their own destruction. Wherever
we see today a man great in sin and substance, we shall do well to
anticipate his end and view this verse as the divine in memoriam.

[Psa 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008)

"But I," hunted and persecuted though I am, "am like a green olive
tree." I am not plucked up or destroyed, but am like a flourishing
olive, which out of the rock draws oil, and amid the drought still lives
and grows. "In the house of God." He was one of the divine family, and
could not be expelled from it; his place was near his God, and there was
he safe and happy, despite all the machinations of his foes. He was
bearing fruit, and would continue to do so when all his proud enemies
were withered like branches lopped from the tree. "I trust in the mercy
of God for ever and ever." Eternal mercy is my present confidence. David
knew God's mercy to be eternal and perpetual, and in that he trusted.
What a rock to build on! What a fortress to fly to!

[Psa 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#009)

"1 will praise thee for ever." Like thy mercy shall my thankfulness be.
While others boast in their riches I will boast in my God; and when
their glorying is silenced for ever in the tomb, my song shall continue
to proclaim the lovingkindness of Jehovah. "Because thou hast done it."
Thou hast vindicated the righteous, and punished the wicked. God's
memorable acts of providence, both to saints and sinners, deserve and
must have our gratitude. David views his prayers as already answered,
the promises of God as already fulfilled, and therefore at once lifts up
the sacred Psalm. "And I will wait on thy name." God shall still be the
Psalmist's hope; he will not in future look elsewhere. He whose name has
been so gloriously made known in truth and righteousness, is justly
chosen as our expectation for years to come. "For it is good before thy
saints." Before or among the saints David intended to wait, feeling it
to be good both for him and them to look to the Lord alone, and wait for
the manifestation of his character in due season. Men must not too much
fluster us; our strength is to sit still. Let the mighty ones boast, we
will wait on the Lord; and if their haste brings them present honour,
our patience will have its turn by-and-by, and bring us the honour which
excelleth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 53](psa053)

</div>
