<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa010)  [Next](psa012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 11:0</span></span>

Subject - Charles Simeon gives an excellent summary of this Psalm in the
following sentences: - "The Psalms are a rich repository of experimental
knowledge. David, at the different periods of his life, was placed in
almost every situation in which a believer, whether rich or poor, can be
placed; and in these heavenly compositions he delineates all the
workings of the heart. He introduces, too, the sentiments and conduct of
the various persons who were accessory either to his troubles or his
joys; and thus sets before us a compendium of all that is passing in the
hearts of men throughout the world. When he penned this Psalm he was
under persecution from Saul, who sought his tile, and hunted him 'as a
partridge upon the mountains.' His timid friends were alarmed for his
safety, and recommended him to flee to some mountain where he had a
hiding-place, and thus to conceal himself from the rage of Saul. But
David, being strong in faith, spurned the idea of resorting to any such
pusillanimous expedients, and determined confidently to repose his trust
in God."

To assist us to remember this short, but sweet Psalm, we will give it
the name of "The Song of The Stedfast."

Division - From [Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md) to [Psa
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md), David describes the temptation
with which he was assailed, and from [Psa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md) to [Psa
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007.md), the arguments by which his
courage was sustained.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md) - Faith's bold avowal, and
brave refusal.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md) - Teacheth us to trust in
God, how great soever our dangers be; also that we shall be many times
assaulted to make us put far from us this trust, but yet that we must
cleave unto it, as the anchor of our souls, sure and steadfast - Thomas
Wilcocks.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md) - The advice of cowardice,
and the jeer of insolence, both answered by faith. Lesson - Attempt no
other answer.

[Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002.md) - The craftiness of our
spiritual enemies.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md) - This may furnish a double
discourse.

I. If God's oath and promise could remove, what could we do? Here the
answer is easy.

II\. If all earthly things fail, and the very state fall to pieces, what
can we do? We can suffer joyfully, hope cheerfully, wait patiently, pray
earnestly, believe confidently, and triumph finally.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md) - Necessity of holding and
preaching foundation truths.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md) - The elevation, mystery,
supremacy, purity, everlastingness, invisibility, etc., of the throne of
God.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md), [Psa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md) - In these verses mark the fact
that the children of men, as well as the righteous, are tried; work out
the contrast between the two trials in their design and result, etc.

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md) - "The Lord trieth the
righteous."

I. Who are tried?

II\. What in them is tried? - Faith, love, etc.

III\. In what manner? - Trials of every sort.

IV\. How long?

V. For what purposes?

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md) - His soul hateth. The
thoroughness of God's hatred of sin. Illustrate by providential
judgments, threatenings, sufferings of the surety, and the terrors of
hell.

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md) - The trying of the gold,
and the sweeping out of the refuse.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md) - "He shall rain. Gracious
rain and destroying rain.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md) - The portion of the
impenitent.

[Psa 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007.md) - The Lord possesses
righteousness as a personal attribute, loves it in the abstract, and
blesses those who practice it.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

The most probable account of the occasion of this Psalm is that given by
Amyraldus. He thinks it was composed by David while he was in the court
of Saul, at a time when the hostility of the king was beginning to show
itself, and before it had broken out into open persecution. David's
friends, or those professing to be so, advised him to flee to his native
mountains for a time, and remain in retirement, till the king should
show himself more favourable. David does not at that time accept the
counsel, though afterwards he seems to have followed it. This Psalm
applies itself to the establishment of the church against the calumnies
of the world and the compromising counsel of man, in that confidence
which is to be placed in God the Judge of all. - W. Wilson, D.D., in
loc., 1860.

Whole Psalm

If one may offer to make a modest conjecture, it is not improbable this
Psalm might be composed on the sad murder of the priests by Saul ([Sa1
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#019).md), when after the slaughter of
Abimelech, the high priest, Doeg, the Edomite, by command from Saul,
"slew in one day fourscore and five persons which wore a linen ephod." I
am not so carnal as to build the spiritual church of the Jews on the
material walls of the priests' city at Nob (which then by Doeg was
smitten with the edge of the sword), but this is most true, that
"knowledge must preserve the people;" and ([Mal
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007).md), "The priests' lips shall
preserve knowledge;" and then it is easy to conclude, what an earthquake
this massacre might make in the foundations of religion. - Thomas
Fuller.

Whole Psalm

Notice how remarkably the whole Psalm corresponds with the deliverance
of Lot from Sodom. This verse, with the angel's exhortation, "Escape to
the mountains, lest thou be consumed," and Lot's reply, "I cannot escape
to the mountains, lest some evil take me and I die." [Gen
19:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#017.md). And again, "The Lord's seat
is in heaven, and upon the ungodly he shall rain snares, fire,
brimstone, storm and tempest," with "Then the Lord rained upon Sodom and
Gomorrah brimstone and fire out of heaven:" and again, "His countenance
will behold the thing that is just," with "Delivered just Lot.... for
that righteous man vexed his righteous soul with their ungodly deeds."
[Pe2 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007.md), [Pe2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008). - Cassiodorus (a.d., 560.md) in John
Mason Neale's "Commentary on the Psalms, from Primitive and Medival
Writers," 1860.

Whole Psalm

The combatants at the Lake Thrasymene are said to have been so engrossed
with the conflict, that neither party perceived the convulsions of
nature that shook the ground -

"An earthquake reeled unheedingly away,

None felt stern nature rocking at his feet."

From a nobler cause, it is thus with the soldiers of the Lamb. They
believe, and, therefore, make no haste; nay, they can scarcely be said
to feel earth's convulsions as other men, because their eager hope
presses forward to the issue at the advent of the Lord. - Andrew A.
Bonar.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

"I trust in the Lord: how do ye say to my soul, Swerve on to your
mountain like a bird?" (others, "O thou bird.") Saul and his adherents
mocked and jeered David with such taunting speeches, as conceiving that
he knew no other shift or refuge, but so betaking himself unto wandering
and lurking on the mountains; hopping, as it were, from one place to
another like a silly bird; but they thought to ensnare and take him well
enough for all that, not considering God who was David's comfort, rest
and refuge. - Theodore Haak's "Translation of the Dutch Annotations, as
ordered by the Synod of Dort, in 1618." London, 1657.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

"With Jehovah I have taken shelter; how say ye to my soul, Flee,
sparrows, to your hill?" "Your hill," that hill from which you say your
help cometh: a sneer. Repair to that boasted hill, which may indeed give
you the help which it gives the sparrow: a shelter against the
inclemencies of a stormy sky, no defence against our power. - Samuel
Horsley, in loc.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

"In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to
your mountain?" The holy confidence of the saints in the hour of great
trial is beautifully illustrated by the following ballad which Anne
Askew, who was burned at Smithfield in 1564, made and sang when she was
in Newgate: -

Like as the armed knight,

Appointed to the field,

With this world will I fight,

And Christ shall be my shield.

Faith is that weapon strong,

Which will not fail at need:

My foes, therefore, among

Therewith will I proceed.

As it is had in strength

And force of Christe's way,

It will prevail at length,

Though all the devils say nay.

Faith in the fathers old

Obtained righteousness;

Which make me very bold

To fear no world's distress.

I now rejoice in heart,

And hope bids me do so;

For Christ will take my part,

And ease me of my woe.

Thou say'st Lord, whoso knock,

To them wilt thou attend:

Undo therefore the lock,

And thy strong power send.

More enemies now I have

Than hairs upon my head:

Let them not me deprave,

But fight thou in my stead.

On thee my care I cast,

For all their cruel spite:

I set not by their haste;

For thou art my delight.

I am not she that list

My anchor to let fall

For every drizzling mist,

My ship substantial.

Not oft use I to write,

In prose, nor yet in rhyme;

Yet will I shew one sight

That I saw in my time.

I saw a royal throne,

Where justice should have sit,

But in her stead was one

Of moody, cruel wit.

Absorbed was righteousness.

As of the raging flood:

Satan, in his excess,

Sucked up the guiltless blood.

Then thought I, Jesus Lord,

When thou shall judge us all,

Hard it is to record

On these men what will fall.

Yet, Lord, I thee desire,

For that they do to me,

Let them not taste the hire

Of their iniquity.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

"How say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?" We may
observe, that David is much pleased with the metaphor in frequently
comparing himself to a bird, and that of several sorts: first, to an
eagle ([Psa 103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005).md), "My youth is
renewed like the eagle's;" sometimes to an owl ([Psa
102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006).md), "I am like an owl in the
desert;" sometimes to a pelican, in the same verse, "Like a pelican in
the wilderness;" sometimes to a sparrow ([Psa
102:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007).md), "I watch, and am as a
sparrow;" sometimes to a partridge, "As when one doth hunt a partridge."
I cannot say that he doth compare himself to a dove, but he would
compare himself ([Psa 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006).md), "O that I
had the wings of a dove, for then I would flee away, and be at rest."
Some will say, How is it possible that birds of so different a feather
should all so fly together as to meet in the character of David? To whom
we answer, That no two men can more differ one from another, than the
same servant of God at several times differeth from himself. David in
prosperity, when commanding, was like an eagle; in adversity, when
contemned, like an owl; in devotion, when retired, like a pelican; in
solitariness, when having no company, like a sparrow; in persecution,
when fearing too much company (of Saul), like a partridge. This general
metaphor of a bird, which David so often used on himself, his enemies in
the first verse of this Psalm used on him, though not particularising
the kind thereof: "Flee as a bird to your mountain;" that is, speedily
betake thyself to thy God, in whom thou hopest for succour and security.

Seeing this counsel was both good in itself, and good at this time, why
doth David seem so angry and displeased thereat? Those his words, "Why
say you to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?" import some
passion, at leastwise, a disgust of the advice. It is answered, David
was not offended with the counsel, but with the manner of the
propounding thereof. His enemies did it ironically in a gibing, jeering
way, as if his flying thither were to no purpose, and he unlikely to
find there the safety he sought for. However, David was not hereby put
out of conceit with the counsel, beginning this Psalm with this his firm
resolution, "In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye then to my soul,"
etc. Learn we from hence, when men give us good counsel in a jeering
way, let us take the counsel, and practise it; and leave them the jeer
to be punished for it. Indeed, corporal cordials may be envenomed by
being wrapped up in poisoned papers; not so good spiritual advice where
the good matter receives no infection from the ill manner of the
delivery thereof. Thus, when the chief priests mocked our Saviour ([Mat
27:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#043).md), "He trusteth in God, let him
deliver him now if he will have him." Christ trusted in God never a whit
the less for the fierce and flout which their profaneness was pleased to
bestow upon him. Otherwise, if men's mocks should make us to undervalue
good counsel, we might in this age be mocked out of our God, and Christ,
and Scripture, and heaven; the apostle Jude, [Jde
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018.md), having foretold that in the last
times there should be mockers, walking after their own lusts. - Thomas
Fuller.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

It is as great an offence to make a new, as to deny the true God. "In
the Lord put I my trust;" how then "say ye unto my soul" (ye seducers of
souls), "that she should fly unto the mountains as a bird;" to seek
unnecessary and foreign helps, as if the Lord alone were not sufficient?
"The Lord is my rock, and my fortress, and he that delivereth me, my
God, and my strength; in him will I trust: my shield, the horn of my
salvation, and my refuge. I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be
praised, so shall I be safe from mine enemies." "Whom have I in heaven
but thee," amongst those thousands of angels and saints, what Michael or
Gabriel, what Moses or Samuel, what Peter, what Paul? "and there is none
in earth that I desire in comparison of thee." - John King, 1608.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

In temptations of inward trouble and terror, it is not convenient to
dispute the matter with Satan. David in [Psa
42:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#011.md), seems to correct himself for
his mistake; his soul was cast down within him, and for the cure of that
temptation, he had prepared himself by arguments for a dispute; but
perceiving himself in a wrong course, he calls off his soul from
disquiet to an immediate application to God and the promises, "Trust
still in God, for I shall yet praise him;" but here he is more aforehand
with his work; for while his enemies were acted by Satan to discourage
him, he rejects the temptation at first, before it settled upon his
thoughts, and chaseth it away as a thing that he would not give ear to.
"In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to
your mountain?" And there are weighty reasons that should dissuade us
from entering the lists with Satan in temptation of inward trouble. -
Richard Gilpin.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

The shadow will not cool except in it. What good to have the shadow
though of a mighty rock, when we sit in the open sun? To have almighty
power engaged for us, and we to throw ourselves out of it, by bold
sallies in the mouth of temptation! The saints' falls have been when
they have run out of their trench and stronghold; for, like the conies,
they are a weak people in themselves, and their strength lies in the
rock of God's almightiness, which is their habitation. - William
Gurnall.

[Psa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

The saints of old would not accepts deliverances on base terms. They
scorned to fly away for the enjoyment of rest except it were with the
wings of a dove, covered with silver innocence. As willing were many of
the martyrs to die, as to dine. The tormentors were tired in torturing
Blandina. "We are ashamed, O Emperor! The Christians laugh at your
cruelty, and grow the more resolute," said one of Julian's nobles. This
the heathen counted obstinacy; but they knew not the power of the
Spirit, nor the secret armour of proof which saints wear about their
hearts. - John Trapp.

[Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002.md)

"For, lo, the wicked bend their bow," etc. This verse presents an
unequal combat betwixt armed power, advantaged with policy, on the one
side; and naked innocence on the other. First, armed power: "They bend
their bows, and make ready their arrows," being all the artillery of
that age; secondly, advantaged with policy: "that they may privily
shoot," to surprise them with an ambush unawares, probably pretending
amity and friendship unto them; thirdly, naked innocence: if innocence
may be termed naked, which is its own armour; "at the upright in heart."
- Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002.md)

"For, lo, the ungodly bend their bow, and make ready their arrows within
the quiver: that they may privily shoot at them which are true of
heart." The plottings of the chief priests and Pharisees that they might
take Jesus by subtlety and kill him. They bent their bow, when they
hired Judas Iscariot for the betrayal of his Master; they made ready
their arrows within the quiver when they sought "false witnesses against
Jesus to put him to death." [Mat
26:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#059.md). "Them which are true of heart."
Not alone the Lord himself, the only true and righteous, but his
apostles, and the long line of those who should faithfully cleave to him
the calumnies and the revilings that from the time of Joseph's
accusation by his mistress till the present day, have been the lot of
God's people. - Michael Ayguan, 1416, in J. M. Neale's Commentary.

[Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002.md)

"That they may secretly shoot at them which are upright in heart." They
bear not their bows and arrows as scarecrows in a garden of cucumbers,
to fray, but to shoot, not at stakes, but men; their arrows are jacula
mortifera ([Psa 3:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#001).md), deadly arrows,
and lest they should fail to hit, they take advantage of the dark, of
privacy and secrecy; they shoot privily. Now this is the covenant of
hell itself. For what created power in the earth is able to dissolve
that work which cruelty and subtlety, like Simeon and Levi, brothers in
evil, are combined and confederate to bring to pass? Where subtlety is
ingenious, insidious to invent, cruelty barbarous to execute, subtlety
giveth counsel, cruelty giveth the stroke. Subtlety ordereth the time,
the place, the means, accommodateth, concinnateth circumstances; cruelty
undertaketh the act: subtlety hideth the knife, cruelty cutteth the
throat: subtlety with a cunning head layeth the ambush, plotteth the
train, the stratagem; and cruelty with as savage a heart, sticketh not
at the dreadfullest, direfullest objects, ready to wade up to the
ankles, the neck, in a whole red sea of human, yea, country blood: how
fearful is their plight that are thus assaulted! - John King.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" But now we
are met with a giant objection, which with Goliath must be removed, or
else it will obstruct our present proceedings. Is it possible that the
foundations of religion should be destroyed? Can God be in so long a
sleep, yea, so long a lethargy, as patiently to permit the ruins
thereof? If he looks on, and yet doth not see these foundations when
destroyed, where then is his omnisciency? If he seeth it, and cannot
help it, where then is his omnipotency? If he seeth it, can help it, and
will not, where then is his goodness and mercy? Martha said to Jesus
([Joh 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#021).md), "Lord, if thou hadst
been here, my brother had not died." But many will say, Were God
effectually present in the world with his aforesaid attributes, surely
the foundations had not died, had not been destroyed. We answer
negatively, that it is impossible that the foundations of religion
should ever be totally and finally destroyed, either in relation to the
church in general, or in reference to every true and lively member
thereof. For the first, we have an express promise of Christ. Matt,
16:18. "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it." Fundamenta
tamen stant inconcussa sionis. And as for every particular Christian (2
Tim if. 19), "Nevertheless, the foundation of God standeth sure, having
this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his." However, though for the
reasons aforementioned in the objections (the inconsistency thereof with
the attributes of God's omnipotency, omnisciency, and goodness), the
foundations can never totally and finally, yet may they partially be
destroyed, quoad gradurn, in a fourfold degree, as followeth. First, in
the desires and utmost endeavours of wicked men.

They bring their 1. Hoc velle,

2\. Hoc agere,

3\. Totum posse. It they destroy not the foundations, it is no thanks to
them, seeing all the world will bear them witness they have done their
best (that is, their worst), what their might and malice could perform.
Secondly, in their own vainglorious imaginations: they may not only
vainly boast, but also verily believe that they have destroyed the
foundations. Applicable to this purpose, is that high rant of the Roman
emperor ([Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001).md): "And it came to
pass in those days, that there went out a decree from Csar Augustus,
that all the world should be taxed." All the world! whereas he had,
though much, not all in Europe, little in Asia, less in Africa, none in
America, which was so far from being conquered, it was not so much as
known to the Romans. But hyperbole is not a figure, but the ordinary
language of pride; because indeed Augustus had very much, he proclaimeth
himself to have all the world.... Thirdly, the foundations may be
destroyed as to all outward visible illustrious apparition. The church
in persecution is like unto a ship in a tempest; down go all their
masts, yea, sometimes for the more speed they are forced to cut them
down: not a piece of canvas to play with the winds, no sails to be seen;
they lie close knotted to the very keel, that the tempest may have the
less power upon them, though when the storm is over, they can hoist up
their sails as high, and spread their canvas as broad as ever before. So
the church in the time of persecution feared, but especially felt,
loseth all gayness and gallantry which may attract and allure the eyes
of beholders, and contenteth itself with its own secrecy. In a word, on
the work-days of affliction she weareth her worst clothes, whilst her
best are laid up in her wardrobe, in sure and certain hope that God will
give her a holy and happy day, when with joy she shall wear her best
garments. Lastly they may be destroyed in the jealous apprehensions of
the best saints and servants of God, especially in their melancholy
fits. I will instance in no puny, but in a star of the first magnitude
and greatest eminency, even Elijah himself complaining ([Kg1
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010).md): "And I, even I only, am left;
and they seek my life, to take it away." - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"If." It is the only word of comfort in the text, that what is said is
not positive, but suppositive; not thetical, but hypothetical. And yet
this comfort which is but a spark (at which we would willingly kindle
our hopes), is quickly sadded with a double consideration. First,
impossible suppositions produce impossible consequences, "As is the
mother, so is the daughter." Therefore, surely God's Holy Spirit would
not suppose such a thing but what was feasible and possible, but what
either had, did, or might come to pass. Secondly, the Hebrew word is not
the conditional irâ sî si torre, but chi, quia, quoniam, because, and
(although here it be favourably rendered if), seemeth to import, more
therein, that the sad case had already happened in David's days. I see,
therefore, that this if, our only hope in the text, is likely to prove
with Job's friends, but a miserable comforter. Well, it is good to know
the worst of things, that we may provide ourselves accordingly; and
therefore let us behold this doleful case, not as doubtful, but as done;
not as feared, but felt; not as suspected, but at this time really come
to pass. - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"If the foundations," etc. My text is an answer to a tacit objection
which some may raise; namely, that the righteous are wanting to
themselves, and by their own easiness and inactivity (not daring and
doing so much as they might and ought), betray themselves to that bad
condition. In whose defence David shows, that if God in his wise will
and pleasure seeth it fitting, for reasons best known to himself to
suffer religion to be reduced to terms of extremity, it is not placed in
the power of the best man alive to remedy and redress the same. "If the
foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" My text is hung
about with mourning, as for a funeral sermon, and contains: First, a sad
case supposed, "If the foundations be destroyed." Secondly, a sad
question propounded, "What can the righteous do?" Thirdly, a sad answer
implied, namely, that they can do just nothing, as to the point of
re-establishing the destroyed foundation. - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"If the foundations be destroyed," etc. The civil foundation of a nation
or people, is their laws and constitutions. The order and power that's
among them, that's the foundation of a people; and when once this
foundation is destroyed, "What can the righteous do?" What can the best,
the wisest in the world, do in such a case? What can any man do, if
there be not a foundation of government left among men? There is no help
nor answer in such a case but that which follows in the fourth verse of
the Psalm, "The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord's throne is in
heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men;" as if he
had said, in the midst of these confusions, when as it is said ([Psa
82:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#005).md), "All the foundations of the
earth are out of course;" yet God keeps his course still, he is where he
was and as he was, without variableness or shadow of turning. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"The righteous." The righteous indefinitely, equivalent to the righteous
universally; not only the righteous as a single arrow, but in the whole
sheaf; not only the righteous in their personal, but in their diffusive
capacity. Were they all collected into one body, were all the righteous
living in the same age wherein the foundations are destroyed, summoned
up and modelled into one corporation, all their joint endeavours would
prove ineffectual to the re-establishing of the fallen foundations, as
not being man's work, but only God's work to perform. - Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"The foundations." Positions, the things formerly fixed, placed, and
settled. It is not said, if the roof be ruinous, or if the side walls be
shattered, but if the foundations.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"Foundations be destroyed." In the plural. Here I will not warrant my
skill in architecture, but conceive this may pass for an undoubted
truth: it is possible that a building settled on several entire
foundations (suppose them pillars) close one to another, if one of them
fall, yet the structure may still stand, or rather hang (at the least
for a short time) by virtue of the complicative, which it receiveth from
such foundations which still stand secure. But in case there be a total
rout, and an utter ruin of all the foundations, none can fancy to
themselves a possibility of that building's subsistence. - Thomas
Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"What can the righteous?" The can of the righteous is a limited can,
confined to the rule of God's word; they can do nothing but what they
can lawfully do. [Co2 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#008.md). "For we
can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth:" Illud possumas,
quod jure possumus. Wicked men can do anything; their conscience, which
is so wide that it is none at all, will bear them out to act anything
how unlawful soever to stab, poison, massacre, by any means, at any
time, in any place, whosoever standeth betwixt them and the effecting
their desires. Not so the righteous; they have a rule whereby to walk,
which they will not, they must not, they dare not, cross. If therefore a
righteous man were assured, that by the breach of one of God's
commandments he might restore decayed religion, and re-settle it statu
quo prius, his hands, head, and heart are tied up, he can do nothing,
because their damnation is just who say ([Rom
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008).md), "Let us do evil that good may
come thereof."

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

"Do." It is not said, What can they think? It is a great blessing which
God hath allowed injured people, that though otherwise oppressed and
straitened, they may freely enlarge themselves in their thoughts. -
Thomas Fuller.

[Psa 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003.md)

Sinning times have ever been the saints' praying times: this sent Ezra
with a heavy heart to confess the sin of his people, and to bewail their
abominations before the Lord. [Ezr
9:1-15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001.md). And Jeremiah tells the wicked
of his degenerate age, that "his soul should weep in secret places for
their pride." [Jer 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017.md). Indeed,
sometimes sin comes to such a height, that this is almost all the godly
can do, to get into a corner, and bewail the general pollutions of the
age. "If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?" Such
dismal days of national confusion our eyes have seen, when foundations
of government were destroyed, and all hurled into military confusion.
When it is thus with a people, "What can the righteous do?" Yes, this
they may, and should do, "fast and pray." There is yet a God in heaven
to be sought to, when a people's deliverance is thrown beyond the help
of human policy or power. Now is the fit time to make their appeal to
God, as the words following hint: "The Lord is in his holy temple, the
Lord's throne is in heaven;" in which words God is presented sitting in
heaven as a temple, for their encouragement, I conceive, in such a
desperate state of affairs, to direct their prayers thither for
deliverance. And certainly this hath been the engine that hath been
instrumental, above any, to restore this poor nation again, and set it
upon the foundation of that lawful government from which it had so
dangerously departed. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

The infinite understanding of God doth exactly know the sins of men; he
knows so as to consider. He doth not only know them, but intently behold
them: "His eyelids try the children of men," a metaphor taken from men,
that contract the eyelids when they would wistly and accurately behold a
thing: it is not a transient and careless look. - Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

"His eyes behold," etc. God searcheth not as man searcheth, by enquiring
into that which before was hid from him; his searching is no more but
his beholding; he seeth the heart, he beholdeth the reins; God's very
sight is searching. [Heb 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#013.md). "All
things are naked and opened unto his eyes," τετραχηλισμένα, dissected or
anatomised. He hath at once as exact a view of the most hidden things,
the very entrails of the soul, as if they had been with never so great
curiosity anatomised before him. - Richard Alleine, 1611-1681.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

"His eyes behold," etc. Consider that God not only sees into all you do,
but he sees it to that very end that he may examine and search into it.
He doth not only behold you with a common and indifferent look, but with
a searching, watchful, and inquisitive eye: he pries into the reasons,
the motives, the ends of all your actions. "The Lord's throne is in
heaven: his eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men." [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014.md), where Christ is described, it is
said, his eyes are as a flame of fire: you know the property of fire is
to search and make trial of those things which are exposed unto it, and
to separate the dross from the pure metal: so, God's eye is like fire,
to try and examine the actions of men: he knows and discerns how much
your very purest duties have in them of mixture, and base ends of
formality, hypocrisy, distractedness, and deadness: he sees through all
your specious pretences, that which you cast as a mist before the eyes
of men when yet thou art but a juggler in religion: all your tricks and
sleights of outward profession, all those things that you use to cozen
and delude men withal, cannot possibly impose upon him: he is a God that
can look through all those fig-leaves of outward profession, and discern
the nakedness of your duties through them. - Ezekiel Hopkins, D.D.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

"His eyes behold," etc. Take God into thy counsel. Heaven overlooks
hell. God at any time can tell thee what plots are hatching there
against thee. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

"His eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men." When an
offender, or one accused for any offence, is brought before a judge, and
stands at the bar to be arraigned, the judge looks upon him, eyes him,
sets his eye upon him, and he bids the offender look up in his face;
"Look upon me," saith the judge, "and speak up:" guiltiness usually
clouds the forehead and clothes the brow; the weight of guilt holds down
the head! the evil doer hath an ill look, or dares not look up; how glad
is he if the judge looks off him. We have such an expression here,
speaking of the Lord, the great Judge of heaven and earth. "His eyelids
try the children of men," as a judge tries a guilty person with his eye
and reads the characters of his wickedness printed in his face. Hence we
have a common speech in our language, such a one looks suspiciously, or,
he hath a guilty look! At that great gaol-delivery described in [Rev
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#016.md), All the prisoners cry out to be
hid from the face of him that sat upon the throne. They could not look
upon Christ, and they could not endure Christ should look on them; the
eyelids of Christ try the children of men.... Wickedness cannot endure
to be under the observation of any eye, much less of the eye of justice.
Hence the actors of it say, "Who seeth us?" It is very hard not to show
the guilt of the heart in the face, and it is as hard to have it seen
there. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md)

"The Lord trieth the righteous." Except our sins, there is not such
plenty of anything in all the world as there is of troubles which come
from sin, as one heavy messenger came to Job after another. Since we are
not in paradise, but in the wilderness, we must look for one trouble
after another. As a bear came to David after a lion, and a giant after a
bear, and a king after a giant, and Philistines after a king; so, when
believers have fought with poverty, they shall fight with envy; when
they have fought with envy, they shall fight with infamy; when they have
fought with infamy, they shall fight with sickness; they shall be like a
labourer who is never out of work. - Henry Smith.

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md)

"The Lord trieth the righteous." - Times of affliction and persecution
will distinguish the precious from the vile, it will difference the
counterfeit professor from the true. Persecution is a Christian's
touchstone, it is a lapis lydius that will try what metal men are made
of, whether they be silver or tin, gold or dross, wheat or chaff, shadow
or substance, carnal or spiritual, sincere or hypocritical. Nothing
speaks out more soundness and uprightness than a pursuing after
holiness, even then when holiness is most afflicted, pursued, and
persecuted in the world' to stand fast in fiery trials argues much
integrity within. - Thomas Brooks.

[Psa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005.md)

Note the singular opposition of the two sentences. God hates the wicked,
and therefore in contrast he loves the righteous; but it is here said
that he tries them: therefore it follows that to try and to love are
with God the same thing. - C. H. S.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"Upon the wicked he shall rain snares." Snares to hold them; then if
they be not delivered, follow fire and brimstone, and they cannot
escape. This is the case of a sinner if he repent not; if God pardon
not, he is in the snare of Satan's temptation, he is in the snare of
divine vengeance; let him therefore cry aloud for his deliverance, that
he may have his feet in a large room. The wicked lay snares for the
righteous, but God either preventeth them that their souls ever escape
them, or else he subventeth them "The snares are broken, and we are
delivered." No snares hold us so fast as those of our own sins; they
keep down our heads, and stoop us that we cannot look up: a very little
ease they are to him that hath not a seared conscience. - Samuel Page,
1646.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"He shall rain snare." As in hunting with the lasso, the huntsman casts
a snare from above upon his prey to entangle its head or feet, so shall
the Lord from above with many twistings of the line of terror, surround,
bind, and take captive the haters of his law. - C. H. S.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"He shall rain snares," etc. He shall rain upon them when they least
think of it even in the midst of their jollity, as rain falls on a fair
day. Or, he shall rain down the vengeance when he sees good, for it
rains not always. Though he defers it, yet will it rain. - William
Nicholson, Bishop of Gloucester, in "David's Harp Strung and Tuned,"
1662.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest." The strange dispensation of affairs in this world is
an argument which doth convincingly prove that there shall be such a day
wherein all the involucra and entanglements of providence shall be
clearly unfolded. Then shall the riddle be dissolved, why God hath given
this and that profane wretch so much wealth, and so much power to do
mischief: is it not that they might be destroyed for ever? Then shall
they be called to a strict account for all that plenty and prosperity
for which they are now envied; and the more they have abused, the more
dreadful will their condemnation be. Then it will be seen that God gave
them not as mercies, but as "snares." It is said that God "will rain on
the wicked snares, fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest'" when he
scatters abroad the desirable things of this world, riches, honours,
pleasures, etc., then he rains "snares" upon them; and when he shall
call them to an account for these things, then he will rain upon them
"fire and brimstone, and an horrible tempest" of his wrath and fury.
Dives, who caroused on earth, yet, in hell could not obtain so much as
one poor drop of water to cool his scorched and flaming tongue: had not
his excess and intemperance been, so great in his life, his fiery thirst
had not been so tormenting after death; and therefore, in that sad item
that Abraham gives him ([Luk 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025).md),
he bids him "remember, that thou, in thy lifetime, receivedst thy good
things, and likewise Lazarus evil things; but now he is, comforted, and
thou art tormented." I look upon this as a most bitter and a most
deserved sarcasm; upbraiding him for his gross folly, in making the
trifles of this life his good things. Thou hast received thy good
things, but now thou art tormented. Oh, never call Dives's purple and
delicious fare good things, if they thus end in torments! Was it good
for him to be wrapped in purple who is now wrapped inflames? Was it good
for him to fare deliciously who was only thereby fatted up against the
day of slaughter? - Ezekiel Hopkins.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"Snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest: this shall be the
portion of their cap." After the judgment follows the condemnation:
pre-figured as we have seen, by the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah.
"Snares'" because the allurements of Satan in this life will be their
worst punishments in the next; the fire of anger, the brimstone of
impurity, the tempest of pride, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life. "This shall be their portion;" compare it
with the Psalmist's own saying, "The Lord himself is the portion of my
inheritance and my cup." [Psa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#005.md). -
Cassiodorus, in J. M. Neale's Commentary.

[Psa 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md)

"The portion of their cap." Heb., the allotment of their cup. The
expression has reference to the custom of distributing to each guest his
mess of meat. - William French and George Skinner, 1842.

[Psa 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007.md)

That God may give grace without glory is intelligible; but to admit a
man to communion with him in glory without grace, is not intelligible.
It is not agreeable to God's holiness to make any inhabitant of heaven,
and converse freely with him in a way of intimate love, without such a
qualification of grace: "The righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his
countenance doth behold the upright; he looks upon him with a smiling
eye, and therefore he cannot favourably look upon an unrighteous person;
so that this necessity is not founded only in the command of God that we
should be renewed, but in the very nature of the thing, because God, in
regard of his holiness, cannot converse with an impure creature. God
must change his nature, or the sinner's nature must be changed. There
can be no friendly communion between two of different natures without
the change of one of them into the likeness of the other. Wolves and
sheep, darkness and light, can never agree. God cannot love a sinner as
a sinner, because he hates impurity by a necessity of nature as well as
a choice of will. It is as impossible for him to love it as to cease to
be holy. - Stephen Charnock.

[Psalms 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 11:1</span></span>

1 In the Lord put I my trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to
your mountain.

2 For, lo, the wicked bend their bow, they make ready their arrow upon
the string, that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart.

3 If the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do?

These verses contain an account of a temptation to distrust God, with
which David was, upon some unmentioned occasion, greatly exercised. It
may be, that in the days when he was in Saul's court, he was advised to
flee at a time when this flight would have been charged against him as a
breach of duty to the king, or a proof of personal cowardice. His case
was like that of Nehemiah, when his enemies, under the garb of
friendship, hoped to entrap him by advising him to escape for his life.
Had he done so, they could then have found a ground of accusation.
Nehemiah bravely replied, "Shall such a man as I flee?" and David, in a
like spirit, refuses to retreat, exclaiming, "In the Lord put I my
trust: how say ye to my soul, Flee as a bird to your mountain?" When
Satan cannot overthrow us by presumption, how craftily will he seek to
ruin us by distrust! He will employ our dearest friends to argue us out
of our confidence, and he will use such plausible logic, that unless we
once for all assert our immovable trust in Jehovah, he will make us like
the timid bird which flies to the mountain whenever danger presents
itself. How forcibly the case is put! The bow is bent, the arrow is
fitted to the string: "Flee, flee, thou defenceless bird, thy safety
lies in flight; be gone, for thine enemies will send their shafts into
thy heart; haste, haste, for soon wilt thou be destroyed!" David seems
to have felt the force of the advice, for it came home to his soul; but
yet he would not yield, but would rather dare the danger than exhibit a
distrust in the Lord his God. Doubtless, the perils which encompassed
David were great and imminent; it was quite true that his enemies were
ready to shoot privily at him; it was equally correct that the very
foundations of law and justice were destroyed under Saul's unrighteous
government: but what were all these things to the man whose trust was in
God alone? He could brave the dangers, could escape the enemies, and
defy the injustice which surrounded him. His answer to the question,
"What can the righteous do?" would be the counter-question, "What cannot
they do?" When prayer engages God on our side, and when faith secures
the fulfilment of the promise, what cause can there be for flight,
smitten a giant before whom the whole hosts of Israel were trembling,
and the Lord, who delivered him from the uncircumcised Philistine, could
surely deliver him from King Saul and his myrmidons. There is no such
word as "impossibility" in the language of faith; that martial grace
knows how to fight and conquer, but she knows not how to flee.

[Psalms 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 11:4</span></span>

4 The Lord is in his holy temple, the Lord's throne is in heaven: his
eyes behold, his eyelids try, the children of men.

5 The Lord trieth the righteous but the wicked and him that loveth
violence his soul hateth.

6 Upon the wicked he shall rain snares, fire and brimstone, and an
horrible tempest: this shall be the portion of their cup.

7 For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness; his countenance doth
behold the upright.

David here declares the great source of his unflinching courage. He
borrows his light from heaven - from the great central orb of deity. The
God of the believer is never far from him; he is not merely the God of
the mountain fastnesses, but of the dangerous valleys and battle plains.

"Jehovah is in his holy temple." The heavens are above our heads in all
regions of the earth, and so is the Lord ever near to us in every state
and condition. This is a very strong reason why we should not adopt the
vile suggestions of distrust. There is one who pleads his precious blood
in our behalf in the temple above, and there is one upon the throne who
is never deaf to the intercession of his Son. Why, then, should we fear?
What plots can men devise which Jesus will not discover? Satan has
doubtless desired to have us, that he may sift us as wheat, but Jesus is
in the temple praying for us, and how can our faith fail? What attempts
can the wicked make which Jehovah shall not behold? And since he is in
his holy temple, delighting in the sacrifice of his Son, will he not
defeat every device, and send us a sure deliverance?

"Jehovah's throne is in the heavens;" he reigns supreme. Nothing can be
done in heaven, or earth, or hell, which he doth not ordain and
over-rule. He is the world's great Emperor. Wherefore, then, should we
flee? If we trust this King of kings, is not this enough? Cannot he
deliver us without our cowardly retreat? Yes, blessed be the Lord our
God, we can salute him as Jehovah-nissi; in his name we set up our
banners, and, instead of flight, we once more raise the shout of war.

"His eyes behold." The eternal Watcher never slumbers; his eyes never
know a sleep. "His eyelids try the children of men:" he narrowly
inspects their actions, words and thoughts. As men, when intently and
narrowly inspecting some very minute object, almost close their eyelids
to exclude every other object, so will the Lord look all men through and
through. God sees each man as much and as perfectly as if there were no
other creature in the universe. He sees us always; he never removes his
eye from us; he sees us entirely, reading the recesses of the soul as
readily as the glancing of the eye. Is not this a sufficient ground of
confidence, and an abundant answer to the solicitations of despondency?
My danger is not hid from him; he knows my extremity, and I may rest
assured that he will not suffer me to perish while I rely alone on him.
Wherefore, then, should I take the wings of the timid bird, and flee
from the dangers which beset me.

"The Lord trieth the righteous:" he doth not hate them, but only tries
them. They are precious to him, and therefore he refines them with
afflictions. None of the Lord's children may hope to escape from trial,
nor, indeed, in our right minds, would any of us desire to do so, for
trial is the channel of many blessings.

"'Tis my happiness below

Not to live without the cross'

But the Saviour's power to know,

Sanctifying every loss.

Trials make the promise sweet;

Trials give new life to prayer;

Trials bring me to his feet -

Lay me low, and keep me there.

Did I meet no trials here -

No chastisement by the way -

Might I not, with reason, fear

I should prove a cast-away!

Bastards may escape the rod,

Sunk in earthly vain delight;

But the true-born child of God

Must not - would not, if he might.'

William Cowper.

Is not this a very cogent reason why we should not distrustfully
endeavour to shun a trial? - for in so doing we are seeking to avoid a
blessing.

"But the wicked and him that loveth violence his soul hateth:" why,
then, shall I flee from these wicked men? If God hateth them, I will not
fear them. Haman was very great in the palace until he lost favour, but
when the king abhorred him, how bold were the meanest attendants to
suggest the gallows for the man at whom they had often trembled! Look at
the black mark upon the faces of our persecutors, and we shall not run
away from them. If God is in the quarrel as well as ourselves, it would
be foolish to question the result, or avoid the conflict. Sodom and
Gomorrah perished by a fiery hail, and by a brimstone shower from
heaven; so shall all the ungodly. They may gather together like Gog and
Magog to battle, but the Lord will rain upon them "an overflowing rain,
and great hailstones, fire, and brimstone:" [Eze
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#022.md). Some expositors think that in
the term "horrible tempest," there is in the Hebrew an allusion to that
burning, suffocating wind, which blows across the Arabian deserts, and
is known by the name of Simoom. "A burning storm," Lowth calls it, while
another great commentator reads it "wrathwind;" in either version the
language is full of terrors. What a tempest will that be which shall
overwhelm the despisers of God! Oh! what a shower will that be which
shall pour out itself for ever upon the defenceless heads of impenitent
sinners in hell! Repent, ye rebels, or this fiery deluge shall soon
surround you. Hell's horrors shall be your inheritance, your entailed
estate, "the portion of your cup." The dregs of that cup you shall wring
out, and drink for ever. A drop of hell is terrible, but what must a
full cup of torment be? Think of it - a cup of misery, but not a drop of
mercy: O people of God, how foolish is it to fear the faces of men who
shall soon be faggots in the fire of hell! Think of their end, their
fearful end, and all fear of them must be changed into contempt of their
threatenings and pity for their miserable estate.

The delightful contrast of the last verse is well worthy of our
observation, and it affords another overwhelming reason why we should be
stedfast, unmovable, not carried away with fear, or led to adopt carnal
expedients in order to avoid trial. "For the righteous Lord loveth
righteousness." It is not only his office to defend it, but his nature
to love it. He would deny himself if he did not defend the just. It is
essential to the very being of God that he should be just; fear not,
then, the end of all your trials, but "be just, and fear not." God
approves, and, if men oppose, what matters it? "His countenance doth
behold the upright." We need never be out of countenance, for God
countenances us. He observes, he approves, he delights in the upright.
He sees his own image in them, an image of his own fashioning, and
therefore with complacency he regards them. Shall we dare to put forth
our hand unto iniquity in order to escape affliction? Let us have done
with by-ways and short turnings, and let us keep to that fair path of
right along which Jehovah's smile shall light us. Are we tempted to put
our light under a bushel, to conceal our religion from our neighbours?
Is it suggested to us that there are ways of avoiding the cross, and
shunning the reproach of Christ? Let us not hearken to the voice of the
charmer, but seek an increase of faith, that we may wrestle with
principalities and powers, and follow the Lord, fully going without the
camp, bearing his reproach, Mammon, the flesh, the devil, will all
whisper in our ear, "Flee as a bird to your mountain;" but let us come
forth and defy them all. "Resist the devil, and he will flee from you."
There is no room or reason for retreat. Advance! Let the vanguard push
on! To the front! all ye powers and passions of our soul. On! on! in
God's name, on! for "the Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is
our refuge."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 12](psa012.md)

</div>
