<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa037)  [Next](psa039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 38:0</span></span>

Title - A Psalm of David, to bring to remembrance. David felt as if he
had been forgotten of his God, and, therefore, he recounted his sorrows
and cried mightily for help under them. The same title is given to [Psa
70:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa070.htm#001), where in like manner the
Psalmist pours out his complaint before the Lord. It would be foolish to
make a guess as to the point in David's history when this was written;
it may be a commemoration of his own sickness and endurance of cruelty;
it may, on the other hand, have been composed by him for the use of sick
and slandered saints, without special reference to himself.

Divisions - The Psalm opens with a prayer, [Psa
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001); continues in a long complaint,
[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002); pauses to dart an eye to
heaven, [Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009); proceeds with a
second tale of sorrow, [Psa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010);
interjects another word of hopeful address to God, [Psa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015); a third time pours out a flood
of griefs, [Psa 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016); and then closes
as it opened, with renewed petitioning, [Psa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021)and [Psa
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022).

Hints to Preachers

Title - The art of memory. Holy memorabilia. The usefulness of sacred
remembrances.

[Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001) - The rebuke of God's wrath.

I. Richly deserved.

II\. Reasonably dreaded.

III\. Earnestly deprecated

\- B. Davies.

[Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001) - The evil consequences of
sin in this world - J. J. Blunt.

[Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001) - The bitterest of bitters,
"thy wrath;" why deprecated; and how escaped.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002) - God sharply chasteneth
many of his children, and yet for all that he loves them never a whit
the less, nor withholdeth in good time his mercy from them - Thomas
Wilcocks.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003) (last clause) - Sin causes
unrest. He who cures it alone gives rest. Dwell on both facts.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004) (first clause) - Sin in its
relations to us. To the eye pleasing. To the heart disappointing. In the
bones vexing. Over the head overwhelming.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004) - The confession of an
awakened sinner.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004) (last clause) - Sin.

I. Heavy - "a burden."

II\. Very heavy - "a heavy burden."

III\. Superlatively heavy - "too heavy for me."

IV\. Not immovable, for though too heavy for me, yet Jesus bore it.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005) - "Foolishness." The folly
of sin. Everything that a man has to do with sin shows his folly.

I. Dallying with sin.

II\. Committing it.

III\. Continuing in it.

IV\. Hiding it.

V. Palliating it.

\- B. Davies.

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006) - Conviction of sin. Its
grief, its depth, its continuance.

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006) - "I go mourning."

I. Unlawful reasons for mourning.

II\. Legitimate themes for sorrow.

III\. Valuable alleviations of grief.

[Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009) - The many desires of God's
children: the fact that God understands them even when unexpressed; and
the certainty that he will grant them.

[Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009) - Omniscience, a source of
consolation to the desponding.

[Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013) - The wisdom, dignity,
power and difficulty of silence.

[Psa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015) - Prayer, the offspring of
hope.

Hope strengthened by confidence in God's answering prayer.

[Psa 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017) - Mr. Ready-to-Halt. His
pedigree, and infirmity; his crutches, and his cure; his history, and
safe departure.

[Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018) - The excellence of
penitent confession.

[Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018) - The twin children of
grace - confession and contrition: their mutual revelation and reaction.

[Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018) (last clause) - There is
good reason for such sorrow, God is well pleased with it. It benefits
the mourner.

[Psa 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019) - The terrible energy and
industry of the powers of evil.

[Psa 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022) - Faith tried, faith
trembling, faith crying, faith grasping, faith conquering.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

The first word, Mizmor, or Psalm, is the designation of forty-four
sacred poems, thirty-two of which are ascribed to David. The English
reader must observe, that this word is not the same in the original
Hebrew as that which forms the general title of the book of Psalms; the
latter expressing a Hymn of Praise. The word Psalm, however, as used
both in the context and in the titles of the individual compositions, is
uniformly Mizmor in the original; a term which accurately defines their
poetical character. To explain its proper meaning I must have recourse
to the beautiful and accurate definition of Bishop Lowth. "The word
Mizmor signifies a composition, which in a peculiar manner is cut up
into sentences, short, frequent, and measured by regular intervals." ...
He adds that Zamar means to cut or prune, as applied to the removing
superfluous branches from trees; and, after mentioning the secondary
sense of the word, "to sing with a voice or instrument," gives it as his
opinion, that Mizmor may be more properly referred to the primary sense
of the root, so as to mean a poem cut up into short sentences, and
pruned from all superfluity of words, which is the peculiar
characteristic of the Hebrew poetry. - John Jebb.

Title

The title that David gives this Psalm is worth your notice, A Psalm of
David to bring to remembrance. David was on his death-bed as he thought,
and he said it shall be a Psalm of remembrance, to bring sin to
remembrance, to confess to God my uncleanness with Bathsheba, to bring
to my remembrance the evils of my life. Whenever God brings thee under
affliction, thou art then in a fit plight to confess sin to God, and
call to remembrance thy sin. - Christopher Love.

Title

The Psalm is "to bring to remembrance." This seems to teach us that good
things need to be kept alive in our memories, that we should often sit
down, look back, retrace, and turn over in our meditation things that
are past, lest at any time we should let any good thing sink into
oblivion. Among the things which David brought to his own remembrance,
the first and foremost were, (1), his past trials and his past
deliverances. The great point, however, in David's Psalm is to bring to
remembrance, (2), the depravity of our nature. There is, perhaps, no
Psalm which more fully than this describes human nature as seen in the
light which God the Holy Ghost casts upon it in the time when he
convinces us of sin. I am persuaded that the description here does not
tally with any known disease of the body. It is very like leprosy, but
it has about it certain features which cannot be found to meet in any
leprosy described either by ancient or modern writers. The fact is, it
is a spiritual leprosy, it is an inward disease which is here described,
and David paints it to the very life, and he would have us to recollect
this. A third thing the Psalm brings to our remembrance is, (3), our
many enemies. David says, that his enemies laid snares for him, and
sought his hurt, and spoke mischievous things, and devised and imagined
deceits all the day long. "Well," says one, "how was it that David had
so many enemies? How could he make so many? Must he not have been
imprudent and rash, or perhaps morose?" It does not appear so in his
life. He rather made enemies by his being scrupulously holy. His enemies
attacked him, not because he was wicked, but as he says, in this very
Psalm, they were his enemies because he loved the thing which is good.
The ultimate result of the religion of Christ is to make peace
everywhere, but the first result is to cause strife. Further, the Psalm
reminds us of, (4), our gracious God. Anything which drives us to God is
a blessing, and anything which weans us from leaning on an arm of flesh,
and especially that weans us from trying to stand alone, is a boon to
us. - C. H. S.

Whole Psalm

The most wonderful features in this Psalm, are the depth of misery into
which the Psalmist gradually plunges in his complaints in the first part
of it, the sudden grasp at the arm of mercy and omnipotence that is made
in [Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008), and the extreme height
of comfort and consolation that it reaches in the end. - Benjamin Weiss.

[Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

"O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath." But is it not an absurd request,
to require God not to rebuke me in his anger; as though I thought he
would rebuke me if he were not angry? Is it not a senseless suit to pray
to God not to chasten me in his displeasure, as though he would chasten
me if he were not displeased? The frowardest natures that are, will yet
be quiet as long as they be pleased: and shall I have such a thought of
the great yet gracious God, that he should be pleased and yet not be
quiet? But, O my soul, is it all one, to rebuke in his anger and to
rebuke when he is angry? He may rebuke when he is angry, and yet
restrain and bridle in his anger; but to rebuke in his anger is to let
loose the reins to his anger; and what is it to give the reins to his
anger, but to make it outrun his mercy? And then what a miserable case
should I be in, to have his anger to assault me, and not his mercy ready
to relieve me? To have his indignation fall upon me when his
lovingkindness were not by to take it off! Oh, therefore, rebuke me not
in thine anger, O God, but let thy rebuking stay for thy mercy; chasten
me not in thy displeasure, but let thy lovingkindness have the keeping
of thy rod. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

Neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure," etc. Both these words, which
we translate to chasten, and hot displeasure, are words of a heavy and
of a vehement signification. They extend both to express the eternity of
God's indignation, even to the binding of the soul and body in eternal
chains of darkness. For the first jasar, signifies in the Scriptures,
vincire, to bind, often with ropes, often with chains; to fetter, or
manacle, or pinion men that are to be executed; so that it imports a
slavery, a bondage all the way, and a destruction at last. And so the
word is used by Rehoboam, "My father chastised you with whips, but I
will chastise you with scorpions." [Kg1
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#011). And then, the other word,
chamath, doth not only signify "hot displeasure," but that effect of
God's hot displeasure which is intended by the prophet Esay: "Therefore
hath he poured forth his fierce wrath, and the strength of battle, and
it hath set him on fire round about, yet he knew it not, and it burned
him, yet he laid it not to heart." These be the fearful conditions of
God's hot displeasure, to be in a furnace, and not to feel it; to be in
a habit of sin, and not know what leads us into temptation; to be burnt
to ashes, and so not only without all moisture, all holy tears, but, as
ashes, without any possibility that any good thing can grow in us. And
yet this word, chamath, hath a heavier signification than this; for it
signifies poison itself, destruction itself, for so it is twice taken in
one verse: "Their poison is like the poison of a serpent" ([Psa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004)); so that this hot displeasure is
that poison of the soul, obduration here, and that extension of that
obduration, a final impenitence in this life, and an infinite
impenitableness in the next, to die without any actual penitence here,
and live without all possibility of future penitence for ever hereafter.
David therefore foresees, that if God rebuke in anger, it will come to a
chastening in hot displeasure. For what should stop him? For, "if a man
sin against the Lord, who will plead for him?" says Eli. "Plead thou my
cause," says David; it is only the Lord that can be of counsel with him,
and plead for him; and that Lord is both the judge and angry too. - John
Donne.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

"For thine arrows stick fast in me." First, we shall see in what respect
he calls them "arrows:" and therein, first, that they are allenae, they
are shot from others, they are not in his own power; a man shoots not an
arrow at himself; and then that they are veloces, swift in coming, he
cannot give them their time; and again, they are vix visibiles, though
they be not altogether invisible in their coming, yet there is required
a quick eye, and an express diligence and watchfulness to avoid them; so
they are arrows in the hand of another, not his own; and swift as they
come, and invisible before they come. And secondly, they are many
arrows: the victory lies not in escaping one or two. And thirdly, they
"stick" in him: they find not David so good proof as to rebound back
again, and imprint no sense: and they stick "fast:" though the blow be
felt and the wound discerned, yet there is not a present cure, he cannot
shake them off; infixae sunt; and then, with all this, they stick fast
in him; that is, in all him; in his body and soul; in him, in his
thoughts and actions; in him, in his sins and in his good works too;
infixae mihi, there is no part of him, no faculty in him, in which they
stick not; for (which may well be another consideration), that "hand,"
which shot them, presses him, follows the blow, and presses him "sore,"
that is, vehemently. But yet (which will be our conclusion), sagittae
tuae, thy arrows, and manus tua, thy hand, these arrows that are shot,
and this hand that presses him so sore, are the arrows, and the hand of
God; and therefore, first, they must have their effect, they cannot be
disappointed: but yet they bring their comfort with them, because they
are his, because no arrows from him, no pressing with his hand, comes
without that balsamum of mercy to heal as fast as he wounds. - John
Donne.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

"Thine arrows stick fast." Though importunity be to God most pleasing
always, yet to us it is then most necessary when the cheerful face of
God is turned into frowns, and when there is a justly conceived fear of
the continuance of his anger: and have I not just cause to fear it,
having the arrows of his anger sticking so fast in me? If he had meant
to make me but a butt, at which to shoot his arrows, he would quickly, I
suppose, have taken them up again; but now that he leaves them sticking
in me, what can I think, but that he means to make me his quiver; and
then I may look long enough before he come to pluck them out. They are
arrows, indeed, that are leathered with swiftness, and headed with
sharpness; and to give them a force in flying, they are shot, I may say,
out of his crossbow, I am sure his bow of cross; for no arrows can fly
so fast, none pierce so deep, as the crosses and afflictions with which
he hath surprised me: I may truly say surprised me, seeing when I
thought myself most safe, and said, "I shall never be moved," even then,
these arrows of his anger lighted upon me, and stick so fast in my
flesh, that no arm but his that shot them is ever able to draw them
forth. Oh, then, as thou hast stretched forth thine arm of anger, O God,
to shoot these arrows at me, so stretch forth thine arm of mercy to draw
them forth, that I may rather sing hymns than dirges unto thee; and that
thou mayest show thy power, as well in pardoning as thou hast done in
condemning. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

"Thine arrows." Arrows are (1) swift, (2) secret, (3) sharp, (4)
killing, instruments. They are instruments drawing blood and drinking
blood, even unto drunkenness ([Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042)); afflictions are like arrows in
all these properties. 1. Afflictions often come very speedily, with a
glance as an arrow, quick as a thought. 2. Afflictions come suddenly,
unexpectedly; an arrow is upon a man afore he is aware, so are
afflictions. Though Job saith, the thing he feared came upon him, he
looked for this arrow before it came; yet usually afflictions are
unlooked for guests, they thrust in upon us when we dream not of them.
3. They come with little noise; an arrow is felt before, or, as soon as
it is heard; an arrow flies silently and secretly, stealing upon and
wounding a man, unobserved and unseen. Lastly, all afflictions are
sharp, and in their own nature killing and deadly. That any have good
from them, is from the grace of God, not from their nature. - Joseph
Caryl.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

Let no one think these expressions of penitence ([Psa
38:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)) overstrained or excessive.
They are the words of the Holy Spirit of God speaking by the mouth of
the man after God's own heart. If we were as repentant as David, we
should bring home to ourselves his language; as it is, our affections
are chilled, and therefore we do not enter into his words.... And let us
observe how all the miseries are referred to their proper end. The sin
is not bewailed merely on account of its ill effect on the guilty one,
but on account of the despite done to God. The Psalmist's first thought
is the "anger" of the Lord, and his "hot displeasure." It is not the
"arrows" that afflict him so much as that they are God's. "Thine arrows
stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me." The reason why there is no
health in his flesh is because of God's displeasure. Such is true
contrition, "not the sorrow of the world which worketh death, but the
sorrow that worketh repentance not to be repented of." - A Commentary on
the Seven Penitential Psalms. Chiefly from Ancient Sources \[by A. P.
F.\], 1847.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

"Thy hand presseth me sore." Not the hand of Egypt or Ashur; then were
it hand for hand, a duel of some equality hand to hand; here forces and
stratagems might achieve the victory but "Thy hand." The weight of a
man's blow is but weak, according to the force and pulse of his arm; as
the princes of Midian answered Gideon, when he bade his son try the dint
of his sword upon them; "Rise thou, and fall upon us: for as the man is,
so is his strength." [Jdg 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021). But
"it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." [Heb
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031). As Homer called the hands of
Jupiter χείρες ἄεπτοι, hands whose praise could not be sufficiently
spoken; which some read χείρες ἄαπτοι, hands inaccessible, irresistible
for strength all the gods in heaven could not ward a blow of Jupiter's
hand. This hand never strikes but for sin; and where sin is mighty his
blow is heavy. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)

"Thine anger.... my sin." I, alas! am as an anvil under two hammers; one
of thine anger, another of my sin; both of them beating incessantly upon
me; the hammer of thine anger beating upon my flesh and making that
unsound; the hammer of my sin beating upon my bones and making them
unquiet: although indeed both beat upon both: but thine anger more upon
my flesh, as being more sensible; my sin more upon my bones, as being
more obdurate. God's anger and sin are the two efficient causes of all
misery; but the procatartic cause indeed is sin: God's anger, like the
house that Samson pulled upon his own head, falls not upon us but when
we pull it upon ourselves by sin. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)

"My flesh.... my bones." I know by the unsoundness of my flesh that God
is angry with me; for if it were not for his anger my flesh would be
sound: but what soundness can there be in it now, when God's angry hand
lies beating upon it continually, and never ceaseth? I know by the
unquietness of my bones that I have sin in my bosom; for if it were not
for sin my bones would be quiet. But what quietness can be in them now,
when sin lies gnawing upon them incessantly with the worm of remorse?
One would think my bones were far enough removed and closely enough
hidden from sins doing them any hurt: yet see the searching nature, the
venomous poison of sin, which pierceth through my flesh, and makes
unquietness in my very bones. I know my flesh is guilty of many faults,
by which it justly deserves unsoundness; but what have my bones done?
for they minister no fuel to the flames of my flesh's sensuality; and
why then should they be troubled? But are not my bones supporters of my
flesh, and are they not by this at least accessory to my flesh's faults?
As accessories, then, they are subject to the same punishment the flesh
itself is, which is the principal. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)

"Neither is there any rest in my bones because of my sin." A Christian
in this life is like quicksilver, which hath a principle of motion in
itself, but not of rest' we are never quiet, but as the ball upon the
racket, or the ship upon the waves. As long as we have sin, this is like
quicksilver a child of God is full of motion and disquiet.... We are
here in a perpetual hurry, in a constant fluctuation; our life is like
the tide; sometimes ebbing, sometimes flowing; here is no rest; and the
reason is because we are out of centre. Everything is in motion till it
comes at the centre; Christ is the centre of the soul; the needle of the
compass trembles till it comes to the North Pole. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)

Learn here of beggars how to procure succour and relief. Lay open thy
sores, make known thy need, discover all thy misery, make not thy case
better than it is. Beggars by experience find that the more miserable
they appear to be, the more they are pitied, the more succoured; and yet
the mercies of the most merciful men are but as drops in comparison of
the oceans of God's mercies; and among men there are many like the
priest and Levite in the parable ([Luk
10:30-32](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)) that can pass by a naked,
wounded man, left half dead, and not pity him nor succour him. But God,
like the merciful Samaritan, hath always compassion on such as with
sense of their misery are forced to cry out and crave help. Read how
Job, chap. 6 and 7; David, [Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003),
etc., Hezekiah, [Isa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010), etc., and
other like saints, poured out their complaints before the Lord, and
withal observe what mercy was showed them of the Lord, and you may have
in them both good patterns how to behave yourselves in like cases, and
good encouragement so to do. This is it which God expecteth of us, and
whereunto he desireth to bring us, that seeing our own emptiness and
insufficiency, and the impotency and disability of others to help us, we
should in all humility fly to his mercy. - William Gouge.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)

"For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden they
are too heavy for me." David proceeds to a reason why his prayer must be
vehement, why these miseries of his are so violent, and why God's anger
is permanent, and he finds all this to be, because in his sins, all
these venomous qualities, vehemence, violence, and continuance, were
complicated, and enwrapped; for he had sinned vehemently, in the rage of
lust, and violently, in the effusion of blood, and permanently, in a
long and senseless security. They are all contracted in this text into
two kinds, which will be our two parts in handling these words: first,
the Supergressae super, "Mine iniquities are gone over my head," there
is the multiplicity, the number, the succession, and so the continuation
of his sin; and then, the Gravatae super, "My sins are as a heavy
burden, too heavy for me," there is the greatness, the weight, the
unsupportableness of his sin. St. Augustine calls these two distinctions
or considerations of sin, ignorantiam, et difficultatem; first that
David was ignorant, that he saw not the tide, as it swelled up upon him,
abyssus abyssum, depth called upon depth; and all thy waters, and all
thy billows are gone over me (says he in another place); he perceived
them not coming till they were over him, he discerned not his particular
sins then when he committed them, till they came to the supergressae
super, to that height that he was overflowed, surrounded, his iniquities
were gone over his head; and in that St. Augustine notes ignorantiam,
his unobservance, his inconsiderations of his own case; and then he
notes difficultatem, the hardness of recovering, because he that is
under water hath no air to see by, no air to hear by, he hath nothing to
reach to, he touches not ground, to push him up, he feels no bough to
pull him up, and therein that further notes difficultatem, the hardness
of recovering. Now Moses expresses these two miseries together, in the
destruction of the Egyptians, in his song, after Israel's deliverance
and the Egyptians' submersion, "The depths have covered them" (there is
the supergressae super, their iniquities, in that punishment of their
iniquities were gone over their heads), and then, they sank into the
bottom like a stone (says Moses), there is the gravatae super, they
depressed them, suppressed them, oppressed them, they were under them,
and there they must lie. The Egyptians had, David had, we have, too many
sins to swim above water, and too great sins to get above water again
when we are sunk. - John Donne.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)

"As an heavy burden they are too heavy for me." No strength is so great
but it may be overburdened: though Samson went light away with the gates
of Gaza, yet when a whole house fell upon him it crushed him to death.
And such, alas! am I; I have had sin as a burden upon me ever since I
was born, but bore it a long time as light as Samson did the gates of
Gaza; but now that I have pulled a whole house of sin upon me, how can I
choose but be crushed to death with so great a weight? And crushed, O my
soul, thou shouldst be indeed, if God for all his anger did not take
some pity on thee, and for all his displeasure did not stay his hand
from further chastening thee. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)

It is of singular use to us, that the backslidings of the holy men of
God are recorded in Holy Writ. Spots appear nowhere more disagreeable
than when seen in a most beautiful face, or on the cleanest garment. And
it is expedient to have a perfect knowledge of the filthiness of sin. We
also learn from them to think humbly of ourselves, to depend on the
grace of God, to keep a stricter eye upon ourselves, lest perhaps we
fall into the same or more grievous sins. [Gal
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001). - Herman Witsius, D.D., 1636
-1708.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004), [Psa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)

It is only when we can enter into all that is implied here that we begin
to see our exceeding sinfulness. There is a certain feeling of sin which
does not interfere with our pride and self-respect. We can have that
sort of feeling, and say pretty earnestly, "Mine iniquities are gone
over mine head: as an heavy burden they are too heavy for me." But it is
otherwise with us when we get to know ourselves better and to feel
ourselves loathsome in our wickedness, when our folly and meanness and
ingratitude oppress us, and we begin to loathe ourselves, and can enter
into [Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005). Our wounds, once an
object of self-pity, and something in which we could claim sympathy and
healing from our friends, have become "corrupt," because of the meanness
and folly we feel to be in us. We hide them now, for if they were seen,
would not "lovers and friends stand aloof from our sore?" Then we are
silent except to God, "For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O
Lord my God," [Psa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015). O love of
God that turns not away! O blessed Jesus, that turned not away from the
leprous man that fell upon his face and said, "If thou wilt, thou canst
make me clean," but put forth thine hand and touched him, saying, 'I
will: be thou clean,' to whom can we go but unto thee!" - Mary B. M.
Duncan.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)

"My wounds stink and are corrupt," etc. These expressions seem to be in
a great measure figurative, and significant rather of the diseased state
of his mind than of his body. - William Walford.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)

"My wounds stink and are corrupt." - I know, O Lord, I have done most
foolishly, to let my sores run so long without seeking for help; for
now, "My wounds stink and are corrupt," in as ill a case as Lazarus'
body was when it had been four days buried; enough to make any man
despair that did not know thee as I do. For, do not I know, that nullum
tempus occurrit tibi; do not I know thou hast as well wisdom to remedy
my foolishness as power to cure my wounds? Could the grave hold Lazarus
when thou didst but open thy mouth to call him forth? No more can the
corruption of my sores be any hindrance to their healing when thy
pleasure is to have them be cured. Although, therefore, I have done my
own discretion wrong to defer my care, yet I will not do thy power wrong
to despair of thy cure: for, how should I despair, who know thee to be
as powerful as thou art merciful; if I may not rather say, to be as
merciful as thou art powerful! - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)

"My wounds stink and are corrupt." Either they must be understood
literally of the sores that were in his body (as the words in the
following verse may also seem to import) which he calls wounds, to
intimate that he looked upon them as the wheals or swelling tumours (for
so the original word may signify) which the rod of God had made in his
flesh, or the wounds of those arrows of which he had spoken ([Psa
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)), "Thine arrows stick fast in
me;" or else figuratively, of any other miseries that God had brought
upon him, comparing them to stinking and festering sores; either to
imply the long continuance of them, or the sharp pains and sorrows which
he felt in himself by reason thereof. Yet some, I know, would have it
meant of the shame which his sins had brought upon him. - Arthur
Jackson.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005), [Psa
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)

The spiritual feeling of sin is indispensable to the feeling of
salvation. A sense of the malady must ever precede, and prepare the soul
for a believing reception and due apprehension of the remedy. Wherever
God intends to reveal his Son with power, wherever he intends to make
the gospel to be "a joyful sound," he makes the conscience feel and
groan under the burden of sin. And sure am I that when a man is
labouring under the burden of sin he will be full of complaint. The
Bible records hundreds of the complaints of God's people under the
burden of sin. "My wounds stink and are corrupt," cries one, "because of
my foolishness. I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; 1 go mourning
all the day long." "My soul," cries another, "is full of troubles: and
my life draweth nigh unto the grave." [Psa
88:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#003). "He hath led me," groans out a
third, "and brought me into darkness, but not into light." [Lam
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#002). A living man must need cry under
such circumstances. He cannot carry the burden without complaining of
its weight. He cannot feel the arrow sticking in his conscience without
groaning under the pain. He cannot have the worm gnawing his vitals,
without complaining of its venomous tooth. He cannot feel that God is
incensed against him without bitterly complaining that the Lord is his
enemy. Spiritual complaint then is a mark of spiritual life, and is one
which God recognises as such. "I have surely heard Ephraim bemoaning
himself." [Jer 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018). It shows that he
has something to mourn over; something to make him groan being burdened;
that sin has been opened up to him in its hateful malignancy; that it is
a trouble and distress to his soul; that he cannot roll it like a sweet
morsel under his tongue; but that it is found out by the penetrating
eye, and punished by the chastening hand of God. - J. C. Philpot, 1842.

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)

"1 am troubled." I writhe with pain. This is the proper sense of the
original, which means to "turn out of its proper situation, or course;"
thence to be "distorted, writhed," as a person in pain. Our Bible
translation, which says in the text, "I am troubled," adds in the
margin, "wried," an obsolete word, correctly expressing the Hebrew. -
Richard Mant.

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)

"I go mourning all the day long." And now was I both a burden and a
terror to myself, nor did I ever so know, as now, what it was to be
weary of my life, and yet afraid to die. Oh, how gladly now would I have
been anybody but myself! Anything but a man I and in any condition but
mine own I for there was nothing did pass more frequently over my mind
than that it was impossible for me to be forgiven my transgression, and
to be saved from wrath to come. - John Bunyan, in "Grace Abounding."

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)

Let a man see and feel himself under the bonds of guilt, in danger of
hell, under the power of his lusts, enmity against God, and God a
stranger to him; let but the sense of this condition lie upon his heart,
and let him go on in his jollity if he can. What a woful creature doth a
man see himself now to be! He envies the happiness of the beasts that
are filled, and play in their pastures. We have heard of him who when he
saw a toad, stood weeping, because God had made him a man, so excellent
a creature, and not a toad, so abominable: the goodness of God, then, it
seems, as he apprehended it, made him weep; but this man meets a toad,
and he weeps also, but why? because he is a man, who thinks his estate
infinitely worse than the condition of a toad, and if it were possible
to attain it, would change states with the toad, that hath no guilt of
sin, fears no wrath of God, is not under power of lusts or creatures;
God is no enemy to it, which is his miserable state. - Giles Firmin,
1617-1697.

[Psa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)

"For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease." The word here used,
according to Gesenius (Lex.), properly denotes the internal muscles of
the loins near the kidneys, to which the fat adheres The word rendered
"loathsome" - the word "disease" being supplied by our translators - is
derived from קלה, kalah, a word which means to roast, to parch, as
fruit, grain, etc.; and then, in the form used here, it means scorched,
burned; hence, a burning or inflammation; and the whole phrase would be
synonymous with an inflammation of the kidneys. The word here used does
not imply that there was any eruption, or ulcer, though it would seem
from verse five that this was the fact, and that the inflammation had
produced this effect. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)

"A loathsome disease." In many things our estimates are extravagant; but
we never over-estimate the evil of sin. It is as corrupting as it is
damning. It covers the soul with plague-spots, with the leprosy. [Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005), [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006). - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)

"I am feeble." literally, I am benumbed, I have become deadly cold, cold
as a corpse; possibly with reference to the burning inflammation in the
previous verse, as marking the alternations in the fever fit. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)

"I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my heart." Where sin is,
there will never be but unquietness of heart; and an unquiet heart will
always produce these miserable effects - feebleness of body,
dejectedness of mind, and roaring of voice. But how can roaring stand
with feebleness, which seems to require a strength of spirits? Is it
not, therefore, a roaring, perhaps not so much in loudness as in an
inarticulate expressing? that having done actions more like a beast than
a man, I am forced to use a voice not so much of a man as of a beast? Or
is it perhaps a roaring in spirit, which the heart may send forth though
the body be feeble; or rather then, most, when it is most feeble; not
unlike the blaze of a candle, then greatest when going out? Howsoever it
be, this is certain' the heart is that unhappy plot of ground, which,
receiving into it the accursed seed of sin, brings forth in the body and
soul of man these miserable fruits: and how, then, can I be free from
these weeds of the fruits, since I have received into me so great a
measure of the seed? Oh, vile sin, that I could as well avoid thee as I
can see thee, or could as easily resist thee as I deadly hate thee, I
should not then complain of either feebleness of body, or dejectedness
of mind, or roaring of voice; but I should perfectly enjoy that happy
quietness in all my parts, which thou, O God, didst graciously bestow as
a blessed dowry on our first parents at their creation. - Sir Richard
Baker.

[Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)

"I have roared," etc. It is difficult for a true penitent, in the
bitterness of his soul, to go over the life which he has dragged on in
sinfulness, without groaning and sighing from the bottom of his heart.
But happy are these groans, happy these sighs, happy these sobs, since
they flow from the influence of grace, and from the breath of the Holy
Spirit, who himself in an ineffable manner groans in us and with us, and
who forms these groans in our hearts by penitence and love! but as the
violence of both, that is, of penitence and of love, cannot but burst
the narrow limits of a penitent heart, it must make a vent for itself by
the eyes and mouth. The eyes shed tears, and the mouth sends forth sighs
and groans, which it can no longer restrain; because they are driven on
by the fire of divine love, and so these lamentations frame themselves
into words and intelligible sentences. - Jean Baptiste Elias Avrillon,
1652-1729.

[Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)

"The disquietness of my heart." David felt pains gather about his heart,
and then he cried out. The heart is the mark that God principally aims
at when a Christian hath turned aside from his upright course; other
outward parts he may hit and deeply wound, but this is but to make holes
in the heart, where the seat of unsoundness that principally offends him
is. The fire which conscience kindles, it may flash forth into the eyes,
and tongue, and hands, and make a man look fearfully, speak desperately,
and do bloodily, against the body; but the heat of the fire is
principally within, in the furnace, in the spirit; 'tis but some
sparkles and flashes only that you see come forth at the lower holes of
the furnace, which you behold in the eyes, words, and deeds of such men.
- Nicholas Lockyer.

[Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)

There are usually, if not always, pains with desires, especially in
desires after the creature, because that oftentimes there is a
frustration of our desires, or an elongation of the things, the things
are far off, hard to come by; our desires oftentimes are mute, they
speak not; or the things that we desire, know not our minds: but our
desires after God always speak, they are open unto God, he heareth their
voice. "Lord, all my desire is before thee," saith David, "and my
groaning is not hid from thee." Therefore it must needs be sweet, when
the soul lies thus open unto God. Other desires do not assure and secure
a man in the things he desires; a man may wish this and wish that and go
without both; but the soul that thus longs after God is instated in his
wish, hath a present enjoyment, and certainly shall have a full
enjoyment of him. "He will fulfil the desire of those that fear him: he
also will hear their cry." [Psa
145:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#019). - Joseph Symonds.

[Psa 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)

"My groaning is not hid from thee." Secret tears for secret sins are an
excellent sign of a holy heart, and a healing balsam for broken spirits.
God well understands the language of half words interrupted with sighs,
and interprets them as the streams and breathings of a broken heart. As
all our foolishness is before him to cover it, so is all our heaviness
to ease it; and therefore shall our souls praise and please him more
than a bullock with young horns and hoofs upon his altar. Holy mourning
keeps out carnal sorrow and produces spirit joy. It stirs up the heart
of a saint to beg preventing grace which no false heart can perform
without secret reserves. This inward sorrow prevents open shame. God
will never give up such souls to be trampled on by spiritual enemies,
who are already humbled by themselves. In saints' humiliation there's a
door opened for secret hope, because of the precious promises that are
plighted to it, and especially of preventing future sin by strengthening
grace. For as the love of God is the fountain of all true repentance, so
it is the attractive of more incomes of divine love to the soul. -
Samuel Lee.

[Psa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)

"My heart panteth." The verb which David here uses signifies to travel
or wander hither and thither, but here it is taken for the agitation or
disquietude which distress of heart engenders when we know not what to
do. According as men are disquieted in mind, so do they turn themselves
on all sides; and so their heart may be said to turn round, or to run to
and fro. - John Calvin.

[Psa 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)

"My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore; and my kinsmen stand
afar off." So miserable am I, that I am left alone as one utterly
forsaken; they are all pieces that recoil and fly back at the first
voice of the powder. Yet it is not so much me they stand aloof from as
my sore; for if it were not for my sore, I should have enough of their
company easily enough; but they cannot abide sores, their eyes are too
tender to endure to see them, and yet hard enough not to relieve them.
Or is it they stand aloof, that is, so near as to show they are willing
enough to see them; but yet so far off as to show they have no meaning
to come and help them!.....

"My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore," as fearing more my
sore than me; but "my kinsmen stand afar off," as fearing me no less
than my sore; and where my lovers and friends by standing aloof do but
violate the law of a contracted friendship, my kinsmen by standing afar
off violate even the law of natural affection; and is not this a
grievous thing, that the law of reason, the law of friendship, the law
of nature, shall all be broken rather than I shall be relieved or find
assistance? - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)

"My lovers and my friends stand afar off." Deserted by false friends,
but conqueror through thee, to thee I speed, who though seeming to act
the part of an enemy, yet never changest thy love; but lovest for ever
him whom thou once hast loved. When thou seemest afar off, thou art
near. I conceive this sorrow on account of the treachery of false
friends, and the cowardliness of my kinsfolk, who are to me as piercing
thorns rather than sweet-smelling roses. The proof of affection is seen
by deeds. I hear the name of kinsman and friend; I see no deed. To thee,
therefore, I flee, whose word is deed; for I need thy help. - From the
Latin of A. Rivetus.

[Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013)

"But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth
not his mouth." For why should I hear when I meant not to speak? and why
should I speak when I knew beforehand I should not be heard? I knew by
contesting I should but provoke them, and make them more guilty that
were guilty too much before. I therefore thought it better myself to be
silent than to set them a roaring and make them grow outrageous. No
doubt a great wisdom in David, to know that to be deaf and dumb was in
this case his best course, but yet a far greater virtue that knowing it,
he was able to do it. Oh, how happy should we be, if we could always do
that which we know is best to be done, and if our wills were as ready to
act as our reason is able to enact; we should then decline many rocks we
now run upon, we should then avoid many errors we now run into. To be
deaf and dumb are indeed great inabilities and defects, when they be
natural; but when they be voluntary, and I may say artificial, they are
then great abilities, or rather perfections. - Sir Richard Baker.

[Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013)

"But I, as a deaf man, heard not." The inspired writer here compares
himself to a dumb and deaf man for two reasons. In the first place, he
intimates that he was so overwhelmed with the false and wicked judgments
of his enemies, that he was not even permitted to open his mouth in his
own defence. In the second place, he alleges before God his own
patience, as a plea to induce God the more readily to have pity upon
him; for such meekness and gentleness, not only with good reason,
secures favour to the afflicted and the innocent, but it is also a sign
of true piety. - John Calvin.

[Psa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014)

"Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
reproofs." You, who truly know yourselves; by whom silent suffering,
secret grief, and hidden joy are understood; by the knowledge of your
own unspoken sorrow, unexpressed, because inexpressible feelings, by the
consciousness of the unrevealed depths of your own nature, the earnest,
but ever unsatisfied yearnings of your spirit, learn to reverence and
love those by whom you are surrounded, whose inner life can never be
completely read, but whom you are sure must need sacred sympathy and
tender consideration. If a secret grief is constantly gnawing my heart,
making my voice falter in the song of praise, may not my brother's
downcast eye and heavy heart be occasioned by a similar cause; shall I
condemn him for his want of gladness? No: but remember, "the heart
knoweth his own bitterness, and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his
joy." The silent breathings of the spirit are not for our ears; the hot
tears which in secret fall, are not for our eyes; in mercy has the veil
been drawn round each heart; but by the sacred memory of our own
sadness, let our voice be gentle, our look tender, our tread quiet, as
we pass amongst the mourners. - Jessie Coombs, in "Thoughts for them
Inner Life," 1867.

[Psa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)

A man that is to go down into a deep pit, he does not throw himself
headlong into it, or leap down at all adventures, but fastens a rope at
top upon a cross beam or some sure place, and so lets himself down by
degrees: so let thyself down into the consideration of thy sin, hanging
upon Christ; and when thou art gone so low that thou canst endure no
longer, but art ready to be overcome with the horror and darkness of thy
miserable estate, dwell not too long at the gates of hell, lest the
devil pull thee in, but wind thyself up again by renewed acts of faith,
and "fly for refuge unto the hope that is set before thee." [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018). - Thomas Cole (1627-1697), in
"Morning Exercises."

[Psa 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)

"For I am ready to halt:" to show my infirmity in my trials and
afflictions; as Jacob halted after his wrestling with God. [Gen
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#031). In the Greek, I am ready for
scourges, that is, to suffer correction and punishment for my sins: so
the Chaldee saith, for calamity. - Henry Ainsworth.

[Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)

Pliny writeth of some families that had private marks on their bodies
peculiar to those of that line, and every man hath, as it were, a
private sin, which is most justly called his; but if we will confess our
sins aright, we must not leave out that sin; nay, our chiefest spite
must be against it, according to David's resolve: "I will declare mine
iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin." ... David doth not only say, "I
will declare," but, "I will be sorry for my sin." The people of God
([Sa1 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006)) in the day of their
confession not only say, "We have sinned," but draw water, and pour it
out before the Lord in token of contrition. We should, in confessing
sin, have our hearts so affected, that our eyes, with Job, may "pour
tears before God" ([Job 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#020)); that,
with David, "rivers of tears, may run down our eyes" ([Psa
119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136)); yea, we should wish with
Jeremiah, that "our head were waters, and our eyes a fountain of tears."
[Jer 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001). But, however, nonne
stillabit oculus noster? if we cannot pour out, shall we not drop a
tear? or at least, if we cannot shed a tear, let us breathe forth a sigh
for our sins. It is only the heart broken with godly sorrow that sends
forth a true confession. - Nathanael Hardy.

[Psa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020)

"They are mine enemies because I follow the thing that good is." It is a
bold attempt to ding Satan out of his nest. If we conform us to the men
of this world we find peace with them; they will not discord with us so
long as we go their way; but to shame them by a godly life is an affront
they cannot digest; and to rebuke their sin, findeth at their hand all
that Satan disappointed or corruption provoked can devise. A sleeping
dog is quiet, but being stirred, turneth all in barking and biting. Not
to do as they do is matter enough of anger, but a reproof is the highest
degree of disgrace in their account. All that hatred which they ought to
bear to Satan and his instruments, is turned upon God in his rebuking
and reclaiming servants. That anger that in remorse should burn against
their own sin is set against their reprovers. - William Struther.

[Psa 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022)

"O Lord my salvation." Faith the suppliant is now made faith triumphant.
- Franz Delitzsch.

[Psalms 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 38:1</span></span>

1 O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath; neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

"O Lord, rebuke me not in thy wrath." Rebuked I must be, for I am an
erring child and thou a careful Father, but throw not too much anger
into the tones of thy voice; deal gently although I have sinned
grievously. The anger of others I can bear, but not thine. As thy love
is most sweet to my heart, so thy displeasure is most cutting to my
conscience. "Neither chasten me in thy hot displeasure." Chasten me if
thou wilt, it is a Father's prerogative, and to endure it obediently is
a child's duty; but, O turn not the rod into a sword, smite not so as to
kill. True, my sins might well inflame thee, but let thy mercy and
long-suffering quench the glowing coals of thy wrath. O let me not be
treated as an enemy or dealt with as a rebel. Bring to remembrance thy
covenant, thy fatherhood, and my feebleness, and spare thy servant.

[Psalms 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 38:2</span></span>

2 For thine arrows stick fast in me, and thy hand presseth me sore.

3 There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger; neither is
there any rest in my bones because of my sin.

4 For mine iniquities are gone over mine head: as an heavy burden are
they too heavy for me.

5 My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness.

6 I am troubled; I am bowed down greatly; I go mourning all the day
long.

7 For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease: and there is no
soundness in my flesh.

8 I am feeble and sore broken: I have roared by reason of the
disquietness of my heart.

[Psa 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#002)

"For thine arrows stick fat in me." By this he means both bodily and
spiritual griefs, but we may suppose, especially the latter, for these
are most piercing and stick the fastest. God's law applied by the Spirit
to the conviction of the soul of sin, wounds deeply and rankles long; it
is an arrow not lightly to be brushed out by careless mirthfulness, or
to be extracted by the flattering hand of self-righteousness. The Lord
knows how to shoot so that his bolts not only strike but stick. He can
make convictions sink into the innermost spirit like arrows driven in up
to the head. It seems strange that the Lord should shoot at his own
beloved ones, but in truth he shoots at their sins rather than them, and
those who feel his sin-killing shafts in this life, shall not be slain
with his hot thunderbolts in the next world. "And thy hand presseth me
sore." The Lord had come to close dealing with him, and pressed him down
with the weight of his hand, so that he had no rest or strength left. By
these two expressions we are taught that conviction of sin is a piercing
and a pressing thing, sharp and sore, smarting and crushing. Those who
know by experience "the terrors of the Lord," will be best able to vouch
for the accuracy of such descriptions; they are true to the life.

[Psa 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#003)

"There is no soundness in my flesh because of thine anger." Mental
depression tells upon the bodily frame; it is enough to create and
foster every disease, and is in itself the most painful of all diseases.
Soul sickness tells upon the entire frame; it weakens the body, and then
bodily weakness reacts upon the mind. One drop of divine anger sets the
whole of our blood boiling with misery. "Neither is there any rest in my
bones because of my sin." Deeper still the malady penetrates, 'till the
bones, the more solid parts of the system, are affected. No soundness
and no rest are two sad deficiencies; yet these are both consciously
gone from every awakened conscience until Jesus gives relief. God's
anger is a fire that dries up the very marrow; it searches the secret
parts of the belly. A man who has pain in his bones tosses to and fro in
search of rest, but he finds none; he becomes worn out with agony, and
so in many cases a sense of sin creates in the conscience a horrible
unrest which cannot be exceeded in anguish except by hell itself.

[Psa 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#004)

"For mine iniquities are gone over mine head." Like waves of the deep
sea; like black mire in which a man utterly sinks. Above my hopes, my
strength, and my life itself, my sin rises in its terror. Unawakened
sinners think their sins to be mere shallows, but when conscience is
aroused they find out the depth of iniquity. "As an heavy burden they
are too heavy for me." It is well when sin is an intolerable load, and
when the remembrance of our sins burdens us beyond endurance. This verse
is the genuine cry of one who feels himself undone by his transgressions
and as yet sees not the great sacrifice.

[Psa 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005)

"My wounds stink and are corrupt because of my foolishness." Apply this
to the body, and it pictures a sad condition of disease; but read it of
the soul, and it is to the life. Conscience lays on stripe after stripe
till the swelling becomes a wound and suppurates, and the corruption
within grows offensive. What a horrible creature man appears to be to
his own consciousness when his depravity and vileness are fully opened
up by the law of God, applied by the Holy Spirit! It is true there are
diseases which are correctly described in this verse, when in the worst
stage; but we prefer to receive the expressions as instructively
figurative, since the words "because of my foolishness" point rather at
a moral than a physical malady. Some of us know what it is to stink in
our own nostrils so as to loathe ourselves. Even the most filthy
diseases cannot be so foul as sin. No ulcers, cancers, or putrifying
sores, can match the unutterable vileness and pollution of iniquity. Our
own perceptions have made us feel this. We write what we do know, and
testify what we have seen; and even now we shudder to think that so much
of evil should lie festering deep within our nature.

[Psa 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#006)

"I am troubled." I am wearied with distress, writhing with pain, in sore
travail on account of sin revealed within me. "I am bowed down greatly."
I am brought very low, grievously weakened and frightfully depressed.
Nothing so pulls a man down from all loftiness as a sense of sin and of
divine wrath concerning it. "I go mourning all the day long." The
mourner's soul-sorrow knew no intermission, even when he went about such
business as he was able to attend, he went forth like a mourner who goes
to the tomb, and his words and manners were like the lamentations of
those who follow the corpse. The whole verse may be the more clearly
understood if we picture the Oriental mourner, covered with sackcloth
and ashes, bowed as in a heap, sitting amid squalor and dirt, performing
contortions and writhings expressive of his grief; such is the awakened
sinner, not in outward guise, but in very deed.

[Psa 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#007)

"For my loins are filled with a loathsome disease" - a hot, dry,
parching disorder, probably accompanied by loathsome ulcers.
Spiritually, the fire burns within when the evil of the heart is laid
bare. Note the emphatic words, the evil is loathsome, it is in the
loins, its seat is deep and vital - the man is filled with it. Those who
have passed through the time of conviction understand all this. "And
there is no soundness in my flesh." This he had said before, and thus
the Holy Spirit brings humiliating truth again and again to our
memories, tears away every ground of glorying, and makes us know that in
us, that is, in our flesh, there dwelleth no good thing.

[Psa 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#008)

"I am feeble." The original is "benumbed," or frozen, such strange
incongruities and contradictions meet in a distracted mind and a sick
body - it appears to itself to be alternately parched with heat and
pinched with cold. Like souls in the Popish fabled Purgatory, tossed
from burning furnaces into thick ice, so tormented hearts rush from one
extreme to the other, with equal torture in each. A heat of fear, a
chill of horror, a flaming desire, a horrible insensibility - by these
successive miseries a convinced sinner is brought to death's door. "And
sore broken." Crushed as in a mill, pounded as in a mortar. The body of
the sick man appears to be all out of joint and smashed into a
palpitating pulp, and the soul of the desponding is in an equally
wretched case; as a victim crushed under the car of Juggernaut, such is
a soul over whose conscience the wheels of divine wrath have forced
their awful way. "I have roared by reason of the disquietness of my
heart." Deep and hoarse is the voice of sorrow, and often inarticulate
and terrible. The heart learns groanings which cannot be uttered, and
the voice fails to tone and tune itself to human speech. When our
prayers appear to be rather animal than spiritual, they are none the
less prevalent with the pitiful Father of mercy. He hears the murmur of
the heart and the roaring of the soul because of sin, and in due time he
comes to relieve his afflicted.

The more closely the preceding portrait of an awakened soul is studied
in the light of experience, the more will its striking accuracy appear.
It cannot be a description of merely outward disorder, graphic as it
might then be; it has a depth and pathos in it which only the soul's
mysterious and awful agony can fully match.

[Psalms 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 38:9</span></span>

9 Lord, all my desire is before thee; and my groaning is not hid from
thee.

"Lord, all my desire is before thee." If unuttered, yet perceived.
Blessed be God, he reads the longings of our hearts; nothing can be
hidden from him; what we cannot tell to him he perfectly understands.
The Psalmist is conscious that he has not exaggerated, and therefore
appeals to heaven for a confirmation of his words. The good Physician
understands the symptoms of our disease and sees the hidden evil which
they reveal, hence our case is safe in his hands. "And my groaning is
not hid from thee."

"He takes the meaning of our tears,

The language of our groans."

Sorrow and anguish hide themselves from the observation of man, but God
spieth them out. None more lonely than the broken-hearted sinner, yet
hath he the Lord for his companion.

[Psalms 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 38:10</span></span>

10 My heart panteth, my strength faileth me: as for the light of mine
eyes, it also is gone from me.

11 My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore: and my kinsmen
stand afar off.

12 They also that seek after my life lay snares for me: and they that
seek my hurt speak mischievous things, and imagine deceits all the day
long.

13 But I, as a deaf man, heard not; and I was as a dumb man that openeth
not his mouth.

14 Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
reproofs.

[Psa 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#010)

"My heart panteth." Here begins another tale of woe. He was so
dreadfully pained by the unkindness of friends, that his heart was in a
state of perpetual palpitation. Sharp and quick were the beatings of his
heart; he was like a hunted roe, filled with distressing alarms, and
ready to fly out of itself with fear. The soul seeks sympathy in sorrow,
and if it finds none, its sorrowful heart-throbs are incessant. "My
strength faileth me." What with disease and distraction, he was weakened
and ready to expire. A sense of sin, and a clear perception that none
can help us in our distress, are enough to bring a man to death's door,
especially if there be none to speak a gentle word, and point the broken
spirit to the beloved Physician. "As for the light of mine eyes, it also
is gone from me." Sweet light departed from his bodily eye, and
consolation vanished from his soul. Those who were the very light of his
eyes forsook him. Hope, the last lamp of night, was ready to go out.
What a plight was the poor convict in! Yet here we have some of us been;
and here should we have perished had not infinite mercy interposed. Now,
as we remember the lovingkindness of the Lord, we see how good it was
for us to find our own strength fail us, since it drove us to the strong
for strength; and how right it was that our light should all be
quenched, that the Lord's light should be all in all to us.

[Psa 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#011)

"My lovers and my friends stand aloof from my sore." Whatever affection
they might pretend to, they kept out of his company, lest as a sinking
vessel often draws down boats with it, they might be made to suffer
through his calamities. It is very hard when those who should be the
first to come to the rescue, are the first to desert us. In times of
deep soul trouble even the most affectionate friends cannot enter into
the sufferer's case; let them be as anxious as they may, the sores of a
tender conscience they cannot bind up. Oh, the loneliness of a soul
passing under the convincing power of the Holy Ghost! "And my kinsmen
stand afar off." As the women and others of our Lord's acquaintances
from afar gazed on his cross, so a soul wounded for sin sees all mankind
as distant spectators, and in the whole crowd finds none to aid. Often
relatives hinder seekers after Jesus, oftener still they look on with
unconcern, seldom enough to do they endeavour to lead the penitent to
Jesus.

[Psa 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#012)

"They also that seek after my life lay snares for me." Alas! for us when
in addition to inward griefs, we are beset by outward temptations.
David's foes endeavoured basely to ensnare him. If fair means would not
overthrow him, foul should be tried. This snaring business is a vile
one, the devil's own poachers alone condescend to it; but prayer to God
will deliver us, for the craft of the entire college of tempters can be
met and overcome by those who are led of the Spirit. "They that seek my
hurt speak mischievous things." Lies and slanders poured from them like
water from the town pump. Their tongue was for ever going, and their
heart for ever inventing lies. "And imagine deceits all the day long."
They were never done, their forge was going from morning to night. When
they could not act they talked, and when they could not talk they
imagined, and schemed, and plotted. Restless is the activity of malice.
Bad men never have enough of evil. They compass sea and land to injure a
saint; no labour is too severe, no cost too great if they may utterly
destroy the innocent. Our comfort is, that our glorious Head knows the
pertinacious malignity of our foes, and will in due season put an end to
it, as he even now sets a bound about it.

[Psa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#013)

"But I, as a deaf man, heard not." Well and bravely was this done. A
sacred indifference to the slanders of malevolence is true courage and
wise policy. It is well to be as if we could not hear or see. Perhaps
the Psalmist means that this deafness on his part was unavoidable
because he had no power to answer the taunts of the cruel, but felt much
of the truth of their ungenerous accusations. "And I was as a dumb man
that openeth not his mouth." David was bravely silent, and herein was
eminently typical of our Lord Jesus, whose marvellous silence before
Pilate was far more eloquent than words. To abstain from self-defence is
often most difficult, and frequently most wise.

[Psa 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#014)

"Thus I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no
reproofs." He repeats the fact of his silence that we may note it,
admire it, and imitate it. We have an advocate, and need not therefore
plead our own cause. The Lord will rebuke our foes, for vengeance
belongs to him; we may therefore wait patiently and find it our strength
to sit still.

[Psalms 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 38:15</span></span>

15 For in thee, O Lord, do I hope: thou wilt hear, O Lord my God.

David committed himself to him that judgeth righteously, and so in
patience was able to possess his soul. Hope in God's intervention, and
belief in the power of prayer, are two most blessed stays to the soul in
time of adversity. Turning right away from the creature to the sovereign
Lord of all, and to him as our own covenant God, we shall find the
richest solace in waiting upon him. Reputation like a fair pearl may be
cast into the mire, but in due time when the Lord makes up his jewels,
the godly character shall shine with unclouded splendour. Rest then, O
slandered one, and let not thy soul be tossed to and fro with anxiety.

[Psalms 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 38:16</span></span>

16 For I said, Hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me: when
my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me.

17 For I am ready to halt, and my sorrow is continually before me.

18 For I will declare mine iniquity; I will be sorry for my sin.

19 But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong: and they that hate
me wrongfully are multiplied.

20 They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries; because I
follow the thing that good is.

[Psa 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#016)

"For I said, hear me, lest otherwise they should rejoice over me." The
good man was not insensible, he dreaded the sharp stings of taunting
malice; he feared lest either by his conduct or his condition, he should
give occasion to the wicked to triumph. This fear his earnest desires
used as an argument in prayer as well as an incentive to prayer. "When
my foot slippeth, they magnify themselves against me." The least flaw in
a saint is sure to be noticed; long before it comes to a fall the enemy
begins to rail, the merest trip of the foot sets all the dogs of hell
barking. How careful ought we to be, and how importunate in prayer for
upholding grace! We do not wish, like blind Samson, to make sport for
our enemies; let us then beware of the treacherous Delilah of sin, by
whose means our eyes may soon be put out.

[Psa 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)

"For I am ready to halt." Like one who limps, or a person with tottering
footsteps, in danger of falling. How well this befits us all. "Let him
that thinketh he standeth, take heed lest he fall." How small a thing
will lame a Christian, how insignificant a stumbling-block may cause him
to fall! This passage refers to weakness caused by pain and sorrow; the
sufferer was ready to give up in despair; he was so depressed in spirit
that he stumbled at a straw. Some of us painfully know what it is to be
like dry tinder for the sparks of sorrow; ready to halt, ready to mourn,
and sigh and cry upon any occasion, and for any cause. "And my sorrow is
continually before me." He did not need to look out of window to find
sorrow, he felt it within, and groaned under a body of sin which was an
increasing plague to him. Deep conviction continues to irritate the
conscience; it will not endure a patched-up peace; but cries war to the
knife till the enmity is slain. Until the Holy Ghost applies the
precious blood of Jesus, a truly awakened sinner is covered with raw
wounds which cannot be healed nor bound up, nor mollified with ointment.

[Psa 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#018)

"For I will declare mine iniquity." The slander of his enemies he
repudiates, but the accusations of his conscience he admits. Open
confession is good for the soul. When sorrow leads to hearty and
penitent acknowledgment of sin it is blessed sorrow, a thing to thank
God for most devoutly. "I will be sorry for my sin." My confession shall
be salted with briny tears. It is well not so much to bewail our sorrows
as to denounce the sins which lie at the root of them. To be sorry for
sin is no atonement for it, but it is the right spirit in which to
repair to Jesus, who is the reconciliation and the Saviour. A man is
near to the end of his trouble when he comes to an end with his sins.

[Psa 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#019)

"But mine enemies are lively, and they are strong." However weak and
dying the righteous man may be, the evils which oppose him are sure to
be lively enough. Neither the world, the flesh, nor the devil, are ever
afflicted with debility or inertness; this trinity of evils labours with
mighty unremitting energy to overthrow us. If the devil were sick, or
our lusts feeble, or Madame Bubble infirm, we might slacken prayer; but
with such lively and vigorous enemies we must not cease to cry mightily
unto our God. "And they that hate me wrongfully are multiplied." Here is
another misery, that as we are no match for our enemies in strength, so
also they outnumber us as a hundred to one. Wrong as the cause of evil
is, it is a popular one. More and more the kingdom of darkness grows.
Oh, misery of miseries, that we see the professed friends of Jesus
forsaking him, and the enemies of his cross and his cause mustering in
increasing bands!

[Psa 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#020)

"They also that render evil for good are mine adversaries." Such would a
wise man wish his enemies to be. Why should we seek to be beloved of
such graceless souls? It is a fine plea against our enemies when we can
without injustice declare them to be like the devil, whose nature it is
to render evil for good. "Because I follow the thing that good is." If
men hate us for this reason we may rejoice to bear it' their wrath is
the unconscious homage which vice renders to virtue. This verse is not
inconsistent with the writer's previous confession; we may feel deeply
guilty before God, and yet be entirely innocent of any wrong to our
fellow men. It is one thing to acknowledge the truth, quite another
thing to submit to be belied. The Lord may smite me justly, and yet I
may be able to say to my fellow man, "Why smitest thou me?"

[Psalms 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 38:21</span></span>

21 Forsake me not, O Lord: O my God, be not far from me.

22 Make haste to help me, O Lord my salvation.

[Psa 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#021)

"Forsake me not, O Lord." Now is the time I need thee most. When
sickness, slander, and sin, all beset a saint, he requires the especial
aid of heaven, and he shall have it too. He is afraid of nothing while
God is with him, and God is with him evermore. "Be not far from me."
Withhold not the light of thy near and dear love. Reveal thyself to me.
Stand at my side. Let me feel that though friendless besides, I have a
most gracious and all-sufficient friend in thee.

[Psa 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#022)

"Make haste to help me." Delay would prove destruction. The poor pleader
was far gone and ready to expire, only speedy help would serve his turn.
See how sorrow quickens the importunity of prayer! Here is one of the
sweet results of affliction, it gives new life to our pleading, and
drives us with eagerness to our God. "O Lord my salvation." Not my
Saviour only, but my salvation. He who has the Lord on his side has
salvation in present possession. Faith foresees the blessed issue of all
her pleas, and in this verse begins to ascribe to God the glory of the
expected mercy. We shall not be left of the Lord. His grace will succour
us most opportunely, and in heaven we shall see that we had not one
trial too many, or one pang too severe. A sense of sin shall melt into
the joy of salvation; grief shall lead on to gratitude, and gratitude to
joy unspeakable and full of glory.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 39](psa039)

</div>
