<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa108)  [Next](psa110.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 109](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 109:0</span></span>

To the Chief Musician. - Intended therefore to be sung, and sung in the
temple service! Yet is it by no means easy to imagine the whole nation
singing such dreadful imprecations. We ourselves, at any rate, under the
gospel dispensation, find it very difficult to infuse into the Psalm a
gospel sense, or a sense at all compatible with the Christian spirit;
and therefore one would think the Jews must have found it hard to chant
such strong language without feeling the spirit of revenge excited; and
the arousal of that spirit could never have been the object of divine
worship in any period of time - under law or under gospel. At the very
outset this title shows that the Psalm has a meaning with which it is
fitting for men of God to have fellowship before the throne of the Most
High: but what is that meaning? This is a question of no small
difficulty, and only a very childlike spirit will ever be able to answer
it.

A Psalm of David. Not therefore the ravings of a malicious misanthrope,
or the execrations of a hot, revengeful spirit. David would not smite
the man who sought his blood, he frequently forgave those who treated
him shamefully; and therefore these words cannot be read in a bitter,
revengeful sense, for that would be foreign to the character of the son
of Jesse. The imprecatory sentences before us were penned by one who
with all his courage in battle was a man of music and of tender heart,
and they were meant be addressed to God in the form of a Psalm, and
therefore they cannot possibly have en meant to be mere angry cursing.

Unless it can be proved that the religion of the old dispensation was
altogether hard, morose, and Draconian, and that David was of a
malicious, vindictive spirit, it cannot be conceived that this Psalm
contains what one author has ventured to call "a pitiless hate, a
refined and insatiable malignity." To such a suggestion we cannot give
place, no, not for an hour. But what else can we make of such strong
language? Truly this is one of the hard places of Scripture, a passage
which the soul trembles to read; yet as it is a Psalm unto God, and
given by inspiration, it is not ours to sit in judgment upon it, but to
bow our ear to what God the Lord would speak to us therein.

This Psalm refers to Judas, for so Peter quoted it; but to ascribe its
bitter denunciations to our Lord in the hour of his sufferings is more
than we dare to do. These are not consistent with the silent Lamb of
God, who opened not his mouth when led to the slaughter. It may seem
very pious to put such words into his mouth; we hope it is our piety
which prevents our doing so. See our first note from Perowne on page
445.

Division. - In the [Psa 109:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md) David
humbly pleads with God that he may be delivered from his remorseless and
false-hearted enemies. From [Psa
109:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md), filled with a prophetic
furor, which carries him entirely beyond himself, he denounces judgment
upon his foes, and then from [Psa
109:21-31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md) he returns to his communion
with God in prayer and praise. The central portion of the Psalm in which
the difficulty lies must be regarded not as the personal wish of the
Psalmist in cool blood, but as his prophetic denunciation of such
persons as he describes, and emphatically of one special "son of
perdition" whom he sees with prescient eye. We would all pray for the
conversion of our worst enemy, and David would have done the same; bat
viewing the adversaries of the Lord, and doers of inquiry, as such, and
as incorrigible, we cannot wish them well; on the contrary, we desire
their overthrow and destruction. The gentlest hearts burn with
indignation when they hear of barbarities to women and children, of
crafty plots for ruining the innocent, of cruel oppression of helpless
orphans, and gratuitous ingratitude to the good and gentle. A curse upon
the perpetrators of the atrocities in Turkey may not be less virtuous
than a blessing upon the righteous. We wish well to all mankind, and for
that very reason we sometimes blaze with indignation against the Inhuman
wretches by whom every law which protects our fellow creatures is
trampled down, and every dictate of humanity is set at nought.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md). - The silence of God. What
it may mean: what it involves: how we may endeavour to break it.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md). - "God of my praise." A
text which may be expounded in its double meaning.

[Psa 109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md). - Slander. Its cause -
wickedness and malice. Its instruments - deceit and lies. Its frequency
- Jesus and the saints slandered. Its punishment. Our resort when tried
by it - prayer to God.

[Psa 109:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md). -

I. God is for his people when the wicked are against them ([Psa
109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001).md);

1\. for his people's sake;

2\. for his own sake.

II\. The wicked are against his people when he is for them ([Psa
109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md), [Psa
109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003).md);

1\. from hatred to God;

2\. from hatred to his people. - G. R.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md). - On the excellency of
prayer. See Expository Notes.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md). - Our Lord's adversaries,
and his resort.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md), [Psa
109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005.md). -

I. David's spirit and conduct towards his enemies.

1\. His spirit is love - love for hatred; hence his denunciations are
against their sins, rather than against them.

2\. His conduct. He returned good for evil; he interceded for them.

II\. Their spirit and conduct towards him.

1\. Hatred for love.

2\. Evil for good. - G. R.

[Psa 109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005.md). - "Evil for good." This is
devil-like. Have not men been guilty of this to parents, to those who
have warned them, to saints and ministers, and especially to the Lord
himself?

[Psa 109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005.md). - How has the Redeemer
been recompensed? Show what he deserves and what he receives from
various individuals. He feels the unkindness of those who are
ungrateful.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md). - It is the law of
retribution to punish the wicked by means of the wicked. - Starke.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md). - When may prayer become
sin? From what is sought, how sought, by whom sought, and wherefore
sought.

[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md). - "Let his days be Jew."
Sin the great shortener of human life. After the flood the whole race
lived a shorter time; passion and avaricious care shorten life, and some
sins have a peculiar power to do this, lust, drunkenness, &c.

[Psa 109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020.md), [Psa
109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md). -

I. David leaves his enemies in the hand of God ([Psa
109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020).md).

II\. He puts himself into the same hands ([Psa
109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021).md). - G. R.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md). - The plea of a believer
must be drawn from his God, - his "name" and "mercy." The opposite habit
of searching for arguments in self very common and very disappointing.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md). - The peculiar goodness
of divine mercy.

[Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022.md). - The inward sorrows of a
saint. Their cause, effects, consolations, and cure.

[Psa 109:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#026.md), [Psa
109:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#027.md). -

I. The Prayer.

II\. The Believing Title: "O Lord my God."

III\. The attribute relied upon.

IV\. The motive for the petition.

[Psa 109:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028.md). - The divine cure for
human ill-will; and the saint's temper when he trusts therein - "let thy
servant rejoice."

[Psa 109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029.md). -

I. A prayer for the repentance of David's adversaries.

II\. A prophecy for their confusion if they remain impenitent. - G. R.

[Psa 109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029.md). - The sinner's last
mantle.

[Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md). - Vocal praise. Should be
personal, resolute, intelligent, abundant, hearty. It should attract
others, join with others, stimulate others, but never lose its
personality.

[Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md), [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). -

I. David's will with respect to himself: "I will ... yea, I will," etc.
([Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030).md).

II\. His shall with respect to God: "he shall," etc. ([Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031).md). -

[Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md), [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). - He promiseth God that he
will praise him, [Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md). He
promiseth himself that he shall have cause to praise God, [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). -

I. The character to whom the promise is made - the poor.

II\. The danger to which he is exposed - those that condemn his soul.

III\. The deliverance which is promised to him - divine, opportune,
efficient, complete, everlasting.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

"Mysterious" was the one word written opposite this Psalm in the pocket
Bible of a late devout and popular writer. It represents the utter
perplexity with which it is very generally regarded. - Joseph Hammond.

Whole Psalm

In this Psalm David is supposed to refer to Doeg the Edomite, or to
Ahithophel. It is the most imprecatory of the Psalms, and may well be
termed the Iscariot Psalm. What David here refers to his mortal enemy,
finds its accomplishment in the betrayer of the Son of David. It is from
[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md) that Peter infers the
necessity of filling up the vacancy occasioned by the death of Judas: it
was, says he, predicted that another should take his office. - Paton J.
Gloag, in "A Commentary on the Acts," 1870.

Whole Psalm

We may consider Judas, at the same time, as the virtual head of the
Jewish nation in their daring attempt to dethrone the Son of God. The
doom pronounced, and the reasons for it, apply to the Jews as a nation,
as well as to the leader of the band who took Jesus. - Andrew A. Bonar.

Whole Psalm

Is it possible that this perplexing and distressing Psalm presents us
after all, not with David's maledictions upon his enemies, but with
their maledictions upon him? Not only do I hold this interpretation to
be quite legitimate, I hold it to be by far the more natural and
reasonable interpretation. - Joseph Hammond.

\[In Dr. Cox's Expositor, Vol. II. p. 225. this theory is well
elaborated by Mr. Hammond, but we cannot for an instant accept it. - C.
H. S.\]

The Imprecations of the Psalm. - The language has been justified, not as
the language of David, but as the language of Christ, exercising his
office of Judge, or, in so far as he had laid aside that office during
his earthly life, calling upon his Father to accomplish the curse. It
has been alleged that this is the prophetic fore-shadowing of the solemn
words, "Woe unto that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed! it had
been good for that man if he had not been born" ([Mat
26:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#024).md). The curse in the words of
Chrysostom is, "a prophecy in the form of a curse" (προφητεία ὲν εἴδει
ἀρᾶς).

The strain which such a view compels us to put on much of the language
ought to have led long since to its abandonment. Not even the words
denounced by our Lord against the Pharisees can really be compared to
the anathemas which are here strung together. Much less is there any
pretence for saying that those words so full of deep and holy sorrow,
addressed to the traitor in the gospels, are merely another expression
of the appalling denunciations of the Psalm. But terrible as these
undoubtedly are, to be accounted for by the spirit of the Old
Dispensation, not to be defended by that of the New, still let us learn
to estimate them aright. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

The Imprecations. - These imprecations are not appropriate in the mouth
of the suffering Saviour. It is not the spirit of Zion but of Sinai
which here speaks out of the mouth of David; the spirit of Elias, which,
according to [Luk 9:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#058.md), is not the
spirit of the New Testament. This wrathful spirit is overpowered by the
spirit of love. But these anathemas are still not on this account so
many beatings of the air. There is in them a divine energy, as in the
blessing and cursing of every man who is united to God, and more
especially of a man whose temper of mind is such as David's. They
possess the same power as the prophetical threatenings, and in this
sense they are regarded in the New Testament as fulfilled in the son of
perdition ([Joh 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012).md). To the
generation of the time of Jesus they were a deterrent warning not to
offend against the Holy One of God, and this Psalmus Ischarioticus ([Act
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020).md) will ever be such a mirror of
warning to the enemies and persecutors of Christ and his church. - Franz
Delitzsch.

The lmprecations. - Respecting the imprecations contained in this Psalm,
it will be proper to keep in mind what I have said elsewhere, that when
David forms such maledictions, or expresses his desire for them, he is
not instigated by any immoderate carnal propensity, nor is he actuated
by zeal without knowledge, nor is he influenced by any private personal
considerations. These three matters must be carefully weighed, for in
proportion to the amount of self-esteem which a man possesses, is he so
enamoured with his own interests as to rush headlong upon revenge. Hence
it comes to pass that the more a person is devoted to selfishness, he
will be the more immoderately addicted to the advancement of his own
individual interests. This desire for the promotion of personal interest
gives birth to another species of vice: for no one wishes to be avenged
upon his enemies because such a thing would be right and equitable, but
because it is the means of gratifying his own spiteful propensity. Some,
indeed, make a pretext of righteousness and equity in the matter; but
the spirit of malignity, by which they are inflamed, effaces every trace
of Justice, and blinds their minds.

When the two vices, selfishness and carnality, are corrected, there is
still another thing demanding correction: we must repress the ardour of
foolish zeal, in order that we may follow the Spirit of God as our
guide. Should any one, under the influence of perverse zeal, produce
David as an example of it, that would not be an example in point; for to
such a person may be very aptly applied the answer which Christ returned
to his disciples, "Ye know not what spirit ye are of," [Luk
9:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#055.md). How detestable a piece of
sacrilege is it on the part of the monks, and especially the Franciscan
friars, to pervert this Psalm by employing it to countenance the most
nefarious purposes! If a man harbour malice against a neighbour, it is
quite a common thing for him to engage one of those wicked wretches to
curse him, which he would do by daily repeating this Psalm. I know a
lady in France who hired a parcel of these friars to curse her own and
only son in these words. But I return to David, who, free from all
inordinate passion, breathed forth his prayers under the influence of
the Holy Spirit. - John Calvin.

The Imprecations. - It is possible, as Tholuck thinks, that in some of
the utterances in what are called the vindictive Psalms, especially the
imprecations in Psalm 109, unholy personal zeal may have been mingled
with holy zeal, as was the case seemingly with the two disciples James
and John, when the Lord chided their desire for vengeance ([Luk
9:54-56](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#054).md). But, in reality, the feeling
expressed in these Psalms may well be considered as virtuous anger, such
as Bishop Butler explains and justifies in his sermons on "Resentment
and the Forgiveness of Injuries," and such as Paul teaches in [Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026.md), "Be ye angry, and sin not."
Anger against sin and a desire that evildoers may be punished, are not
opposed to the spirit of the gospel, or to that love of enemies which
our Lord both enjoined and exemplified. If the emotion or its utterance
were essentially sinful, how could Paul wish the enemy of Christ and the
perverter of the gospel to be accursed (ἀνάθεμα, [Co1
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#022.md); [Gal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#008).md); and especially, how could the
spirit of the martyred saints in heaven call on God for vengeance ([Rev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#010).md), and join to celebrate its final
execution ([Rev 19:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001).md); Yea,
resentment against the wicked is so far from being necessarily sinful
that we find it manifested by the Holy and Just One himself, when in the
days of his flesh he looked around on his hearers "with anger, being
grieved for the hardness of their hearts" ([Mar
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#005).md); and when in "the great day of
his wrath" ([Rev 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017).md), he shall say
to "all workers of iniquity" ([Luk
13:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#027).md), "Depart from me, ye cursed"
([Mat 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041).md). - Benjamin Davies
(1814-1875), in Kitto's Cyclopaedia.

Imprecations. - It is true that this vengeance is invoked on the head of
the betrayer of Christ: and we may profit by reading even the severest
of the passages when we regard them as dictated by a burning zeal for
the honour of Jehovah, a righteous indignation and a jealousy of love,
and generally, if not universally, as denunciations of just judgment
against the obstinate enemies of Christ, and all who obey not the Gospel
of God. At the same time, these passages cannot be fully accounted for
without a frank recognition of the fact that the Psalter was conceived
and written under the Old Covenant. That dispensation was more stern
than ours. God's people had with all other peoples a conflict with sword
and spear. They wanted to tread down their enemies, to crush the
heathen; and thought it a grand religious triumph for a righteous man to
wash his feet in the blood of the wicked, [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010.md); [Psa
68:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#023.md). Now the struggle is without
carnal weapons, and the tone of the dispensation is changed. - Donald
Fraser, 1873.

Imprecations. - Imprecations of judgment on the wicked on the hypothesis
of their continued impenitence are not inconsistent with simultaneous
efforts to bring them to repentance; and Christian charity itself can do
no more than labour for the sinners' conversion. The law of holiness
requires us to pray for the fires of divine retribution: the law of love
to seek meanwhile to rescue the brand from the burning. The last prayer
of the martyr Stephen was answered not by any general averting of doom
from a guilty nation, but by the conversion of an individual persecutor
to the service of God. - Joseph Francis Thrupp.

Imprecations. - That explanation which regards the "enemies" as
spiritual foes has a large measure of truth. It commended itself to a
mind so far removed from mysticism as Arnold's. It is most valuable for
devout private use of the Psalter. For, though we are come to Mount
Sion, crested with the eternal calm, the opened ear can hear the thunder
rolling along the peaks of Sinai. In the Gospel, the wrath of God is
revealed from heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness. Sin is
utterly hateful to God. The broad gates are flung wide open to the city
that lies foursquare towards all the winds of heaven; for its ruler is
divinely tolerant, But there shall in no wise enter it anything that
defileth, neither whatever worketh abomination; for he is divinely
intolerant too. And thus when, in public or private, we read these
Psalms of imprecation, there is a lesson that comes home to us. We must
read them, or dishonour God's word. Reading them, we must depart from
sin, or pronounce judgment upon ourselves. Drunkenness, impurity,
hatred, every known sin of flesh or spirit - these, and not mistaken
men, are the worst enemies of God and of his Christ. Against these we
pray in our Collects for Peace at Morning and Evening Prayer - "Defend
us in all assaults of our enemies, that by thee we being defended from
the fear of our enemies, may pass our time in rest and quietness." These
were the dark hosts which swept through the Psalmist's vision when he
cried, "Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed," [Psa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#010.md). - William Alexander, in "The
Witness of the Psalms to Christ and Christianity," 1877.

Imprecations. - I cannot forbear the following little incident that
occurred the other morning at family worship. I happened to be reading
one of the imprecatory Psalms, and as I paused to remark, my little boy,
a lad of ten years, asked with some earnestness: "Father, do you think
it right for a good man to pray for the destruction of his enemies like
that?" and at the same time referred me to Christ as praying for his
enemies. I paused a moment to know how to shape the reply so as to fully
meet and satisfy his enquiry, and then said, "My son, if an assassin
should enter the house by night, and murder your mother, and then
escape, and the sheriff and citizens were all out in pursuit, trying to
catch him, would you not pray to God that they might succeed and arrest
him, and that he might be brought to justice?" "Oh, yes!" said he, "but
I never saw it so before. I did not know that that was the meaning of
these Psalms." "Yes," said I, "my son, the men against whom David prays
were bloody men, men of falsehood and crime, enemies to the peace of
society, seeking his own life, and unless they were arrested and their
wicked devices defeated, many innocent persons must suffer." The
explanation perfectly satisfied his mind. - F. G. Hibbard, in "The
Psalms chronologically arranged," 1856.

Title

It is worth noting, that the superscription, "to the chief Musician," to
the precentor (למנצת), proves it to have been designed, such as it is,
for the Tabernacle or Temple service of song. - Joseph Hammond, in "The
Expositor," 1875.

Title

Syriac inscription. - The verbs of the Hebrew text through nearly the
whole of the imprecatory part of this Psalm are read in the singular
number, as if some particular subject were signified by the divine
prophet. But our translators always change the verbs into the plural
number; which is not done by the Seventy and the other translators, who
adhere more closely to the Hebrew text. But without doubt this has
arisen, because the Syriac Christians explain this Psalm of the
sufferings of Christ, which may be understood from the Syriac
inscription of this Psalm, and which in Polyglottis Angl. reads thus: -
"Of David: when they made Absolom king, he not knowing: and on account
of this he was killed. But to us it sets forth the sufferings of
Christ." For this reason all these imprecations are transferred to the
enemies or murderers of Jesus Christ. - John Augustus Dathe, 1731-1791.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise." All commendation or
manifestation of our innocence is to be sought from God when we are
assailed with calumnies on all sides. When God is silent, we should cry
all the more strongly; nor should we because of such delay despair of
help, nor impatiently cease from praying. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"Hold not thy peace." How appropriately this phrase is applied to God,
with whom to speak is the same as to do; for by his word he made all
things. Rightly, therefore, is he said to be silent when he seems not to
notice the things which are done by the wicked and patiently bears with
their malice. The Psalmist begs him to rise up and speak with the wicked
in his wrath, and thus take deserved vengeance on them; which is as easy
for him to do as for an angry man to break forth in words of rebuke and
blame. This should be to us a great solace against the wickedness of
this last age, which God, our praise, can restrain with one little word.
- Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"O God." As the most innocent and holy servants of God are subject to
heavy slanders and false calumnies raised against them, so the best
remedy and relief in this case is to go to God, as here the Psalmist
doth. - David Dickson.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"God of my praise." Thou, who art the constant object of my praise and
thanksgiving, [Jer 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014.md). - William
Keatinge Clay.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"O God of my praise." In denominating him the God of his praise, he
intrusts to him the vindication of his innocence, in the face of the
calumnies by which he was all but universally assailed. - John Calvin.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"The God of MY praise." Give me leave, in order to expound it the
better, to expostulate. What, David, were there no saints but thyself
that gave praise to God? Why dost thou then seem to appropriate and
engross God unto thyself, as the God of thy praise, as if none praised
him else but thee? It is because his soul had devoted all the praise he
was able to bestow on any, unto the Lord alone; as whom he had set
himself to praise, and praise alone. As of a beloved son we use to say,
"the son of my love." And further, it is as if he had said, If I had all
the ability of all the spirits of men and angels wherewith to celebrate
him, I would bestow them all on him, he is the God of my praise. And as
he was David's, so he should be ours. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md)

"For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me." Speak, says Arnobius, to thine own conscience, O man of
God, thou who art following Christ; and when the mouth of the wicked and
deceitful man is opened concerning thee, rejoice and be secure; because
while the mouth of the wicked is opened for thy slander in the earth,
the mouth of God is opened for thy praise in heaven. - Lorinus.

[Psa 109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md), [Psa
109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003.md)

Note, first, the detractor opens his mouth, that he may pour forth his
poison, and that he may devour his victim. Hence, David says, "the mouth
of the wicked is opened against me." Note, secondly, the detractor is
talkative - "They have spoken," etc. The mouth of the detractor is a
broken pitcher leaking all over. Note, thirdly, detraction springs from
hatred, "they compassed me about also with words of hatred." In Greek,
ἐκύκλωσάν με, i.e., as in a circle they have enclosed me. St. Climacus
says, "Detraction is odii partus, a subtle disease, a fat but hidden
leech which sucks the blood of charity and after destroys it." -
Lorinus.

[Psa 109:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md)

"The mouth of the wicked," etc.

Vice - deformed

Itself, and ugly, and of flavour rank -

To rob fair Virtue of so sweet an incense,

And with it to anoint and salve its own

Rotten ulcers, and perfume the path that led

To death, strove daily by a thousand means:

And oft succeeded to make Virtue sour

In the world's nostrils, and its loathly self

Smell sweetly. Rumour was the messenger

Of defamation, and so swift that none

Could be the first to tell an evil tale.

'Twas Slander filled her mouth with lying words

Slander, the foulest whelp of Sin. The man

In whom this spirit entered was undone.

His tongue was set on fire of hell; his heart

Was black as death; his legs were faint with haste

To propagate the lie his tongue had framed

His pillow was the peace of families

Destroyed, the sigh of innocence reproached,

Broken friendships, and the strife of brotherhoods.

Yet did he spare his sleep, and hear the clock

Number the midnight watches, on his bed

Devising mischief more; and early rose,

And made most hellish meals of good men's names.

Peace fled the neighbourhood in which he made

His haunts; and, like a moral pestilence,

Before his breath the healthy shoots and blooms

Of social joy and happiness decayed.

Fools only in his company were seen,

And those forsaken of God, and to themselves

Given up. The prudent man shunned him and his house

As one who had a deadly moral plague.

\- Robert Pollok.

[Psa 109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003.md)

Although an individual may be absent, so that he cannot corporeally be
encompassed and fought with; nevertheless, so great is the force and
malice of an envenomed tongue, that an absent man may be none the less
dangerously surrounded and warred against. Thus David, though absent and
driven into exile, was nevertheless surrounded and assailed by the
calumnies of Doeg and the other flatterers of Saul, so that at length he
was also corporeally surrounded; in which contest he would clearly have
perished unless he had been divinely delivered: see 1 Sam. 23. And this
kind of surrounding and assault is so much the more deadly as it is so
much the less possible to be avoided. For who can be so innocent as to
escape the snares of a back-biting and calumnious tongue? What place can
be so remote and obscure as that this evil will not intrude when David
could not be safe in the mountains and caves of the rocks? - Wolfgang
Musculus.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004) (first clause.md)

None prove worse enemies than those that have received the greatest
kindnesses, when once they turn unkind. As the sharpest vinegar is made
of the purest wine, and pleasant meats turn to the bitterest humours in
the stomach; so the highest love bestowed upon friends, being ill
digested or corrupt, turns to the most unfriendly hatred, proximorum
odia sunt acerrima. - Abraham Wright.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

"For my love they are my adversaries"; that's an ill requital; but how
did David requite them? We may take his own word for it; he tells us
how, "But I give myself unto prayer"; yea, he seemed a man wholly given
unto prayer. The elegant conciseness of the Hebrew is, "But I prayer";
we supply it thus, "But I give myself unto prayer." They are sinning
against me, requiting my love with hatred, "But I give myself unto
prayer." But for whom did he pray? Doubtless he prayed and prayed much
for himself; he prayed also for them. We may understand these words, "I
give myself unto prayer," two ways. First, I pray against their plots
and coil dealings with me (prayer was David's best strength always
against his enemies), yet that was not all. But, secondly, "I give
myself unto prayer," that the Lord would pardon their sin, and turn
their hearts, when they are doing me mischief; or, though they have done
me mischief, I am wishing them the best good. David (in another place)
showed what a spirit of charity he was clothed with, when no reproof
could hinder him from praying for others, [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005.md). - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

The translator of the Syriac version has inserted in the [Psa
109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md) "and I have prayed for them," as
if he had copied them from the words of our Lord in [Mat
5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044.md), where in the Syriac version of
the New Testament we have exactly the same construction. It is in
keeping with the inscription of the Psalm, which applies it directly to
Christ. It would seem as if the Translator understood this verse of the
crucifixion and of the Redeemer's prayer for his murderers, or as if the
only way to understand the elliptical language of the Psalmist was from
the teaching and example of our Lord. - E. T. Gibson, Crayford.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

"I prayer." The Messiah says in this prophetic Psalm, "I am prayer."
During his pilgrimage on earth, his whole life was communion with God;
and now in his glory he is constantly making intercession for us. But
this does not exhaust the idea, "I am prayer." lie not merely prayed and
is now praying, he not merely teaches and influences us to pray, but he
is prayer, the fountain and source of all prayer, as well as the
foundation and basis of all answers to our petitions. He is the Word in
this sense also. From all eternity his Father heard him, heard him as
interceding for that world which, created through him, he represented,
and in which., through him, divine glory was to be revealed. In the same
sense, therefore, in which he is light and gives light, in which he is
life and resurrection, and therefore quickens, Jesus is prayer. - Adolph
Saphir, in Lectures on the Lord's Prayer, 1870.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

Persecuted saints are men of prayer, yea, they are as it were made up
all of prayer. David prayed before; but, oh, when his enemies fell a
persecuting of him, then he gave himself up wholly to prayer. Oh, then
he was more earnest, more fervent, more frequent, more diligent, more
constant, and more abundant in the work of prayer! When Numa, king of
the Romans, was told that his enemies were in arms against him, he did
but laugh at it, and answered, "And I do sacrifice": so when persecutors
arm themselves against the people of God; they do but divinely smile and
laugh at it, and give themselves the more up to prayer. When men arm
against them, then they arm themselves with all their might to the work
of prayer; and woe, woe to them that have armies of prayers marching
against them. - Thomas Brooks.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

"I give myself unto prayer." The instruction to ourselves froth these
words is most comforting and precious. Are we bowed down with sorrow and
distress? "I give myself unto prayer." Are we persecuted, and reviled,
and corn-passed about with words of hatred? "I give myself unto prayer."
Has death entered our dwellings? and as we gaze in heart-broken anguish
on the no longer answering look of one who was our earthly stay, and we
feel as if all hope as well as all help were gone, still there remains
the same blessed refuge for all the Lord's sorrowing ones, "I give
myself unto prayer." In the allegory of the ancients, Hope was left at
the bottom of the casket, as the sweetener of human life; but God, in
far richer mercy, gives prayer as the balm of human trial. - Barton
Bouchier.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

A Christian is all over prayer: he prays at rising, at lying down, and
as he walks: like a prime favourite at court, who has the key to the
privy stairs, and can wake his prince by night. - Augustus Montague
Toplady, 1740-1778.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Set thou a wicked man over him," etc. Here commences that terrible
series of maledictions, unparalleled in Holy Writ, as directed against
an individual sinner, albeit it is little more than a special
reduplication of the national woes denounced in Leviticus 26 and
Deuteronomy 28. - Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Set thou a wicked man over him." The first thing that the Psalmist asks
is, that his foe might be subjected to the evil of having a man placed
over him like himself: - a man regardless of justice, truth, and right;
a man who would respect character and propriety no more than he had
himself done. It is, in fact, a prayer that he might be punished in the
line of his offences. It cannot be wrong that a man should be treated as
he treats others; and it cannot be in itself wrong to desire that a man
should be treated according to his character and deserts, for this is
the object of all law, and this is what all magistrates and legislators
are endeavouring to secure. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Over him." Consider what would have been the effect if these
denunciations had been against the sins of men and not, as they are in
these passages, against the sinners. Men would have said, "My sin is
denounced, not me." What a license would have been given to sin! The
depraved nature would have said, "If I am not condemned, but only my
sin, I can do as I like; I shall not be called to account for it. I love
sin and can go on in it." This is what men would have said. There would
have been no effort to get rid of it. Why should there be, if only sin
is condemned and not the sinner? But man's sin is identified with
himself, and this makes him tremble. God's wrath rests on him because of
his sin. Condemnation is awaiting him because of his sin. This makes him
anxious to get rid of it. - Frederick Whitfield.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Let Satan stand at his right hand." It appears to have been the custom
at trial before the Jewish tribunals for a pleader to stand at the right
hand of the accused. See [Zac 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001.md),
where are described Joshua the High Priest, standing before the Angel of
Jehovah, and the adversary (שׂטז, Satan, as here) standing at his right
hand to oppose him. See also [Psa
109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). - John Le Clerc, 1657-1736.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Let Satan stand at his right hand." Hugo observes that the Devil is on
the left hand of those whom he persecutes in temporal things: on the
right of those whom he rules in spiritual things: before the face of
those who are on their guard against his wiles: behind those who are not
foreseeing and prudent: above those whom he treads down: below, and
beneath the feet of those who tread him down. A recent Spanish author,
writing in that language, thinks that there cannot be anything worse
than that man who diligently and of set purpose injures others by
speaking deceitfully, by surrounding with speeches of hatred, by
attacking without cause, by slandering, by returning evil for good, and
hatred for love: therefore, in this place it is desired that a wicked
man may be set over such a one, and the devil at his right hand; as if
he should be doomed to take the lowest place because he is the worst. -
Lorinus.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"At his right hand." The strength or force of the body shows itself
principally in the right hand. Therefore, he who wishes to obstruct
another, and to hinder his endeavour, stands at his right hand; and thus
easily parries his stroke or attempt. This I consider to be the most
simple meaning of this passage which shows that God represses and
restrains the ragings of the enemies of the Church, who withstand each
other by their opposing efforts, either from envy or from other causes.
Thus, 2 Sam. 17 the counsels of Ahithophel are broken by Hushai; and in
one day we see that the counsels and attempts of our enemies have been
frequently and wonderfully restrained by the hindrances they have given
one to the other: in which matter the goodness of God is to be
discerned. - Mollerus.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

He beginneth to prophesy what they should receive for their great
impiety, detailing their lot in such a manner as if he wished its
realisation from a desire of revenge; while he declareth what was to
happen with the most absolute certainty, and what of God's justice would
worthily come upon such. Some not understanding this mode of predicting
the future under the appearance of wishing evil, suppose hatred to be
returned for hatred, and an evil will for an evil will: since in truth
it belongeth to few to distinguish in what way the punishment of the
wicked pleaseth the accuser, who longeth to satiate his enmity; and in
how widely different a way it pleaseth the judge, who with a righteous
mind punisheth sins. For the former returneth evil for evil, but the
judge when he punisheth doth not return evil for evil, since he
returneth justice to the unjust; and what is just is surely good. He
therefore punisheth not from delight in another's misery, which is evil
for evil but from love of justice, which is good for evil. Let not then
the blind pervert the light of the Scriptures, imagining that God doth
not punish sins: nor let the wicked flatter themselves, as if he
rendered evil for evil. Let us therefore hear the sequel of this divine
composition; and in the words of one who seemeth to wish ill, let us
recognise the predictions of a prophet; and let us see God making a just
retribution, raising our mind up to his eternal laws. - Augustine.

[Psa 109:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

These terrible curses are repeated with many words and sentences, that
we may know that David has not let these words fall rashly or from any
precipitate impulse of mind; but, the Holy Spirit having dictated, he
employs this form of execration that it may be a perpetual prophecy or
prediction of the bitter pains and destruction of the enemies of the
Church of God. Nor does David imprecate these punishments so much on his
own enemies and Judas the betrayer of Christ; but that similar
punishments await all who fight against the kingdom of Christ. -
Mollerus.

[Psa 109:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

I had also this consideration, that if I should now venture all for God,
I engaged God to take care of my concernments; but if I forsook him and
his ways for fear of any trouble that should come to me or mine, then I
should not only falsify my profession, but should count also that my
concernments were not so sure, if left at God's feet, while I stood to
and for his name, as they would be if they were under my own tuition
\[or care\] though with the denial of the way of God. This was a
smarting consideration, and was as spurs unto my flesh. This Scripture
\[[Psa 109:6-20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)\] also greatly helped
it to fasten the more upon me, where Christ prays against Judas, that
God would disappoint him in all his selfish thoughts, which moved him to
sell his master: pray read it soberly. I had also another consideration,
and that was, the dread of the torments of hell, which I was sure they
must partake of, that for fear of the cross do shrink from their
profession of Christ, his words, and laws, before the sons of men. I
thought also of the glory that he had prepared for those that, in faith,
and love, and patience, stood to his ways before them. These things, I
say, have helped me, when the thoughts of the misery that both myself
and mine might for the sake of my profession be exposed to, hath lain
pinching on my mind. - John Bunyan.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." As the clamours of a condemned malefactor
not only find no acceptance, but are looked upon as an affront to the
court. The prayers of the wicked now become sin, because soured with the
leaven of hypocrisy and malice; and so they will in the great day,
because then it will be too late to cry, "Lord, Lord, open unto us." -
Matthew Henry

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." Evidently his prayer in reference to his
trial for crime; his prayer that he might be acquitted and discharged.
Let it be seen in the result that such a prayer was wrong; that it was,
in fact, a prayer for the discharge of a bad man - a man who ought to be
punished. Let it be seen to be what a prayer would be if offered for a
murderer, or violator of the law, - a prayer that he might escape or not
be punished. All must see that such a prayer would be wrong, or would be
a "sin"; and so, in his own case, it would be equally true that a prayer
for his own escape would be "sin." The Psalmist asks that, by the result
of the trial, such a prayer might be seen to be in fact a prayer for the
protection and escape of a bad man. A just sentence in the case would
demonstrate this; and this is what the Psalmist prays for. - Albert
Barnes.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." Kimchi in his annotations thus explains
these words: i.e., "let it be without effect, so that he does not get
what he asks for; let him not hit the mark at which he aims: for הטא
sometimes has the meaning 'to miss.'" - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." St. Jerome says that Judas's prayer was
turned into sin, by reason of his want of hope when he prayed: and thus
it was that in despair he hanged himself. - Robert Bellarmine.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." The prayer of the hypocrite is sin
formally, and it is sin in the effect, that is, instead of getting any
good by it, he gets hurt, and the Lord instead of helping him because he
prayeth, punisheth him because of the sinfulness of his prayers. Thus
his prayer becomes sin to him, because he receives no more respect from
God when he prays than when he sins. And sin doth not only mingle with
his prayer (as it doth with the prayers of the holiest), but his prayer
is nothing else but a mixture or mingle-mangle (as we speak) of many
sins. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"Let his prayer become sin." We should be watchful in prayer lest the
most holy worship of God should become an abomination: [Isa
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015.md); [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003.md); [Jam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#003.md); [Hos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014.md); [Amo
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#023.md). If the remedy be poisoned, how
shall the diseased be cured? - Martin Geier.

[Psa 109:7-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

These and the following verses, although they contain terrible
imprecations, will become less dreadful it we understand them as spoken
concerning men perniciously cleaving to their vices, against whom only
has God threatened punishments; not against those who repent with all
their heart, and become thoroughly changed in life. - John Le Clerc.

[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md)

"Let his days be few." By "his days," he meant the days of his
apostle-ship, which were few; since before the passion of our Lord, they
were ended by his crime and death. And as if it were asked, What then
shall become of that most sacred number twelve, within which our Lord
willed, not without a meaning,' to limit his twelve first apostles? he
at once addeth, "and let another take his office." As much as to say,
let both himself be punished according to his desert, and let his number
be filled up. And if any one desire to know how this was done, let him
read the Acts of the Apostles. - Augustine.

[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md)

"Let another take his office." So every man acts, and practically prays,
who seeks to remove a bad and corrupt man from office. As such an office
must be filled by some one, all the efforts which he puts forth to
remove a wicked man tend to bring it about that "another should take his
office," and for this it is right to labour and pray. The act does not
of itself imply malignity or bad feeling, but is consistent with the
purest benevolence, the kindest feelings, the strictest integrity, the
sternest patriotism, and the highest form of piety. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009.md)

"Let his children be fatherless." Helpless and shiftless. A sore
vexation to many on their death-beds, and just enough upon graceless
persecutors. But happy are they who, when they lie a-dying, can say as
Luther did, "Domine Deus gratias ago tibi quod velueris me esse
pauperera, et mendicum," &c. Lord God, I thank thee for my present
poverty, but future hopes. I have not an house, lands, possessions, or
monies to leave behind me. Thou hast given me wife and children; behold,
I return them back to thee, and beseech thee to nourish them, teach
them, keep them safe, as hitherto thou hast done, O thou father of the
fatherless, and Judge of widows. - John Trapp.

[Psa 109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009.md), [Psa
109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md), [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md), [Psa
109:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013.md)

"His children ... his posterity." Though in matters of a civil or
judicial character, we have it upon the highest authority that the
children are not to be made accountable for the fathers, nor the fathers
for the children, but every transgressor is to bear the penalty of his
own sin; yet, in a moral, and in a social and spiritual sense, it is
impossible that the fathers should eat sour grapes, and yet that the
children's teeth should not be set on edge. The offspring of the
profligate and the prodigal may, and often do, avoid the specific vices
of the parent; but rarely, if ever, do they escape the evil consequences
of those vices. And this re-action cannot be prevented, until it shall
please God first to unmake and then to remodel his whole intelligent
creation. - T. Dale, in a Sermon to Heads of Families, 1839.

[Psa 109:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009.md)

Under the Old Covenant, calamity, extending from father to son, was the
meed of transgression; prosperity, vice versa, of obedience: (see
Solomon's prayer: [Ch2 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#023).md): and
these prayers of the Psalmist (cf. [Psa
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#013.md), [Psa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001.md), [Psa
58:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#010), etc..md) may express the wish that
God's providential government of his people should be asserted in the
chastisement of the enemy-of God and man. - Speaker's Commentary.

[Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md)

"Let his children be continually vagabonds." The word used in the
sentence pronounced upon Cain, [Gen
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#012.md). Compare [Psa
59:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#011.md), [Psa
59:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa059.htm#015.md). - William Kay.

[Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md)

"Let them seek," etc. Horsley renders this clause, "Let them be driven
out from the-very-ruins-of their dwellings," and remarks that the image
is that of "vagabonds seeking a miserable shelter among the ruins of
decayed or demolished buildings, and not suffered to remain even in such
places undisturbed."

[Psa 109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009.md), [Psa
109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md)

When we consider of whom this Psalm is used there will be no difficulty
about it. No language could be more awful than that of [Psa
109:6-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md). It embraces almost every
misery we can think of. But could any man be in a more wretched
condition than Judas was? Could any words be too severe to express the
depth of his misery - of him, who, for three whole years, had been the
constant attendant of the Saviour of mankind; who had witnessed his
miracles, and had shared his miraculous powers; who had enjoyed all the
warnings, all the reproofs of his love, and then had betrayed him for
thirty pieces of silver? Can we conceive a condition more miserable than
that of Judas? And this Psalm is a prophecy of the punishment that
should overtake him for his sin. S. Peter, in the Acts of the Apostles,
quotes part of this Psalm, and applies it to Judas: he applies it as a
prophecy of the punishment he should suffer on the betrayal of the Son
of God.

It is probable that in this Psalm, when it uses the word children, it
does not mean those who are his offspring by natural descent, but those
who resemble him, and who partake with him in his wickedness. This is a
common meaning of the word sons, or children, in Holy Scripture. As
where our blessed Lord tells the Jews, "Ye are of your father the
devil," he could not mean that the Jews were the natural descendants of
the devil, but that they were his children because they did his works.
Again, when they are called Abraham's children, it means those who do
the works of Abraham. So in this Psalm, where it is foretold that
fearful punishment should happen to Judas for the betrayal of his Lord,
and should be extended to his children, it means his associates, his
companions, and imitators in wickedness. - F. H. Dunwell, in "A Tract on
the Commination Service," 1853.

[Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md), [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md), [Psa
109:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013.md)

It is for public ends that the Psalmist prayed that the families of the
wicked might be involved in their ruin. These are very terrible
petitions; but iris God, not man, who has appointed these calamities as
the ordinary consequences of persistence in wickedness. It is God, not
man, who visits the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, to the
third and fourth generations. It is because this is the ordinary portion
of the transgressors, and that thus in God's wonted way his abhorrence
of the transgressions of his enemies might be marked, that the Psalmist
prays for these calamities. He asks God to do what he had declared he
would do, and this for public ends, for he says: "I will greatly praise
the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him among the multitude. For
he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from those
that condemn his soul," [Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md),
[Psa 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md). - R. A. Bertram, in "The
Imprecatory Psalms," 1867.

[Psa 109:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md)

Many penurious fathers are so scraping for their children, that they
ravish the poor children of God; but the hand of the Lord shall be
against their young lions. [Nah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#013.md).
They join house to house, and field to field, but their children shall
be "vagabonds and beg,.... seeking their bread out of their desolate
places." How many a covetous mole is now digging a house in the earth
for his posterity and never dreams of this sequel, that God should make
those children beggars, for whose sake their fathers had made so many
beggars! This is a quittance which the sire will not believe, but as
sure as God is just the son shall feel. Now if he had but leave to come
out of hell for an hour, and see this, how should he curse his folly!
Sure, if possible, it would double the pain of his infernal torture. Be
moderate, then, ye that so insatiately devour, as if you had an infinite
capacity: you overload your stomachs, it is fit they should be
disburdened in shameful spewing. How quickly doth a worldly-minded man
grow a defrauder, from a defrauder to a usurer, from a usurer to an
oppressor, from an oppressor to an extortioner! if his eyes do but tell
his heart of a booty, his heart will charge his hand, and he must have
it, [Mic 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002.md). They do but see it, like
it, and take it. Observe their due payment. "Let the extortioner catch
all that he hath": they got all by extortion, they shall lose all by
extortion. They spoiled their neighbours, strangers shall spoil them.
How often hath the poor widow and orphan cried, wept, groaned to them
for mercy, and found none! They have taught God how to deal with
themselves; "let there be none to extend mercy to them." They have
advanced houses for a memorial, and dedicated lands to their own names,
[Psa 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011.md); all to get them a name;
and even in this they shall be crossed: "In the next generation their
name shall be quite put out." - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011.md)

"Let the extortioner catch all that he hath." Note: he is most miserable
who falls into the hands of usurers; for they will flay him alive and
drain his blood. The Romans, that they might deter the citizens from
usury; placed a statue of Marsyas in the Forum or law-court, by which
they signified that those who came into the hands of usurers would be
skinned alive; and to show that usurers, as the most unjust litigants,
deserved hanging, they placed a rope in the hand of the figure. - Le
Blanc.

[Psa 109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011.md)

"Catch." This refers to the obligations between creditors and debtors,
and he calls these snares, by which, as it were, the insolvent debtors
are caught, and at last come to servitude. - Mollerus.

[Psa 109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md)

"Let there be none to extend mercy to him." He does not say, None who
shall shew, but none who shall "extend" kindness to him. The extending
of kindness is, when after a friend's death it is shown to his children,
and true friendship is of this sort, that the kindness which friends
shewed to each other while alive is maintained, not extinguished with
the death of the friend. - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md)

"Let there be none to extend mercy to him." Let God in his justice set
off all hearts from him that had been so unreasonably merciless. Thus no
man opened his mouth to intercede for Haman; Judas was shaken off by the
priests, and bid see to himself, etc. - John Trapp.

[Psa 109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015.md)

"Let them be before the Lord continually." The fearful punishment of
sinners is, to be always under the eye of an angry God: then the soul of
the sinner is dismayed at its own deformity. - Le Blanc.

[Psa 109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015.md)

"Let them be before the Lord continually." Lafayette, the friend and
ally of Washington, was in his youth confined in a French dungeon. In
the door of his cell there was cut a small hole, just big enough for a
man's eye; at that hole a sentinel was placed, whose duty it was to
watch, moment by moment, till he was relieved by a change of guard. All
Lafayette saw was the winking eye, but the eye was always there; look
when he would, it met his gaze. In his dreams, he was conscious it was
staring at him. "Oh," he says, "it was horrible; there was no escape;
when he lay down and when he rose up, when he ate and when he read, that
eye searched him." - "New Cyclopaedia of Illustrative Anecdote," 1875.

[Psa 109:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015.md), [Psa
109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029.md)

Strict justice, and nothing more, breathes in every petition. Cannot you
say, Amen! to all these petitions? Are you not glad when the wicked man
falls into the ditch he has made for another's destruction, and when his
mischief returns upon his own head? But you say, "These petitions are
unquestionably just, but why did not the Psalmist ask, not for justice,
but for mercy?" The answer is, that in his public capacity, he was bound
to think first about justice.

No government could stand upon the basis of forgiveness; justice must
always go before mercy. Suppose that in the course of the next session
Parliament should decree that henceforth, instead of justice being shown
to thieves, by sending them to prison, they should be treated
charitably, and compelled to restore one-half of what they stole what
would honest men say about the government? The thieves would doubtless
be very complimentary, but what would honest men say? Why, they would
say the government had altogether failed of its function, and it would
not live to be a week older. And just so, the Psalmists were bound first
of all to seek for the vindication and establishment of justice and
truth. Like the magistrates of to-day, they considered first the
well-being of the community. This they had in view in all the calamities
they sought to bring upon wrong-doers. - R. A. Bertram.

[Psa 109:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#016.md)

"Because." Why, what is the crime? "Because that he remembered not to
shew mercy," etc. See what a long vial full of the plagues of God is
poured out upon the unmerciful man! - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 109:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#016.md)

"But persecuted the poor." If any man will practice subtraction against
the poor, God will use it against him, and take his name out of the book
of life. If he be damned that gives not his own, what shall become of
him that takes away another man's? (Augustine.) If judgment without
mercy shall be to him that shows no mercy ([Jam
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013).md) where shall subtraction and
rapine appear? "Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let
strangers spoil his labour," [Psa
109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011.md) : there is one subtraction, his
estate. "Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following
let their name be blotted out," [Psa
109:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013.md) : there is another subtraction,
his memory. "Let there be none to extend mercy unto him: neither let
there be any to favour the fatherless children," [Psa
109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md) : there is another subtraction,
a denial of all pity to him and his. "Let him be condemned: and let his
prayer become sin," [Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md) : there
is another subtraction, no audience from heaven. "Let another take his
office;" there is a subtraction of his place, "let his days be few,"
[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md) : there is a subtraction of
his life. "Let him be blotted out of the book of the living, and not be
written with the righteous," [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028.md); there is the last, the
subtraction of his soul. This is 'a fearful arithmetic' if the wicked
add sins, God will add plagues. If they subtract from others their
rights, God shall subtract from them his mercies. - Thomas Adams.

[Psa 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)

Cursing is both good and bad. For we read in the Scriptures that holy
men have often cursed. Indeed none can offer the Lord's Prayer rightly
without cursing. For when he prays, "Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom
come, thy will be done," etc., he must include in the same outpouring of
his desires all that is opposed to these, and say, cursed and execrated
and dishonoured must all other names be, and all kingdoms which are
opposed to thee must be destroyed and rent in pieces, and all devices
and purposes formed against thee fall to the ground. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)

"As he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him."

He was a wolf in clothing of the lamb,

That stole into the fold of God, and on

The blood of souls, which he did sell to death,

Grew fat; and yet, when any would have turned

Him out, he cried, "Touch not the priest of God."

And that he was anointed, fools believed;

But knew, that day, he was the devil's priest,

Anointed by the hands of Sin and Death,

And set peculiarly apart to ill -

While on him smoked the vials of perdition,

Poured measureless. Ah, reel What cursing then

Was heaped upon his head by ruined souls,

That charged him with their murder, as he stood

With eye, of all the unredeemed, most sad,

Waiting the coming of the Son of Man!

Robert Pollok.

[Psa 109:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)

Possibly [Psa 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md) and [Psa
109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018.md) describe as fact what [Psa
109:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019.md) amplifies in a wish, or prayer.
"He loved cursing, and it loved him in return, and came to him: he
delighted not in blessing, and it was far from him. He clothed himself
with cursing as with a garment, and it permeated his inmost parts as
water, as the refreshing oil with which the body is anointed finds a way
into marrow and bones." The images are familiar; the daily dress, the
water that permeates daily every part of the body, the oil used daily
for nourishment ([Psa 104:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#015).md) and
gladness ([Psa 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005).md). In the wish that
follows ([Psa 109:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019).md), the mantle, or
garment, which is always worn, and the girdle or belt with which the
accursed one is always girded, are substituted, apparently, for more
general terms. - Speaker's Commentary.

[Psa 109:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)

As the loss of the soul is a loss peculiar to itself, and a loss double,
so it is a loss most fearful, because it is attended with the most heavy
curse of God. This curse lieth in a deprivation of all good, and in a
being swallowed up of all the most fearful miseries that a holy and just
and eternal God can righteously inflict, or lay upon the soul of a
sinful man. Now let reason here come in and exercise itself in the most
exquisite manner; yea, let him now count up all, and all manner of
curses and torments that a reasonable and an immortal soul is, or can be
made capable of, and able to suffer, and when he has done, he shall come
infinitely short of this great anathema, this master curse which God has
reserved amongst his treasuries, and intends to bring out in that day of
battle and war, which he proposeth to make upon damned souls in that
day. And this God will do, partly as a retaliation, as the former, and
partly by way of revenge.

1\. By way of retaliation: "As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him
as he delighted not in blessing, so let it be far from him." Again, "As
he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let it come
into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones. Let it be unto
him as the garment which covereth him, and for a girdle wherewith he is
girded continually." "Let this," saith Christ, "be the reward of mine
adversaries from the Lord," etc.

2\. As this curse comes by way of retaliation, so it cometh by way of
revenge. God will right the wrongs that sinners have done him, will
repay vengeance for the despite and reproach wherewith they have
affronted him, and will revenge the quarrel of his covenant. As the
beginnings of revenges are terrible ([Deu
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#041.md), [Deu
32:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#042).md); what, then, will the whole
execution be, when he shall come in flaming fire, taking vengeance on
them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of Jesus Christ?
And, therefore, this curse is executed in wrath, in jealousy, in anger,
in fury; yea, the heavens and the earth shall be burned up with the fire
of that jealousy in which the great God will come when he cometh to
curse the souls of sinners, and when he cometh to defy the ungodly, [Th2
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007.md). - John Bunyan.

[Psa 109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018.md)

The three figures in this verse are climatic: he has clothed himself in
cursing, he has drunk it in like water ([Job
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#016.md), [Job
34:7](../../../bib/kjv/job034.htm#007).md), it has penetrated to the marrow
of his bones, like the oily preparations which are rubbed in and
penetrate to the bones. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018.md)

We must not pass this verse without remarking that there is an allusion
in its tone to [Num 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#021.md), [Num
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#022.md), [Num
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#024.md) -the unfaithful wife. Her curse
was to penetrate into her bowels; "the water that causeth the curse
shall enter into her": and such a curse comes on unfaithful Judas, who
violates his engagement to the Lord; and upon Israel at large also, who
have departed from him "as a wife treacherously departeth from her
husband," and have committed adultery against the Bridegroom. - Andrew
A. Bonar.

[Psa 109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018.md), [Psa
109:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019.md)

Peter, in [Act 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md), applies this
Psalm to Christ when the Jews cried, "His blood be upon us and upon our
children"; then did they put on the envenomed garment which has
tormented them ever since. It is girded about their loins; the curse has
penetrated like water, and entered the very bones like oil. How awful
will be the state of those who crucify him afresh, and again put him to
open shame. - Samuel Horsley.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

"For thy name's sake." My enemies would soon become my friends and my
protectors, if I would but renounce my allegiance to thee; my refusal to
disobey thee constitutes all my crime in their eyes. My cause,
therefore, becomes thine, it will be to thy glory to declare thyself on
my side, lest the impious should take occasion from my sufferings to
blaspheme thy holy name, as if thou hadst not the power to deliver, or
wert utterly indifferent to those who, renouncing all human help, have
put their confidence in thee. - Jean Baptiste Massilion.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

"For thy name's sake." He does not say, For my name, that it may be
vindicated from reproach and shame; but for Thy name; as if he would
say, whatever I may be, O Lord, and whatever may befall me, have respect
to Thy name, have regard to it only. I am not worthy, that I should seek
Thy help, but Thy name is worthy which thou mayest vindicate from
contempt. We learn here with what passion for the glory of the divine
name they ought to be animated who are peculiarly consecrated to the
name of God.

He does not say, "Because my case is good," but "because thy mercy is
good." Note this also, he does not simply say, Because thou art good, or
because thou art merciful; but because thy mercy is good. He had
experienced a certain special goodness in the Divine mercy; i.e. such
timeliness, kind readiness in all afflictions, and help for every kind
of affliction prepared and provided. On this he rests hope and
confidence, in this takes refuge. All those are truly happy who have had
experience of this mercy, and can depend on it with firm hope and
confidence. - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

Unto a truly broken, humbled sinner, the mercies that are in God, out of
which he pardons, should have infinitely more of goodness and sweetness
in them than the pardon itself, or all things else that are in the
promises. This a soul that hath tasted how good the Lord is will
instantly acknowledge. A promise of life to a condemned man is sweet,
for life is sweet, as we say; but "thy lovingkindness," said David, who
had tasted how good the Lord is, "is better than life," and infinitely
sweeter, [Psa 63:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#003.md). And again says
David. "Because thy mercy is good, deliver thou me." Deliverance was
good; yea, but the mercy of God apprehended therewith was infinitely
more good to him, which was the greatest inducement to him to seek
deliverance. And indeed God's mercy doth eminently bear the style of
goodness. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 109:21-25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

The thunder and lightning are now as it were followed by a shower of
tears of deep sorrowful complaint. - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022.md)

"For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me." Note here,
how beautifully he unites these arguments. He had said, "Because Thy
mercy is good"; and he adds, "Because I am poor and needy." He could not
have added anything more appropriate: for this is the nature of goodness
and mercy, even in the human heart, much more in God, the best and most
merciful of all beings, that nothing more easily moves it to give
succour, than the affliction, calamity, and misery of those by whom it
is invoked. - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022.md)

"My heart is wounded within me." The hearts of the saints and pious men
are not as brass or stone, that the apathy of the Stoics should have
lodging in them, but are susceptible to griefs and passions. - Musculus.

[Psa 109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023.md)

"I am gone like the shadow when it declineth." - Bishop Horsley renders,
"I am just gone, like the shadow stretched to its utmost length"; and
remarks: - "The state of the shadows of terrestrial objects at sunset,
lengthening every instant, and growing faint as they lengthen; and in
the instant that they shoot to an immeasurable length disappearing."

[Psa 109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023.md)

"I am tossed up and down as the locust." Although the locusts have
sufficient strength of flight to remain on the wing for a considerable
period, and to pass over great distances, they have little or no command
over the direction of their flight, always travel with the wind, in the
same way as the quail. So entirely are they at the mercy of the wind,
that if a sudden gust arises the locusts are tossed about in the most
helpless manner; and if they should happen to come across one of the
circular air-currents that are so frequently found in the countries
which they inhabit, they are whirled round and round without the least
power of extricating themselves. - J. G. Wood.

[Psa 109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023.md)

"I am tossed up and down as the locust." This reference is to the flying
locust. I have had frequent opportunities to notice how these squadrons
are tossed up and down, and whirled round and round by the ever-varying
currents of the mountain winds. - W. M. Thomson.

[Psa 109:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028.md)

"Let them curse, but bless thou." Fear not thou, who art a saint, their
imprecations; this is but like false fire in the pan of an uncharged
gun, it gives a crack, but hurts not; God's blessings will cover thee
from their curse. - William Gurnall.

[Psa 109:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028) (first clause.md)

Men's curses are impotent, God's blessings are omnipotent. - Matthew
Henry.

[Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md)

"I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth." In the celebration of
God's praises, there can be no question that these must issue from the
heart ere they can be uttered by the lips; at the same time, it would be
an indication of great coldness, and of want of fervour, did not the
tongue unite with the heart in this exercise. The reason why David makes
mention of the tongue only is, that he takes it for granted that, unless
there be a pouring out of the heart before God, those praises which
reach no farther than the ear are vain and frivolous; and, therefore,
from the very bottom of his soul, he pours forth his heart-felt
gratitude in fervent strains of praise; and this he does from the same
motives which ought to influence all the faithful - the desire of mutual
edification; for to act otherwise would be to rob God of the honour
which belongs to him. - John Calvin.

[Psa 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md)

"He shall stand at the right hand of the poor." This expression implies,
first, that he appears there as a friend. How cheering, how comforting
it is to have a friend to stand by us when we are in trouble! Such a
friend is Jesus. In the hour of necessity he comes as a friend to stand
by the right hand of the poor creature whose soul is condemned by guilt
and accusation. But he stands in a far higher relation than that of a
friend; he stands, too, as surety and a deliverer. He goes, as it were,
into the court; and when the prisoner stands at the bar, he comes
forward and stands at his right hand as his surety and bondsman; he
brings out of his bosom the acquittance of the debt, signed and sealed
with his own blood, he produces it to the eyes of the court, and claims
and demands the acquittal and absolution of the prisoner at whose right
hand he stands. He stands there, then, that the prisoner may be freely
pardoned, and completely justified from those accusations that "condemn
his soul." O sweet standing! O blessed appearance! - Joseph C. Philpot
(1802-1869).

[Psa 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md)

"He shall stand at the right hand of the poor." One of the oldest
Rabbinical commentaries has a very beautiful gloss on this passage.
"Whenever a poor man stands at thy door, the Holy One, blessed be his
Name, stands at his right hand. If thou givest him alms, know that thou
shalt receive a reward from him who standeth at his right hand." -
Alfred Edersheim, in "Sketches of the Jewish Social Life in the Days of
Christ," 1876.

[Psalms 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 109:1</span></span>

1 Hold not thy peace, O God of my praise;

2 For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me; they have spoken against me with a lying tongue.

3 They compassed me about also with words of hatred; and fought against
me without a cause.

4 For my love they are my adversaries; but I give myself unto prayer.

5 And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love.

[Psa 109:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#001.md)

"Hold not thy peace." Mine enemies speak, be thou pleased to speak too.
Break thy solemn silence, and silence those who slander me. It is the
cry of a man whose confidence in God is deep, and whose communion with
him is very close and bold. Note, that he only asks the Lord to speak: a
word from God is all a believer needs. "O God of my praise." Thou whom
my whole soul praises, be pleased to protect my honour and guard my
praise. "My heart is fixed," said he in the former Psalm, "I will sing
and give praise," and now he appeals to the God whom he had praised. If
we take care of God's honour he will take care of ours. We may look to
him as the guardian of our character if we truly seek his glory. If we
live to God's praise, he will in the long run give us praise among men.

[Psa 109:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#002.md)

"For the mouth of the wicked and the mouth of the deceitful are opened
against me." Wicked men must needs say wicked things, and these we have
reason to dread; but in addition they utter false and deceitful things,
and these are worst of all. There is no knowing what may come out of
mouths which are at once lewd and lying. The misery caused to a good man
by slanderous reports no heart can imagine but that which is wounded by
them: in all Satan's armoury there are no worse weapons than deceitful
tongues. To have a reputation, over which we have watched with daily
care, suddenly bespattered with the foulest aspersions, is painful
beyond description; but when wicked and deceitful men get their mouths
fully opened we can hardly expect to escape any more than others. "They
have spoken against me with a lying tongue." Lying tongues cannot lie
still. Bad tongues are not content to vilify bad men, but choose the
most gracious of saints to be the objects of their attacks. Here is
reason enough for prayer. The heart sinks when assailed with slander,
for we know not what may be said next, what friend may be alienated,
what evil may be threatened, or what misery may be caused to us and
others. The air is full of rumours, and shadows impalpable flit around;
the mind is confused with dread of unseen foes and invisible arrows.
What ill can be worse than to be assailed with slander,

"Whose edge is sharper than the sword, whoso tongue

Outvenoms all the worms of Nile"?

[Psa 109:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#003.md)

"They compassed me about also with words of hatred." Turn which way he
would they hedged him in with falsehood, misrepresentation, accusation,
and scorn. Whispers, sneers, insinuations, satires, and open charges
filled his ear with a perpetual buzz, and all for no reason, but sheer
hate. Each word was as full of venom as an egg is full of meat; they
could not speak without showing their teeth. "And fought against me
without a cause." He had not provoked the quarrel or contributed to it,
yet in a thousand ways they laboured to "corrode his comfort, and
destroy his case." All this tended to make the suppliant feel the more
acutely the wrongs which were done to him.

[Psa 109:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#004.md)

"For my love they are my adversaries." They hate me because I love them.
One of our poets says of the Lord Jesus - "Found guilty of excess of
love." Surely it was his only fault, Our Lord might have used all the
language of this complaint most emphatically - they hated him without a
cause and returned him hatred for love. What a smart this is to the
soul, to be hated in proportion to the gratitude which it deserved,
hated by those it loved, and hated because of its love. This was a cruel
case, and the sensitive mind of the Psalmist writhed under it, "But I
give myself unto prayer." He did nothing else but pray. He became prayer
as they became malice. This was his answer to his enemies, he appealed
from men and their injustice to the Judge of all the earth, who must do
right. True bravery alone can teach a man to leave his traducers
unanswered, and carry the case unto the Lord.

"Men cannot help but reverence the courage that walketh amid calumnies
unanswering."

"He standeth as a gallant chief unheeding shot or shell."

[Psa 109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005.md)

"And they have rewarded me evil for good, and hatred for my love." Evil
for good is devil-like. This is Satan's line of action, and his children
upon earth follow it greedily; it is cruel, and wounds to the quick. The
revenge which pays a man back in his own coin has a kind of natural
justice in it; but what shall be said of that baseness which returns to
goodness the very opposite of what it has a right to expect? Our Lord
endured such base treatment all his days, and, alas, in his members,
endures it still.

Thus we see the harmless and innocent man upon his knees pouring out his
lamentation: we are now to observe him rising from the mercy-seat,
inspired with prophetic energy, and pouring forth upon his foes the
forewarnings of their doom. We shall hear him speak like a judge clothed
with stern severity, or like the angel of doom robed in vengeance, or as
the naked sword of justice when she bares her arm for execution. It is
not for himself that he speaks so much as for all the slandered and the
down-trodden, of whom he feels himself to be the representative and
mouthpiece. He asks for justice, and as his soul is stung with cruel
wrongs he asks with solemn deliberation, making no stint in his demands.
To pity malice would be malice to mankind; to screen the crafty seekers
of human blood would be cruelty to the oppressed. Nay, love, and truth,
and pity lift their wounds to heaven, and implore vengeance on the
enemies of the innocent and oppressed; those who render goodness itself
a crime, and make innocence a motive for hate, deserve to find no mercy
from the great Preserver of men. Vengeance is the prerogative of God,
and as it would be a boundless calamity if evil were for ever to go
unpunished, so it is an unspeakable blessing that the Lord will
recompense the wicked and cruel man, and there are times and seasons
when a good man ought to pray for that blessing. When the Judge of all
threatens to punish tyrannical cruelty and falsehearted treachery,
virtue gives her assent and consent. Amen, so let it be, saith every
just man in his inmost soul.

[Psalms 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 109:6</span></span>

6 Set thou a wicked man over him; and let Satan stand at his fight hand.

7 When he shall be judged, let him be condemned; and let his prayer
become sin.

8 Let his days be few; and let another take his office.

9 Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow.

10 Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg; let them seek
their bread also out of their desolate places.

11 Let the extortioner catch all that he hath; and let the strangers
spoil his labour.

12 Let there be none to extend mercy unto him; neither let there be any
to favour his fatherless children.

13 Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let
their name be blotted out.

14 Let the iniquity of his fathers be remembered with the Lord; and let
not the sin of his mother be blotted out.

15 Let them be before the Lord continually, that he may cut off the
memory of them from the earth.

16 Because that he remembered not to shew mercy, but persecuted the poor
and needy man, that he might even slay the broken in heart.

17 As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him: as he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him.

18 As he clothed himself with cursing like as with his garment, so let
it come into his bowels like water, and like oil into his bones.

19 Let it be unto him as the garment which covereth him, and for a
girdle wherewith he is girded continually.

20 Let this be the reward of mine adversaries from the Lord, and of them
that speak evil against my soul.

[Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md)

"Set thou a wicked man over him." What worse punishment could a man
have? The proud man cannot endure the proud, nor the oppressor brook the
rule of another like himself. The righteous in their patience find the
rule of the wicked a sore bondage; but those who are full of resentful
passions, and haughty aspirations, are slaves indeed when men of their
own class have the whip hand of them. For Herod to be ruled by another
Herod would be wretchedness enough, and yet what retribution could be
more just? What unrighteous man can complain if he finds himself
governed by one of like character? What can the wicked expect but that
their rulers should be like themselves? Who does not admire the justice
or God when he sees fierce Romans ruled by Tiberius and Nero, and Red
Republicans governed by Marat and Robespierre? "And let Satan stand at
his right hand." Should not like come to like? Should not the father of
lies stand near his children? Who is a better right-hand friend for an
adversary of the righteous than the great adversary himself? The curse
is an awful one, but it is most natural that it should come to pass:
those who serve Satan may expect to have his company, his assistance,
his temptations, and at last his doom.

[Psa 109:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#007.md)

"When he shall be judged, let him be condemned." He judged and condemned
others in the vilest manner, he suffered not the innocent to escape; and
it would be a great shame if in his time of trial, being really guilty,
he should be allowed to go free. Who would wish Judge Jeffries to be
acquitted if he were tried for perverting justice? Who would desire Nero
or Caligula to be cleared if set at the bar for cruelty? When Shylock
goes into court, who wishes him to win his suit? "And let his prayer
become sin." It is sin already, let it be so treated. To the injured it
must seem terrible that the black-hearted villain should nevertheless
pretend to pray, and very naturally do they beg that he may not be
heard, but that his pleadings may be regarded as an addition to his
guilt. He has devoured the widow's house, and yet he prays. He has put
Naboth to death by false accusation and taken possession of his
vineyard, and then he presents prayers to the Almighty. He has given up
villages to slaughter, and his hands are red with the blood of babes and
maidens, and then he pays his vows unto Allah! He must surely be
accursed himself who does not wish that such abominable prayers may be
loathed of heaven and written down as new sins. He who makes it a sin
for others to pray will find his own praying become sin. When he at last
sees his need of mercy, mercy herself shall resent his appeal as an
insult. "Because that he remembered not to show mercy," he shall himself
be forgotten by the God of grace, and his bitter cries for deliverance
shall be regarded as mockeries of heaven.

[Psa 109:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#008.md)

"Let his days be few." Who would desire a persecuting tyrant to live
long? As well might we wish length of days to a mad dog. If he will do
nothing but mischief the shortening of his life will be the lengthening
of the world's tranquillity. "Bloody and deceitful men shall not live
out half their days," - this is bare justice to them, and great mercy to
the poor and needy. "And let another take his office." Perhaps a better
man may come, at any rate it is time a change were tried. So used were
the Jews to look upon these verses as the doom of traitors, of cruel and
deceitful mind, that Peter saw at once in the speedy death of Judas a
fulfilment of this sentence, and a reason for the appointment of a
successor who should take his place of oversight. A bad man does not
make an office bad: another may use with benefit that which he perverted
to ill uses.

[Psa 109:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#009.md)

"Let his children be fatherless, and his wife a widow." This would
inevitably be the case when the man died, but the Psalmist uses the
words in an emphatic sense, he would have his widow "a widow indeed,"
and his children so friendless as to be orphaned in the bitterest sense.
He sees the result of the bad man's decease, and includes it in the
punishment. The tyrant's sword makes many children fatherless, and who
can lament when his barbarities come home to his own family, and they,
too, weep and lament. Pity is due to all orphans and widows as such, but
a father's atrocious actions may dry up the springs of pity. Who mourns
that Pharaoh's children lost their father, or that Sennacherib's wife
became a widow? As Agag's sword had made women childless none wept when
Samuel's weapon made his mother childless among women. If Herod had been
slain when he had just murdered the innocents at Bethlehem no man would
have lamented it even though Herod's wife would have become a widow.
These awful maledictions are not for common men to use, but for judges,
such as David was, to pronounce over the enemies of God and man. A judge
may sentence a man to death whatever the consequences may be to the
criminal's family, and in this there will be no feeling of private
revenge, but simply the doing of justice because evil must be punished.
We are aware that this may not appear to justify the full force of these
expressions, but it should never be forgotten that the case supposed is
a very execrable one, and the character of the culprit is beyond measure
loathsome and not to be met by any common abhorrence. Those who regard a
sort of effeminate benevolence to all creatures alike as the acme of
virtue are very much in favour with this degenerate age; these look for
the salvation of the damned, and even pray for the restoration of the
devil. It is very possible that if they were less in sympathy with evil,
and more in harmony with the thoughts of God, they would be of a far
sterner and also of a far better mind. To us it seems better to agree
with God's curses than with the devil's blessings; and when at any time
our heart kicks against the terrors of the Lord we take it as a proof of
our need of greater humbling, and-confess our sin before our God.

[Psa 109:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#010.md)

"Let his children be continually vagabonds, and beg." May they have
neither house nor home, settlement nor substance; and while they thus
wander and beg may it ever be on their memory that their father's house
lies in ruins, - "let them seek their bread also out of their desolate
places." It has often been so: a race of tyrants has become a generation
of beggars. Misused power and abused wealth have earned the family name
universal detestation, and secured to the family character an entail of
baseness. Justice herself would award no such doom except upon the
supposition that the sin descended with the blood; but supreme
providence which in the end is pure justice has written many a page of
history in which the imprecation of this verse has been literally
verified.

We confess that as we read some of these verses we have need of all our
faith and reverence to accept them as the voice of inspiration; but the
exercise is good for the soul, for it educates our sense of ignorance,
and tests our teachableness. Yes, Divine Spirit, we can and do believe
that even these dread words from which we shrink have a meaning
consistent with the attributes of the Judge of all the earth, though his
name is Love. How this may be we shall know hereafter.

[Psa 109:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#011.md)

"Let the extortioner catch all that he hath." A doom indeed. Those who
have once fallen into the hands of the usurer can tell you what this
means: it were better to be a fly in the web of a spider. In the most
subtle, worrying, and sweeping manner the extortioner takes away, piece
by piece, his victim's estate, till not a fraction remains to form a
pittance for old age. Baiting his trap, watching it carefully, and
dexterously driving his victim into it, the extortioner by legal means
performs unlawful deeds, catches his bird, strips him of every feather,
and cares not if he die of starvation. He robs with law to protect him,
and steals with the magistrate at his back; to fall into his clutches is
worse than to be beset by professed thieves. "And let the strangers
spoil his labour," - so that his kindred may have none of it. What with
hard creditors and pilfering strangers the estate must soon vanish!
Extortion drawing one way, and spoliation the other, a known
money-lender and an unknown robber both at work, the man's substance
would soon disappear, and rightly so, for it was gathered by shameless
means. This too has been frequently seen. Wealth amassed by oppression
has seldom lasted to the third generation: it was gathered by wrong and
by wrong it is scattered, and who would decree that it should be
otherwise? Certainly those who suffer beneath high-handed fraud will not
wish to stay the retributions of the Almighty, nor would those who see
the poor robbed and trampled on desire to alter the divine arrangements
by which such evils are recompensed even in this life.

[Psa 109:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#012.md)

"Let there be none to extend mercy unto him." He had no mercy, but on
the contrary, he crushed down all who appealed to him. Loath to smite
him with his own weapon, stern justice can do no otherwise, she lifts
her scales and sees that this, too, must be in the sentence. "Neither
let there be any to layout his fatherless children." We are staggered to
find the children included in the father's sentence, and yet as a matter
of fact children do suffer for their father's sins, and, as long as the
affairs of this life are ordered as they are, it must be so. So involved
are the interests of the race, that it is quite impossible in all
respects to view the father and the child apart. No man among us could
desire to see the fatherless suffer for their deceased father's fault,
yet so it happens, and there is no injustice in the fact. They share the
parent's ill-gotten gain or rank, and their aggrandizement is a part of
the object at which he aimed in the perpetration of his crimes; to allow
them to prosper would be an encouragement and reward of his iniquity;
therefore, for these and other reasons, a man perishes not alone in his
iniquity. The ban is on his race. If the man were innocent this would be
a crime; if he were but commonly guilty it would be excessive
retribution; but when the offence reeks before high heaven in
unutterable abomination, it is little marvel that men devote the man's
whole house to perpetual infamy, and that so it happeneth.

[Psa 109:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#013.md)

"Let his posterity be cut off; and in the generation following let their
name be blotted out." Both from existence and from memory let them pass
away till none shall know that such a vile brood existed. Who wishes to
see the family of Domitian or Julian continued upon earth? Who would
mourn if the race of Tom Paine or of Voltaire should come to an utter
end? It would be undesirable that the sons of the utterly villainous and
bloodthirsty should rise to honour, and if they did they would only
revive the memory of their father's sins.

[Psa 109:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#014.md)

This verse is, perhaps, the most terrible of all, but yet as a matter of
fact children do procure punishment upon their parents' sins, and are
often themselves the means of such punishment. A bad son brings to mind
his father's bad points of character; people say, "Ah, he is like the
old man. He takes after his father." A mother's sins also will be sure
to be called to mind if her daughter becomes grossly wicked. "Ah," they
will say, "there is little wonder, when you consider what her mother
was." These are matters of everyday occurrence. We cannot, however,
pretend to explain the righteousness of this malediction, though we
fully believe in it. We leave it till our heavenly Father is pleased to
give us further instruction. Yet, as a man's faults are often learned
from his parents, it is not unjust that his consequent crimes should
recoil upon him.

[Psa 109:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#015.md)

Again, he wishes that his father's sins may follow up the transgressor
and assist to fill the measure of his own iniquities, so that for the
whole accumulated load the family may be smitten with utter extinction.
A king might justly wish for such an end to fall upon an incorrigible
brood of rebels; and of persecutors, continuing in the same mind, the
saints might well pray for their extinction; but the passage is dark;
and we must leave it so. It must be right or it would not be here, but
how we cannot see. Why should we expect to understand all things?
Perhaps it is more for our benefit to exercise humility, and reverently
worship God over a hard text, than it would be to comprehend all
mysteries.

[Psa 109:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#016.md)

"Because that he remembered not to shew mercy." Because he had no memory
to show mercy the Judge of all will have a strong memory of his sins. So
little mercy had he ever shown that he had forgotten how to do it, he
was without common humanity, devoid of compassion, and therefore only
worthy to be dealt with after the bare rule of justice. "But persecuted
the poor and needy man." He looked on poor men as a nuisance upon the
earth, he ground their faces, oppressed them in their wages, and treated
them as the mire of the streets. Should he not be punished, and in his
turn laid low? All who know him are indignant at his brutalities, and
will glory to see him overthrown. "That he might even slay the broken in
heart." He had malice in his heart towards one who was already
sufficiently sorrowful, whom it was a superfluity of malignity to
attack. Yet no grief excited sympathy in him, no poverty ever moved him
to relent. No, he would kill the heart-broken and rob their orphans of
their patrimony. To him groans were music, and tears were wine, and
drops of blood precious rubies. Would any man spare such a monster? Will
it not be serving the ends of humanity if we wish him gone, gone to the
throne of God to receive his reward? If he will turn and repent, well:
but if not, such a upas tree ought to be felled and cast into the fire.
As men kill mad dogs if they can, and justly too, so may we lawfully
wish that cruel oppressors of the poor were removed from their place and
office, and, as an example to others, made to smart for their
barbarities.

[Psa 109:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#017.md)

"As he loved cursing, so let it come unto him." Deep down in every man's
soul the justice of the lex talionis is established. Retaliation, not
for private revenge, but as a measure of public justice, is demanded by
the Psalmist and deserved by the crime. Surely the malicious man cannot
complain if he is judged by his own rule, and has his corn measured with
his own bushel. Let him have what he loved. They are his own chickens,
and they ought to come home to roost. He made the bed, let him lie on it
himself. As he brewed, so let him drink. So all men say as a matter of
Justice, and though the higher law of love overrides all personal anger,
yet as against the base characters here described even Christian love
would not wish to see the sentence mitigated. "As he delighted not in
blessing, so let it be far from him." He felt no joy in any man's good,
nor would he lift a hand to do another a service, rather did he frown
and fret when another prospered or mirth was heard under his window;
what, then, can we wish him? Blessing was wasted on him, he hated those
who gently sought to lead him to a better mind; even the blessings of
providence he received with murmurs and repinings, he wished for famine
to raise the price of his corn, and for war to increase his trade. Evil
was good to him, and good he counted evil. If he could have blasted
every field of corn in the world he would have done so if he could have
turned a penny by it, or if he could thereby have injured the good man
whom he hated from his very soul. What can we wish for him? He hunts
after evil, he hates good; he lays himself out to ruin the godly whom
God has blessed, he is the devil's friend, and as fiendish as his
patron; should things go well with such a being? Shall we "wish him good
luck in the name of the Lord"? To invoke blessings on such a man would
be to participate in his wickedness, therefore let blessing be far from
him, so long as he continues what he now is.

[Psa 109:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#018.md), [Psa
109:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#019.md)

He was so openly in the habit of wishing ill to others that he seemed to
wear robes of cursing, therefore let it be as his raiment girded and
belted about him, yea, let it enter as water into his bowels, and search
the very marrow of his bones like a penetrating oil. It is but common
justice that he should receive a return for his malice, and receive it
in kind, too.

[Psa 109:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#020.md)

This is the summing up of the entire imprecation, and fixes it upon the
persons who had so maliciously assailed the inoffensive man of God.
David was a man of gentle mould, and remarkably free from the spirit of
revenge, and therefore we may here conceive him to be speaking as a
judge or as a representative man, in whose person great principles
needed to be vindicated and great injuries redressed.

Thousands of God's people are perplexed with this Psalm, and we fear we
have contributed very little towards their enlightenment, and perhaps
the notes we have gathered from others, since they display such a
variety of view, may only increase the difficulty. What then? Is it not
good for us sometimes to be made to feel that we are not yet able to
understand all the word and mind of God? A thorough bewilderment, so
long as it does not stagger our faith, may be useful to us by
confounding our pride, arousing our faculties, and leading us to cry,
"What I know not teach thou me."

[Psalms 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 109:21</span></span>

21 But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy name's sake: because thy
mercy is good, deliver thou me.

22 For I am poor and needy, and my heart is wounded within me.

23 I am gone like the shadow when it declineth: I am tossed up and down
as the locust.

24 My knees are weak through fasting; and my flesh faileth of fatness.

25 I became also a reproach unto them: when they looked upon me they
shaked their heads.

26 Help me, O Lord my God: O save me according to thy mercy:

27 That they may know that this is thy hand; that thou, Lord, hast done
it.

28 Let them curse, but bless thou; when they arise, let them be ashamed;
but let thy servant rejoice.

29 Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame, and let them cover
themselves with their own confusion, as with a mantle.

30 I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth; yea, I will praise him
among the multitude.

31 For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor, to save him from
those that condemn his soul.

[Psa 109:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#021.md)

"But do thou for me, O God the Lord, for thy name's sake." How eagerly
he turns from his enemies to his God! He sets the great Thou in
opposition to all his adversaries, and you see at once that his heart is
at rest. The words are very indistinct, and though our version may not
precisely translate them, yet it in a remarkable manner hits upon the
sense and upon the obscurity which hang over it. "Do thou for me" - what
shall he do? Why, do whatever he thinks fit. He leaves himself in the
Lord's hands, dictating nothing, but quite content so long as his God
will but undertake for him. His plea is not his own merit, but the name.
The saints have always felt this to be their most mighty plea. God
himself has performed his grandest deeds of grace for the honour of his
name, and his people know that this is the most potent argument with
him. What the Lord himself has guarded with sacred jealousy we should
reverence with our whole hearts and rely upon without distrust. "Because
thy mercy is good, deliver thou me." Not because I am good, but because
thy mercy is good: see how the saints fetch their pleadings in prayer
from the Lord himself. God's mercy is the star to which the Lord's
people turn their eye when they are tossed with tempest and not
comforted, for the peculiar bounty and goodness of that mercy have a
charm for weary hearts. When man has no mercy we shall still find it in
God. When man would devour we may look to God to deliver. His name and
his mercy are two firm grounds for hope, and happy are those who know
how to rest upon them.

[Psa 109:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#022.md)

"For I am poor and needy." When he does plead anything about himself he
urges not his riches or his merits, but his poverty and his necessities
this is gospel supplication, such as only the Spirit of God can indite
upon the heart. This lowliness does not comport with the supposed
vengeful spirit of the preceding verses: there must therefore be some
interpretation of them which would make them suitable in the lips of a
lowly-minded man of God. "And my heart is wounded within me." The Lord
has always a tender regard to broken-hearted ones, and such the Psalmist
had become: the undeserved cruelty, the baseness, the slander of his
remorseless enemies had pierced him to the soul, and this sad condition
he pleads as a reason for speedy help. It is time for a friend to step
in when the adversary cuts so deep. The case has become desperate
without divine aid; now, therefore, is the Lord's time.

[Psa 109:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#023.md)

"I am gone like the shadow when it declineth." I am a mere shadow, a
shadow at the vanishing point, when it stretches far, but is almost lost
in the universal gloom of evening which settles over all, and so
obliterates the shadows cast by the setting sun. Lord, there is next to
nothing left of me, wilt thou not come in before I am quite gone? "I am
tossed up and down as the locust," which is the sport of the winds, and
must go up or down as the breeze carries it. The Psalmist felt as
powerless in his distress as a poor insect, which a child may toss up
and down it its pleasure. He entreats the divine pity, because he had
been brought to this forlorn and feeble condition by the long
persecution which his tender heart had endured. Slander and malice are
apt to produce nervous disorders and to lead on to pining diseases.
Those who use these poisoned arrows are not always aware of the
consequences; they scatter firebrands and death and say it is sport.

[Psa 109:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#024.md)

"My knees are weak through lasting;" either religious fasting, to which
he resorted in the dire extremity of his grief, or else through loss of
appetite occasioned by distress of mind. Who can eat when every morsel
is soured by envy? This is the advantage of the slanderer, that he feels
nothing himself, while his sensitive victim can scarcely eat a morsel of
bread because of his sensitiveness. However, the good God knoweth all
this, and will succour his afflicted. The Lord who bids us confirm the
feeble knees will assuredly do it himself. "And my flesh faileth of
fatness." He was wasted to a skeleton, and as his body was emaciated, so
was his soul bereft of comfort; he was pining away, and all the while
his enemies saw it and laughed at his distress. How pathetically he
states his case; this is one of the truest forms of prayer, the setting
forth of our sorrow before the Lord. Weak knees are strong with God, and
failing flesh has great power in pleading.

[Psa 109:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#025.md)

"I became also a reproach unto them." They made him the theme of
ridicule, the butt of their ribald jests: his emaciation by fasting made
him a tempting subject for their caricatures and lampoons. "When they
looked upon me they shaked their heads." Words were not a sufficient
expression of their scorn, they resorted to gestures which were meant
both to show their derision and to irritate his mind. Though these
things break no bones, yet they do worse, for they break and bruise far
tenderer parts of us. Many a man who could have answered a malicious
speech, and so have relieved his mind, has felt keenly a sneer, a
putting out of the tongue, or some other sign of Contempt. Those, too,
who are exhausted by such fasting and wasting as the last verse
describes are generally in a state of morbid sensibility, and therefore
feel more acutely the unkindness of others. What they would smile at
during happier seasons becomes intolerable when they are in a highly
nervous condition.

[Psa 109:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#026.md)

"Help me, O Lord my God." Laying hold of Jehovah by the appropriating
word my, he implores his aid both to help him to bear his heavy load and
to enable him to rise superior to it. He has described his own weakness,
and the strength and fury of his foes, and by these two arguments he
urges his appeal with double force. This is a very rich, short, and
suitable prayer for believers in any situation of peril, difficulty, or
sorrow. "O save me according to thy mercy." As thy mercy is, so let thy
salvation be. The measure is a great one, for the mercy of God is
without bound. When man has no mercy it is comforting to fall back upon
God's mercy. Justice to the wicked is often mercy to the righteous, and
because God is merciful he will save his people by overthrowing their
adversaries.

[Psa 109:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#027.md)

"That they may know that this is thy hand." Dolts as they are, let the
mercy shown to me be so conspicuous that they shall be forced to see the
Lord's agency in it. Ungodly men will not see God's hand in anything if
they can help it, and when they see good men delivered into their power
they become more confirmed than ever in their atheism; but all in good
time God will arise and so effectually punish their malice and rescue
the object of their spite that they will be compelled to say like the
Egyptian magicians, "this is the finger of God." "That thou, Lord, hast
done it." There will be no mistaking the author of so thorough a
vindication, so complete a turning of the tables.

[Psa 109:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#028.md)

"Let them curse, but bless thou," or, "they will curse and thou wilt
bless." Their cursing will then be of such little consequence that it
will not matter a straw. One blessing from the Lord will take the poison
out of ten thousand curses of men. "When they arise, let them be
ashamed." They lift up themselves to deal out another blow, to utter
another falsehood, and to watch for its injurious effects upon their
victim, but they see their own defeat and are filled with shame. "But
let thy servant rejoice." Not merely as a man protected and rescued, but
as God's servant in whom his master's goodness and glory are displayed
when he is saved from his foes. It ought to be Our greatest joy that the
Lord is honoured in our experience; the mercy itself ought not so much
to rejoice us as the glory which is thereby brought to him who so
graciously bestows it.

[Psa 109:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#029.md)

"Let mine adversaries be clothed with shame." It is a prophecy as well
as a wish, and may we read both in the indicative and the imperative.
Where sin is the underclothing, shame will soon be the outer vesture. He
who would clothe good men with contempt shall himself be clothed with
dishonour. "And let them cover themselves with their own confusion, as
with a mantle." Let their confusion be broad enough to wrap them all
over from head to foot, let them bind it about them and hide themselves
in it, as being utterly afraid to be seen. Now they walk abroad
unblushingly and reveal their own wickedness, acting as if they either
had nothing to conceal or did not care whether it was seen or no; but
they will be of another mind when the great Judge deals with them, then
will they entreat mountains to hide them and hills to fall upon them,
that they may not be seen: but all in vain, they must be dragged to the
bar with no other covering but their own confusion.

[Psa 109:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#030.md)

"I will greatly praise the Lord with my mouth." Enthusiastically,
abundantly, and loudly will he extol the righteous Lord, who redeemed
him from all evil; and that not only in his own chamber or among his own
family, but in the most public manner. "Yea, I will praise him among the
multitude." Remarkable and public providences demand public recognition,
for otherwise men of the world will judge us to be ungrateful. We do not
praise God to be heard of men, but as a natural sense of justice leads
every one to expect to hear a befriended person speak well of his
benefactor, we therefore have regard to such natural and just
expectations, and endeavour to make our praises as public as the benefit
we have received. The singer in the present case is the man whose heart
was wounded within him because he was the laughing-stock of remorseless
enemies; yet now he praises, praises greatly, praises aloud, praises in
the teeth of all gainsayers, and praises with a right joyous spirit.
Never let us despair, yea, never let us cease to praise.

[Psa 109:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#031.md)

"For he shall stand at the right hand of the poor." God will not be
absent when his people are on their trial; he will hold a brief for them
and stand in court as their advocate, prepared to plead on their behalf.
How different is this from the doom of the ungodly who has Satan at his
right hand ([Psa 109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006).md). "To save him
from those that condemn his soul." The court only met as a matter of
form, the malicious had made up their minds to the verdict, they judged
him guilty, for their hate condemned him, yea, they pronounced sentence
of damnation upon the very soul of their victim: but what mattered it?
The great King was in court, and their sentence was turned against
themselves. Nothing can more sweetly sustain the heart of a slandered
believer than the firm conviction that God is near to all who are
wronged, and is sure to work out their salvation.

O Lord, save us from the severe trial of slander: deal in thy
righteousness with all those who spitefully assail the characters of
holy men, and cause all who are smarting under calumny and reproach to
come forth unsullied from the affliction, even as did thine
only-begotten Son. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 110](psa110.md)

</div>
