<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa107)  [Next](psa109) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 108](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 108:0</span></span>

Title and Subject. - A Song or Psalm of David, - To be sung jubilantly
as a national hymn, or solemnly as a sacred Psalm. We cannot find it in
our heart to dismiss this Psalm by merely referring the reader first to
[Psa 57:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007) and then to [Psa
60:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#005), though it will be at once
seen that those two portions of Scripture are almost identical which the
verses before us. It is true that most of the commentators have done so,
and we are not so presumptuous as to dispute their wisdom; but we hold
for ourselves that the words would not have been repeated if there had
not been an object for so doing, and that this object could not have
been answered if every hearer of it had said, "Ah, we had that before,
and therefore we need not meditate upon it again." The Holy Spirit is
not so short of expressions that he needs to repeat himself, and the
repetition cannot be meant merely to fill the book: there must be some
intention in the arrangement of two former divine utterances in a new
connection; whether we can discover that intent is another matter. It is
at least ours to endeavour to do so, and we may expect divine assistance
therein.

We have before us the warrior's morning song, with which he adores his
God and strengthens his heart before entering upon the conflicts of the
day. As an old Prussian officer was wont in prayer to invoke the aid of
"his Majesty's August Ally," so does David appeal to his God and set up
his banner in Jehovah's name.

Divisions. - First we have an utterance dictated by the spirit of
praise, [Psa 108:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001); then a second
deliverance evoked by the spirit of believing prayer, [Psa
108:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006); and then a final word of
resolve ([Psa 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013)), as the warrior
hears the war-trumpet summoning him to join battle immediately, and
therefore marches with his fellow soldiers at once to the fray.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. - Parts of two former Psalms are here united in one.

I. Repetition is here sanctioned by inspiration.

1\. Of what? Of hymns, of prayers, of sermons.

2\. For what? For impression. "As we said before so say I now again, if
any man preach," etc. For confirmation, "Rejoice in the Lord, and again
I say rejoice" they went through Syria and Cilicia again confirming the
churches. For preservation: quotations authenticate originals, a writing
in two copies is safer than in one.

II\. Rearrangement is here sanctioned by inspiration.

1\. Different experiences may require it. Sometimes the heart is most
fixed at the commencement of a spiritual exercise: sometimes at its
close. Hence the commencement of one Psalm is the close of another.

2\. Different occasions may require it. As of sorrow and joy. Two parts
of two different hymns may better harmonise with a particular occasion
than either one separately considered. - G. R.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001). -

I. The best occupation: praise. Worthy -

1\. Of the heart in its best condition.

2\. Of the best faculties of the best educated man.

II\. The best resolution.

1\. Arising from a fixed heart.

2\. Deliberately formed.

3\. Solemnly expressed.

4\. Joyfully executed.

III\. The best results. To praise God makes a man both happier and
holier, stronger and bolder - as the succeeding verses show.

[Psa 108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002). - The benefit of early
rising. The sweetness of the Sabbath morning early prayer-meeting.

[Psa 108:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#003). - We must not restrain
praise because we are overheard by strangers, nor because the listeners
are heathen, or ungodly, or are numerous, or are likely to oppose. There
may be all the more reason for our outspoken praise of God when we are
in such circumstances.

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004), [Psa
108:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005). - The greatness of mercy, the
height of truth, and the immensity of the Divine praise.

[Psa 108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006). - The prayer of a
representative man. There are times when to answer me is to deliver the
church - at such times I have a powerful plea.

[Psa 108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007). - God's voice the cause of
joy, the reason for action, the guarantee of success.

[Psa 108:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#008). - "Judah is my lawgiver."
Jesus the sole and only lawmaker in the church.

[Psa 108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011) (first clause). -
Confidence in a frowning God.

[Psa 108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011) (second clause). - Whether
God will go forth with our hosts depends upon - Who they are? What is
their object? What is their motive and spirit? What weapons do they use?
etc.

[Psa 108:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#012). - The failure of human
help is often -

I. The direct cause of our prayer.

II\. The source of urgency in pleading.

III\. A powerful argument for the pleader.

IV\. A distinct reason for hope to light upon.

[Psa 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013). - How, when, and why a
believer should do valiantly.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

Note the different application of the words as they are used In [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001) and [Psa
60:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#001) and as they are employed in
[Psa 108:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001). In the former they were
prophetic of prosperity yet to come, and consolatory in the expectation
of approaching troubles. In the latter, they are eucharistic for mercies
already received, and descriptive of the glorious things which God has
prepared for his Son and for Israel his people. The Psalm, thus
interpreted, announces that Messiah's travail is ended, when the
troubles of Israel are brought to a close. David's Son and David's Lord
has taken to himself his great power and begun to reign, and sitting
upon the throne of glory, he sings this hymn, [Psa
108:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001). But with the glory of the
Redeemer is associated also the restoration, to favour and happiness, of
Israel, his long east off, but not forgotten people. The setting up of
King Messiah upon the holy hill of Zion Is graphically described, and
all Jehovah's promises are realised in the amplest measure. Messiah is
described as a conqueror when the battle is won, and kings and nations,
prostrate at his feet, await his sentence and judgment upon them. "I
will rejoice. I will divide and portion out Shechem and the valley of
Succoth. Gilead is mine, and I give it to the children of Gad and
Reuben. And Manasseh also is mine. Ephraim is my strength in war - my
horn of defence. Judah is my king." Thus in gracious and flattering
words, the victor addresses his confederates and subjects. In a
different strain, a strain of sarcasm and contempt, he announces his
pleasure respecting his vanquished enemies. "Moab I will use as a vessel
to wash my feet in. Over proud Edom I will cast my shoe, as an angry
master to a slave ministering to him. Philistia follow my chariot, and
shout forth my triumph." But what is to be understood of the next
passage, [Psa 108:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#010), "Who will bring
me into Edom?" Edom is already treated as a vassal state, [Psa
108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009). When all the nations become the
kingdoms of Messiah, what is this Edom that is to be amongst his latest
triumphs? One passage only seems to bear upon it, [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001), and from this we learn that it
is from Edom as the last scene of his vengeance, the conquering Messiah
will come forth, "clothed with a vesture dipped in blood." This Edom is
therefore named with anxiety, because after its overthrow, Messiah will
shine out "King of kings, and Lord of lords," [Rev
19:13-16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013). - R. H. Ryland.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm hath two parts: in the former is the thanksgiving of faith,
and promise of praise, in hope of obtaining all which the church is here
to pray for ([Psa 108:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)). In the
latter part is the prayer for preservation of the church, [Psa
108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006), with confidence to be heard and
helped, whatsoever impediment appear, against all who stand out against
Christ's kingdom, whether within the visible church ([Psa 108:7, 19
108:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007)), or whether without, such as
are professed enemies unto it ([Psa 108:9, 19 108:10, 19
108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)), which prayer is followed
forth ([Psa 108:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#012)), and comfortably
closed with assurance of the Church's victory by the assistance of God,
[Psa 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013). - David Dickson.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

"O God, my heart is fixed." The wheels of a chariot revolve, but the
axletree turns not; the sails of a mill move with the wind, but the mill
itself moves not; the earth is carried round its orbit, but its centre
is fixed. So should a Christian be able, amidst changing scenes and
changing fortunes, to say, "O God, my heart is fixed, my heart is
fixed." - G. S. Bowes, in, "Illustrative Gatherings," 1862.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

"My heart is fixed." The prophet saith his heart was ready, so the old
translation hath it; the new translation, "My heart is fixed." The word
in the Hebrew signifies, first, ready, or prepared. Then, secondly, it
signifies fixed. We first fit, prepare a thing, sharpen it, before we
drive it into the ground, and then drive it in and fix it. So ask
seriously and often, that thy heart may be ready, and may also be fixed,
and this by a habit which brings readiness and fixedness, as in other
holy duties, so in that of meditation. - Nathanael Ranew, in "Solitude
improved by Divine Meditation," 1670.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

Meditation is a fixed duty. It is not a cursory work. Man's thoughts
naturally labour with a great inconsistency; but meditation chains them,
and fastens them upon some spiritual object. The soul when it meditates
lays a command on itself, that the thoughts which are otherwise flitting
and feathery should fix upon its object; and so this duty is very
advantageous. As we know a garden which is watered with sudden showers
is more uncertain in its fruit than when it is refreshed with a constant
stream; so when our thoughts are sometimes on good things, and then run
off; when they only take a glance of a holy object, and then flit away,
there is not so much fruit brought into the soul. In meditation, then,
there must be a fixing of the heart upon the object, a steeping the
thoughts, as holy David, "O God, my heart is fixed." We must view the
holy object presented by meditation, as a limner who views some curious
piece, and carefully heeds every shade, every line and colour; as the
Virgin Mary kept all these things, and pondered them in her heart.
Indeed, meditation is not only the busying the thoughts, but the
centering of them; not only the employing of them, but the staking them
down upon some spiritual affair. When the soul, meditating upon
something divine, saith as the disciples in the transfiguration ([Mat
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)), "It is good to be here." - John
Wells, in the "Practical Sabbatarian," 1668.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

"With my glory." The parallel passage in the Prayer-book version is,
"with the best member I have." The tongue, being considered the best
member, is here described as the glory of man - as that which tends to
elevate him in the scale of creation; and therefore the pious man
resolves to employ his speech in giving utterance to the goodness of
God. God is glorified by the praise of his redeemed, and the instrument
whereby it is effected is man's glory. - The Quiver.

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001), [Psa
108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)

As a man first tuneth his instrument, and then playeth on it: so should
the holy servant of God first labour to bring his spirit, heart, and
affections into a solid and settled frame for worship, and then go to
work; "My heart is fixed," or prepared firmly, "I will sing and give
praise." As the glory of man above the brute creatures, is that from a
reasonable mind he can express what is his will by his tongue: so the
glory of saints above other men, is to have a tongue directed by the
heart, for expressing of God's praise: "I will sing and give praise,
even with my glory." Under typical terms we are taught to make use of
all sanctified means for stirring of us up into God's service - for this
the Psalmist intendeth, when he saith, "Awake psaltery and harp." We
ourselves must first be stirred up to make right use of the means,
before the means can be fit to stir us up - therefore saith he, "I
myself will awake right early." - David Dickson.

[Psa 108:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

After David has professed a purpose of praising God ([Psa
108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001), [Psa
108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002), [Psa
108:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#003)) he tells you, next, the
proportion that is between the attributes which he praiseth in God, and
his praise of him. The greatness of the attributes "mercy and truth" we
have in [Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004), "Thy truth reaches
unto the clouds"; and there is an answerable greatness in his praises of
God for them, [Psa 108:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005), "Be thou
exalted, O God, above the heavens. and thy glory above all the earth."
He wisheth and endeavoureth to exalt him as high in his praises as he is
in himself; to exalt him above the earth, above the heaven, and the
clouds. - Henry Jeanes.

[Psa 108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)

With reference to this passage the Talmud says, "A cithern used to hang
above David's bed; and when midnight came the north wind blew among the
strings, so that they sounded of themselves; and forthwith he arose and
busied himself with the Tra until the pillar of the dawn ascended."
Rashi observes, "The dawn awakes the other kings; but I, said David,
will awake the dawn." - Franz Delitzsch.

[Psa 108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)

When the Hebrew captives were sitting in sorrow "by the waters of
Babylon," they wept, and hung their harps on the willows, and could not
be prevailed upon by the conquerors to sing "the songs of Zion in that
land" ([Psa 137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001), [Psa
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)). But when "the Lord turned
again the captivity of Zion, then was their mouth filled with laughter
and their tongue with singing"([Psa
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001), [Psa
126:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#002)). Then the "psaltery and harp"
of former generations "awoke" ([Psa
108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)). The old songs revived on their
lips, and the melodies of David acquired new charms for them. -
Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)

"Awake early."

"Yet never sleep the sun up; prayer should

Dawn with the day, there are set awful hours

'Twixt heaven and us; the manna was not good

After sun-rising, for day sullies flowers."

Henry Vaughan, 1621-1695.

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004)

"For thy mercy is great," etc. His mercy is great - that mercy sung of
lately ([Psa 107:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001) and [Psa
107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043)). It is "from above the
heavens" (מעל־שׁמים); i.e., coming down to us as do drops of a
fertilizing shower; even as the "Peace on earth," of [Luk
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014), was first "peace in heaven"
([Luk 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038)) Andrew A Bonar

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004)

The mercy of God was then great above the heavens, when the God-man,
Christ Jesus, was raised to the highest heavens, and the truth of our
salvation established on the very throne of God. - W. Wilson.

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004), [Psa
108:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005)

There is more stuff and substance of good in the Lord's promises than
the sharpest-sighted saint did or can perceive; for when we have
followed the promise, to find out all the truth which is in it, we meet
with a cloud of unsearchable riches and are forced to leave it there;
for so much is included in this, "Thy truth reacheth unto the clouds."
The height of our praising of God is to put the work of praising God
upon himself, and to point him out unto others as going about the
magnifying of his own name, and to be glad for it, as here. "Be thou
exalted, O God, above the heavens; and thy glory above all the earth." -
David Dickson.

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004), [Psa
108:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005), [Psa
108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)

There is great confidence here, and, as ever, mercy to the soul which
knows itself and comes before truth. But, then, for its own deliverance
and blessing, it looks to the exalting of God. This shows it must be a
holy, righteous exalting. "Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens and
thy glory above all the earth; that thy beloved may be delivered." It is
a blessed thought, and this is what faith has to lay hold of now, even
in the time of trial, that our blessing and God's glory are one, only we
must put his glory first. - J. N. Darby.

[Psa 108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)

"That thy beloved may be delivered," etc. The church is the Lord's
"beloved," or the incorporation, more loved than anything else in the
world, therefore here called, "Thy beloved." Because the church is God's
beloved, the care of it should be most in our mind, and the love of the
preservation of it should draw forth our prayer most in favour of it.
"That thy beloved may be delivered: save." - David Dickson.

[Psa 108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)

God being thus exalted according to the majesty of his truth, the
special plea of the Spirit of Jesus, founded on the mercy which has
throned itself above the heavens, is next urged ([Psa
108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)) on behalf of the nation of his
ancient love. "That thy beloved \[ones\] may be delivered, save with thy
right hand and answer me." It is the Spirit of Immanuel that thus makes
intercession for his well-remembered people according to God. His land
should be rid in due time of those who had burdened it with wickedness.
For God had spoken in his holiness concerning the portion of his
anointed. - Arthur Pridham.

[Psa 108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007)

"God hath spoken" the word of assurance. This refers to all the words in
which the land of their inheritance was defined, especially [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), [Exo
23:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#031), [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024), and that remarkable prediction
concerning the perpetuity of David's line, 2 Sam. 7, which must have
made a deep impression on his mind. From these passages it is evident
that Aram as well as Edom was included in the full compass of the
territory designed for Israel, and that David felt himself to be in the
path of destiny when he was endeavouring to extend his sway from the
river of Egypt to the great river, even the Euphrates. "In his
holiness," in the immutable integrity of his heart, which was an
infallible guarantee for the fulfilment of his promise. "I will exult."
This is the exclamation of the representative head of the people, when
he ponders upon the divine utterance. - James G. Murphy.

[Psa 108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007)

Faith closing with a promise, will furnish joy to the believer before he
enjoys the performance of it, "God hath spoken," saith he, "I will
rejoice." - David Dickson.

[Psa 108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007)

He, the second David, had accomplished his warfare, and had crowned
himself with victory. Henceforth he would apportion the kingdoms of the
world and subdue them unto himself at his own holy will. Ephraim and
Judah, Moab and Philistia, the Jew first and then the Gentile, were to
be brought to confess him as their Lord. - Plain Commentary.

[Psa 108:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#008)

"Ephraim also is the strength of mine head." As Ephraim was the most
populous of all the tribes, he appropriately terms it the strength of
his head, that is, of his dominions. - John Calvin.

[Psa 108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)

Moab, who had enticed Israel to impurity, is made a vessel for its
purifying. Edom, descendant of him who despised his birthright, is
deprived of his independence; - for "flinging a shoe" was a sign of the
transference of a prior claim on land. [Rut
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007). - William Kay.

[Psa 108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)

"Moab is my washpot." The office of washing the feet was in the East
commonly performed by slaves, and the meanest of the family, as appears
from what Abigail said to David when he took her to wife, "Behold, let
thine handmaid be a servant to wash the feet of the servants of my
lord," [Sa1 25:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#041); and from the fact
of our Saviour washing his disciples' feet, to give them an example of
humility, [Joh 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#005). The word νιπτὴρ,
used in this last passage, signifies in general a washing-pot, and is
put for the word ποδόνιπτρον, the term which the Greeks, in strict
propriety of speech, applied to a vessel for washing the feet. As this
office was servile, so the vessels employed for this purpose were a mean
part of household stuff. Gataker and Le Clerc illustrate this text from
an anecdote related by Herodotus, concerning Amasis, king of Egypt, who
expressed the meanness of his own origin by comparing himself to a pot
for washing the feet in (Herod, Lib. ii. c. 172). When, therefore, it is
said, "Moab is my washing-pot," the complete and servile subjection of
Moab to David is strongly marked. This is expressed, not by comparing
Moab to a slave who performs the lowest offices, as presenting to his
master the basin for washing his feet, but by comparing him to the mean
utensil itself. See [Sa2 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002); [Ch1
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#001), [Ch1
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#002), [Ch1
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#012), [Ch1
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1018.htm#013). - James Anderson's Note to
Calvin on Ps. 9.

[Psa 108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)

"Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast my shoe." This somewhat
difficult expression may be thus explained. Moab and Edom were to be
reduced to a state of lowest vassalage to the people of God. The one was
to be like a pot or tub fit only for washing the feet in, while the
other was to be like the domestic slave standing by to receive the
sandals thrown to him by the person about to perform his ablutions, that
he might first put them by in a safe place, and then come and wash his
master's feet. - "Rays from the East."

[Psa 108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)

"Over Edom will I cast my shoe." David overthrew their army in the
"Valley of Salt," and his general, Joab, following up the victory,
destroyed nearly the whole male population ([Kg1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015), [Kg1
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#016)), and placed Jewish garrisons in
all the strongholds of Edom ([Sa2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013), [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014)). In honour of that victory the
Psalmist-warrior may have penned the words in [Psa
60:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa060.htm#008), "Over Edom will I cast shoe." -
J. L. Porter, in "Smith's Dictionary of the Bible."

[Psa 108:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#010)

The strong city built on the rock, even man's hardened heart, stronger
and more stony than the tomb, he had conquered and overcome; and in him
and his might are his people to carry on his warfare, and to cast down
all the strongholds of human pride, and human stubbornness, and human
unrepentance. - Plain Commentary.

[Psa 108:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#010), [Psa
108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011)

It is not conclusive evidence that we are not called to undertake a
given work or perform a certain duty, because it is very difficult, or
even impossible for us to succeed without special help from God. If God
calls David to take Petra, he shall take Petra. - William S. Plumer.

[Psa 108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011)

"Wilt not thou, O God?" His hand shall lead him even to Petra, which
seems unapproachable by human strength. That marvellous rock-city of the
Edomites is surrounded by rocks some of which are three hundred feet
high, and a single path twelve in width leads to it. The city itself is
partly hewn out of the cloven rocks, and its ruins, which however belong
to a later period, fill travellers with amazement. - Augustus F.
Tholuck.

[Psa 108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011)

He who came victorious from Edom, and with garments dyed in the blood of
his passion from Bozrah, will henceforth now go forth with the armies of
the true Israel, - for what are hosts without the Lord of hosts? - to
subdue their enemy. - Plain Commentary.

[Psa 108:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#012)

"Give, us help from trouble," etc. He who would have God's help in any
business, must quit confidence in man's help; and the seeing of the
vanity of man's help must make the believer to trust the more unto, and
expect the more confidently, God's help, as here is done. "Give us help
from trouble: for vain is the help of man." - David Dickson.

[Psalms 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 108:1</span></span>

1 O God, my heart is fixed; I will sing and give praise, even with my
glory.

2 Awake, psaltery and harp; I myself will awake early.

3 I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people, and I will sing praises
unto thee among the nations.

4 For thy mercy is great above the heavens: and thy truth reacheth unto
the clouds.

5 Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the
earth;

These five verses are found in [Psa
57:7-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#007) almost verbatim: the only
important alteration being the use of the great name of Jehovah in [Psa
108:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#003) instead of Adonai in [Psa
57:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#009). This the English reader will
only be able to perceive by the use of capitals in the present Psalm and
not in [Psa 57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001). There are other
inconsiderable alterations, but the chief point of difference probably
lies in the position of the verses. In [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001) these notes of praise follow
prayer and grow out of it; but in this case the Psalmist begins at once
to sing and give praise, and afterwards prays to God in a remarkably
confident manner, so that he seems rather to seize the blessing than to
entreat for it. Sometimes we must climb to praise by the ladder of
prayer, and at other times we must bless God for the past in order to be
able in faith to plead for the present and the future. By the aid of
God's Spirit we can both pray ourselves up to praise, or praise the Lord
till we get into a fit frame for prayer. In [Psa
57:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001) these words are a song in the
cave of Adullam, and are the result of faith which is beginning its
battles amid domestic enemies of the most malicious kind: but here they
express the continued resolve and praise of a man who has already
weathered many a campaign, has overcome all home conflicts, and is
looking forward to conquests far and wide. The passage served as a fine
close for one Psalm, and it makes an equally noteworthy opening for
another. We cannot too often with fixed heart resolve to magnify the
Lord; nor need we ever hesitate to use the same words in drawing near to
God, for the Lord who cannot endure vain repetitions is equally weary of
vain variations. Some expressions are so admirable that they ought to be
used again: who would throw away a cup because he drank from it before?
God should be served with the best words, and when we have them they are
surely good enough to be used twice. To use the same words continually
and never utter a new song would show great slothfulness, and would lead
to dead formalism, but we need not regard novelty of language as at all
essential to devotion, nor strain after it as an urgent necessity. It
may be that our heavenly Father would here teach us that if we are
unable to find a great variety of suitable expressions in devotion, we
need not in the slightest degree distress ourselves, but may either pray
or praise, "using the same words."

[Psa 108:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#001)

"O God, my heart is fixed." Though I have many wars to disturb me, and
many cares to toss me to and fro, yet I am settled in one mind and
cannot be driven from it. My heart has taken hold and abides in one
resolve. Thy grace has overcome the fickleness of nature, and I am now
in a resolute and determined frame of mind. "I will sing and give
praise." Both with voice and music will I extol thee - "I will sing and
play," as some read it. Even though I have to shout in the battle I will
also sing in my soul, and if my fingers must needs be engaged with the
bow, yet shall they also touch the ten-stringed instrument and show
forth thy praise. "Even with my glory" - with my intellect, my tongue,
my poetic faculty, my musical skill, or whatever else causes me to be
renowned, and confers honour upon me. It is my glory to be able to speak
and not to be a dumb animal, therefore my voice shall show forth thy
praise; it is my glory to know God and not to be a heathen, and
therefore my instructed intellect shall adore thee; it is my glory to be
a saint and no more a rebel, therefore the grace I have received shall
bless thee; it is my glory to be immortal and not a mere brute which
perisheth, therefore my inmost life shall celebrate thy majesty. When he
says I will, he supposes that there might be some temptation to refrain,
but this he puts on one side, and with fixed heart prepares himself for
the joyful engagement. He who sings with a fixed heart is likely to sing
on, and all the while to sing well.

[Psa 108:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#002)

"Awake, psaltery and harp." As if he could not be content with voice
alone, but must use the well-tuned strings, and communicate to them
something of his own liveliness. Strings are wonderful things when some
men play upon them, they seem to become sympathetic and incorporated
with the minstrel, as if his very soul were imparted to them and
thrilled through them. Only when a thoroughly enraptured soul speaks in
the instrument can music be acceptable with God: as mere musical sound
the Lord can have no pleasure therein, he is only pleased with the
thought and feeling which are thus expressed. When a man has musical
gift, he should regard it as too lovely a power to be enlisted in the
cause of sin. Well did Charles Wesley say : -

"If well I know the tuneful art

To captivate a human heart,

The glory, Lord, be thine.

A servant of thy blessed will.

I here devote my utmost skill

To sound the praise divine.

"Thine own musician, Lord, inspire,

And let my consecrated lyre

Repeat the Psalmist's part.

His Son and Thine reveal in me,

And fill with sacred melody

The fibres of my heart."

"I myself will awake early." I will call up the dawn. The best and
brightest hours of the day shall find me heartily aroused to bless my
God. Some singers had need to awake, for they sing in drawling tones, as
if they were half asleep; the tune drags wearily along, there is no
feeling or sentiment in the singing, but the listener hears only a dull
mechanical sound, as if the choir ground out the notes from a worn-out
barrel-organ. Oh, choristers, wake up, for this is not a work for
dreamers, but such as requires your best powers in their liveliest
condition. In all worship this should be the personal resolve of each
worshipper: "I myself will awake."

[Psa 108:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#003)

"I will praise thee, O Lord, among the people." Whoever may come to hear
me, devout or profane, believer or heathen, civilized or barbarian, I
shall not cease my music. David seemed inspired to foresee that his
Psalms would be sung in every land, from Greenland's icy mountains to
India's coral strand. His heart was large, he would have the whole race
of man listen to his joy in God, and lo, he has his desire, for his
psalmody is cosmopolitan; no poet is so universally known as he. He had
but one theme, he sang Jehovah and none beside, and his work being thus
made of gold, silver, and precious stones, has endured the fiery ordeal
of time, and was never more prized than at this day. Happy man, to have
thus made his choice to be the Lord's musician, he retains his office as
the Poet Laureate of the kingdom of heaven, and shall retain it till the
crack of doom. "And I will sing praises unto thee among the nations."
This is written, not only to complete the parallelism of the verse, but
to reaffirm his fixed resolve. He would march to battle praising
Jehovah, and when he had conquered he would make the captured cities
ring with Jehovah's praises. He would carry his religion with him
wherever he pushed his conquests, and the vanquished should not hear the
praises of David, but the glories of the Lord of Hosts. Would to God
that wherever professing Christians travel they would carry the praises
of the Lord with them! It is to be feared that some leave their religion
when they leave their homes. Nations and peoples would soon know the
gospel of Jesus if every Christian traveller were as intensely devout as
the Psalmist. Alas, it is to be feared that the Lord's name is profaned
rather than honoured among the heathen by many who are named by the name
of Christ.

[Psa 108:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#004)

"For thy mercy is great above the heavens," and therefore there must be
no limit of time, or place, or people, when that mercy is to be
extolled. As the heavens over-arch the whole earth, and from above mercy
pours down upon men, so shalt thou be praised everywhere beneath the
sky. Mercy is greater than the mountains, though they pierce the clouds;
earth cannot hold it all, it is so vast, so boundless, so exceeding high
that the heavens themselves are over-topped thereby. "And thy truth
reacheth unto the clouds." As far as we can see we behold thy truth and
faithfulness, and there is much beyond which lies shrouded in cloud, but
we are sure that it is all mercy, though it be far above and out of our
sight. Therefore shall the song be lifted high and the Psalm shall peal
forth without stint of far-resounding music. Here is ample space for the
loudest chorus, and a subject which deserves thunders of praise.

[Psa 108:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#005)

"Be thou exalted, O God, above the heavens: and thy glory above all the
earth." Let thy praise be according to the greatness of thy mercy, Ah,
if we were to measure our devotion thus, with what ardour should we
sing! The whole earth with its overhanging dome would seem too scant an
orchestra, and all the faculties of all mankind too little for the
hallelujah. Angels would be called in to aid us, and surely they would
come. They will come in that day when the whole earth shall be filled
with the praises of Jehovah. We long for the time when God shall be
universally worshipped, and his glory in the gospel shall be everywhere
made known. This is a truly missionary prayer. David had none of the
exclusiveness of the modern Jew or the narrow-heartedness of some
nominal Christians. For God's sake, that his glory might be everywhere
revealed, he longed to see heaven and earth full of the divine praise.
Amen, so let it be.

[Psalms 108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 108:6</span></span>

6 That thy beloved may be delivered: save with thy right hand, and
answer me.

7 God hath spoken in his holiness; I will rejoice, I will divide
Shechem, and mete out the valley of Succoth.

8 Gilead is mine; Manasseh is mine; Ephraim also is the strength of mine
head; Judah is my lawgiver;

9 Moab is my washpot; over Edom will I cast out my shoe; over Philistia
will I triumph.

10 Who will bring me into the strong city? who will lead me into Edom?

11 Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off? and wilt not thou, O God,
go forth with our hosts?

12 Give us help from trouble, for vain is the help of man.

Now prayer follows upon praise, and derives strength of faith and holy
boldness therefrom. It is frequently best to begin worship with a hymn,
and then to bring forth our vials full of odours after the harps have
commenced their sweeter sounds.

[Psa 108:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#006)

"That thy beloved may be delivered save with thy right hand, and answer
me." Let my prayer avail for all the beloved ones. Sometimes a nation
seems to hang port the petitions of one man. With what ardour should
such an one pour out is soul! David does so here. It is easy praying for
the Lord's beloved, for we feel sure of a favourable answer, since the
Lord's heart is already set upon doing them good - yet it is solemn work
to plead when we feel that the condition of a whole beloved nation
depends upon what the Lord means to do with us whom he has placed in a
representative position. "Answer me, that thy many beloved ones may be
delivered" it is an urgent prayer. David felt that the case demanded the
right and of God, - his wisest, speediest, and most efficient
interposition, and he feels sure of obtaining it for himself, since his
cause involved the safety of the chosen people. Will the Lord fail to
use his right hand of power on behalf of those whom he has set this
right hand of favour? Shall not the beloved be delivered by him who
loves hem? When our suit is not a selfish one, but is bound up with the
cause of God, re may be very bold about it.

[Psa 108:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#007)

"God has spoken in his holiness." Aforetime the Lord had made large
promises to David, and these his holiness had guaranteed. The divine
attributes were pledged to give the son of Jesse great blessings; there
was no fear that the covenant God would run back from his plighted word.
"I will rejoice." If God has spoken we may well be glad the very fact of
a divine revelation is a joy. If the Lord Lad meant to destroy us he
would not have spoken to us as he has done. But what God has spoken is a
still further reason for gladness, for he has declared "the sure mercies
of David," and promised to establish his seed upon his throne, and to
subdue all his enemies. David greatly rejoiced after the Lord had spoken
to him by the mouth of Nathan. He sat before the Lord in a wonder of
joy. See 1 Chronicles 17, and note that in the next chapter David began
to act vigorously against his enemies, even as in this Psalm he vows to
do. "I will divide Shechem." Home conquests come first. Foes must be
dislodged from Israel's territory, and lands properly settled and
managed. "And mete out the valley of Succoth." On the other side Jordan
as well as on this the land must be put in order, and secured against
all wandering marauders. Some rejoicing leads to inaction, but not that
which is grounded upon a lively faith in the promise of God. See how
David prays, as if he had the blessing already, and could share it among
his men this comes of having sung so heartily unto the Lord his helper.
See how he resolves on action, like a man whose prayers are only a part
of his life, and vital portions of his action.

[Psa 108:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#008)

"Gilead is mine." Thankful hearts dwell upon the gifts which the Lord
has given them, and think it no task to mention them one by one.
"Manasseh is mine." I have it already, and it is to me the token and
assurance that the rest of the promised heritage will also come into my
possession in due time. If we gratefully acknowledge what we have we
shall be in better heart for obtaining that which as yet we have not
received. He who gives us Gilead and Manasseh will not fail to put the
rest of the promised territory into our hands. "Ephraim also is the
strength of mine head." This tribe furnished David with more than twenty
thousand "mighty men of valour, famous throughout the house of their
fathers" - the faithful loyalty of this land was, no doubt, a proof that
the rest of the tribe were with him, and so he regarded them as the
helmet of the state, the guard of his royal crown. "Judah is my
lawgiver." There had he seated the government and chief courts of
justice. No other tribe could lawfully govern but Judah: till Shiloh
came the divine decree fixed the legal power in that state. To us also
there is no lawgiver but our Lord who sprang out of Judah; and whenever
Home, or Canterbury, or any other power shall attempt to set up laws and
ordinances for the church, we have but one reply - "Judah is my
lawgiver." Thus the royal Psalmist rejoiced because his own land had
been cleansed of intruders, and a regular government had been set up,
and guarded by an ample force, and in all this he found encouragement to
plead for victory over his foreign foes. Even thus do we plead with the
Lord that as in one land and another Christ's holy gospel has been set
up and maintained, so also in other lands the power of his sceptre of
grace may be owned till the whole earth shall bow before him, and the
Edom of Antichrist shall be crushed beneath his feet.

[Psa 108:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#009)

"Moab is my washpot." This nation had shown no friendly spirit to the
Israelites, but had continually viewed them as a detested rival,
therefore they were to be subdued and made subject to David's throne. He
claims by faith the victory, and regards his powerful enemy with
contempt. Nor was he disappointed, for "the Moabites became David's
servants and brought him gifts" ([Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002)) As men wash their feet after a
long journey, and so are revived, so vanquished difficulties serve to
refresh us we use Moab for a washpot. "Over Edom will I cast out my
shoe." It shall be as the floor upon which the bather throws his
sandals, it shall lie beneath his foot, subject to his will and
altogether his own. Edom was proud, but David throws his slipper at it;
its capital was high, but he casts his sandal over it; it was strong,
but he hurls his shoe at it as the gage of battle. He had not entered
yet into its rock-built fortresses, but since the Lord was with him he
felt sure that he would do so. Under the leadership of the Almighty, he
felt so secure of conquering even fierce Edom itself that he looks upon
it as a mere slave, over which he could exult with impunity. We ought
never to fear those who are defending the wrong side, for since God is
not with them their wisdom is folly, their strength is weakness, and
their glory is their shame. We think too much of God's foes and talk of
them with too much respect. Who is this Pope of Rome? His Holiness? Call
him not so, but call him His Blasphemy! His Profanity! His Impudence!
What are he and his cardinals, and his legates, but the image and
incarnation of Antichrist, to be in due time cast with the beast and the
false prophet into the lake of fire? "Over Philistia will I triumph."
David had done so in his youth, and he is all the more sure of doing it
again. We read that "David smote the Philistines and subdued them" ([Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001)), even as he had smitten Edom and
filled it with his garrisons. The enemies with whom we battled in our
youth are yet alive, and we shall have more brushes with them before we
die, but, blessed be God, we are by no means dismayed at the prospect,
for we expect to triumph over them even more easily than aforetime.

Thy right hand shall thy people aid;

Thy faithful promise makes us strong;

We will Philistia's land invade,

And over Edom chant the song.

Through thee we shall most valiant prove,

And tread the foe beneath our feet;

Through thee our faith shall hills remove,

And small as chaff the mountains beat.

[Psa 108:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#010)

Faith leads on to strong desire for the realisation of the promise, and
hence the practical question, "Who will bring me into the strong city?
who will lead me into Edom?" The difficulty is plainly perceived. Petra
is strong and hard to enter: the Psalmist warrior knows that he cannot
enter the city by his own power, and he therefore asks who is to help
him. He asks of the right person, even of his Lord, who has all men at
his beck, and can say to this man, "show my servant the road," and he
will show it, or to this band, "cut your way into the rock city," and
they will assuredly do it. Of Edom it is written by Obadiah, "The pride
of thine heart hath deceived thee, thou that dwellest in the clefts of
the rock, whose habitation is high; that saith in his heart, who shall
bring me down to the ground? Though thou exalt thyself as the eagle, and
though thou set thy nest among the stars, thence will I bring thee down,
saith the Lord." David looked for his conquest to Jehovah's infinite
power, and he looked not in vain.

[Psa 108:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#011)

"Wilt not thou, O God, who hast cast us off?" This is grand faith which
can trust the Lord even when he seems to have cast us off. Some can
barely trust him when he pampers them, and yet David relied upon him
when Israel seemed under a cloud and the Lord had hidden his face. O for
more of this real and living faith. The casting off will not last long
when faith so gloriously keeps her hold. None but the elect of God who
have obtained "like precious faith" can sing -

"Now thou array'st thine awful face

In angry frowns, without a smile;

We, through the cloud, believe thy grace,

Secure of thy compassion still."

"And wilt not thou, O God, go forth with our hosts?" Canst thou for ever
forsake thine own and leave thy people to be overthrown by thine
enemies? The sweet singer is sure that Edom shall be captured, because
he cannot and will not believe that God will refrain from going forth
with the armies of his chosen people. When we ask ourselves, "Who will
be the means of our obtaining a promised blessing?" we need not be
discouraged if we perceive no secondary agent, for we may then fall back
upon the great Promiser himself, and believe that he himself will
perform his word unto us. If no one else will lead us into Edom, the
Lord himself will do it, if he has promised it. Or if there must be
visible instruments he will use our hosts, feeble as they are. We need
not that any new agency should be created, God can strengthen our
present hosts and enable them to do all that is needed; all that is
wanted even for the conquest of a world is that the Lord go forth with
such forces as we already have. He can bring us into the strong city
even by such weak weapons as we wield to-day.

[Psa 108:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#012)

"Give us help from trouble for vain is the help of man." This prayer has
often fallen from the lips of men who have been bitterly disappointed by
their fellows, and has also been poured out unto the Lord in the
presence of some gigantic labour in which mortal power is evidently of
no avail. Edom cannot be entered by any human power, yet from its
fastnesses the robber bands come rushing down; therefore, O Lord, do
thou interpose and give thy people deliverance. Help divine is expected
because help human is of no avail. We ought to pray with all the more
confidence in God when our confidence in man is altogether gone. When
the help of man is vain, we shall not find it vain to seek the help of
God.

[Psalms 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 108:13</span></span>

13 Through God we shall do valiantly, for he it is that shall tread down
our enemies.

[Psa 108:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa108.htm#013)

God's help shall inspire us to help ourselves. Faith is neither a coward
nor a sluggard she knows that God is with her, and therefore she does
valiantly; she knows that he will tread down her enemies, and therefore
she arises to tread them down in his name. Where praise and prayer have
preceded the battle, we may expect to see heroic deeds and decisive
victories. "Through God" is our secret support; from that source we draw
all our courage, wisdom, and strength. "We shall do valiantly." This is
the public outflow from that secret source our inward and spiritual
faith proves itself by outward and valorous deeds. "He shall tread down
our enemies." They shall fall before him, and as they lie prostrate he
shall march over them, and all the hosts of his people with him. This is
a prophecy. It was fulfilled to David, but it remains true to the Son of
David and all who are on his side. The church shall yet arouse herself
to praise her God with all her heart, and then with songs and hosannas
she will advance to the great battle; her foes shall be overthrown and
utterly crushed by the power of her God, and the Lord's glory shall be
above all the earth. Send it in our time, we beseech thee, O Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 109](psa109)

</div>
