<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa118)  [Next](psa120) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 119:0</span></span>

Title. - There is no title to this Psalm, neither is any author's name
mentioned. It is The Longest Psalm, and this is a sufficiently
distinctive name for it. It equals in bulk twenty-two Psalms of the
average length of the Songs of Degrees. Nor is it long only; for it
equally excels in breadth of thought, depth of meaning, and height of
fervour. It is like the celestial city which lieth four-square, and the
height and the breadth of it are equal. Many superficial readers have
imagined that it harps upon one string, and abounds in pious repetitions
and redundancies; but this arises from the shallowness of the reader's
own mind: those who have studied this divine hymn, and carefully noted
each line of it, are amazed at the variety and profundity of the
thought. Using only a Jew words, tire writer has produced permutations
and combinations of meaning which display his holy familiarity with his
subject, and the sanctified ingenuity of his mind. He never repeats
himself; for if the same sentiment recurs it is placed in a fresh
connection, and so exhibits another interesting shade of meaning. The
more one studies it the fresher it becomes. As those who drink the Nile
water like it better every time they take a draught, so does this Psalm
become the more full and fascinating the oftener you turn to it. It
contains no idle word; the grapes of this cluster are almost to bursting
lull with the new wine of the kingdom. The more you look into this
mirror of a gracious heart the more you will see in it. Placid on the
surface as the sea of glass before the eternal throne, it yet contains
within its depths an ocean of fire, and those who devoutly gaze into it
shall not only see the brightness, but feel the glow of the sacred
flame. It is loaded with holy sense, and is as weighty as it is bulky.
Again and again have we cried while studying it, "Oh the depths!" Yet
these depths are hidden beneath an apparent simplicity, as Augustine has
well and wisely said, and this makes the exposition all the more
difficult. Its obscurity is hidden beneath a veil of light, and hence
only those discover it who are in thorough earnest, not only to look on
the word, but, like the angels, to look into it.

The Psalm is alphabetical. Eight stanzas commence with one letter, and
then another eight with the next letter, and so the whole Psalm proceeds
by octonaries quite through the twenty-two letters of the Hebrew
alphabet. Besides which, there are multitudes of appositions of sense,
and others of those structural formalities with which the oriental mind
is pleased, - formalities very similar to those in which our older poets
indulged. The Holy Spirit thus deigned to speak to men in farms which
were attractive to the attention and helpful to the memory. He is often
plain or elegant in his manner, but he does not disdain to be quaint or
formal if thereby his design of instruction can be the more surely
reached. He does not despise even contracted and artificial modes of
speech, if by their use he can fix this teaching upon the mind. Isaac
Taylor has worthily set forth the lesson of this fact: - "In the
strictest sense this composition is conditioned; nevertheless in the
highest sense is it an utterance of spiritual life; and in thus finding
these seemingly opposed elements, intimately commingled as they are
throughout this Psalm, a lesson full of meaning is silently conveyed to
those who shall receive it - that the conveyance of the things of God to
the human spirit is in no way damaged or impeded, much less is it
deflected or vitiated by its subjugation to those modes of utterance
which most of all bespeak their adaptation to the infancy and the
childlike capacity of the recipient."

Author. - The fashion among modern writers is, as far as possible, to
take every Psalm from David. As the critics of this school are usually
unsound in doctrine and unspiritual in tone, we gravitate in the
opposite direction, from a natural suspicion of everything which comes
from so unsatisfactory a quarter. We believe that David wrote this
Psalm. It is Davidic in tone and expression, and it tallies with David's
experience in many interesting points. In our youth our teacher called
it "David's pocket book," and we incline to the opinion then expressed
that here we have the royal diary written at various times throughout a
long life. No, we cannot give up this Psalm to the enemy. "This is
David's spoil." After long reading an author one gets to know his style,
and a measure of discernment is acquired by which his composition is
detected even if his name be concealed; we feel a kind of critical
certainty that the hand of David is in this thing, yea, that it is
altogether his own.

Subject. - The one theme is the word of the Lord. The Psalmist sets his
subject in many lights, and treats of it in divers ways, but he seldom
omits to mention the word of the Lord in each verse under some one or
other of the many names by which he knows it; and even if the name be
not there, the subject is still heartily pursued in every stanza. He who
wrote this wonderful song was saturated with those books of Scripture
which he possessed. Andrew Bonar tells of a simple Christian in a
farmhouse who had meditated the Bible through three times. This is
precisely what this Psalmist had done, - he had gone past reading into
meditation. Like Luther, David had shaken every fruit-tree in God's
garden, and gathered golden fruit therefrom. "The most," says Martin
Boos, "read their Bibles like cows that stand in the thick grass, and
trample under their feet the finest flowers and herbs." It is to be
feared that we too often do the like. This is a miserable way of
treating the pages of inspiration. May the Lord prevent us from
repeating that sin while reading this precious Psalm,

There is an evident growth in the subject matter. The earlier verses are
of such a character as to lend themselves to the hypothesis that the
author was a young man, while many of the later passages could only have
suggested themselves to age and wisdom. In every portion, however, it is
the fruit of deep experience, careful observation, and earnest
meditation. If David did not write it, there must have lived another
believer of exactly the same order of mind as David, and he must have
addicted himself to psalmody with equal ardour, and have been an equally
hearty lover of Holy Writ.

Our best improvement of this sacred composition will come through
getting our minds into intense sympathy with its subject. In order to
this, we might do well to commit it to memory. Philip Henry's daughter
wrote in her diary, "I have of late taken some pains to learn by heart
Psalm 119, and have made some progress therein." She was a sensible,
godly woman. Having done this, we should consider the fulness,
certainty, clearness, and sweetness of the word of God, since by such
reflections we are likely to be stirred up to a warm affection for it.
What favoured beings are those to whom the Eternal God has written a
letter in his own hand and style. What ardour of devotion, what
diligence of composition can produce a worthy eulogium for the divine
testimonies! If ever one such has fallen from the pen of man it is
this[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001), which might well be
called the holy soul's soliloquy before an open Bible.

This sacred ode is a little Bible, the Scriptures condensed, a mass of
Bibline, Holy Writ rewritten in holy emotions and actions. Blessed are
they who can read and understand these saintly aphorisms; they shall
find golden apples in this true Hesperides, and come to reckon that this
Psalm, like the whole Scripture which it praises, is a pearl island, or,
better still, a garden of sweet flowers.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001). - "Blessed." True
blessedness lies in -

I. Defilement avoided by the word.

II\. Delight experienced in the word.

[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001). - Spiritual pedestrians
are often mentioned in this Psalm. Model travellers are described in
this passage. Observe, -

I. Their Character: "Undefiled." They are so

\(1\) in Christ: found in him; complete; accepted. They are so

\(2\) by Christ: His spirit, truth, and grace are in them. "Chosen
generation," "peculiar people."

II\. Their path: "the law of the Lord." This path is

\(1\) Conspicuous - high, visible, distinguished from every other.

\(2\) Ancient. The old path. Holiness is older than sin, wisdom than
folly, life than death, joy than sorrow.

\(3\) Safe. Christ has repaired it. Apart from his work none can pass
safely over. He has brought down mountains, raised up valleys, made
crooked places straight, and rough places smooth. He has driven away the
lion.

\(4\) Narrow. It has a fence of commands on one side, and of
prohibitions on the other. It is entered by a strait gate, which renders
it necessary for the great to become as little children.

III\. Their progress: "walk." Not only talk, but step in the footprints
of Jesus. Follow the law-fulfiller. They proceed in the exercise of his
graces, in the exhibition of his virtues, in the fulfilment of his
injunctions, and in the enjoyment of his favours.

IV\. Their happiness: "Blessed." They have unfailing help, suitable
company, animating prospects on the way. - W. Jackson, 1882.

[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001), [Psa
119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002), [Psa
119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003). -

I. Positive and Negative Beatitudes of Being.

II\. Six Con - Lions of Peace with God.

1\. Purity.

2\. Obedience.

3\. Fidelity.

4\. Seeking.

5\. Integrity.

6\. Following. - William Durban, 1882.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002). - "Blessed are they that
keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the whole heart."

I. The sacred Quest: "Seek him." He has been sought among the trees, the
hills, the planets, the stars. He has been sought in his own defaced
image, man. He has been sought amid the mysterious wheels of Providence.
But these quests have often been prompted simply by intellect, or
compelled by conscience, and have therefore resulted but in a cold,
faint light. He has been sought in the word which this Psalm so highly
extols, when it has led up the smoke-covered and gleaming peaks of
Sinai. It has been followed, when it has led beneath the olives of
Gethsemane to witness a mysterious struggle in blood-sweating and
anguish; to Calvary, where, in the place of a skull, life and
immortality are brought to light. The sacred quest but there begins.

II\. The Conduct of the Quest. Seekers might be mistakenly dejected by
so literal an interpretation of the "whole heart." We do not hesitate to
say a stream is in its whole volume flowing toward sea while there are
little side creeks in which the water eddies backward; or to say the
tide is coming despite receding waves; or that spring is upon us despite
haft-storm and biting wind. Indication of,

1\. Unity.

2\. Intensity.

3\. Determination.

No one conducts this quest aright who is not prompted to or sustained in
it by the gracious Spirit.

III\. Blessedness both in the pursuit and issue.

1\. Blessedness in the bitterness of penitence. The door-handle touched
by him drops of myrrh. The rising sun sends kindling beams upon the
highest peaks.

2\. Blessedness in the gladsome findings of salvation and adoption.

3\. Blessedness in the perpetual pursuit. - William Anderson, 1882.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002). - The double blessing.

I. On keeping the testimonies.

II\. On seeking the Lord.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002). - "That seek him with the
whole heart."

I. Seek what? God himself. No peace until he is found.

II\. Seek where? In his testimonies.

1\. By studying them.

2\. By keeping to them.

III\. Seek how? With the whole heart. - George Rogers.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002). - Seeking for God.

I. The Psalmist's way of seeking God.

1\. He sought God with the heart. Only the heart can find God. Sight
fails. "The scientific method" fails. All reason fails. Only love and
trust can succeed. Love sees much where all other perception finds
nothing. Faith generally goes with discovery, and nowhere so much as in
finding God.

2\. He sought God with all his heart.

\(1\) Half-heartedness seldom finds anything worth having.

\(2\) Half-heartedness shows contempt for God.

\(3\) God will not reveal himself to half-heartedness. It would be
putting the highest premium possible upon indifference.

II\. The Psalmist's plea in seeking God: "Let me not wander from thy
commandments."

1\. God's commandments lead, presently into his own presence. If we take
even the moral law, every one of the ten commandments leads away from
the world, and sin, into that seclusion of holiness in which he hides.
It is thus with all the commandments of the Scriptures.

2\. The earnestness of the soul's search for God becomes, in itself, a
plea with God that he will be found of us. God, who loves importunity in
prayer, loves it no less when it takes the form of searching with all
the heart. He who seeks with all the heart finds special encouragement
to pray: "Let me not wander from thy commandments." - F. G. Marchant.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002). - "That seek him." We must
remember six conditions required in them who would seek the Lord
rightly.

I. We must seek him in Christ the Mediator. [Joh
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006).

II\. We must seek him in truth. [Jer
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#010); [Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024); [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006).

III\. We must seek him in holiness. [Ti2
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#019); [Heb
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014); 1 John 3.

IV\. We must seek him above all things and for himself.

V. We must seek him by the light of his own word.

VI\. We must seek him diligently and with perseverance, never resting
till we find him, with the spouse in the Canticles. - William Cowper.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002), [Psa
119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004), [Psa
119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005), [Psa
119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008). - "Blessed are they that keep."
"Thou hast commanded us to keep." "O that my ways were directed to
keep." "I will keep." The blessedness of keeping God's precepts -
displayed ([Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)), commanded
([Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004)), prayed for ([Psa
119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005)), resolved upon ([Psa
119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008)). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003). - "They also do no
iniquity." They work no iniquity with -

1\. Purpose of heart;

2\. Delight;

3\. Perseverance;

4\. Nor at all when the heart is fully sanctified unto God; Christ
dwelling in it by faith, and casting out sin. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003). - The relation between
negative and positive virtue. Or walking with God the best preventive of
iniquity.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004). -

I. Take notice of the law-giver, "Thou." Not thy equal, or one that will
be baffled, but the great God.

II\. He hath interposed his authority: "hast commanded."

III\. The nature of this obedience, or the thing commanded: "To keep thy
precepts." - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004). - The supplementary
commandment. God having ordained the moral law, supplements it with a
commandment prescribing the manner of keeping it. Hence:

I. God is not indifferent to men's treatment of his law - whether they
observe, neglect, or defy it.

II\. When observed, God discriminates the spirit of its observance,
whether slavish, partial, careless, or diligent.

III\. There is but one spirit of obedience, whether slavish, partial,
careless, or diligent.

IV\. There is but one spirit of obedience which satisfies God's
requirements. "Diligently" implies an obedience which is, - careful to
ascertain the law - prompt to fulfil it ([Psa
119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060)) - unreserved - love-inspired
("diligently," old meaning, through the Latin, "lovingly," [Psa
119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047), [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097), [Psa
119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113)).

V. Does our obedience come up to this standard? - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004). - Not only is service
commanded, but the manner of it. Heartiness, care, perseverance
required, because without these it will not be true, uniform, or
victorious over difficulty.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004). - How to obey:
"Diligently."

1\. Not partially, but fully.

2\. Not doubtfully, but confidently.

3\. Not reluctantly, but readily.

4\. Not slovenly, but carefully.

5\. Not coldly, but earnestly.

6\. Not fitfully, but regularly. - W. J.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004), [Psa
119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005), [Psa
119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006). - A willing recognition ([Psa
119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004)). An ardent aspiration ([Psa
119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005)). A happy consequence ([Psa
119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006)). - W. D.

[Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005). - The prayer of the
gracious.

I. Suggested by each preceding clause of blessing.

II\. By a consciousness of failure.

III\. By a loving clinging to the Lord.

[Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005). -

I. The end desired: "To keep thy statutes." Not to be safe merely, or
happy, but holy.

II\. The help implored.

1\. To understand the divine precepts.

2\. To keep them. - G. R.

[Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005). - Longing to obey.

1\. It is a noble aspiration. There is nothing grander than the desire
to do this except the doing of it.

2\. It is a spiritual aspiration. Not the offspring of our carnal
nature. It is the heart of God in the new creature.

3\. It is a practicable aspiration. We sometimes sigh for the
impossible. But this may be attained by divine grace.

4\. It is an intense aspiration. It is the "Oh!" of a burning wish.

5\. It is an influential aspiration. It does not evaporate in sighs. It
is a mighty incentive implanted by grace which will not let us rest
without holiness. - W. J.

[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006). - See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1443: "A Clear Conscience."

[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006). - Holy confidence the
offspring of universal obedience.

[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006). - The armour of proof.

I. Universal obedience will give unabashed confidence -

1\. Before the criticising world.

2\. In the court of conscience.

3\. At the throne of grace.

4\. In the day of judgment.

II\. But our obedience is far from universal, and leaves us open to -

1\. The world's shafts.

2\. The rebukes of conscience.

3\. It paralyses our prayers, and,

4\. It dares not appear for us at the bar of God.

III\. Then let us by faith wrap ourselves in the perfect righteousness
of Christ. Our answer to the world's cavil. We are not faultless, and
for salvation we rest wholly on another. This righteousness is -

1\. The salve of our wounded conscience.

2\. Our mighty plea in prayer.

3\. Our triumphant vindication in the judgment day. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006). - Topic: - Self-respect
depends on respect for one greater than self. - W. D.

[Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007). - The best of praise, the
best of learning, the best of blendings, viz., praise and holiness.

[Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007). -

I. The professor of sacred music, "I will praise."

II\. The subject of his song - "Thee."

III\. The instrument, "Heart."

IV\. The instrument tuned: "Uprightness of heart."

V. The musician's training academy: "Judgments." - W. D.

[Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007). - Learning and praising.

I. They are two spiritual exercises. It is possible for learners and
singers to be carnal and sensual; but in this case they are employed
about the righteous ends, works, and ways of the Lord.

II\. They are two appropriate exercises. What can be more seemly than to
learn of God and to praise him?

III\. They are two profitable exercises. The expectations of the most
utilitarian are surpassed. The pleasure and the profit yield abundant
reward. Heart, head, life are all benefited.

IV\. They are two mutually-assisting exercises. In the one we are
receptive, and in the other communicative. By the one we are fitted to
do the other. By the former we are stimulated to do the latter. How
wonderfully the lesson is turned into a song, and the learner into a
singer. - W. D.

[Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007). -

I. Deficiency confessed, "When I shall have learned." This is essential
to growth. It is an admission all can truly make.

II\. Progress anticipated. He gave his heart to the work of learning. He
sought divine help.

III\. Praise promised. He promised it to God alone. He vowed it should
be sincere: "with upright heart." - W. Williams, 1882.

[Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008). -

I. A hopeful resolve for life.

II\. A dreadful fear.

III\. A series of considerations removing the fear.

[Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008). -

I. The resolution: "I will keep," etc.

II\. The petition: "O forsake me not utterly."

1\. Filial submission. I deserve it occasionally.

2\. Filial confidence. "Not utterly."

III\. The connection between the two. Obedience without prayer and
prayer without obedience are equally in vain. To make headway both oars
must be applied. God cannot abide lazy beggars, who while they can get
anything by asking will not work. - G. R.

[Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008). - "O forsake me not
utterly." Divine desertion deprecated.

I. The anguished prayer.

1\. Sovereign forsakings. Sovereignty is not arbitrariness or
capriciousness; perhaps its right definition is mysterious kingly love;
unknown now, but justified when revealed.

2\. Vicarious forsakings.

3\. Forsakings on account of sin. David, Jonah, and Peter. The seven
churches of Asia; the Jews. But to know what "utter" both in regard to
degree and time means, we must go to hell. Like one trembling on the
very verge of hell, he prays. Like belated traveller, in vast wood and
surrounded by beasts of prey, sighs at day's departure. Like the watch
on the raft, seeing the sail that he has shouted himself hoarse to stop
fading away in the sky line.

II\. Its doctrinal foundation. Where he condescendeth to dwell, his
abode is perpetual. He can only utterly forsake us because he was
deceived in us. He can only utterly forsake because baffled. Both imply
blasphemy. Thou who hatest putting away, thou who hast never yet utterly
forsaken any saint, make not me the solitary exception.

III\. Historical certainty of answer. The saint and the church in all
time delivered. It may tarry till "eventide," as in Cowper's case. His
face bore after death an expression of delighted surprise. - W. A.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). -

I. The young man's question.

II\. The wise man's reply.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). - In the word of God, when
applied to the heart by the Spirit of God, there is,

I. A sufficiency of light to discover to men the need of cleansing their
way.

II\. Sufficiency of energy for the cleansing their way.

III\. A sufficiency of pleasure to encourage them to choose to cleanse
their way.

IV\. A sufficiency of support to sustain them in their cleansed way. -
Theophilus Jones, in a "Sermon to the Young," 1829.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). - The word of God provides
for the cleansing of the way,

I. By pointing out to the young man the evil of the way.

II\. By discovering an infallible remedy for the disorders of his nature
- the salvation that is by Jesus Christ.

III\. By becoming a directory in all the paths of duty to which he may
be called. - Daniel Wilson, 1828.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). - The Psalmist's rules for
the attainment of holiness deduced from his own experience.

1\. Seek God with thy "whole heart" ([Psa
119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)). Be truly sensible of your
wants.

2\. Keep and remember what God says ([Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)): "Thy word have I hidden,"
etc.

3\. Reduce all this to practice ([Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)): "That I might not sin against
thee."

4\. Bless God for what he has given ([Psa
119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012)): "Blessed art thou," etc.

5\. Ask more ([Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012)): "Teach me
thy statutes."

6\. Be ready to communicate his knowledge to others ([Psa
119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013)): "With my lips have I
declared."

7\. Let it have a due effect on thy own heart ([Psa
119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014)), "I have rejoiced," etc.

8\. Meditate frequently upon them ([Psa
119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015)): "I will meditate," etc.

9\. Deeply reflect on them ([Psa
119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016)): "I will have respect," etc.
As food undigested will not nourish the body, so the word of God not
considered with deep meditation and reflection will not feed the soul.

10\. Having pursued the above course he should continue in it, and then
his happiness would be secured ([Psa
119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016)): "I will not forget thy word:
I will (in consequence) delight myself in thy statutes." - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). - A question and answer
for the young. The Bible is a book for young people. Here it intimates,

I. That the young man's way needs to be cleansed. His way of thinking,
feeling, speaking, acting.

II\. That he must take an active part in the work. The efficient cause
in the operation is God. Other good influences are also at work. But the
young man must be in hearty and practical sympathy with the work.

III\. That he must use the Bible for the purpose. This records facts,
presents incitations, enjoins precepts, utters promises, and sets up
examples, all which are adapted to make a young man holy. By reading,
studying, and imitating the Scriptures in a lowly and prayerful spirit
the young shall escape pollution and ornament society. - W. D.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009). - A word to the young.

I. Show how the young man is in special danger of defiling his way.
Through,

1\. His strong passions.

2\. His immature judgment.

3\. His inexperience.

4\. His rash self-sufficiency.

5\. His light companions, and,

6\. His general heedlessness.

II\. The circumspection he should use to cleanse his way. "Taking heed,"

1\. Of his evil propensities.

2\. Of his companions.

3\. Of his pursuits.

4\. Of the tendencies of all he does.

III\. The infallible guide by which his circumspection is to be
regulated, "according to thy word" - that is to say,

1\. Its precepts.

2\. Its examples.

3\. Its motives.

4\. Its warnings.

5\. Its allurements. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010). -

I. A grateful review.

II\. An anxious forecast.

III\. A commendable prayer.

[Psa 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010). - The believer's two
great solicitudes.

1\. What he is anxious to find: "I have sought thee."

2\. What he is afraid of losing: "Thy commandments." - W. D.

[Psa 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010). - Sincerity not
self-sufficiency.

I. The believer must be conscious of whole-heartedness in seeking God.

II\. But consciousness of sincerity does not warrant self-sufficiency.

III\. The most whole-hearted seeker must still look to divine grace to
keep him from wandering. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011). - The best thing, in the
best place, for the best of purposes.

[Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012). - The blessedness of God,
and the mode of entering into it.

[Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012). -

I. David gives glory to God: "Blessed art thou, O Lord."

II\. He asks grace from God. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012). -

I. What it is, or how God doth teach us.

1\. God doth teach us outwardly; by his ordinances, by the ministry of
men.

2\. Inwardly; by the inspiration and work of the Holy Ghost.

II\. The necessity of his teaching.

III\. The benefit and utility of it. - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012). - Desire for Divine
Teaching excited by the Recognition of Divine Blessedness.

I. Unveil in some inadequate degree the happiness of the ever blessed
God, arising from his purity, benevolence, love.

II\. Show the way in which man may become partaker of that blessedness
by conformity to his precepts.

III\. Utter the prayer of the text. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013). - Speech fitly employed.
It is occupied with a choice subject, a full subject, a subject
profitable to men, and glorifying to God.

[Psa 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014). - Practical religion, the
source of a comfort surpassing riches. It gives a man ease of mind,
independence of carriage, weight of influence, and other matters
supposed to arise out of wealth.

[Psa 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014). -

I. The subject of rejoicing. Not the "testimonies" merely, but their
observances, "the way of," etc.

II\. The rejoicing in that subject.

1\. In its inward peace.

2\. In its external consequences.

III\. The degree of the rejoicing, "as much as," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014). - The two scales of the
balance. Whatever riches are good for, God's testimonies are good for.

I. Riches are desirable as the means of procuring the necessaries of
life; but God's testimonies supply the necessities of the soul.

II\. Riches are desirable as a means of procuring personal enjoyment;
but God's testimonies produce the highest joy.

III\. Riches are desirable as a means of attaining personal improvement;
but God's testimonies are the highest educators.

IV\. Riches are desirable as a means of doing good; but God's
testimonies work the highest good. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015). - The contemplative and
active life; their common food, object, and reward.

[Psa 119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016). -

I. What there is to be delighted in.

II\. What comes of such delight "I will never forget."

III\. What comes of such memory - more delight.

[Psa 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017). -

I. A bountiful master.

II\. A needy servant - begging for very life.

III\. A suitable recompense: "and keep thy word."

[Psa 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017). - We are here taught,

I. That we owe our lives to God's mercy.

II\. That therefore we ought to spend our lives in God's service. -
Matthew Henry.

[Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018). -

I. The precious casket: "thy law."

II\. The invisible treasure: "wondrous things."

III\. The miraculous eyesight, "that I may behold."

IV\. The divine oculist, "Open thou mine eyes."

[Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018). - The hidden wonders of
the gospel. There are many hidden things in nature; many in our fellow
men; so there are many in the Bible. The things of the Bible are hidden
because of the blindness of man.

I. The blind man's sorrow: "Open mine eyes." I cannot see. I have eyes
and see not. The pain of this conscious blindness when a man really
feels it.

II\. The blind man's conviction, "That I may behold wondrous," etc.
There are wondrous things there to be seen. I am sure of it. There is a
wonderful view, -

\(1\) of sin;

\(2\) of hell, as its desert;

\(3\) of One ready to save;

\(4\) of perfect pardon;

\(5\) of God's love;

\(6\) of all-sufficient grace;

\(7\) of heaven.

III\. The blind man's wisdom. The fault is in my eyes, not in thy word.
"Open my eyes," and all will be well. The reason for not seeing is
because the eyes are blinded by sin. There is nothing wanting in the
Bible.

IV\. The blind man's prayer: "Open thou mine eyes."

1\. I cannot open them.

2\. My dearest friends cannot.

3\. Only thou canst. "Lord, I pray thee, now open them." Many seek to
stop such praying. Be like Bartimeus who "cried so much the more."

V. The blind man's anticipation: "That I may behold."

1\. The joy of a cured blind man when he is about to behold, for the
first time, the beauties of nature.

2\. The joy of the spiritually healed when they begin "looking unto
Jesus."

3\. The personal character of the joy: "Open thou mine eyes, that I may
behold." I have hitherto had to see through the eyes of others. I would
depend on other eyes no longer. The glad anticipation of Job: "Whom I
shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall behold, and not another." -
Frederick G. Merchant, 1882.

[Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018). - God's word suited to
man's sense of wonder.

I. We shall make some remarks on the sense of wonder in man, and what
generally excites it. One of the first causes of wonder is the new or
unexpected. The second source is to be found in things beautiful and
grand. A third source is the mysterious which surrounds man - there are
things unknowable.

II\. God has made provision for this sense of wonder in his revealed
word. The Bible addresses our sense of wonder by constantly presenting
the new and unexpected to us; it sets before us things beautiful and
grand. If we come to the third source of wonder, that which raises it to
awe, it is the peculiar province of the Bible to deal with this.

III\. The means we are to use in order to have God's word thus unfolded
- the prayer of the Psalmist may be our guide - "Open thou mine eyes,
that I may behold wondrous things out of thy law." - John Ker, of
Glasgow, 1877.

[Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018). - Wondrous sights for
opened eyes.

I. The wondrous things in God's law. A wondrous rule of life. A wondrous
curse against transgression. A wondrous redemption from the curse
shadowed forth in the ceremonial law.

II\. Special eyesight needed to behold them. They are spiritual things.
Men are spiritually blind. [Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014).

III\. Personal prayer to the Great Opener of eyes. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019). - An insight into the
divine will, the best assistance in our journey through the earth. Or,
what I am; where I am; where I am going; how am I to get there?

[Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019) (first clause). - The
stranger in the earth.

I. A short exposition. The text means, -

1\. That the saint is not born of the earth.

2\. That the saint is not known on earth.

3\. The saint's portion is not upon the earth.

4\. The saint is compassed with sorrows and trials upon earth.

5\. The saint is soon to leave the earth.

II\. A short application.

1\. Do not be like the world.

2\. Be prepared to be a sufferer on the earth.

3\. Sit loose to the world.

4\. Correspond with home.

5\. Cherish brotherly love for your fellow-strangers on the earth.

6\. Hasten home.

7\. Press others to come with you. - Duncan Macgregor's Sermon in "The
Shepherd in Israel," 1869.

[Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019). - The stranger's prayer.

I. How he came to be a stranger in the earth. He was born again. He
learned the manners of his foreign home. He spoke the language of his
Fatherland; and so was misunderstood and rejected on earth.

II\. How he longed after everything homelike. Home rules: "thy
commandments." Home teaching, "hide not." Specially his Father's voice.

III\. How in his loneliness he, solaced himself by communication with
his Father.

IV\. Would you not like to be a stranger? - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020). -

I. The word sought, and sought at all times.

II\. The word sought, and sought with intense desire.

III\. The word sought, and sought the more intensely the more it is
found. It was because he had found so much in the word of the Lord
already, that the soul of the Psalmist was breaking to find more. Those
who have been once admitted to "the secret of the Lord" find their
highest joy in knowing that secret still more fully. It is to those who
know that secret that the promise is given - "He will shew them his
covenant'" [Psa 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014). - F. G. M.

[Psa 119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020). - One of the best tests
of character and prophecies of what a man will be, are his longings.

I. The saint's absorbing object, "Thy judgments." The word here is
synonymous with the "word" of God.

1\. The Psalmist greatly reverenced the word.

2\. He intensely desired to know its contents.

3\. He wishes to feed upon God's word.

4\. He longed to obey it.

5\. He longed to feel the power of God's judgments in his own heart.

II\. The saint's ardent longings.

1\. They constitute a living experience.

2\. The expression used in the text represents a humble sense of
imperfection.

3\. It indicates an advanced experience.

4\. It is an experience which we may term a bitter sweet.

5\. These longings may become very wearying to a man's soul.

III\. Cheering reflections.

1\. God is at work in your soul.

2\. The result of God's work is very precious.

3\. It is leading on to something more precious.

4\. The desire itself is doing you good.

5\. It makes Christ precious. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1586, "Holy
Longings."

[Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021). -

I. The character of the proud.

II\. God's dealings with them.

III\. Our own relation to them.

[Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021). -

I. The sin; "Err from the commandments."

1\. By neglect; or,

2\. By abuse of them.

II\. Its origin - pride: pride of reason, of heart, of life.

III\. Its punishment.

1\. Rebuke.

2\. Condemnation. - G. R.

[Psa 119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023). - Meditation.

I. Our best employment while others slander.

II\. Our best comfort under their falsehood.

III\. Our best preservative from a spirit of revenge.

IV\. Our best mode of showing our superiority to their attacks.

[Psa 119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024). -

I. He reverenced them as God's testimonies.

II\. He revelled in them as his delight.

III\. He referred to them as his counsellors.

[Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025). -

I. Nature and its tendency.

II\. Grace and its mode of operation.

III\. Both truths in their personal application.

[Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025). - "Quicken thou me," etc.

I. There are many reasons why we should seek quickening.

1\. Because of the deadening influence of the world. "My soul cleaveth,"
etc.

2\. The influence of vanity (see [Psa
119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037)).

3\. Because we are surrounded by deceivers (see [Psa 119:87, 19
119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087)).

4\. Because of the effect of seasons of affliction upon us (see [Psa
119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007)).

II\. Some of the motives for seeking quickening.

1\. Because of what you are - a Christian; life seeks more life.

2\. Because of what you ought to be.

3\. Because of what we shall be.

4\. In order to obedience (see [Psa
119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088)).

5\. For your comfort ([Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107) and
[Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050)).

6\. As the best security against the attacks of enemies ([Psa
119:87-88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087)).

7\. To invigorate our memories ([Psa
119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093)).

8\. Consider (as a motive to seek this quickening) the terrible
consequences of losing spiritual life or, in other words, lacking it in
its manifest display.

III\. Some of the ways in which the quickening may be brought to us.

1\. It must be by the Lord himself. "Quicken me, O Lord."

2\. By the turning of the eyes ([Psa
119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037)).

3\. By the word ([Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050)).

4\. By the precepts ([Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093)).

5\. By affliction ([Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)).

6\. By divine comforts.

IV\. Enquire where are our pleas when we come before God to ask for
quickening.

1\. Our necessity ([Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107),
etc.).

2\. Our earnest desire ([Psa 119:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040)).

3\. Appeal to God's righteousness ([Psa
119:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040)).

4\. To his lovingkindness ([Psa
119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088), [Psa
119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149), [Psa
119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156)).

5\. The plea in the text: "according to thy word" ([Psa
119:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#028) and [Psa
119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)). See "Spurgeon's Sermons,"
No. 1350: "Enlivening and Invigorating."

[Psa 119:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#026). - Confession. Absolution.
Instruction.

[Psa 119:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#026). -

I. The duty: "I have declared my ways" - made known my experience of thy
word to others.

II\. Its notice by God, "Thou heardest me."

III\. Its reward. More knowledge will be given: "Teach me," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#027). -

I. A student's prayer.

1\. It deals with the main subject of the conversation which is to be
that student's occupation - '"the way of God's precepts."

2\. A confession is implied, "Make me," etc.

3\. A great boon is asked to understand, to know, thy statutes.

4\. The Fountain of all wisdom is applied to.

II\. The occupation of the instructed man.

1\. He testifies of God's works - his wondrous works - Christ's work for
us; the Holy Spirit's work in us. The wonderful character of these works
of God, a wide field for devout study.

2\. He speaks very plainly: "I will talk," etc.

3\. He will speak very frequently: "I will talk."

4\. He will speak to the point: "So" - i.e., according to understanding.

III\. The intimate relation between the prayer of the student and the
pursuit that he subsequently followed. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No.
1344: "The Student's Prayer."

[Psa 119:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#027). - Education for the
ministry.

I. The student at college: "Make me to understand." His lesson. His
instructor. His application.

II\. The preacher at his work: "So shall I talk," etc. His
qualification. His theme. His manner. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#028). - Heaviness, its cause,
curse, and cure.

[Psa 119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029). - The way of lying.

I. Describe the way of lying. Various paths, e.g., erroneous views of
doctrine: false grounds of faith: looseness of practice: shrinking from
the daily cross.

II\. Show why it is thus named. It does not furnish its promised
pleasures. It does not lead to its professed goal. It lies through the
territory of the father of lies.

III\. Notice the peculiarity in the prayer against it. Not remove me
from, but remove from me: for the way of lying is within us.

IV\. Our deliverance from the way of lying lies with God. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029), [Psa
119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030). -

I. The way of lying, our wish to have it removed, and the method of
answer.

II\. The way of truth, our choice, and the method of carrying it out.

[Psa 119:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#031). - Reasons for sticking to
the Divine testimonies.

[Psa 119:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#031). - A wholesome mixture.

I. Sturdy fidelity.

II\. Self-distrust, and,

III\. Importunate prayer. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032). - The Fettered Racer set
free.

I. The course that invited him.

II\. The shackles that bound him.

III\. The impatience that prompted him.

IV\. The Lord that freed him.

V. Now let him go. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032). -

I. Liberty desired.

II\. Liberty rightly used. Or, the effect of the heart upon the feet.

[Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032). - The text will give us
occasion to speak,

I. Of the benefit of an enlarged heart.

II\. The necessary precedency of this work on God's part, before there
can be any serious bent or motion of heart towards God on our part.

III\. The subsequent resolution of the saints to engage their hearts to
live to God.

IV\. With what earnestness, alacrity and vigour of spirit this work is
to be carried on: "I will run." - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032). -

I. The way of obedience. "Thy commandments."

II\. The duty of obedience, "I will run" - not stand still - not loiter
- not creep - not walk, but run.

III\. The life of obedience.

1\. Where it lies - in the heart.

2\. Whence it comes: "When thou shalt," etc.

3\. What it does - enlarges the heart. - G. R.

[Psa 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033). - In this prayer for
grace observe,

1\. The person to whom he prays. "O Lord."

2\. The person for whom: "teach me."

3\. The grace for which he prayeth, to be taught.

4\. The object of this teaching: "The way of thy statutes." The teaching
which he beggeth, is not speculative, but practical, to learn how to
walk in the way of God. - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033). - The superior efficacy
of divine teaching - it secures holy practice and insures its
perpetuity.

[Psa 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033), [Psa
119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034). - Light from above.

I. The blinding power of sin. "Teach me," i.e., "point out to me." "Give
me understanding." Whatever may have been the original amount of light
which came from eating from the tree of knowledge of good and evil, that
light has long been insufficient.

1\. Men need light to discern the right way from the wrong.

2\. Men need light to understand the beauties of the right way. Such
beauties line the way of truth on either hand, but only the God - taught
mind appreciates them. Even Jesus, who is the way, the truth, and the
life, is as a root out of a dry ground, till the mind is taught of the
Lord. Sin is the cause of this blindness. The farther any man walks in
the way of sin, the less can he see of the beauties of holiness.

II\. The enlightening grace of the Lord. "Teach me." "Give me
understanding." This grace,

1\. May be boldly asked: "If any man lack wisdom let him ask of God."

2\. Will be freely given. "Who giveth to all men liberally." "Ask, and
it shall be given."

3\. Will be amply sufficient. "I shall keep it unto the end." "I shall
keep Thy law." To see is to follow.

III\. The stimulating power of clearly revealed truth. "I shall observe
it with my whole heart." To see is not only to follow, but to follow
with love and gladness. It is written of the light which will come
before the throne, "We shall be like him, for we shall see him as he
is." "O thou, that dwellest between the Cherubim, shine forth," even
here, on the way that leads to thy presence. - F. G. M.

[Psa 119:33-35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033). - Alpha and Omega.

I. God, the giver of spiritual instruction: [Psa
119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033).

II\. Of spiritual understanding, without which this instruction is in
vain: [Psa 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034).

III\. Of grace for practical obedience when thus instructed: [Psa
119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035).

IV\. For whole-hearted obedience: [Psa
119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034).

V. For final perseverance: [Psa
119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:33-36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033). - Human Dependence on
Divine help.

I. There can be no steady keeping in the way of the Lord without the
Lord's guidance: [Psa 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033).

II\. There can be no observing of the way with the heart without Divine
light for the mind: [Psa 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034).

III\. There can be no diligent pursuit of the way till divine energy be
given to the will: [Psa 119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035).

IV\. There can be no true love of the way unless the heart be
constrained by the love of God: [Psa
119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036). He who said, "Without me ye
can do nothing," is necessary for us to see the way, to understand the
way, to walk in the way, and to love the way. - F. G. M.

[Psa 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034). - The influence of the
understanding upon the heart, and the united power of understanding and
heart over the life.

[Psa 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034). - Seeing and loving.

I. When men see they love (the whole verse).

II\. When men love they see. Only the loving heart would have seen
enough to write such a verse. - F. G. M.

[Psa 119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035). - The prayer of a child,
and the delight of a child. Or, Our pleasure in holiness a plea for
grace.

[Psa 119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035). -

I. Delight avowed.

II\. Disinclination implied.

III\. Constraint implored. - W. W.

[Psa 119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036). - Holiness a cure for
covetousness.

[Psa 119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036), [Psa
119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112). - The Co-operation of the
Divine and the Human in Salvation.

I. It is God that worketh in you: [Psa
119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036).

II\. Therefore work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, [Psa
119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037). - "Quicken thou me in thy
way." This brief prayer -

I. Deals with the believer's frequent need.

II\. It directs us to the sole worker of quickening: "Thou."

III\. It describes the sphere of renewed vigour: "in thy way."

IV\. It denotes that there may be special reasons and special seasons
for this prayer - times of temptation: [Psa
119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037); seasons of affliction, [Psa
119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107); when called to some
extraordinary service. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1073: "A
Honeycomb."

[Psa 119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037). - Here is,

I. Conversion from - '"vanity."

II\. Conversion to - '"thy way.

III\. Conversion by - '"Quicken thou me." - G. R.

[Psa 119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037). - David prays,

\(1\) for restraining grace that he might be prevented and kept back
from that which would hinder him in the way of his duty: "Turn away mine
eyes from beholding vanity."

\(2\) He prays for constraining grace, that he might not only be kept
from everything that would obstruct his progress heaven-ward, but that
he might have that grace which was necessary to forward him in that
progress: "Quicken thou me in thy way." - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038). - Confirmation. What?
"Thy word established." To whom? "Unto thy servant." Why? "Who is
devoted," etc.

[Psa 119:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038). - Fear of God evidences
itself,

1\. By a dread of his displeasure.

2\. Desire of his favour.

3\. Regard for his excellencies.

4\. Submission to his will.

5\. Gratitude for his benefits.

6\. Conscientious obedience to his commands. - Charles Buck.

[Psa 119:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038). - The four kinds of fear.

1\. The fear of man, by which we are led rather to do wrong than to
suffer evil.

2\. Servile fear, through which we are induced to avoid sin only from
the dread of hell.

3\. Initial fear, in which we avoid sin partly from the fear of hell,
but partly also from the love of God, which is the fear of ordinary
Christians.

4\. Filial fear, when we are afraid to disobey God only and altogether
from the love we bear him. [Jer 32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040).
- Ayguan, in J. Edward Vaux's "Preacher's Storehouse," 1878.

[Psa 119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039). -

I. Man's judgment dreaded.

II\. God's judgment approved.

[Psa 119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039). - The reproach of
inconsistency.

I. The dishonour caused by it ([Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)).

II\. The danger of incurring it.

III\. The prayer against it. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040). -

I. Gracious longings experienced.

II\. Great necessity felt - more life needed.

III\. Wise petition offered.

[Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041). - See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1524, "Your Personal Salvation."

[Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041). -

I. God's mercies come to us unsought continually. His sparing mercies,
temporal mercies, etc.

II\. The chief outcome of God's mercies is his salvation. It is our
greatest need; it is his greatest gift.

III\. We should have a personal interest in this salvation - "Let thy
mercies come also unto me."

IV\. When we seek God's salvation, we may plead his promise. "according
to thy word." - Horatio Wilkins, 1882.

[Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041). - "Even me."

I. In me there is need of mercy.

II\. To me mercy can come.

III\. Thy salvation suits me.

IV\. Special difficulties would daunt me.

V. Thy word encourages me.

[Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041). -

I. Salvation is all of mercy.

II\. All mercies are in salvation.

III\. All men should be anxious for salvation to come to them.

IV\. It can only come according to God's word. - W. W.

[Psa 119:41-43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041). - A Comprehensive
Prayer.

I. The possession of salvation, [Psa
119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041).

II\. Is the power for defence, [Psa
119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042).

III\. And the qualification for usefulness, [Psa
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042). - Faith's answer to
reproach found in the fact that she trusts God's word.

[Psa 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042), [Psa
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043), [Psa
119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047). - Faith, hope, and love. "I
trust." "I have hoped." "I have loved." Faith warring, hope testifying,
love obeying.

[Psa 119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043). - How the true preacher
could be silenced, and his plea that he may not be so.

[Psa 119:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#044). - The perpetuity of
gracious living. On what it is conditioned. "So." How entirely it is
consistent with free agency. "I keep." How continuous it is, and how
eternal.

[Psa 119:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#044). - Heaven begun below.

I. The present life of the believer - keeping God's law.

II\. The continual care of the believer - to keep God's law.

III\. The eternal prospect of the believer - keeping God's law for ever
and ever. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:45-47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045). - Liberty of walk.
Liberty of speech. Liberty of heart.

[Psa 119:45-48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045). - The true freeman
enjoys -

1\. Free walk with God.

2\. Free talk about God.

3\. Free love unto God.

4\. Free exercise of soul,

\(1\) in holy practice;

\(2\) in heavenly meditation. - W. Durban.

[Psa 119:45-48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045). - Five things the
Psalmist promiseth himself here in the strength of God's grace.

1\. That he should be free and easy in his duty, "I will walk at
liberty."

2\. That he should be bold and courageous in his duty, "I will speak of
thy testimonies also before kings."

3\. That he should be cheerful and pleasant in his duty. "I will delight
myself in thy commandments."

4\. That he should be diligent and vigorous in his duty: "I will delight
myself in thy commandments."

5\. That he should be thoughtful and considerate in his duty: "I will
meditate in thy statutes." M. Henry.

[Psa 119:46-48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046). - Lips, heart, and
hands.

I. Public profession of God's word ("I will speak," [Psa
119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)) must be warranted by -

II\. Private delight in God's word ("I will delight, myself," [Psa
119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047)), which must result in -

III\. Practical obedience to God's word ("I will lift up my hands," [Psa
119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048)).

[Psa 119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046). -

I. The truly earnest must speak.

II\. They are at no loss for good subjects - "Thy testimonies." The
range is boundless - the variety endless.

III\. They never fear any audience. "before kings." - W. W.

[Psa 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048). -

I. Love renewing its activity.

II\. Love refreshing itself with spiritual food.

[Psa 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048). -

I. Scripture in the hand for reading. Often in the hand.

II\. In the mind for meditation: "I will meditate," etc.

III\. In the heart for love: "Which I have loved." - G. R.

[Psa 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048). - Religion engaged the
whole manhood of David: hands, heart, head.

I. The uplifted hands.

1\. Taking an oath of allegiance to God's word. [Gen
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022); [Eze
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#028). To receive its doctrines, obey
its precepts, regard its warnings, uphold its honour.

2\. Imploring a blessing upon God's word. [Gen
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014); [Lev
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#022); [Luk
24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050). That its light might spread:
"Fly abroad, thou mighty gospel;" that its influence may become
universal.

II\. The loyal heart.

1\. This accounts for uplifted hands. He had loved the word himself.
Religion is inward first, then outward. We must love it before we are
anxious to spread it.

2\. But what accounts for the loyal heart? The word had brought him
salvation, yielded him sustenance, afforded him guidance. We love the
word for its joyous effects upon ourselves.

III\. The studious mind.

1\. Devout meditation the best employment.

2\. The word of God affords a grand field for it.

3\. To meditate in it learn to love it: "have loved," "will meditate." -
W. W.

[Psa 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048). -

I. God's commandments loved. We love the law when we love the Lawgiver.
We love his will only when our hearts are reconciled and renewed. Hence
the need of spiritual renewal.

II\. God's commandments the subject of prayer: "My hands also will I
lift up." Perowne says, "The expression denotes the act of prayer." We
may pray for a fuller knowledge, a deeper experience, a readier and more
perfect obedience.

III\. A theme for meditation. Amidst the hurry of outward activities we
must not forget the need of quiet meditation. -H. W.

[Psa 119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049). -

I. The personality of the word: "the word unto thy servant."

II\. The application of the word: "upon which thou hast caused me to
hope."

III\. The pleading of the word: "Remember the word," etc.

[Psa 119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049). - The word of hope.

I. God's word the foundation of human hope. (The fact of a revelation.
The substance of the revelation.)

II\. Particular words of God which have been found peculiarly
hope-enkindling.

III\. The pleading of such words at the throne of grace. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050). - Each man has his own
affliction and his own consolation. Quickened piety the best comfort.
The word the means of it.

[Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050). -

I. The need of consolation.

II\. The consolation needed. - G. R.

[Psa 119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051). - The proud man's
contumely, and the gracious man's constancy.

[Psa 119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051). - Fidelity in the face of
contempt.

I. The proud deride the believer's subjection to God's law.

II\. They ridicule the believer's delight in God's service.

III\. They are met by the believer's resolution to cleave to God. [Sa2
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020), [Sa2
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#022). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052). - Comfort derived from a
review of the ancient doings of the Lord towards the wicked and his
people.

[Psa 119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052). -

I. The dead speaking to the living.

II\. The living listening to the dead. - G. R.

[Psa 119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052). - Sweet water from a dark
well.

I. God's judgments are calculated to inspire terror.

II\. But they prove God's superintending care over the world.

III\. They are ever against sin, and for holiness.

IV\. In all times of judgment God delivers his people. Noah, Lot, etc.

V. Therefore God's judgments are a source of comfort to the believer. -
C. A. D.

[Psa 119:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#053). - The sensations of godly
men at the sight of sinners' horror at their crime, their perseverance
in it, their rejection of grace, and their end.

[Psa 119:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#053). - Horror-stricken.

I. The guilt and danger of impenitent sinners.

II\. The horror and concern of godly spectators.

III\. The prayer and labour which such concern should dictate. - C. A.
D.

[Psa 119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054). - Here is -

I. Light in darkness.

II\. Companionship in solitude.

III\. Activity in rest: "house of pilgrimage." - G. R.

[Psa 119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054). - The cheerful pilgrim.

I. A good man views his residence in this world as only the house of his
pilgrimage.

II\. The situation, however disadvantageous, admits of cheerfulness.

III\. The sources of his joy are derived from the Scriptures. - W. Jay.

[Psa 119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054). - See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1652: "The Singing Pilgrim."

[Psa 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055) with [Psa
119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049). - "Remember." "I have
remembered."

[Psa 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055). - Night memories. Day
duties. How they act and react upon each other.

[Psa 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055). - Dark nights. Bright
memories. Right results. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055). -

I. Happy though restless night.

II\. Happy though busy day. - W. D.

[Psa 119:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#056). - The gains of godliness;
or, what a man gets through holy living.

[Psa 119:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#056). -

I. The duty: "I kept thy precepts."

II\. Its reward: "This I had," etc. Protection: "this I had." Guidance:
"this I had." Prosperity: "this I had." Consolation: "this I had." - G.
R.

[Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057). -

I. The infinite possession: "Thou art my portion, O Lord." Notice -

1\. A clear distinction made by the Psalmist between his portion and
that of the ungodly here and hereafter: See Ps. 73.

2\. A positive claim: "Thou art my portion, O Lord." This "portion" is
boundless, abiding, appropriate, satisfying, elevating, all of grace.

II\. The appropriate resolution: "I have said that I would keep thy
words."

1\. Notice the preface: "I have said."

2\. The link between the portion possessed and the resolution made.

3\. The work of keeping God's words. Keep him who is the Word - Christ
Jesus. Keep the word of the gospel - doctrines, precepts, promises (kept
in the heart to comfort the believer). This blessed subject suggests a
solemn contrast. See the portion of that servant who did not keep his
Lord's word: Matt. 29:48-51. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1372: "God
our Portion, and his Word our Treasure."

[Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057) (first clause). - The
believer's portion.

I. Show the validity of his claim: "my."

1\. A gift by covenant, [Heb 8:10-13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010).

2\. Involved in joint heirship with Christ: [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017).

3\. Confirmed by the experience of faith.

II\. Survey the superlative value of his possession: "The Lord."

1\. Absolutely good.

2\. Infinitely precious.

3\. Inexhaustibly full.

4\. Everlastingly sure.

III\. Suggest a method of deriving the greatest present advantage from
it.

1\. Meditate much upon God, under the conviction that he is your
portion.

2\. Carry all cares to him, and cast every burden on him.

3\. Refer every temptation to the word of his law, and every doubt to
the word of his promise.

4\. Draw largely upon his riches to meet every need as it arises. - John
Field, 1882.

[Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057), [Psa
119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058). - The believer's estate,
profession, and petition.

[Psa 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058). - The soul's sunshine.

I. God's favour the one thing needful.

II\. Whole-heartedness the one mode of entreating it.

III\. Covenant mercy the one plea for obtaining it. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058). - We may learn how a
seeker may come to enjoy saving favour, by a careful study of -

I. The Profession: "I intreated thy favour with my whole heart."

1\. What he did: "I intreated." Heb. "I painfully sought thy face."
Earnest desire. Importunate supplication. Painful sorrow for sin.

2\. How he did it: "With my whole heart." The intellect, affections,
will, all engaged and concentrating effort. Otherwise, seeking is solemn
trifling. This only worthy of our purpose, pleasing to God, and
successful.

3\. The evidence that we are doing it. Frequent prayer, searching the
word, often enquiring. The first and main business - Giving up for
Christ.

II\. The Petition: "Be merciful unto me."

1\. God's favour to be expected on the terms of mercy only.

2\. Happily, this is a prayer every sinner can and should use.

3\. Blessedly true it is, that it never fails.

III\. The Plea: "According to thy word."

1\. A plea that cannot be gainsaid is a great thing in an entreaty.

2\. The promise of God is just such a plea.

3\. Seek it out, lay hold of it, and urge it. - J. F.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059). -

I. Self-examination: "I thought on" my private "ways" - my social ways -
my sacred ways - my public ways.

II\. Its advantages: "And turned my feet," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059). -

I. Unthinking and straying.

II\. Thinking and turning. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059). -

I. Conviction.

II\. Conversion. - W. D.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059). - Thinking on our own
ways. Enquire,

I. Why so generally neglected?

1\. Want of courage.

2\. Occupied too much.

3\. Unpleasant, and therefore the chief care of many is to banish it.

II\. When is it wisely conducted?

1\. When honestly engaged in.

2\. When thoroughly carried out.

3\. When Scripture is made the referee and standard.

4\. When Divine help is sought.

III\. What end will it serve?

1\. Turn us from our own ways with shame and penitence.

2\. Turn us to God's testimonies with earnestness, reverence, and
hopefulness. - J. F.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059). -

I. Right thinking: "I thought on my ways."

1\. That this thought upon his ways caused the Psalmist dissatisfaction
is evident.

2\. Right thinking upon our ways will suggest a practical change.

3\. The retrospect we take of our life should suggest that any turn we
make should be Godward: "Unto thy testimonies."

4\. Right thinking also suggests that such a turning is possible.

II\. Right turning. The turn was -

1\. Complete.

2\. Practical.

3\. Spiritual.

4\. Immediate.

5\. It must be a divine work. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1181,
"Thinking and Turning."

[Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060). - The dangers of delay.
The reasons for prompt action.

[Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060). - A sermon to loiterers.

I. Reflection. Keeping God's commandments is my duty; is my welfare.
Commandments delayed may be never kept. Delay is in itself disobedience.
Alacrity is the soul of obedience.

II\. Resolve. I will make haste and delay not. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060). -

I. Quick.

II\. Sure. - W. D.

[Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060). - Procrastination
considered in its most important application; that is, to religion.

I. This procrastination is irrational.

II\. It is unpleasant, disagreeable, painful.

III\. It is disgraceful.

IV\. It is sinful, and that is the highest degree.

V. It is dangerous. - John Angell James.

[Psa 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061). -

I. Spiritual highway-robbery.

II\. The traveller keeping his road. Or, what enemies can do, and what
they cannot do.

[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062). -

I. The duty of gratitude, "give thanks."

II\. The subject for gratitude, "thy righteous judgments."

III\. The season for gratitude, at night as well as in the day. - G. R.

[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062). - Up in the night.
Singing in the night. Reasons for such singular conduct.

[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062). - The nightingale.

I. A natural association of thought, "midnight" and "judgments." Exod.
12, etc.

II\. An incongruous association of feeling, "thanks" and "judgments"

III\. A full justification of this apparent incongruity: "thanks because
of thy righteous judgments."

IV\. A vigorous performance of at, incumbent duty, "at midnight I will
rise to give thanks." - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063). -

I. True religion is friendly.

II\. Our friendliness should be catholic.

III\. Our friendliness should be discriminating.

IV\. Such friendliness is most useful.

[Psa 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063). - Of good and bad
company. How to avoid the one, and improve the other. See W. Bridge's
Sermon, in his works, vol. v., p. 90. Tegg's edition, 1845.

[Psa 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063). - The believer's choice
of companions.

I. Ought to be decided by their piety, "Them that fear thee."

II\. Is directed by their conduct, "Them that keep thy precepts."

III\. Should be extended as far as possible, "All."

IV\. Involves reciprocal obligation, "I am a companion." - J. F.

[Psa 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064). - The sum and substance
of this verse will be comprised in these five propositions: -

I. That saving knowledge is a benefit that must be asked of God.

II\. That this benefit cannot be too often or sufficiently enough asked,
it is his continual request.

III\. In asking, we are encouraged by the bounty or mercy of God.

IV\. That God is merciful all his creatures declare.

V. That his goodness to all his creatures should confirm us in hoping
for saving grace or spiritual good things - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064). -

I. Observations in the school of nature.

II\. Supplications to enter the school of grace.

[Psa 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064). - The mercy of God in
nature and his mercy as revealed in the word.

I. The one excellent; the other super-excellent.

II\. The one easily given; the other coming through a great sacrifice.

III\. The one may be enjoyed, and even increase condemnation; the other,
if enjoyed, is sure salvation.

IV\. The one should lead to repentance; the other is specially adapted
for the penitent's restoration to holiness. - J. F.

[Psa 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065). - The servant giving his
master a character; or, experience tallying with Scripture, two fruitful
themes.

[Psa 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065). -

I. Experience confirmed by the word.

II\. The word confirmed by experience. - G. R.

[Psa 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065). - A servant's story.

I. Although he knew my faults he engaged me.

II\. Although I am so far beneath him, yet, he familiarly teaches me.

III\. Although I am always ailing, he is very kind to me in my
afflictions.

IV\. Although I am one of the meanest of his servants, he permits me to
feast at his own table.

V. Although I do little work, he will pay me good wages.

VI\. Although I am to have such great wages, I have very many
perquisites.

VII\. Although my Master is all this to me (can you believe it?) I
murmur and repine at him if he crosses me in anything. Application: -

1\. Does not the word "servant" sound like a misnomer? - '"not servants
but I have called you friends."

2\. Though he calls me "friend," I shall never cease to call him
"Master." - Richard Andrew Griffin, in "Stems and Twigs."

[Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066). -

I. Singular faith: "I have believed thy commandment."

II\. Special petition based upon it: "Teach me."

[Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066). - The value of a good
judgment to sound knowledge.

I. It carefully discriminates between truth and error.

II\. It puts each truth in its proper relation to other truths.

III\. It holds every truth firmly, but has the greater care for the more
important.

IV\. It rather avoids the curious and the speculative, but really loves
the plain and useful.

V. Knowing that truths are rightly held only, when applied, it turns all
to practical account.

VI\. Knowing also, that good food may, under some circumstances, become
poisonous, it is careful in its selection and use of truths. - J. F.

[Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067). -

I. The dangers of prosperity.

II\. The benefits of adversity. - G. R.

[Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067). - The restraining power
of affliction.

[Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067), [Psa
119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071), [Psa
119:75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075). - Affliction thrice viewed and
thrice blessed.

I. Before affliction: straying.

II\. In affliction: learning.

III\. After affliction: knowing. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068). - The double plea for a
choice blessing. The goodness of God the hope of our ignorance.

[Psa 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068). - "Thou art good and
doest good." The nature and work of God are manifest in nature,
providence, grace, and glory. They are morally good; beneficially good;
perfectly good; immeasurably good; immutably good; experimentally good;
satisfactorily good. - W. J.

[Psa 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068) (first clause). - A sermon
on God's goodness.

I. The perfectness of it.

II\. The proofs of it.

III\. The power it should have over us. - J. F.

[Psa 119:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#069). - Whole-hearted obedience
the best solace under slander; the best answer to it; and the best way
of converting the slanderers.

[Psa 119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070). -

I. Fatty degeneration of the heart.

II\. Thorough regeneration of the heart.

[Psa 119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070). - A fatty heart.

I. The diagnosis of the disease.

II\. Its symptoms. Pride; no delight in God, nor in his law; dislike to
his people; readiness to lie: [Psa
119:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#069).

III\. Its fatal character.

IV\. Its only cure. [Psa 51:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#010); [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071). -

I. David knew what was good for him.

II\. David learned what is good essentially. Active obedience is learned
by passive obedience.

[Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071). - Affliction an
instructor.

I. Never welcomed: "Have been."

II\. Often impatiently endured.

III\. Always gratefully remembered: "It is good," etc.

IV\. Efficient for a perverse scholar: "That I might learn."

V. Indispensable in the education of all. - J. F.

[Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071). - The school of
affliction.

I. The reluctant scholar sent to school.

II\. The scholar's hard lesson.

III\. The scholar's blessed learning.

IV\. The scholar's sweet reflection. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072). - The advantages of
riches far excelled by the blessings of the word.

[Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072). - A valuation.

I. The saints' high estimate of God's law.

II\. Show when it was formed: in affliction: [Psa
119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071).

III\. Vindicate its truth - by illustrating the hollowness of riches,
and the satisfaction found in godliness. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072). - The word, better than
gold and silver.

I. It gives what gold and silver cannot purchase.

II\. Without what it gives, gold and silver may be a curse.

III\. Without gold and silver, it may yield its treasure more freely and
fully than with them.

IV\. The word and what it gives shall rejoice the heart when gold and
silver shall be useless to their disappointed worshippers. - J. F.

[Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072). - "The law of the mouth
is better," etc.

I. It is more refining, and makes me a better man.

II\. It is more enriching, and makes me a wealthier man.

III\. It is more distinguishing, and makes me a greater man.

IV\. It is more sustaining, and makes me a stronger man.

V. It is more preserving, and makes me a safer man.

VI\. It is more satisfying and makes me a happier man.

VII\. It is more lasting, and better suited to me as an immortal man. -
W. J.

[Psa 119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073). -

I. Consider the Lord's great care in our creation.

II\. See in it a reason for his perfecting the new creation within us.

III\. Observe the method of this perfecting.

[Psa 119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074). -

I. The encouraging influence of good men upon others.

II\. The Instructive influence of others upon them. - G. R.

[Psa 119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074). - Converse with a tried
but steadfast believer is a source of gladness to the children of God.

I. He has a thrilling tale of experience to tell.

II\. He has valuable counsels and cautions to give.

III\. He is a monument of God's faithfulness, confirming the hope of
others.

IV\. He is an epistle of Christ, written expressly to illustrate the
preciousness and the power of the gospel. - J. F.

[Psa 119:75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075). - Experimental knowledge,
positive, personal, glorifying to God, consoling to the saints.

[Psa 119:76](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#076). - Comfort.

I. May be a matter of prayer.

II\. Is provided for in the Lord.

III\. Is promised in the word.

IV\. Is of great value to the believer.

[Psa 119:76](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#076). -

I. The need of comfort.

II\. The source of comfort, "Thy merciful kindness"

III\. The rule of comfort, "According to thy word." - G. R.

[Psa 119:77](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#077). -

I. Visitors invited.

II\. Boon expected.

III\. Welcome guaranteed: "for thy law," etc.

[Psa 119:77](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#077). - Divine life - it is
born, sustained, increased, by God's tender mercies. - W. W.

[Psa 119:78](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#078). -

I. A hard thing - to make the proud ashamed.

II\. A cruel thing - "they dealt perversely with me," etc.

III\. A wise thing - '"but I will meditate," etc.

[Psa 119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079). - Restoration to church
fellowship.

I. Good men may be in such a case as to need to be restored.

II\. They should not be ashamed to seek it.

III\. They should pray about it.

[Psa 119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079). - Select society.

I. Sociableness is an instinct of human nature.

II\. Sociableness is helpful to a wholesome Christian life.

III\. The choice of society should be a subject of prayer. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080). -

I. David's prayer for sincerity - that his heart might be brought to
God's statutes, and that it might be sound in them, not rotten or
deceitful.

II\. His dread of the consequences of hypocrisy, "that I be not
ashamed." Shame is the portion of hypocrites, here or hereafter. - M.
Henry.

[Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080). -

I. The heart in religion.

II\. The necessity of its being sound in it.

III\. The result of such sound-heartedness.

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081). - Text suitable for a
missionary sermon.

I. The condition of the heathen world, enough to make the Christian
faint for the salvation of God to visit it.

1\. The grossness of its darkness.

2\. Its wide area.

3\. Its long continuance.

4\. The limited character and effort of mission labour.

5\. The opposing influences.

II\. This condition, though exceedingly sad, is not hopeless. Because -

1\. Of the intention, adaptation, and universal call of the gospel.

2\. Of Christ's commission to his church.

3\. Of the compassionate character of the spiritually enlightened,
produced by their faith in the word.

4\. Of the prophecies and promises. Thus, there is hope in the word.

III\. If Christians are fainting for the salvation, but hoping in the
word, their interest in mission work will be intense, and will show
itself.

1\. In earnest prayer for more labourers, and greater results.

2\. In devoting themselves, if possible, to the work.

3\. In free and generous giving, to help on the work. - J. F.

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081). - "My soul fainteth,"
etc. Men faint for health, provision, rest, promotion, success, and in
some instances for salvation. David fainted.

I. For his own salvation.

1\. From guilt, "Deliver me from all my transgressions"; "from
bloodguiltiness."

2\. From defilement, "Create in me a clean heart." "Wash me."

3\. From formality, "Let the words of my mouth," etc.

4\. From darkness, "Why hidest thou thyself? Lift up," etc. "Say unto my
soul," etc.

5\. From unhappiness, "Out of the depths," etc.

II\. For the salvation of others.

1\. He talked about it, "Time for thee to work, Lord."

2\. He prayed for it, "Oh that the salvation," etc. "Let thy work," etc.
"God be merciful unto us.... Save now, I beseech thee."

3\. He laboured for it, "I will make mention of thy righteousness.... I
will teach transgressors thy ways." - W. J.

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081). -

I. Eagerness expectation.

II\. Energy of hope.

III\. Establishment of promise, "in thy word."

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081). - "Salvation," in
Scripture, hath divers acceptations' it is put -

1\. For that temporal deliverance which God giveth, or hath promised to
give to his people, so it is taken. [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013).

2\. For the exhibition of Christ in the flesh. [Psa
98:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#002), [Psa
98:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#003); [Luk
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029), [Luk
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#030).

3\. For the benefits which we have by Christ on this side of heaven; as
the pardon of sin, and the renovation of our natures. [Mat
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#021); [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005); [Psa
51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012).

4\. For everlasting life, "Receiving the end of your faith, even the
salvation of your souls" ([Pe1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#009));
meaning thereby our final reward. - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081). -

I. Faint.

II\. Pursuing. - W. D.

[Psa 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082). - Answer to the enquiry -
'"When wilt thou comfort me?"

I. When your grief has answered its purpose.

II\. When you believe.

III\. When you leave sin.

IV\. When you obey.

V. When you submit to my will.

VI\. When you seek my glory.

[Psa 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082). -

I. How longingly the believer turns to God for comfort in his
affliction: "When wilt thou comfort me?"

II\. How intently he gazes upon the Divine promises, "My eyes fail for
thy word."

III\. How the weariness of waiting cannot wear out his patience, while
hope increases his importunity, "When wilt thou?" - J. F.

[Psa 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082). - The pleading of the
eyes.

I. How the eyes speak. By "expression" of the moods of the soul, as -
longing, [Isa 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#017); faith, [Isa
45:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#022); [Heb
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002); expectation, [Psa
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#003); [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020); [Tit
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013); love, [Co2
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).

II\. What the eyes say. "When wilt thou comfort me? Brushing aside all
other comforters, thou art my sun: my life, my love, my all."

III\. How the pleading eyes shall meet the responsive Eye of the Lord.
[Heb 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#018). In the look of the
recognition of grief, [Exo 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#025); in
the look of pardon, Luke 23:61; of strength-giving, Jud. [Luk
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#014); of complacent love, [Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083). -

I. The outward man in ill case.

II\. Character blackened.

III\. Constantly exposed to discomfort.

IV\. Contents maturing.

[Psa 119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083). - "A bottle in the
smoke."

I. God's people have their trials.

1\. From the poverty of their condition.

2\. Our trials frequently result from our comforts.

3\. The ministry hath made much smoke with it.

4\. The poor bottle in the smoke keeps there for a long time, till it
gets black.

II\. Christian men feel their troubles; they are like "bottles" in the
smoke.

1\. The trial that we do not feel is no trial at all.

2\. Trials which are not felt are unprofitable trials. A bottle in the
smoke gets very black, becomes very useless, is an empty bottle.

III\. Christians do not, in their troubles, forget God's statutes of
command, the statutes of promise. Why was it that David still held fast
by God's statutes?

1\. He was not a bottle in the fire, or he would have forgotten them.

2\. Jesus Christ was in the smoke with him, and the statutes were in the
smoke with him too.

3\. The statutes were in the soul, where the smoke does not enter. -
From "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 71.

[Psa 119:84](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#084). - A solemn question
pointing to the shortness of life, the severity of sorrow, the necessity
of industry, the nearness of the reward.

[Psa 119:85](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#085). - Pits; or, the secret
schemes of wicked men against the godly.

[Psa 119:86](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#086) (last clause). - A prayer
for all occasions. See the many cases in which it is used in Scripture.

[Psa 119:87](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087). -

I. What the good man loses by gaining.

II\. What he gains by losing. - G. R.

[Psa 119:87](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087). -

I. "Almost," but not altogether.

II\. The saving clause, "I forsook not thy precepts."

[Psa 119:87](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087). - Passing through fires,
and the asbestos covering.

[Psa 119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088). -

I. New life is the cause of new obedience.

II\. New obedience is the effect of new life. - G. R.

[Psa 119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088). - Quickening.

I. Our greatest need.

II\. God's most gracious boon.

III\. The guarantee of our steadfastness; and so,

IV\. The promoter of God's glory.

[Psa 119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088). -

I. He closes with a frequent petition, "Quicken thou me - make me
alive." All true religion consists in the LIFE Of God in the SOUL Of
man.

II\. The manner in which he wishes to be quickened: "Alter thy
lovingkindness." He wishes not to be raised from the death of sin by
God's thunder, but by the loving voice of a tender Father.

III\. The effect it should have upon him, "So shall I keep the testimony
of thy mouth." Whatever thou speakest I will hear, receive, love, and
obey. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 119:89-92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089). - The Psalmist here
tells us the prescription which soothed his pains and sustained his
spirits. Here we have strong consolation.

I. In certain facts which he remembered.

1\. The eternal existence of God.

2\. The immutability of his word.

3\. The faithfulness of the fulfilment of that word.

4\. The perpetuity of the word in nature.

5\. The perpetuity of the word in experience.

II\. The delights which he experienced in the time of his trouble. In
bereavements; when everything seemed shifting and inconstant; when his
own faith failed him; when all helpers failed him; he fell back upon the
eternal settlements, "O Lord, thy word is settled," etc. See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1656, "My Solace in my Affliction."

[Psa 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089). - Eternal settlements,
or, heavenly certainties.

[Psa 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089). - God's eternal calm (in
contrast with earth's mutations) imaged in the starry heavens. - William
Bickle Haynes, 1882.

[Psa 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089). - Consider,

I. The term, "thy word."

1\. A word is a revealed thought. The Scriptures are just this' the
thoughts and purposes of God made intelligible to man.

2\. But a "word" also marks specially unity (it is one word) and
wholeness or completeness, a word, not a syllable. The Scriptures are
one and complete.

II\. The statement, "for ever settled in heaven."

1\. "Settled in heaven" before it came to earth; therefore it could come
as a continuous unfolding, through various dispensations, without the
shadow of hesitation or contradiction manifest in it.

2\. Abides "settled in heaven," for its central revelation; the
atonement is a completed fact, and Christ is now in heaven a perfected
Saviour; thus the word is unalterable.

3\. "For ever settled in heaven." Not only because God in heaven is of
one mind and cannot be turned; but because righteousness itself, the
righteousness of heaven, demands that an atonement by suffering shall be
fully and ever - lastingly answered by its due reward.

III\. The lessons.

1\. If settled in heaven, men on earth can never unsettle it.

2\. The wicked may not indulge a future hope arising from any new
dispensation beyond the grave; God's present word to us cannot then be
unsettled.

3\. The godly may rely on a settled word amidst the unsettled
experiences and feelings incident to earth. - J. F.

[Psa 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090). - The stability of the
earth a present picture of everlasting faithfulness.

[Psa 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090), [Psa
119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091). - Consider,

I. The steadfastness of nature as dependent upon the divine decree,
"according to thy ordinances."

II\. The subserviency of nature to the divine will, "for all are thy
servants."

III\. The fixedness of nature's laws, together with their subserviency
to God's purposes, as a confirmation of the Christian's faith in the
written word, in the care of a divine providence, and in the sureness of
spiritual and heavenly things. "Thy faithfulness is," etc. - J. F.

[Psa 119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091). - Our starry monitors.
They teach us,

I. To serve, though we cannot shine with their brightness.

II\. To do all with strict regard to God's will.

III\. To "continue" - "according to thine ordinances." W. B. H.

[Psa 119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091). - The service of nature.

I. Universal, "all are thy servants."

II\. Obedient, "according to thy ordinances"

III\. Perpetual, "they continue."

IV\. Derived, "thou hast established the earth."

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - The sustaining power of
joy in God.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - The word of God as a
sustaining power amid the greater sorrows of life.

I. Its necessity.

1\. For want of it, men have become drunkards to drown their sorrows,
have become suicides because life was unbearable, have become broken and
hopeless because they had no strength to struggle against misfortune,
have become atheists in creed as, alas, they were before in practice;
all, in fact, become subject to sorrow's worst bitterness and calamity's
worst effects.

2\. Nothing can supply the place of God's word. Nature throws no light
on the mystery of suffering. Human philosophy is at best cold comfort,
and when most needed most fails.

II\. Its efficiency. Proved -

1\. In the experience of those who have tried it.

2\. By the character of its promises.

3\. By the discovery it makes of a beneficent providence working through
calamity and sorrow.

4\. By the revelation it gives of the pity of God and the sympathy of
Christ.

5\. By its record of the "Man of sorrows," who through suffering wrought
out man's salvation, and entered into glory.

6\. By its teaching concerning the Incarnate Word; thus showing a
suffering God, which may well be a solace to suffering meal.

7\. By displaying the glory of heaven and the eternal felicity awaiting
those who overcome through the blood of the Lamb. - J. F.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - The Godly Man's Ark;
or, City of Refuge in the day of his Distress. Discovered in divers
(five) Sermons By Edmund Calamy, B. D. Eighteenth edition. 1709. 12mo.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - We have here set before
us by the Psalmist,

I. The case which he had been in, and which he now refers to - one sad
and sinking. He was under such affliction that he was ready to perish;
which seems to include inward and outward trouble at once; trials
without and pressure within.

II\. What it was that gave him relief, and this when nothing else could,
etc., the law of God.

III\. How he looked back upon this relief received, namely, with
thankfulness to God, to whom he speaks, and records it for the
encouragement and direction of others: "Unless thy law had been my
delights, I should then have perished in mine affliction." - Daniel
Wilcox, 1676 -1733.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - The life-buoy. Under
the form of the narrative of a shipwrecked mariner, describe the
experience of the soul struggling in the sea of affliction; almost
overwhelmed: yet buoyed up over each successive billow: and finally
saved by clinging to the Word of God. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092). - The Psalmist's shudder
at recollected danger.

I. Sore peril: affliction tending to despair and ruin.

II\. Fearful crisis, "then."

III\. Many-handed help: "thy law my delights." - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093). - Experience fixes the
word upon the memory.

[Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093). -

I. A good resolve: "I will never forget thy precepts."

1\. The precepts are worth remembering.

2\. Safety lies in remembering them.

3\. Fidelity to God cannot be without remembering them.

4\. Not to remember them is shameful ingratitude.

II\. An excellent reason for making it: "For with them thou hast
quickened me."

1\. A reason founded upon personal experience, "me."

2\. A reason appreciative of the benefit received: "quickened."

3\. A reason indicative of gratitude to God: "thou." - J. F.

[Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093). - "Never forget"; an
often-uttered phrase. Here golden.

I. Something that could not be forgotten, life and pardon received. How
could it?

II\. Something that should not be forgotten: the precious
instrumentality. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093). -

I. The instrumental power of truth.

1\. Used by God in our regeneration, [Jam
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018); [Psa
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#007).

2\. Used in our liberation, [Joh 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#032).

3\. Used in our sanctification - [Joh
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#007).

II\. Our consequent affection for it. We cannot forget.

1\. Our past obligations to it.

2\. Our present dependence upon it.

3\. Our future needs of it. - W. W.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). -

1\. David claims relation to God: "I am thine" - devoted to thee, and
owned by thee, thine in covenant.

2\. He proves his claim: "I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy
precepts"; i.e., I have carefully enquired concerning my duty, and
diligently endeavoured to do it.

3\. He improves his claim: "I am thine, save me." Save me from sin, save
me from ruin. - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). -

I. A great prayer: "Save me."

II\. A grand prayer: "I am thine."

III\. A gracious experience: "I have sought," etc.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). -

I. Relation: "I am thine."

II\. Preservation: "save me."

III\. Obligation: "I have sought," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). -

I. God's child humbly points out to him his responsibility: "I am
thine."

II\. Ventures to urge his own sincerity, he has at least "sought."

III\. With these two hands extended, he utters a sharp cry for help,
"save me." - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). - Multum in parvo.

I. A profession.

II\. A prayer.

III\. A plea. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). -

I. God's interest in us.

II\. Our interest in God. - W. D.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). - The characteristics of
personal religion.

I. Personal devotedness to God: "I am thine."

II\. Personal obedience rendered: "I have sought thy precepts."

III\. Personal expectation cherished; "save me." - J. F.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094). - The courage obedience
gives.

I. It emboldens us to a firm assurance: "I am thine, for I have," etc.

1\. We become God's by faith alone.

2\. But the assurance of being his cannot exist without obedience;
obedience proves the faith to ourselves; satisfies us concerning grace
received.

3\. Poor obedience always interferes with assurance.

II\. It emboldens us to pray, and in prayer - "Save me."

1\. The Christian's prayers are only of faith and offered in faith.

2\. Yet disobedience makes him shrink from approaching God in prayer,
and renders him feeble in petitioning.

3\. Obedience is humble but bold. The middle clause of the text applies
equally to the first and third clauses. - J. F.

[Psa 119:95](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#095). - Wicked men patient in
carrying out their evil designs. Good men patient in considering the
ways of the Lord.

[Psa 119:95](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#095). - The hatred of the
wicked towards the righteous.

I. Show that it ever has been, and still is.

1\. Select Scriptural instances, beginning with Abel.

2\. Notice the persecutions of the church.

3\. Treatment in the workshop.

4\. Often in the home.

5\. The contemptuous manner the "saints" are spoken of, etc.

II\. Enquire as to why it is so.

1\. The enmity of the carnal heart to God.

2\. The jealousy excited by the Christian's assurance of eternal
blessedness.

3\. The consciousness of being rebuked by a holy life.

4\. Excited to it by Satan.

5\. The restless mischievousness of sin which, if it cannot hinder
holiness, will maliciously hurt its advocates.

III\. Direct how to act when exposed to it: "I will consider thy
testimonies." That means -

1\. Be the more obedient to God.

2\. Have the more watchful control over words and feelings.

3\. Love your enemies.

4\. Pray for those who hate you.

5\. Do good to them on every opportunity.

6\. Be thankful that you are among the hated and not the haters.

7\. Especially consider the holy testimony of Christ's forbearing
patience. - J. F.

[Psa 119:95](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#095). - Waiting counterwrought
by waiting.

I. Temptations in ambush.

II\. The saint with his Lord. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:95](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#095). - Immunity.

I. I am in danger.

II\. I will attend to my duty.

III\. I will trust thee to deliver me. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096). -

I. An end: - "seen"; seen by one man where it should not have been; seen
where there was no end of boasting; seen in all perfection.

II\. No end: - to the extent, spirituality, perpetuity, and perfectness
of the law.

[Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096). -

I. The Finite explored.

II\. The Infinite unexplored. W. D.

[Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096). - Perfectionism disproved
by experience and inspiration. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096). - Perfection - perfect
and imperfect.

I. Loud professions of perfection arise from ignorance (of self, or of
God's requirements).

II\. Are peculiarly liable to collapse, "I have seen an end."

III\. Are best corrected by a survey of the breadth of the divine law. -
C. A. D.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). -

I. Unusual Exclamation.

II\. Unusual Application. - W. D.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). - Indescribable love and
insatiable thought. The action and reaction of affection and meditation.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). -

I. The object of love, "thy law."

II\. The degree of that love, "oh, how love I," etc.

III\. The evidence of that love, "it is my meditation," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). - Love to the law.

I. An ardent confession of love.

II\. An unanswerable evidence of love. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097) (first clause). -
Vehemency of love for God's word.

I. Its recognisable marks.

1\. Profound reverence for the authority of the word.

2\. Admiration for its holiness.

3\. Jealousy for its honour; God's servant feels acute pain when men
show it any slight.

4\. Respect for its wholeness; he would not divorce precepts from
promises, nor ignore a single statement in it.

5\. Indefatigability in its study.

6\. Eager desire to obey it.

7\. Forwardness in praising it.

8\. Activity in spreading it abroad.

II\. Its reasonableness.

1\. The word well deserves it.

2\. It is a proof of true intelligence.

3\. It is not less than a regard for our own interest demands.

III\. Its requisiteness to the true worship of God. Men sneeringly call
such an affection bibliolatry, as though it were the worship of a book.
In truth, it is an essential element in the due worship of God. For -

1\. Without it there cannot be the faith which honours God.

2\. It is involved in that love to God which constitutes the very
essence of worship.

3\. It is itself an act of homage that a worshipper dare not withhold. -
J. F.

[Psa 119:97-100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097). - Spiritual wisdom.

I. God's word the source of surpassing wisdom - excelling that of "mine
enemies," "my teachers," "the ancients."

II\. The three methods of acquiring this wisdom - love, meditation,
practice.

III\. The one Giver of this wisdom, "Thou'" [Psa
119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098). - Constant communion with
truth the student's road to proficiency.

[Psa 119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098), [Psa
119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099), [Psa
119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). - The truly wise man.

1\. The source of his wisdom. The word of "the only wise God," here
described as

\(1\) Thy commandments.

\(2\) Thy testimonies.

\(3\) Thy precepts.

2\. The increase of his wisdom. It arises from

\(1\) The abiding indwelling of the word, "ever with me," [Psa
119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098).

\(2\) Meditation upon the word, [Psa
119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099).

\(3\) Obedience to the word, [Psa
119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100).

3\. The measure of his wisdom.

\(1\) Wiser than his enemies, whose wisdom was "not from above, but
earthly, sensual, devilish."

\(2\) Wiser than his teachers, whose wisdom was "of this world."

\(3\) Wiser than the ancients, whose wisdom was that of unsanctified age
and experience. - W. H. J. Page, 1882.

[Psa 119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099). - The surest way to
excellence.

I. A good subject: "thy testimonies."

II\. A good method, "are my meditations."

[Psa 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). - Antiquity no security
for truth as contrasted with revelation, old age no proof of wisdom as
contrasted with holy living, open confession no evidence of boasting as
contrasted with sullen pride.

[Psa 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). - Obedience the high
road to understanding. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). - Obedience the key of
knowledge. [Joh 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017).

[Psa 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100). - Self-restraint needful
to piety.

[Psa 119:102](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#102). - Divine teaching
necessary to secure perseverance, and effectual to that end.

[Psa 119:102](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#102). - Consider. -

I. The path appointed for men to walk in: "Thy judgments."

1\. Bight path.

2\. Clean path.

3\. Pleasant path.

4\. Safe path.

5\. The end - eternal glory.

II\. The persistent pursuit of it: "I have not departed."

1\. Persecution would drive from it.

2\. Pleasures would allure from it.

3\. The flesh would weary in it.

4\. But the true believer determines to hold on his way to the end.

5\. And carefully watches his steps lest they depart.

III\. The preserving power that holds the traveller to it, "For thou
hast taught me."

1\. The traveller walks with God, and receives instruction by the
special illumination of the Holy Spirit.

2\. The choice property of this teaching is, not only that it makes
wise, but that it captivates the soul, strengthens it, and holds it to a
holy obedience. - J. F.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). - Experience in religion
the source of enjoyment in it; or,

I. Tasting the word - its sweetness.

II\. Declaring the word with the mouth its greater sweetness.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). -

I. The word is positively sweet - "sweet to my taste."

II\. Comparatively sweet - "sweeter than honey."

III\. Superlatively sweet, "how sweet," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). - The comparison,
setting forth the precious property of sweetness in the word, "Sweeter
than honey." "Better than honey," would not do as well. It is -

I. The purest sweetness; even precepts and rebukes.

II\. Uncloying sweetness.

III\. Always a beneficial sweetness.

IV\. A specially grateful sweetness - in affliction, in the hour of
death. - J. F.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). - Spiritual delicacy.

I. The taste needed to relish it.

II\. The life that alone is nourished by it.

III\. The rare enjoyment derived from it. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). -

I. It is sweet.

II\. Let us enjoy it.

III\. The best effects will follow. George Herbert says: -

"O Book! infinite sweetness! let my heart

Suck every letter, and a honey gain,

Precious for any grief in any part;

To clear the breast, to mollify all pain."

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103). - If we would taste the
honey of God, we must have the palate of faith. - A. R. Faussett.

[Psa 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104). - The influence of the
precepts.

I. Upon the understanding.

II\. Upon the affections.

III\. Upon the life.

[Psa 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104). -

I. The intellectual effect of the Scriptures. "I get understanding."

II\. Their moral effect, "I hate," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104). - The understanding
derived from God's precepts begets holy hatred,

I. To the false ways of conventional morality.

II\. To the false ways of a formal religiousness.

III\. To the false ways of an erring theology.

IV\. To the false ways of hypocritical practice.

V. To the false ways of sinful suggestions.

VI\. To the false ways of one's own deceitful heart. - J. F.

[Psa 119:105-108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105). -

I. Illumination ([Psa 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)).

II\. Decision ([Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106)).

III\. Testing, "I am afflicted" ([Psa
119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)).

IV\. Consecration ([Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)).

V. Education, "teach me," etc. ([Psa
119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)).

[Psa 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105). - The practical,
personal, everyday use of the word of God.

[Psa 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105). - Lamp-light.

I. The believer's dangerous night-journey through the world.

II\. The lamp that illumines his path.

III\. The eternal day towards which he travels (when the lamp will be
laid aside. [Rev 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#005)). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106). - Decision for God, and
fit modes of expressing it.

[Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106). -

I. Veneration for the word.

II\. Consecration to the word.

III\. Fidelity to the word. - G. R.

[Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106). - Swearing and
performing.

I. The usefulness of religious vows. To quicken perception; to rouse
conscience; (seen in Jewish nation - [Exo
24:3-7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003); [Ch2
15:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2015.htm#012); [Neh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#028), [Neh
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#029); in Scottish nation - Solemn
League and Covenant).

II\. The danger of religious vows. A vow unfulfilled, or receded from,
is a moral injury: [Ecc 5:4-7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004).

III\. The safeguard of religious vows: dependence on the Spirit of God -
[Eze 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019), [Eze
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020); [Co2
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#005). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107). -

I. A good man greatly afflicted.

II\. A sure cure for the ills of affliction: "Quicken me."

III\. A safe rule to pray by when afflicted. "according unto thy word."

[Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107). -

I. The "very much" afflicted.

1\. The world has such - widows, orphans, ere, etc.

2\. Most take their turn.

II\. But there is "very much" grace.

1\. God's word promises the needed quickening.

2\. Himself very much greater than all our needs.

3\. Christ tried "in all points" has all help.

III\. Therefore bring "very much" faith, as the Psalmist here.

1\. Keen-eyed for promises.

2\. Fervent in pleading them.

3\. Strong in expectation. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108). - Consider, -

I. The instructive title given to prayer and praise, "The free-will
offerings of my mouth."

1\. It shows the believer to be a priest, "offerings."

2\. It shows the peculiarity of his service: "free-will."

3\. It implies whole-hearted consecration.

II\. The humility portrayed in the prayer, "Accept, I beseech thee."

1\. Here is no pharisaic boasting.

2\. Even the free-will offering is felt to need an "I beseech thee."

III\. The longing desire for further instruction in order to a more
perfect obedience: "Teach me thy judgments." - J. F.

[Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108). - Free will seeking free
grace. - W. D.

[Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108). - Work for Free-willers.

I. Offerings of Prayers for each of the blessings of salvation.

II\. Offerings of Repudiation of all claim to unassisted good.

III\. Offerings of Praise - for sovereign grace. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109). - The soul's life in
jeopardy. The life of the soul secured.

[Psa 119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109), [Psa
119:110](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#110). - Here is -

I. David in danger of losing his life. There is but a step between him
and death, for "the wicked have laid a snare" for him. Wherever he was
he found some design or other laid against him; which made him say, "My
soul is continually in my hand." It was not so only as a man - it is
true of us all that we are exposed to the strokes of death - but as a
man of war, and especially as "a man after God's own heart."

II\. David in no danger of losing his religion through this peril; for,

1\. He "doth not forget the law," and therefore is likely to persevere.

2\. He hath not yet erred from God's precepts, and therefore it is to be
hoped he will not. - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:110](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#110). - Various kinds of
snares, and the one way of escaping them.

[Psa 119:110](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#110). - Consider, -

I. Some of the snares set for saints by sinners.

1\. Doctrinal snares, by intellectual sinners.

2\. False accusations, by malignant sinners.

3\. False flatteries, by deceitful sinners.

4\. False charity, by a large number of sinners nowadays.

III\. The secure safeguard for a saint's safety, "I erred not from thy
precepts." Obedience to God gives security, because -

1\. The snares are then suspected and watched against.

2\. The feet cannot become entangled by them.

3\. God keeps him who keeps his word. - J. F.

[Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111). -

I. Estate.

II\. Entering upon it.

III\. Entail upon it.

IV\. Enjoyment of it.

[Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111). - Notice, -

I. How rich the Psalmist - as determined to be, "Thy testimonies have I
taken as a heritage." Rich, -

1\. In knowledge.

2\. In holiness.

3\. In comfort.

4\. In companionship, for God's company goes with his word.

5\. In hope.

II\. How he clung to his wealth, "For ever."

1\. He hurt none by so doing; he could give generously his portion, and
yet not waste.

2\. He was right; for he had the only wealth of which an everlasting
possession is possible.

3\. He was wise.

III\. How he rejoiced in his wealth, "They are the rejoicing of my
heart."

1\. Here is internal and deep joy; not always possible to the possession
of wealth.

2\. Pure, unalloyed joy; it is never so with other wealth.

3\. Safe joy; other joy is dangerous.

4\. Unlosable joy. - J. F.

[Psa 119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112). - Heart-leanings.
Personality, pressure, inclination, performance, constancy, perpetuity.

[Psa 119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112). - The godly man's
obedience.

I. Its reality.

1\. "To perform"; not words or feelings merely; but deeds.

2\. "Thy statutes"; not human inventions, nor self conceits, nor
conventional maxims.

II\. Its cordiality, "inclined my heart."

1\. Heart inclination is requisite for pleasing a heart-searching God.

2\. And to make obedience easy and even delightful.

3\. "I have," he says; was it therefore his doing? Yes. Was it his work
alone? No. See [Psa 119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036).

4\. The proofs.

\(1\) Universality: "statutes," the whole of them.

\(2\) Uniformity: "alway."

III\. Its constancy, "even unto the end."

1\. Though a man should be cautious when planning for the future, yet
this life-long purpose is right, wise, and safe.

2\. Nor can he purpose less, if holy fervency fill the heart.

3\. It is no more than what God and consistency demand. - J. F.

[Psa 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113). - The thought of the
age, and the truth of all ages.

[Psa 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113). -

I. The object of hatred.

II\. The object of love.

Or -

I. Love the cause of hatred.

II\. Hatred the effect of love. - G. R.

[Psa 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113). - "Vain thoughts." What
they are. Whence they arise. The mischief they cause. How they should be
treated. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113). - How the believer -

I. Is troubled by vain thoughts. A frequent and painful experience.

II\. Does not tolerate vain thoughts. Some suffer them to lodge within;
he is anxious to expel them.

III\. Triumphs over vain thoughts. By his love to the law of God. His
prayer is -

"With thoughts of Christ and things divine,

Fill up this foolish heart of mine."

W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114). - Our protection from
danger - '"hiding-place"; in danger "shield"; be fore danger - '"I
hope."

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114). - "Hiding-place."
Secrecy to conceal us. Capacity to hold us. Safety. Comfort. - T.
Manton.

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114). - Hiding and hoping.

I. A hiding-place needed.

II\. A hiding-place provided ([Isa
25:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002)).

III\. A hiding-place used. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114). -

I. The refuge provided: "Thou art," etc.

II\. The refuge revealed: "In thy word."

III\. The refuge found, "I hope," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114). - "Thou art my hiding
place."

I. In thy grace, from condemnation.

II\. In thy compassion, from sorrow.

III\. In thy succour, from temptation.

IV\. In thy power, from opposition.

V. In thy fulness, from want. - W. J.

[Psa 119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115). -

I. Ill company hinders piety.

II\. Piety quits ill company.

III\. Piety, in compelling this departure, acts as God will do at the
last.

[Psa 119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115). - Evil companionships
incompatible with genuine righteousness.

I. They necessitate concealment and compromise.

II\. They destroy the capability of communion with God, and the relish
for spiritual things.

III\. They blunt the sensitiveness of conscience.

IV\. They involve deliberate disobedience to God. - J. F.

[Psa 119:116](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#116). -

I. Upholding promised.

II\. Needful for holy living.

III\. The preventive of shameful acts.

[Psa 119:116](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#116). - "Uphold me according
unto thy word," etc.

I. The Psalmist pleads the promise of God, his dependence upon the
promise, and his expectation from it: "Uphold me according unto thy
word," which word I hope in, and if it be not performed I shall be
"ashamed of my hope."

II\. He pleads the great need he had of God's grace, and the great
advantage it would be to him: "Uphold me, that I may live"; intimating
that he could not live without the grace of God. - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117). -

I. Upholding - God's holding us up. It implies a danger, and that danger
takes many forms. The believer's life, nay be described as walking in
uprightness; he is a pilgrim. He needs upholding, for -

1\. The way is slippery.

2\. Our feet make the danger as well as the way.

3\. Cunning foes seek to trip us up.

4\. Sometimes the difficulty is not caused by the way, but by the height
to which God may elevate us.

5\. The prayer is all the more needful because the most of people do not
keep upright.

II\. Two blessed things that come out of this holding up.

1\. We shall be safe for ourselves, as examples, and as pillars of the
church.

2\. We shall be watchful and sensitive. "I will have respect unto thy
statutes continually." Without this no man is safe. See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1657, "My Hourly Prayer."

[Psa 119:117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117). - "Hold thou me up,"
etc.

I. The good man is up.

II\. The good man wishes to keep up.

III\. The good man prays to be held up.

IV\. The good man knows that divine support is abundantly sufficient. -
W. J.

[Psa 119:117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117). -

I. Dependence for the future: "Hold," etc.

II\. Resolution for the future: "I will have," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118). - Sin and falsehood:
their connection, punishment, and cure.

[Psa 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118). -

I. Hearken to the tramp of God's armies. In nature; providence; angelic
hosts of last day.

II\. The mangled victims. Cunning deceivers specially obnoxious to God.
Examples. Balaam, Pharaoh, Rome, the deceiver of the nations.

III\. The warnings to us of this Aceldama. Repent. Avoid deceit. Mind
God's landmarks. Hide in Christ. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118). - God's punishment of
the wicked though awfully severe is just and necessary.

I. It is due as the merited wages of iniquity.

II\. It is demanded by the position of God as moral governor, and by his
character as righteous.

III\. It is necessary to mark the real worth of righteousness and its
reward. If the wicked are not punished, the full worth of righteousness
cannot appear.

IV\. In the nature of the case, it is absolutely unavoidable, except
upon one condition, namely, the gift of genuine repentance and holiness
after death; that no man has any right to expect, nor has God given the
slightest intimation that he will bestow it.

V. Hell lies in the bosom of sin; and if the wicked were taken to
heaven, they would carry hell thither. Heaven supplies not the things in
which the wicked delight while it abounds in those they can neither
understand nor sympathise with. - J. F.

[Psa 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118) (second clause). - The
deceits of the wicked are all falsehoods.

I. The world they embrace is a false Delilah.

II\. The pleasure they enjoy is a Satanic snare.

III\. Their formal religiousness is a vain delusion.

IV\. Their conceits of God are self-invented lies. - J. F.

[Psa 119:118-120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118). - Saved by fear.

I. The wrath of God revealed against sin.

II\. The judgment of God executed upon sinners.

III\. The fear of God created in the heart. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119). - The saint's
acquiescence in God's judgments. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119). -

I. Comparison of the wicked to dross.

II\. Comparison of their doom to the putting away of dross.

III\. The saint's admiration of divine justice as seen in the rejection
of the wicked.

[Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119). - God's putting away the
wicked like dross.

I. God's judgments are a searching and separating fire.

II\. The final judgment of the great day will complete the separating
process.

III\. The great result will be, the true metal and the dross, each
gathered to its own place. - J. F.

[Psa 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120). - The judgments of God
on the wicked cause in the righteous,

I. Love.

II\. Awe.

III\. Fear.

[Psa 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120). -

I. Describe the true character of the fear.

1\. It is the fear of reverence for God's authority and power.

2\. It is the fear of horror against sin as meriting judgment.

II\. Show its compatibility with filial love.

1\. The more we love God the more firmly we believe in the certainty and
awfulness of his judgments.

2\. The more we love God the more will we fear to arouse his chastising
rod against ourselves.

3\. In fact, if we love not God, we shall have no fear lest sin should
involve us in judgment.

III\. Commend it.

1\. As it proves a just sense of sin's desert.

2\. As it shows a true appreciation of God's righteousness.

3\. As it is not a fear that hath torment, but a fear which increases
watchfulness, and walks hand in hand with perfect confidence in saving
grace. - d. F.

[Psa 119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121), [Psa
119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122). - The double appeal.

I. Of conscious integrity: "I have done judgment," etc.

II\. Of conscious deficiency, "Be surety for thy servant for good." - C.
A. D.

[Psa 119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122). -

I. Suretyship entreated.

II\. Good expected.

III\. Obligation acknowledged: "thy servant."

[Psa 119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122) (first clause). - After
explaining the Psalmist's meaning as shown in [Psa
119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121), this sentence nay be used for
a sermon upon the Suretyship of Christ, by a reference to [Heb
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#022).

I. A Surety for good wanted - the deeply felt, though, perhaps,
undefined want of a sin-burdened soul.

1\. The mere statement of a gratuitous pardon on the part of God is not
thoroughly believable to such a soul, nor, if it could be believed in,
would it give peace to the conscience. For, on the one hand, the pardon
could not be perceived as just, nor as consistent with God's necessary
hatred of sin, yet the conscience demands this perception; on the other
hand, mere pardon does not show how the obligation to a perfect
fulfilment of God's law, as righteousness, can be met, yet the
conscience demands to see this before it can be satisfied to realize
peace. Luther's experience.

2\. Now the Scriptures tell us that God "justifies the ungodly," and
that his "righteousness" is declared in his justifying sinners - [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025). He can forgive sins with
justice. He can treat sinners as righteous persons, and yet be righteous
in doing so. How? By a Surety. Therefore, a Surety is the real want.

II\. A Surety existent. Jesus is the Surety.

1\. He undertook to bear our obligation to the law's penalty, and
fulfilled it in death. Thus pardon, though mercy to us, is an act of
justice to Christ.

2\. He undertook our obligation to a perfect obedience, and satisfied
for that in his fulfilment of the law; thus for God to treat us as
righteous is only just to Christ.

3\. God has shown his satisfaction with the office of Christ, and with
his work, by the resurrection and glorification of Christ. Hence a
well-accredited and efficient Surety exists.

III\. A Surety nigh at hand.

1\. In the gospel, Christ as Surety comes to the sinner as truly as
though he himself left his throne and came in his own person.

2\. Thus, he is so close that a sinner has but to receive the gospel
into his heart and he receives Christ.

3\. Christ received as a Surety is the Surety for whosoever receives
him. - J. F.

[Psa 119:123](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#123). - Holy expectation -
long maintained, in danger of failing; this fact pleaded; reasons for
never renouncing it.

[Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124), [Psa
119:125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125). - The servant of God.

I. Making profession, "I am thy servant."

II\. Making confession - of guilt, dulness, ignorance.

III\. Making petition - for mercy, understanding, and teaching. - C. A.
D.

[Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124). - Heavenly instruction a
great mercy.

[Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124). -

I. His confidence in divine mercy.

II\. His submission to divine authority.

III\. His prayer for divine teaching. - G. R.

[Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124). - A Perfect Prayer,

I. As to the matter of it.

1\. Here is nothing superfluous; no petition for wealth, nor for
honours, nor for anything the worldling covets.

2\. Here is nothing wanting; "Deal with thy servant according to thy
mercy" comprehends everything the guilty soul needs; "Teach me thy
statutes" comprehends all a saint needs to be anxious for.

II\. As to the manner of it.

1\. It is direct and definite.

2\. It is simple and fervent.

3\. It is reverent yet bold.

III\. As to the spirit of it.

1\. "Deal with thy servant"; a sense of obligation; a feeling of
devotedness; a spirit of consecration to holy work.

2\. "Deal.... according to thy mercy"; a sense of unworthiness; becoming
humility; submissiveness to the divine will as to what form the mercy
shall take; great faith in the mercy, its freeness and sufficiency.

3\. "Teach me thy statutes." Longing for holiness, sense of ignorance,
of weakness, of dependence upon special divine spiritual influence. - J.
F.

[Psa 119:125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125). -

I. An office accepted.

II\. Fitness requested.

III\. Discernment desired.

[Psa 119:125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125). -

I. A cheerful acknowledgment, "I am thy servant."

II\. A desire implied - to serve more perfectly.

III\. A need recognized - Divine instruction in holy service.

IV\. A plea urged - "I am thy servant," therefore "Teach me," etc. - W.
H. J. P.

[Psa 119:126-128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126). -

I. A terrible fact, "They have made void thy law": [Psa
119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126).

II\. Two blessed inferences, "Therefore, Therefore," etc.: [Psa 119:127,
19 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127).

[Psa 119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126). - They make void the
law, by denying inspiration, by exalting tradition, by antinomianism, by
scepticism, by indifference, etc.

[Psa 119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126). -

I. There are times when sin is specially active and dominant.

II\. Such times reveal the dependence of the church upon God.

III\. Such times awaken the desires of the church for the intervention
of God.

IV\. Such times are the times when God does arise to plead his own
cause. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126). -

I. The work anticipated - the vindication of the divine law.

II\. The work delayed.

III\. The work executed, "It is time," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127). - The world's assault
upon the truth a reason for our loving it.

[Psa 119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127). -

I. The object of love, "Thy commandments."

II\. The degree of love, "above gold," etc.

III\. The reason of this love - "therefore," etc., because its object
must ultimately prevail. - G. R.

[Psa 119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127). - God's will versus the
golden idol.

I. God's commandments are better than gold.

II\. The love of them is proportionably nobler.

III\. The unmeasurable superiority of character they produce. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128) (first clause). - This
view should be taken of all divine precepts in their bearing,

I. Christ-ward.

II\. Self-ward.

III\. World-ward.

IV\. Church-ward.

V. Heaven-ward. - IV. J.

[Psa 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128). - The Bible right.

I. Its science is correct.

II\. Its history is true.

III\. Its promises are genuine.

IV\. Its morality is perfect.

V. Its doctrines are divine. - W. W.

[Psa 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128). - Learn four lessons, -

I. It is a good thing when wicked men do not praise the truth they
cannot love.

II\. It is a suspicious circumstance when they are found speaking well
of any part of it; it is a Judas' kiss in order to betray its interests.

III\. It must be right to accept and love what the wicked oppose.

IV\. It is always safe to be on the opposite side to them. - J. F.

[Psa 119:129-136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). - In this division
the Psalmist -

I. Praises God's word.

II\. Shows his affection to it.

III\. Prays for grace to keep it.

IV\. Mourns for those who do not. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). - The wonderful
character of the word a reason for obedience. So wonderfully pure, just,
balanced, elevating. So much for our own benefit, for the good of
society, and for the divine glory.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). -

I. What is wonderful in God's word should be believed.

II\. What is believed should be obeyed. - G. R.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). - "Thy testimonies are
wonderful."

I. The facts which they record are wonderful - so wonderful, that if the
book recording them were now published for the first time, there would
be no bounds to the avidity and curiosity with which it would be sought
and perused.

II\. The morality which they inculcate is wonderful.

III\. If you turn from the morality to the doctrines of the Bible, your
admiration will rather increase than diminish at the contents of the
singular book.

IV\. These testimonies are wonderful for the style in which they are
written.

V. They are wonderful for their preservation in the world.

VI\. They are wonderful for the effects which they have produced. - Hugh
Hughes, 1838.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). - "Thy testimonies are
wonderful."

I. The ceremonial law is wonderful, because the mystery of our
redemption-by the blood of Christ is pointed out in it.

II\. The prophecies are wonderful, as predicting things, humanly
speaking, so uncertain, and at such great distance of time, with so much
accuracy.

III\. The decalogue is wonderful, as containing in a very few words all
the principles of justice and charity.

IV\. Were we to go to the New Testament, here wonders rise on wonders!
All is astonishing; but the Psalmist could not have had this in view. -
Adam Clarke.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129) (first clause). -

I. Let us look at five of the wonders of the Bible.

1\. Its authority. It prefaces every statement with a "Thus saith the
Lord."

2\. Its light.

3\. Its power - it has a convincing, awakening, drawing, life-giving
power.

4\. Its depth.

5\. Its universal adaptation.

II\. Indicate three practical uses.

1\. Study the Bible daily.

2\. Pray for the Spirit to grave it on your heart with a pen of iron.

3\. Practise it daily. - D. Macgregor.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129). - To whom and in what
respects are God's testimonies wonderful?

I. To whom? To those, and those only, who through grace do know,
believe, and experience the truth and power of them for themselves.

II\. In what respects wonderful, i.e., astonishingly pleasing,
delightful, and profitable (see [Psa
119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174)).

1\. In respect of the Author and origin of them, whose they are and from
whence they come.

2\. In respect of the subject matter of them, which they contain and
reveal.

3\. In respect of the manner of language in which they are revealed and
declared.

4\. In respect of the multitude and variety of them suited to every
ease.

5\. In respect of the usefulness of them, and the great benefit and
advantage he received from them.

6\. In the respect of the pleasure and delight he finds in them (see
[Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111)).

7\. In respect of the final design, intent, and end of them, viz.,
eternal life, salvation, and glory. - Samuel Medley, 1738-1799.

[Psa 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130). -

I. The essential light of the word.

II\. The dawn of it in the soul.

III\. The great benefit of its advancing day.

[Psa 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130). -

I. The source of divine light to man, "Thy words."

II\. Its force. It forces an entrance into the heart.

III\. Its direction: "unto the simple."

IV\. Its effect: "it giveth understanding." - G. R.

[Psa 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130). - A Bible Society
Sermon.

I. Evidence from history and from personal experience that God's word
has imparted the light of civilization, liberty, holiness.

II\. Argument drawn from hence for the further spread of the word of
God. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130). - The Self-evidencing
Virtue of God's Word.

I. Prove it. "The entrance of thy word giveth light." If this be true,
God's word is light; for only light can give light. But light is
self-evidencing; it needs nothing to show its presence and its value but
itself; so the word of God, to show its own truth and divinity to the
believer.

1\. His conscience proves it; in its conviction of sin; in its peace
through the atoning blood.

2\. His heart proves it; in its outgoings of love to the God, the
Christ, and the righteousness revealed.

3\. His experience In affliction and temptation proves it; in the solace
and in the strength given by the word.

II\. Answer an objection. "If God's word were self-evidencing as light
is, then everyone would acknowledge it to be truth." Answer, No; for the
law holds good in universal experience, that the "entrance" only of
light gives light. Light cannot enter a blind man.

1\. The Scriptures teach that men by nature are blind.

2\. If all men did perceive, by merely reading and hearing the word,
that it was light and truth, paradoxical as it may seem, the word would
not be truth.

3\. Hence the want of universal acknowledgment is not an objection, but
a confirmation.

III\. Show its importance.

1\. It makes the believer independent of church authority for his faith.

2\. He need not trouble to examine books of evidence; his faith is valid
enough without them.

3\. He who receives the word into his soul shall be satisfied of its
truth and value. - J. F.

[Psa 119:131](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#131). - Panting for holiness.
A rare hunger; the evidence of much grace, and the pledge of glory.

[Psa 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132). -

I. Look.

II\. Love.

III\. Use and wont.

[Psa 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132). - Fellowship with the
righteous.

I. There are some who love God's name.

II\. His mercy is the source of all the goodness they experience.

III\. The Lord has been always accustomed to deal mercifully with them.

IV\. His mercy towards them should encourage us to implore mercy for
ourselves.

V. We should be anxious to secure the mercy that is peculiar to them.

VI\. We should be content if God deals with us as he has always dealt
with his people. - W. Jay.

[Psa 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132). - Divine use and wont.

I. God is accustomed to look upon and be merciful toward his people.

II\. We are stirred up to specially desire such merciful dealings in
time of affliction.

III\. Love to God qualifies us for these loving looks and merciful
dealings. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132). - Notice, -

I. The mark of true believers: "Those that love thy name."

II\. God's custom of dealing with them: "Be merciful as thou usest to
do."

III\. Their individual and earnest solicitude: "Look thou upon me." - J.
F.

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). -

I. A holy life is no work of chance, it is a masterpiece of order - the
order of conformity to the prescribed rule; there is arithmetical and
geometrical order: the proportional order; the order of relation; an
order of period: holiness, as to the order, is seasonable, suitable.

II\. The rule of this order - "in thy word."

III\. The director chosen. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 878: "A
Well-ordered Life."

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). -

I. Order in outward life desired.

II\. Order according to the divine idea.

III\. Order in the government within.

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). -

I. Help needed.

1\. To avoid sin.

2\. To be holy.

II\. Help sought.

1\. From below: "thy word."

2\. From above: "order," etc., and "let not," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). - Sin's sway in the
soul.

I. Fervently deprecated.

1\. Realization of the horrors of its rule.

2\. Recognition of the better power.

3\. Thorough exclusion sought.

II\. Wisely combated.

1\. Practicalness as well as prayerfulness.

2\. Regard had to little "steps."

3\. Steps to be governed by divine rule.

4\. System not trusted apart from God. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133). - Notice, -

I. The right path for human feet: "In thy word."

II\. The needed help to control the steps: "Order my steps."

III\. The perverting power of a dominant sin: "Let not any," etc. - J.
F.

[Psa 119:134](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#134). - What sins may be
produced by oppression. What obedience ought to come from those who are
set free.

[Psa 119:134](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#134). -

I. The course to be pursued, "thy precepts."

II\. The opposition to that course: "the oppression of men."

1\. Human opinions.

2\. Human examples.

3\. Human sympathies.

4\. Interests.

5\. Persecutions.

III\. The resistance to that opposition, "Deliver me, so will I," etc. -
G. R.

[Psa 119:134](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#134). - Hindrances removed.

I. The impeding influence of persecution.

II\. The prayer of the persecuted one.

III\. The conduct of the delivered one ([Luk
1:74](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#074), [Luk
1:75](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#075)). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:134](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#134). -

I. How some men oppress their fellows. By the laws they make - as
statesmen. By the books they write - as authors. By the tyranny they
exercise - as masters. By the lives they live - as professors. By the
sermons they deliver - as ministers!

II\. How the prayer of the oppressed may be answered. By the gift of
wise and good statesmen. By increase of sound literature. By the
conversion or removal of hard masters. By a baptism of the Spirit on the
church. - W. W.

[Psa 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135). -

I. A choice position: "thy servant."

II\. A choice delight: "thy face to shine."

III\. A choice privilege: "teach me thy statutes."

[Psa 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135). -

I. God in the word: "Thy word."

II\. God for the word: "Teach me," etc.

III\. God with the word: "Make thy face," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135). - Sunshine.

I. The light in which we can best learn our lessons - God's favour shown
in pardon, justification, adoption, assurance, etc.

II\. The lessons we should learn in the light - grace is productive of
holiness. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135). -

I. A rich historic promise ([Num
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#025)). Its sublime origin and
associations.

II\. The new prayer born of it.

1\. Looks up for the face Divine; the same in its majestic sweetness
that has watched generations decay since the word was first spoken.

2\. Asks to know its shinings. Light of fatherhood, etc.

III\. The old prayer repeated: "Teach me thy statutes." Last time in the
Psalm.

1\. Our need of teaching - oft-repeated prayer.

2\. The intimate connection between obedience and the shinings of God's
face. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136). - Abundant sorrow for
abounding sin. Other men's sins the saint's own sorrows. He thinks of
the good God provoked, of the sinners themselves debased, of their
death, and their perdition.

[Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136). -

I. Occasion of his grief: "they keep not thy law."

II\. Extent of his grief: "rivers," etc. See examples in Jeremiah, Ezra,
Paul, Christ himself.

III\. Effect of his grief. To warn, teach, invite, and exhort them - as
in his Psalms. - G. R.

[Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136). - Sacred tears.

I. The world sinning.

II\. The church weeping.

III\. It is time the world began to weep for itself. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136). - I weep, because,

I. Of the dishonour done to the Law-giver.

II\. Of the injury done to the law-breaker.

III\. Of the wrong done to the law-abiding. "That kingly prophet, that
wept so plentifully for his own offences ([Psa
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#006)), had yet floods of tears left to
bewail his people's" ([Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136) ).
- Thomas Adams. "Bendetti, a Franciscan monk, author of the Stabat
Mater, one day was found weeping, and when asked the reason of his
tears, he exclaimed, 'I weep because Love goes about unloved.'" - W. H.
J. P.

[Psa 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137), [Psa
119:138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#138). - Solemn contemplation.

I. The contemplation of the deep and awful display of the divine
character is good for the soul.

II\. It will lead to a conviction of the righteousness of God's
character and administration.

III\. It will result in loyal submission. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137). - A consideration of
divine righteousness. Convinces us of sin, reconciles us to trying
providences, excites a desire to imitate, arouses to reverent adoration.

[Psa 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137). - God is righteous.

I. In his commands.

II\. In his threatenings.

III\. In his chastisements.

IV\. In his judgments.

V. In his promises. - G. R.

[Psa 119:138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#138). - "Very faithful." Based
on a faithful covenant; confirmed by faithful promises; carried out by a
faithful Redeemer; enjoyed hitherto; relied on for the future. "Though
we believe not, yet he abideth faithful."

[Psa 119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139). - "Zeal."

I. Consuming self.

II\. Inflamed by that which would naturally quench it.

III\. Fed upon God's words.

[Psa 119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139). - "Zeal."

I. Flourishing in an uncompromising atmosphere.

II\. Attaining an astonishing growth.

III\. Accomplishing a blessed work - the consumption of self. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139). -

I. The object of his zeal - "Thy words."

II\. The occasion of his zeal: "Mine enemies," etc.

III\. The fervour of his zeal: "My zeal hath consumed me." - G. R.

[Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140). -

I. An awakened sinner adoring the holy law.

II\. A saint loving it because the pure love the pure.

III\. A saint among sinners loving the law all the more for its
contrast.

[Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140). -

I. The crystal stream.

1\. Flows from under the throne.

2\. Mirrors heaven.

3\. Undefiled through the ages.

4\. Nourishes holiness as it flows.

II\. The enraptured pilgrim.

1\. Keeping by its brink.

2\. Delighted with its lucid depths.

3\. Pleased with its mirrored revelations - self, heaven, God.

4\. Cleansed and refreshed by its waters. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140). -

I. The purity of God's word.

1\. It proceeds from a perfectly pure source: "Thy word."

2\. It reveals a purity otherwise unknown.

3\. It treats impure subjects with absolute purity.

4\. It inculcates the most perfect purity.

5\. It produces such purity in those who are subject to its power.

II\. The love which its purity inspires in gracious souls.

1\. They love it because, while it reveals their natural impurity, it
shows them how to escape from it.

2\. They love it because it conforms them to its own purity.

3\. They love it because to a pure heart the purity of the word is one
of its chief commendations.

III\. The evidences of this love to the pure word.

1\. Desire to possess it in its purity.

2\. Subjection to its spirit and teachings.

3\. Zeal for its honour and diffusion. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:141-144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141). - A mournful song
and a joyful refrain. Stanza I. "I am small and despised." Refrain. The
everlasting righteousness of God. Stanza II. "Trouble and anguish have
seized me." Refrain. The everlasting righteousness of God. - C. A. D,

[Psa 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141). - Here is -

I. David pious, and yet poor. He was a man after God's own heart, and
yet "small and despised" in his own account and in account of many
others.

II\. David poor and yet pious; "small and despised" for his strict and
serious godliness; yet his conscience can witness for him, that he "did
not forget God's precepts." - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141). -

I. The source of man's littleness is in himself.

II\. The source of his greatness is in the Divine word. Hence the
greatest philosopher is a small man compared with the most uneducated
whose delight is in the law of God, and who meditates, etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141). -

I. A little scholar.

II\. A quick learner.

III\. A firm remembrancer.

[Psa 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141). - "Unknown, yet well
known."

I. The estimate formed of the believer by the world.

II\. The estimate formed of the believer by himself.

III\. The profession made by the believer to God.

IV\. On a review, a revised estimate of the believer, [Co1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027); [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005) in C. A. D.

[Psa 119:142](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#142). - Righteousness,
immutability, and truth combined in the revelation of God.

[Psa 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143). - Mingled emotions.

[Psa 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143). -

I. The dark cloud. Trouble, etc.

II\. His silver lining. Yet, etc.

[Psa 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143). -

I. The saint cast into prison.

1\. The jailers, "Trouble and anguish."

2\. Their proceeding, "take hold" and make him fast.

II\. Songs in the night.

1\. Blessed theme, "thy commandments."

2\. Ecstatic melodies: "delights."

III\. Let the prisoners hear them.

1\. Pain-held, sin-held, despair held.

2\. It is matter and melody to open prisons. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143). - Consider, -

I. The excellency of the word, in that it gives delight when trouble and
anguish oppress.

II\. The great kindness of God in so framing his word that it can give
delight at such a time, and under such circumstances.

III\. The disposition of the believer to resort to the word for delight,
when others give themselves over to vain grief and despondency.

IV\. The blessed position of the believer, in that he need never be
without joy. - J. F.

[Psa 119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144). - Everlasting
righteousness revealed in the word, and producing everlasting life in
believers.

[Psa 119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144). -

I. Eternal truths.

II\. Eternal life dependent upon them.

III\. A cry from amid these everlasting hills. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144) (last clause). -

I. Consider the prayer in its simplicity.

1\. It is suitable for the awakened sinner.

2\. For the Christian struggling against temptation.

3\. For the suffering believer.

4\. For the worker.

5\. For aspiring minds in the church of God.

6\. For expiring saints.

II\. The prayer more fully opened up.

1\. Here is want confessed.

2\. The prayer is evidently put upon the footing of free grace - "Give."

III\. Lay bare the argument in the prayer.

1\. The word of God, when practically and experimentally understood, is
a pledge of life.

2\. The word of God is the incorruptible "seed" which liveth and abideth
for ever.

3\. It is the food of life.

4\. It is the very flower and crown and glory of true life.

5\. It is righteous.

6\. It is everlasting. See "Spurgeon's Sermons," No. 1572, "Alive."

[Psa 119:145-148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145). - The cry.

I. Whence it came, from my heart.

II\. Whither it went, to the Lord.

III\. When it was heard, at dawn and dark.

IV\. What it sought, hearing, salvation.

V. What it promised, obedience.

VI\. How it was sustained, by hope in God's word. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145), [Psa
119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146). - The soul's cry.

I. The depth from which it rose.

II\. The height it reached.

[Psa 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145), [Psa
119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146). - Childlike prayer.

I. In its ring, "I cried."

II\. In its directness: "to thee."

III\. In its outburst "whole heart."

IV\. In its outcries: "hear me"; "save me."

V. In its promise of better behaviour, "I will keep thy statutes." - W.
B. H.

[Psa 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145). -

I. The model of prayer, "I cried with my whole heart."

II\. The object of prayer - "Hear me, O Lord."

III\. The accompaniment of prayer, "I will keep thy statutes."

[Psa 119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146). -

I. Prayer remembered.

II\. Prayer continued. "Save me."

III\. Prayer yielding fruit: "I shall keep," etc.

[Psa 119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146). - Salvation.

I. A likely path to it - prayer, cry on.

II\. The proper place for it, "unto thee"; not man, not the heart.

III\. A sound view of it, "keep thy testimonies." Not to escape hell, or
gain heaven, but to please and love God. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147), [Psa
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148). -

I. The heavenly companions' prayer and meditation. Inseparable. Mutually
helpful.

II\. Their favourite seasons' times of stillness; night; the hour before
day.

III\. Their volume and night-lamp, "Thy word;" "Hope."

Or -

I. A grand plea: "Thy lovingkindness." Who can match it? Who can measure
it? Who can mar it?

II\. An insignificant pleader: "my voice." What can "my voice" ever say
to keep step with "thy lovingkindness"? Asking too much out of the
question.

III\. A clever petition ("according to thy judgment"); requesting life;
stolen from God's mouth. God's lovingkindness is matched by God's own
promise. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147). - Observe in this
David's diligence.

I. That it was a personal, closet, or secret prayer; "I cried"; I alone,
with thee in secret.

II\. That it was an early morning prayer: "I prevented the dawning of
the morning."

III\. That it was a vehement and earnest prayer; for it is expressed by
crying. - T. Manton.

[Psa 119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147). - Early rising
commended.

I. A fit time for prayer.

II\. For reading the word.

III\. For indulging the emotions excited by it: "I hoped in thy word."

[Psa 119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148). - "The Inexhaustibleness
of the Bible." A sermon by Harry Melvill, at "The Golden Lecture." 1850.

[Psa 119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148). - Meditation.
Appropriate time, and fruitful subject.

[Psa 119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148). - Meditation in the word
well worth self-denial and care on the part of the Christian.

I. Without meditation reading is a waste of time and an indignity
offered to the word.

II\. Meditation with prayer, but not prayer without meditation, will
discover the sense of the word, when all other means fail; and it has
this advantage, that the meaning sinks into the mind.

III\. Meditation extracts sweetness from the promises, and nourishment
from the whole truth.

IV\. Meditation makes a wise teacher and an efficient worker of one who
has little natural skill or learning.

V. Meditation subjects the soul to the sanctifying power of the word.

VI\. Meditation is an invitation to the Holy Spirit to bless the soul,
for he is closely associated with the truth, and delights to see the
truth honoured. - J. F.

[Psa 119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149). - Prayer - hearing the
result of love; prayer - answering ruled by wisdom.

[Psa 119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149). - Quickening.

I. A prayer of unquestionable necessity: "quicken me."

II\. Twin pleas of irresistible power: "thy lovingkindness:" "thy
judgment." - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149). - The two accordings.

I. The "according," to which a believer hopes to be heard by God, "Hear
my voice according unto thy lovingkindness."

1\. The believer is fully aware of his own unworthiness, and the
imperfections of his prayers, therefore he would have God to accept him
and interpret them after the rule of his own lovingkindness.

2\. Nor does he hope in vain; God's lovingkindness overlooks the
imperfections, and supplies the omissions.

3\. What a blessed thing it is, that while the Holy Spirit helps our
infirmities, the groanings that cannot be uttered are read in their true
meaning by divine lovingkindness!

II\. The "according" to which he expects to be answered by God: "Quicken
me according to thy judgment." "Judgment" here may mean the revealed
word. Then -

1\. He expects to be answered certainly.

2\. He expects to be answered wisely.

3\. He expects to be answered fully, as all his needs require.

4\. He expects that every answer should quicken spiritual life, making
him holy. - J. F.

[Psa 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150), [Psa
119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151). - Against mischief-makers.

I. They press as near as they can to harm us.

II\. They get far from right to get more liberty to injure us.

III\. The Lord is nearer than they.

IV\. God's truth is our shield and sword.

[Psa 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150), [Psa
119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151). - Foes near: the Friend
nearer.

I. The believer viewing with alarm the approach of his foes: "They draw
near."

II\. The believer viewing with comfort the presence of his friend -
"Thou art near-" [Gen 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001); [Kg2
6:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#014). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150), [Psa
119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151). - Two beleaguering hosts.

I. The host of evil: Near -

1\. Demons, godless men, spiritual foes of world and heart.

2\. Mischief in their van.

3\. Law and truth left far behind.

4\. Seeking to narrow their lines.

5\. Thus are all saints beset.

II\. The host of God: nearer - Jehovah, his angels, and battalions of
truths holy and immortal: "Thou and all thy commandments."

1\. Entrenched in the reason: "are truth."

2\. Camped in the heart's pavilion: "near."

3\. Forming impregnable lines within those of the foe. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150). - Consider -

I. Whether the description here given does not apply, more or less, to
all believers in Christ: "They that follow after mischief."

1\. Some men undoubtedly and of set purpose do follow after mischief;
they make themselves the tempters of others, and delight in it.

2\. Others, who do not delight in it, yet cannot help the mischievous
effect of their example.

3\. The very morality of many unbelievers enables them to carry the
pernicious influence of their unbelief where the immorally wicked cannot
come.

4\. Even regular attendants at public worship may by their indecision
encourage others in delay.

II\. The dangerous position of all to whom the description, in any
measure, belongs, "They are far from thy law."

1\. They are so, in that they are unbelievers; for "this is his
commandment, that we shall believe," etc.

2\. They are so, in that they are a cause of evil to others; for we are
commanded to love and do good.

3\. To be far from God's law is to be nigh unto God's righteous wrath.

4\. For the sake of others, as well as their own, men should believe in
Christ, and through faith become sanctified. - J. F.

[Psa 119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151) (last clause). - The
commandments of the Lord are true in principle; they lead to true
living, if carried out; they truly reward the obedient; they never lead
to falsehood, nor cause to be deluded.

[Psa 119:152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#152). - Knowledge of the word.

I. It is well to know it as God's own word.

II\. As founded in truth.

III\. As founded for ever.

IV\. The earlier we know this the better.

[Psa 119:153-159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153). - The two considers.
The subjects, the prayers, the arguments.

[Psa 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153), [Psa
119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154) - Here -

I. David prays for succour in distress. "Is any afflicted? let him
pray"; let him pray as David doth here.

1\. He hath an eye to God's pity and prays, "Consider mine affliction";
take it unto thy thoughts, and all the circumstances, and sit not by as
one unconcerned. God is never unmindful of his people's afflictions, but
he will have us to "put him in remembrance" ([Isa
43:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#026)), to spread our case before him,
and then leave it to his compassionate consideration to do in it as in
his wisdom he shall think fit, in his own time and way.

2\. He has an eye to God's power, and prays, "Deliver me," and again,
"Deliver me." Consider my troubles and bring me out of them. God has
promised deliverance ([Psa 1:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)), and
we may pray for it with submission to his will, and with regard to his
glory, that we may serve him the better.

3\. He has an eye to God's righteousness, and prays, "Plead my cause" be
thou my patron and advocate, and take me for thy client. David had a
just cause, but his adversaries were many and mighty, and he was in
danger of being run down by them - he therefore begs of God to clear his
integrity, and silence their false accusations. If God do not plead his
people's cause, who will? He is righteous, and they commit themselves to
him, and therefore he will do it, and do it effectually, [Isa
51:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#022); [Jer
50:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#034).

4\. He has an eye to God's grace, and prays, "Quicken me" Lord, I am
weak, and unable to bear my troubles; my spirit is apt to droop and
sink, Oh, that thou wouldst revive and comfort me, till the deliverance
is wrought

III\. He pleads his dependence upon the word of God, and his devotedness
to his conduct. "Quicken" and "deliver me according to thy word" of
promise; "for I do not forget thy precepts." The closer we cleave to the
word of God, both as our rule and as our stay, the more assurance we may
have of deliverance in due time. - M. Henry.

[Psa 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153). - The sick man's prayer.

I. The medicine remembered.

II\. The physician sent for.

III\. The physician considering the case.

IV\. The healing wrought. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153). -

I. Lord, do not forget my sorrow.

II\. I do not forget thy law. [Psa
119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154), [Psa
119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156), [Psa
119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). - The threefold quickening. A
capital subject, if the contexts are carefully considered.

[Psa 119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154). - Intercession,
deliverance, quickening, and all in faithfulness to the word.

[Psa 119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154). - A prayer.

I. For promised defence.

II\. For promised deliverance.

III\. For promised revival. - G. R.

[Psa 119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154). - The advocate.

I. The soul hard-pressed by the accuser - in the conscience (l [Joh
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#020)); before the world; at the throne
of grace ([Zac 3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#001)); at the bar of
judgment.

II\. The accused soul committing its case to the Advocate, [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002); [Ti2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#012).

III\. How the case will go. He never lost one yet. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155). -

I. An awful distance.

II\. A distance never decreased by seeking.

III\. A distance increased by sinning.

[Psa 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155). -

I. When salvation is far off.

II\. When it is near.

Or -

I. When the word is far off salvation is far off.

II\. When the word is near salvation is near. - G. R.

[Psa 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155). - How to avoid
salvation.

I. Salvation is inseparable from conformity to God's law: [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005); [Luk
10:25-28](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025); [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017).

II\. Salvation is brought to law-breakers by the Law-giver condescending
to become the Law-keeper and the Law-victim. Salvation is avoided by
those who refuse to be conformed to the eternal law Or will of God. They
perish themselves: their own sin punishes them, necessity punishes them.
- C. A. D.

[Psa 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155). - A syllogism on
salvation.

I. Salvation and obedience go together.

1\. Have a common centre - God, his arm and his lips.

2\. A mutual relation: we are saved in order to obedience. In obeying we
are being saved. Without obedience there is no salvation.

3\. An identical aim - our good and God's glory.

4\. Obedience and salvation are inseparable for ever.

II\. The godless are far from obedience.

1\. Commands avoided.

2\. Submission excluded.

III\. Therefore they are far from salvation. They will not have the one;
they cannot have the other. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156). -

I. A great need.

II\. Laid before a great Lord.

III\. Great favours pleaded.

IV\. A great mercy sought: "Quicken me."

[Psa 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156). - Just, and the
Quickener.

I. Spiritual life is the gift of God's mercy.

II\. Its continuance depends on the exercise of God's power.

III\. We may therefore plead for quickening on the ground of God's
justice. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156). - The saint,

I. Lost in admiration.

1\. Of God's tender mercies.

2\. He cries out at their greatness. They are numerous. Greatly tender.
Great and tender; (exquisite combination!).

II\. Filled with animation. The child of his admiration.

1\. The arrow-like prayer, "Quicken me." To be like, to be true to, such
a God.

2\. The bow in the hand, "according to thy judgments." - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156). -

I. The tenderness of God's greatness.

II\. The greatness of God's tenderness.

III\. The Stimulus to life found in his great and tender presence.

[Psa 119:157](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#157). -

I. A word of multitude: "many."

II\. A tendency of dread, viz., a tendency to decline.

III\. A note of consolation, "yet do I' not decline."

[Psa 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158). - A grievous sight.

I. Transgressors beyond God's bounds.

II\. Bounds so kindly set: "thy word."

III\. Transgressions so wantonly ungrateful, so terribly dangerous, so
fatal.

[Psa 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158). - Sorrow over sinners.

I. A sight we cannot avoid seeing.

II\. A sorrow we ought not to avoid feeling. (See Lot: [Pe2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#007), [Pe2
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008). Moses: [Deu
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#018), [Deu
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#019). Samuel: [Sa1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#011); [Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001). Paul: [Phi
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#018). Christ: [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041).)

III\. A reason we will not avoid endorsing.

[Psa 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158). - A righteous man cannot
but be grieved at the sins of the wicked. He sees in them, -

I. The violation of the divine law which he loves.

II\. Ungrateful rebellion against the God he worships.

III\. Contempt for the gospel of salvation and the blood of Christ.

IV\. The dominion of Satan, the enemy of his God.

V. The degradation of souls which might have been sacred temples.

VI\. Prophetic signs of an awful, everlasting retribution. - J. F.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). -

I. His Own love avowed.

II\. God's love pleaded.

III\. Renewed life implored.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). -

I. Attention invited, "Consider how."

II\. Profession made, "I love thy precepts."

III\. Petition offered: "Quicken me," etc.

IV\. Plea suggested: "according to," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). - My love and thy
lovingkindness. The saint's love.

I. Avowed. "Thou knowest all things," etc.

II\. Submitted. In humble insistance on its sincerity. In sense of its
insufficiency. In prayer to God not to overlook it.

III\. Lost sight of in the sudden glory of God's lovingkindness. Where
is my love now?

IV\. Recovered and humbly brought for quickening. Lord, I'll say no more
about it: "Quicken me." - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). - Quicken me for love's
sake.

I. A prayer for quickened life.

II\. Awakened by love to the divine rule of life.

III\. Enforced by the plea of that love.

IV\. Addressed to the God of love. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159). - Consider, -

I. The holy unsatisfiedness of the believer: "Quicken me" etc.

1\. A prayer frequently occurring in the Psalm, and always urged with
great earnestness.

2\. Its importunity proves the possession of spiritual life; in fact,
none but the living ones crave quickening.

3\. The most earnest feel the most acutely their indwelling sin, and
appreciate most highly thorough sanctification.

4\. Thus, this is, perhaps, the only unsatisfiedness perfectly pure in
its character.

II\. The assuring Divine attribute to which he can appeal, "According to
thy lovingkindness."

1\. An attribute, not only made known in the word, but made manifest to
us in our experience of its gentle dealing.

2\. An attribute that covers sin, and is touched with a feeling of our
infirmities.

3\. An attribute that must be affected with the cry for quickening
grace.

III\. The consideration he ought to be able to lay before God: "Consider
how I love thy precepts."

1\. Because from the word he learnt of the lovingkindness, and through
it received life.

2\. Without it the prayer cannot be genuine.

3\. It is a good reason for expecting more grace; for "whosoever hath,
to him shall be given," etc. - J. F.

[Psa 119:160](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#160). -

I. Early: "true from the beginning."

II\. Late: "endureth for ever."

Or, Truth and immutability the believer's Jachin and Boaz.

[Psa 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161), [Psa
119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162). - God's word, the object of
godly fear and godly joy.

I. It makes the heart quake by its purity and power.

II\. It makes the heart rejoice by its grace and truth. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161). -

I. Wrong without cause.

II\. Right with abundant cause.

[Psa 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161) (second clause). - Awe of
God's word - its propriety, its hallowed influence, the evil of its
absence.

[Psa 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161). - Restrained by awe.

I. The causelessness of persecution.

II\. The temptations to evil occasioned thereby - to revenge: to
apostasy.

III\. The safeguard against falling: awe of God's word. [Sa1
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#006); [Dan
3:16-18](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#016); [Act
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019); [Act
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#029). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162). -

I. The treasure hid, "great spoil" hidden in the divine word.

II\. The treasure found: "as one that findeth," etc.

1\. By reading.

2\. By meditation.

3\. By prayer.

III\. The treasure enjoyed, "I rejoice," etc. - G. R,

[Psa 119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162). - David's joy over God's
word he compares to the joy of the warrior when he finds great spoil.

I. This great joy is sometimes aroused by the fact that there is a word
of God.

1\. The Scriptures are a revealing of God.

2\. The guide of our life.

3\. A sure pledge of mercy.

4\. The beginning of communion with God.

5\. The instrument of usefulness.

II\. Frequently the joy of the believer in the word arises out of his
having had to battle to obtain a grasp of it.

1\. We have had to fight over certain doctrines before we could really
come at them.

2\. The same may be said of the promises.

3\. Of the precepts.

4\. Of the threatenings.

5\. Even about the word which reveals Christ.

III\. At times the joy of the believer lies in enjoying God's word
without any fighting at all - "One that findeth."

IV\. There is a joy arising out of the very fact that Holy Scripture may
be considered to be a spoil.

1\. A spoil is the end of uncertainty.

2\. It is the weakening of the adversary for any future attacks.

3\. It gives a sense of victory.

4\. There is, in dividing the spoil, profit, pleasure, and honour.

5\. The spoiling of the enemy is a prophecy of rest. See "Spurgeon's
Sermons," No. 1641: "Great Spoil."

[Psa 119:163](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#163). - Opposite poles of the
Christian character.

I. Why I hate lying, because it comes from the devil (Pro. 8:44, [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003)), it leads to the devil ([Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008), [Rev
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#015)): it is base, dangerous,
degrading ([Pro 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#005), [Ti1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002), [Ti2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#013)): it is hated by the Lord ([Pro
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#016), [Pro
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017), [Pro
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#022)).

II\. Why I love the law. Because it emanates from God; is the reflection
of his character; is the ideal of my character.

III\. How I came thus to hate and love. By the grace of God: [Psa
119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:163](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#163). -

I. Opposite things.

II\. Opposite feelings.

[Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164). - Praise rendered.
Frequently, statedly, heartily, intelligently.

[Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164). - Perpetual praise.

I. True praise is ever warranted.

II\. True praise is ever welcome.

III\. True praise is never weary. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164). -

I. Some never praise thee; but, "seven times a day," etc.; for I delight
to do so. "Thy righteous judgments" are a terror to them, a joy to me.

II\. Some feebly and coldly praise thee, while, "seven times," etc. My
warm devotion must frequently express itself in praise.

III\. Some are content with occasionally praising thee, but, "seven
times," etc. They think it enough to begin and end the day with praise,
while all the day long I am in the spirit of praise.

IV\. Some soon cease to praise thee, but, "seven times," etc. Not seven
times only, but "unto seventy times seven." Even without ceasing, will I
praise thee. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165). -

I. Great love to a great law.

II\. Great peace under great disquietude.

III\. Great upholding from all stumbling blocks.

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165). - Perfect peace.

I. The law of God should be regarded with love.

II\. Love to the law is productive of great peace. Peace with God
through the blood of reconciliation: peace with self by good conscience
and suppression of evil desires: peace with men by charity.

III\. The peace which springs from love to the law is a security against
stumbling: "nothing shall offend them;" neither the daily cross ([Mar
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#021), [Mar
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#022)); nor the fiery trial ([Mar
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#007)); nor the humbling doctrine ([Joh
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060), [Joh
6:66](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#066), etc.). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165). -

I. The characters described, "they which love thy law."

II\. The blessing they enjoy, "great peace."

III\. The evils they escape, "nothing shall offend them." - G. R.

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165). - The peace and security
of the godly.

I. Their peace. It arises from -

1\. Freedom from an accusing conscience.

2\. Conformity to the requirements of the law.

3\. Enjoyment of the privileges revealed in the law.

4\. Assurance of divine approval and benediction.

II\. Their security.

1\. They are prepared for every duty.

2\. They are proof against every temptation.

3\. They are pledged to final perseverance.

4\. They have the promise of divine protection. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165). -

I. An honourable title, "They which love thy law."

II\. A good possession, "Great peace have they."

III\. A blessed immunity, "Nothing shall offend them." - J. F.

[Psa 119:166](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#166). -

I. A hope which is not ashamed.

II\. A life which is not ashamed.

III\. A God of whom he is not ashamed.

[Psa 119:166](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#166). - A good hope through
grace.

I. Salvation is God's gift, "thy salvation."

II\. Is apprehended by hope, "I have hoped."

III\. Is accompanied by obedience, "and done thy commandments." [Heb
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#009). - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167). - Past and present.

[Psa 119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167). -

I. The more we keep God's testimonies the more we shall love them.

II\. The more we love them the more we shall keep them. - G. R.

[Psa 119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167). -

I. The jewels, "Thy testimonies."

1\. Rare; none like them.

2\. Rich; surpassing valuation.

3\. Beautifying those who wear them.

4\. Glittering with an internal and essential splendour, in the darkness
of this world.

5\. Realising in truth the old superstitions regarding precious stones
having medicinal and magic virtues.

II\. The cabinet, "My soul."

1\. Exactly made to receive the jewels.

2\. A wonderful piece of divine workmanship; but all ruined and marred
unless applied to the use designed.

3\. The only receptacle out of which the genuine beauty of God's
testimonies can so shine as to excite the admiration of beholders.

III\. The lack that keeps all safe, "I love them exceedingly."

1\. Love is the strongest holdfast in the universe.

2\. It is needed, for ten thousand thieves prowl around to steal from us
the treasure.

3\. A love "exceedingly" is a heavenly patent; no ingenuity can pick it;
it is fire-proof and burglar-proof against hell itself. - J. F.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168). -

I. The claim of God's word upon our utmost obedience. "I have kept thy
precepts and thy testimonies." He does not mean that he had kept them
perfectly; for that were to contradict other expressions in the Psalm.
He means that he kept them sincerely and strove to keep them perfectly,
as one who realized their claim upon him.

1\. The whole word is divine, an equal authority pervades every precept;
no distinction should be made of more or less obligation.

2\. The whole word is pure and right; expediency, or making the measure
and manner of obedience suitable to our own purpose, is a false
principle; to be carefully distinguished from righteous expediency,
which is the foregoing of a personal right in consideration of another's
benefit.

3\. The moral code of the word is a unity; obedience is like a connected
chain, a wilful flaw in one link renders all useless.

II\. The consciousness which greatly helps obedience, "For all my ways
are before thee."

1\. "Are before thee," as plainly seen by thee.

2\. "Are before thee," constantly observed.

3\. "Are before thee;" deliberately placed before thee by me, that they
may be corrected and directed. - J. F.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168). - "All my ways are
before thee."

I. The saint's delight.

II\. The sinner's distress. - W. W.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168) (second clause). -

I. Necessarily so: for thou art the omniscient God, [Psa
139:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#003).

II\. Voluntarily so, for I choose to walk in thy sight. See [Psa
116:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#009).

III\. Consciously and blessedly so, for the light of thy countenance
inspires and gladdens me. See [Psa
89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015). - W. H. D. P.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168) (second clause). - Living
in the sight of God. Actually the case with all; designedly the case of
the godly; happily the case of the favoured; preeminently the case of
those who abide in fellowship.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168). -

I. The practical and doctrinal teachings of God before us.

II\. All our ways before him.

III\. The sort of conduct which these two causes will produce.

[Psa 119:169](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169), [Psa
119:170](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#170). -

I. The singular dignity of prayer. We are on earth, but our prayers pass
the seraphim and "come near before God."

II\. The powerful right of prayer - to urge with God his own word:
"according to thy word."

III\. The triumphant possibilities of prayer. Blessing us in mind and
estate. For time and eternity. "Give me understanding." "Deliver me."

IV\. The amazing license accorded to prayer. To double and reiterate its
requests (as here). - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:169](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169). -

I. Admission to the royal court.

II\. Instruction from the royal throne.

III\. Reliance on the royal word.

[Psa 119:170-174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#170). - The pleader: [Psa
119:170](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#170). The singer: [Psa
119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171). The preacher: [Psa
119:172](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#172). The worker: [Psa
119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173). The waiter: [Psa
119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174).

[Psa 119:170](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#170). -

I. Access sought.

II\. Answer entreated.

III\. Argument employed.

[Psa 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171). - Taught; taught to
praise; praising; praising for being taught.

[Psa 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171). - Learning to sing by
learning to obey.

[Psa 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171). - The Happy Scholar.

I. He rejoices in the lesson he has learnt.

II\. In the Teacher who has taught him.

III\. Looks forward to the end of his lesson as the time for the full
singing of his song. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171). - Lessons in Praise. -

I. It is saints' work.

II\. It is sacred work, not to be hurriedly rushed into.

III\. It needs Spirit-instructed singers. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:172](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#172). -

I. The orator: "My tongue shall speak."

II\. His chosen theme: "of thy word."

III\. His inward impulse: "for all thy commandments are righteousness."

[Psa 119:172](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#172). - Savoury Speech.

I. A resolution all believers should make.

II\. The qualification all believers should seek ([Psa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001); [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034), [Mat
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#035)).

III\. The edification believers would thus secure. - C. A. D.

[Psa 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173). -

I. "To will is present with me."

II\. "How to perform that which I would, I find not."

III\. "Help, Lord."

[Psa 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173). -

I. Help needed to keep the divine precepts.

II\. Help sought: "Let thy hand," etc. We should choose nothing and do
nothing in which we cannot ask help from God. - G. R.

[Psa 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173). -

I. God's Hand.

1\. Its warm hold ([Joh 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#029)).

2\. Its wealth of contents ([Psa
104:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#028)).

3\. Its heavy blow ([Psa 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#010)).

4\. Its weight ([Sa1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#011)).

5\. Its saving reach ([Isa 59:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#001)).

6\. Its sweet shadow ([Isa 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002)), etc.

II\. The saint plucks him by the sleeve: "Let thy hand help me."

1\. His humble representation.

2\. His down-drawing of the hand of God. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173). - "Let thy hand help
me."

I. Thy reconciling hand: "stretched out."

II\. Thy comforting hand; like that which touched Daniel and John.

III\. Thy supplying hand. "Thou openest thy hand," etc.

IV\. Thy protecting hand: "all his saints are in thy hand": [Deu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003). "Great Shepherd of the sheep."

V. Thy supporting hand: "I will uphold thee."

VI\. Thy governing hand: "all my times are in thy hand."

VII\. Thy chastening hand: "thy hand was heavy upon me."

VIII\. Thy prospering hand: "the hand of the Lord was with," etc. - W.
J.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174). -

I. Jacob's longings.

II\. Moses' choice.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174). - God's servant drinking
at salvation's well, but unsated.

I. Longing yielding to delight.

1\. At God's salvation.

2\. At the rich Scripture inventory.

II\. Delight bringing forth further longing.

1\. For deeper discoveries in the word.

2\. Richer experiences in the life.

3\. Heaven's consummation. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174). -

I. Sighings for heaven. Holiness, happiness, God.

II\. Sips by the way. The word of God, the will of God, service of God,
the God in all. - W. B. H.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174). - "I have longed for thy
salvation." Thy holy salvation. Thy full salvation. Thy free salvation.
Thy present salvation. Thy permanent salvation. - W. J.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174). - "I have longed," etc.
This longing arises,

I. From a painful consciousness of the need of salvation.

II\. From a perception of the glories of God's salvation.

III\. From the promises which give assurance of the possibility of
obtaining this salvation.

IV\. From the gracious promptings of the Holy Ghost. - W. H. J. P.

[Psa 119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175). -

I. The highest life.

II\. The highest occupation.

III\. Both dependent on the highest aid.

[Psa 119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175). - Praise.

I. The noblest employment of life - to praise God.

II\. The noblest presentation of praise - the holy life.

III\. The noblest application of divine judgments - to inspire praise.

[Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176). -

I. My confession: "I have gone astray."

II\. My profession: "thy servant."

III\. My petition: "seek thy servant."

IV\. My plea: "for I do not forget." etc.

[Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176). -

I. The confession: "I have gone astray."

II\. The petition: "Seek thy servant."

III\. The plea, "For I do not," etc. - G. R.

[Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176). - The last verse as
such. The closing minor cadence.

I. The highest flights of human devotion must end in confession of sin,
"I have gone astray."

II\. The sincerest professions of human fidelity must give place to the
acknowledgment of helplessness, "seek thy servant."

III\. The loftiest human declarations of love to God's law must come
down to the mournful acknowledgment that we have only not forgotten it.
- C. A. D.

[Psalms 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 119:1</span></span>

1 Blessed are the undefiled in the way, who walk in the law of the Lord.

2 Blessed are they that keep his testimonies, and that seek him with the
whole heart.

3 They also do no iniquity: they walk in his ways.

4 Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently.

5 O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!

6 Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy
commandments.

7 I will praise thee with uprightness of heart, when I shall have
learned thy righteous judgments.

8 I will keep thy statutes: O forsake me not utterly.

These first eight verses are taken up with a contemplation of the
blessedness which comes through keeping the statutes of the Lord. The
subject is treated in a devout manner rather than in a didactic style.
Heart-fellowship with God is enjoyed through a love of that word which
is God's way of communing with the soul by his Holy Spirit. Prayer and
praise and all sorts of devotional acts and feelings gleam through the
verses like beams of sunlight through an olive grove. You are not only
instructed, but influenced to holy emotion, and helped to express the
same.

Lovers of God's holy words are blessed, because they are preserved from
defilement ([Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)), because they
are made practically holy ([Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)
and [Psa 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003)), and are led to follow
after God sincerely and intensely ([Psa
119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)). It is seen that this holy
walking must be desirable because God commands it ([Psa
119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004)); therefore the pious soul prays
for it ([Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005)), and feels that
its comfort and courage must depend upon obtaining it ([Psa
119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006)). In the prospect of answered
prayer, yea, while the prayer is being answered the heart is full of
thankfulness ([Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007)), and is
fixed in solemn resolve not to miss the blessing if the Lord will give
enabling grace ([Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008)).

The changes are rung upon the words "way" - "undefiled in the way,"
"walk in his ways," "O that my ways were directed"; "keep" - "keep his
testimonies," "keep thy precepts diligently," "directed to keep," "I
will keep"; and "walk" - "walk in the law," "walk in his ways." Yet
there is no tautology, nor is the same thought repeated, though to the
careless reader it may seem so.

The change from statements about others and about the Lord to more
personal dealing with God begins in [Psa
119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003), and becomes more clear as we
advance, till in the later verses the communion becomes most intense and
soul moving. O that every reader may feel the glow.

[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001)

"Blessed." The Psalmist is so enraptured with the word of God that he
regards it as his highest ideal of blessedness to be conformed to it. He
has gazed on the beauties of the perfect law, and, as if this verse were
the sum and outcome of all his emotions, he exclaims, "Blessed is the
man whose life is the practical transcript of the will of God." True
religion is not cold and dry; it has its exclamations and raptures. We
not only judge the keeping of God's law to be a wise and proper thing,
but we are warmly enamoured of its holiness, and cry out in adoring
wonder, "Blessed are the undefiled!" meaning thereby, that we eagerly
desire to become such ourselves, and wish for no greater happiness than
to be perfectly holy. It may be that the writer laboured under a sense
of his own faultiness, and therefore envied the blessedness of those
whose walk had been more pure and clean; indeed, the very contemplation
of the perfect law of the Lord upon which he now entered was quite
enough to make him bemoan his own imperfections, and sigh for the
blessedness of an undefiled walk.

True religion is always practical, for it does not permit us to delight
ourselves in a perfect rule without exciting in us a longing to be
conformed to it in our daily lives. A blessing belongs to those who hear
and read and understand the word of the Lord; yet is it a far greater
blessing to be actually obedient to it, and to carry out in our walk and
conversation what we learn in our searching of the Scriptures. Purity in
our way and walk is the truest blessedness.

[Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) is not only a preface to
the whole Psalm, but it may also be regarded as the text upon which the
rest is a discourse. It is similar to the benediction of the first
Psalm, which is set in the forefront of the entire book: there is a
likeness between this [Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) and
the Psalter, and this is one point of it, that it begins with a
benediction. In this, too, we see some foreshadowing of the Son of
David, who began his great sermon as David began his great Psalm. It is
well to open our mouth with blessings. When we cannot bestow them, we
can show the way of obtaining them, and even if we do not yet possess
them ourselves, it may be profitable to contemplate them, that our
desires may be excited, and our souls moved to seek after them. Lord, if
I am not yet so blessed to be among the undefiled in thy way, yet I will
think much of the happiness which these enjoy, and set it before me as
my life's ambition.

As David thus begins his Psalm, so should young men begin their lives,
so should new converts commence their profession, so should all
Christians begin every day. Settle it in your hearts as a first
postulate and sure rule of practical science that holiness is happiness,
and that it is our wisdom first to seek the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness. Well begun is half done. To start with a true idea of
blessedness is beyond measure important. Man began with being blessed in
his innocence, and if our fallen race is ever to be blessed again, it
must find it where it lost it at the beginning, namely, in conformity to
the command of the Lord.

"The undefiled in the way." They are in the way, the right way, the way
of the Lord, and they keep that way, walking with holy carefulness and
washing their feet daily, lest they be found spotted by the flesh. They
enjoy great blessedness in their own souls; indeed, they have a
foretaste of heaven where the blessedness lieth much in being absolutely
undefiled; and could they continue utterly and altogether without
defilement, doubtless they would have the days of heaven upon the earth.
Outward evil would little hurt us if we were entirely rid of the evil of
sin, an attainment which with the best of us lies still in the region of
desire, and is not yet fully reached, though we have so clear a view of
it that we see it to be blessedness itself; and therefore we eagerly
press towards it.

He whose life is in a gospel sense undefiled, is blessed, because he
could never have reached this point if a thousand blessings had not
already been bestowed on him. By nature we are defiled and out of the
way, and we must therefore have been washed in the atoning blood to
remove defilement, and we must have been converted by the power of the
Holy Ghost, or we should not have been turned into the way of peace, nor
be undefiled in it. Nor is this all, for the continual power of grace is
needed to keep a believer in the right way, and to preserve him from
pollution. All the blessings of the covenant must have been in a measure
poured upon those who from day to day have been enabled to perfect
holiness In the fear of the Lord. Their way is the evidence of their
being the blessed of the Lord.

David speaks of a high degree of blessedness; for some are in the way,
and are true servants of God, but they are as yet faulty in many ways
and bring defilement upon themselves. Others who walk in the light more
fully, and maintain closer communion with God, are enabled to keep
themselves unspotted from the world, and these enjoy far more peace and
joy than their less watchful brethren. Doubtless, the more complete our
sanctification the more intense our blessedness. Christ is our way, and
we are not only alive in Christ, but we are to live in Christ; the
sorrow is that we bespatter his holy way with our selfishness,
self-exaltation, wilfulness, and carnality, and so we miss a great
measure of the blessedness which is in him as our way. A believer who
errs is still saved, but the joy of his salvation is not experienced by
him; he is rescued but not enriched, greatly borne with, but not greatly
blessed.

How easily may defilement come upon us even in our holy things, yea,
even in the way. We may even come from public or private worship with
defilement upon the conscience gathered when we were on our knees. There
was no floor to the tabernacle but the desert sand, and hence the
priests at the altar were under frequent necessity to wash their feet,
and by the kind foresight of their God, the laver stood ready for their
cleansing, even as for us our Lord Jesus still stands ready to wash our
feet, that we may be clean every whit. Thus our text sets forth the
blessedness of the apostles in the upper room when Jesus had said of
them, "Ye are clean."

What blessedness awaits those who follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goeth, and are preserved from the evil which is in the world through
lust. These shall be the envy of all mankind "in that day." Though now
they despise them as precise fanatics and Puritans, the most prosperous
of sinners shall then wish that they could change places with them. O my
soul, seek thou thy blessedness in following hard after thy Lord, who
was holy, harmless, undefiled; for there hast thou found peace hitherto,
and there wilt thou find it for ever.

"Who walk in the law of the Lord." In them is found habitual holiness.
Their walk, their common everyday life is obedience unto the Lord. They
live by rule, that rule the command of the Lord God. Whether they eat or
drink, or whatsoever they do, they do all in the name of their great
Master and Exemplar. To them religion is nothing out of the way, it is
their everyday walk: it moulds their common actions as well as their
special devotions. This ensures blessedness. He who walks in God's law
walks in God's company, and he must be blessed; he has God's smile,
God's strength, God's secret with him, and how can he be otherwise than
blessed?

The holy life is a walk, a steady progress, a quiet advance, a lasting
continuance. Enoch walked with God. Good men always long to be better,
and hence they go forward. Good men are never idle, and hence they do
not lie down or loiter, but they are still walking onward to their
desired end. They are not hurried, and worried, and flurried, and so
they keep the even tenor of their way, walking steadily towards heaven;
and they are not in perplexity as to how to conduct themselves, for they
have a perfect rule, which they are happy to walk by. The law of the
Lord is not irksome to them; its commandments are not grievous, and its
restrictions are not slavish in their esteem. It does not appear to them
to be an impossible law, theoretically admirable but practically absurd,
but they walk by it and in it. They do not consult it now and then as a
sort of rectifier of their wanderings, but they use it as a chart for
their daily sailing, a map of the road for their life-journey. Nor do
they ever regret that they have entered upon the path of obedience, else
they would leave it, and that without difficulty, for a thousand
temptations offer them opportunity to return; their continued walk in
the law of the Lord is their best testimony to the blessedness of such a
condition of life. Yes, they are blessed even now. The Psalmist himself
bore witness to the fact: he had tried and proved it, and wrote it down,
as a fact which defied all denial. Here it stands in the forefront of
David's magnum opus, written on the topmost line of his greatest Psalm -
"Blessed are they who walk in the law of the Lord." Rough may be the
way, stern the rule, hard the discipline, - all these we know and more,
- but a thousand heaped-up blessednesses are still found in godly
living, for which we bless the Lord.

We have in this verse blessed persons who enjoy five blessed things, A
blessed way, blessed purity, a blessed law, given by a blessed Lord, and
a blessed walk therein; to which we may add the blessed testimony of the
Holy Ghost given in this very passage that they are in very deed the
blessed of the Lord.

The blessedness which is thus set before us we must aim at, but we must
not think to obtain it without earnest effort. David has a great deal to
say about it; his discourse in this Psalm is long and solemn, and it is
a hint to us that the way of perfect obedience is not learned in a day;
there must be precept upon precept, line upon line, and after efforts
long enough to be compared with the 176 verses of this Psalm we may
still have to cry, "I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy
servant; for I do not forget thy commandments."

It must, however, be our plan to keep the word of the Lord much upon our
minds; for this discourse upon blessedness has for its pole-star the
testimony of the Lord, and only by daily communion with the Lord by his
word can we hope to learn his way, to be purged from defilement, and to
be made to walk in his statutes. We set out upon this exposition with
blessedness before us; we see the way to it, and we know where the law
of it is to be found: let us pray that as we pursue our meditation we
may grow into the habit and walk of obedience, and so feel the
blessedness of which we read.

[Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)

"Blessed are they that keep his testimonies." What! A second blessing?
Yes, they are doubly blessed whose outward life is supported by an
inward zeal for God's glory. In [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) we had an undefiled way, and it
was taken for granted that the purity in the way was not mere surface
work, but was attended by the inward truth and life which comes of
divine grace. Here that which was implied is expressed. Blessedness is
ascribed to those who treasure up the testimonies of the Lord: in which
is implied that they search the Scriptures, that they come to an
understanding of them, that they love them, and then that they continue
in the practice of them. We must first get a thing before we can keep
it. In order to keep it well we must get a firm grip of it: we cannot
keep in the heart that which we have not heartily embraced by the
affections. God's word is his witness or testimony to grand and
important truths which concern himself and our relation to him: this we
should desire to know; knowing it, we should believe it; believing it,
we should love it; and loving it, we should hold it fast against all
comers. There is a doctrinal keeping of the word when we are ready to
die for its defence, and a practical keeping of it when we actually live
under its power. Revealed truth is precious as diamonds, and should be
kept or treasured up in the memory and in the heart as jewels In a
casket, or as the law was kept in the ark; this however is not enough,
for it is meant for practical use, and therefore it must be kept or
followed, as men keep to a path, or to a line of business. If we keep
God's testimonies they will keep us; they will keep us right in opinion,
comfortable in spirit, holy in conversation, and hopeful in expectation.
If they were ever worth having - and no thoughtful person will question
that - then they are worth keeping; their designed effect does not come
through a temporary seizure of them, but by a persevering keeping of
them: "in keeping of them there is great reward."

We are bound to keep with all care the word of God, because it is his
testimonies. He gave them to us, but they are still his own. We are to
keep them as a watchman guards his master's house, as a steward husbands
his lord's goods, as a shepherd keeps his employer's flock. We shall
have to give an account, for we are put in trust with the gospel, and
woe to us if we be found unfaithful. We cannot fight a good fight, nor
finish our course, unless we keep the faith. To this end the Lord must
keep us: only those who are kept by the power of God unto salvation will
ever be able to keep his testimonies. What a blessedness is therefore
evidenced and testified by a careful belief in God's word, and a
continual obedience thereunto. God has blessed them, in blessing them,
and will bless them for ever. That blessedness which David saw in others
he realized for himself, for in [Psa
119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168) he says, "I have kept thy
precepts and thy testimonies," and in [Psa
119:54-56](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054) he traces his joyful songs
and happy memories to this same keeping of the law, and he confesses,
"This I had because I kept thy precepts." Doctrines which we teach to
others we should experience for ourselves.

"And that seek him with the whole heart." Those who keep the Lord's
testimonies are sure to seek after himself. If his word is precious we
may be sure that he himself is still more so. Personal dealing with a
personal God is the longing of all those who have allowed the word of
the Lord to have its full effect upon them. If we once really know the
power of the gospel we must seek the God of the gospel. "O that I knew
where I might find HIM," will be our whole-hearted cry. See the growth
which these sentences indicate: first, in the way, then walking in it,
then finding and keeping the treasure of truth, and to crown all,
seeking after the Lord of the way himself. Note also that the further a
soul advances in grace the more spiritual and divine are its longings;
an outward walk does not content the gracious soul, nor even the
treasured testimonies; it reaches out in due time after God himself, and
when it in a measure finds him, still yearns for more of him, and seeks
him still.

Seeking after God signifies a desire to commune with him more closely,
to follow him more fully, to enter into more perfect union with his mind
and will, to promote his glory, and to realize completely all that he is
to holy hearts. The blessed man has God already, and for this reason he
seeks him. This may seem a contradiction: it is only a paradox.

God is not truly sought by the cold researches of the brain: we must
seek him with the heart. Love reveals itself to love: God manifests his
heart to the heart of his people. It is in vain that we endeavour to
comprehend him by reason; we must apprehend him by affection. But the
heart must not be divided with many objects if the Lord is to be sought
by us. God is one, and we shall not know him till our heart is one. A
broken heart need not be distressed at this, for no heart is so whole in
its seekings after God as a heart which is broken, whereof every
fragment sighs and cries after the great Father's face. It is the
divided heart which the doctrine of the text censures, and strange to
say, in scriptural phraseology, a heart may be divided and not broken,
and it may be broken but not divided; and yet again it may be broken and
be whole, and it never can be whole until it is broken. When our whole
heart seeks the holy God in Christ Jesus it has come to him of whom it
is written, "as many as touched him were made perfectly whole."

That which the Psalmist admires in this verse he claims in [Psa
119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010), where he says, "With my whole
heart have I sought thee." It is well when admiration of a virtue leads
to the attainment of it. Those who do not believe in the blessedness of
seeking the Lord will not be likely to arouse their hearts to the
pursuit, but he who calls another blessed because of the grace which he
sees in him is on the way to gaining the same grace for himself.

If those who seek the Lord are blessed, what shall be said of those who
actually dwell with him and know that he is theirs?

"To those who fall, how kind thou art!

How good to those who seek

But what to those who find? Ah! this

Nor tongue nor pen can show!

The love of Jesus - what it is,

None but his loved ones know."

[Psa 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003)

"They also do no iniquity." Blessed indeed would those men be of whom
this could be asserted without reserve and without explanation: we shall
have reached the region of pure blessedness when we altogether cease
from sin. Those who follow the word of God do no iniquity, the rule is
perfect, and if it be constantly followed no fault will arise. Life, to
the outward observer, at any rate, lies much in doing, and he who in his
doings never swerves from equity, both towards God and man, has hit upon
the way of perfection, and we may be sure that his heart is right. See
how a whole heart leads to the avoidance of evil, for the Psalmist says,
"That seek him with the whole heart. They also do no iniquity." We fear
that no man can claim to be absolutely without sin, and yet we trust
there are many who do not designedly, wilfully, knowingly, and
continuously do anything that is wicked, ungodly, or unjust. Grace keeps
the life righteous as to act even when the Christian has to bemoan the
transgressions of the heart. Judged as men should be judged by their
fellows, according to such just rules as men make for men, the true
people of God do no iniquity: they are honest, upright, and chaste, and
touching justice and morality they are blameless. Therefore are they
happy.

"They walk in his ways." They attend not only to the great main highway
of the law, but to the smaller paths of the particular precepts. As they
will perpetrate no sin of commission, so do they labour to be free from
every sin of omission. It is not enough to them to be blameless, they
wish also to be actively righteous. A hermit may escape into solitude
that he may do no iniquity, but a saint lives in society that he may
serve his God by walking in his ways. We must be positively as well as
negatively right: we shall not long keep the second unless we attend to
the first, for men will be walking one way or another, and if they do
not follow the path of God's law they will soon do iniquity. The surest
way to abstain from evil is to be fully occupied in doing good. This
verse describes believers as they exist among us: although they have
their faults and infirmities, yet they hate evil, and will not permit
themselves to do it; they love the ways of truth, right and true
godliness, mid habitually they walk therein. They do not claim to be
absolutely perfect except in their desires, and there they are pure
indeed, for they pant to be kept from all sin, and to be led into all
holiness.

[Psa 119:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#004)

"Thou hast commanded us to keep thy precepts diligently." So that when
we have done all we are unprofitable servants, we have done only that
which it,was our duty to have done, seeing we have our Lord's command
for it. God's precepts require careful obedience: there is no keeping
them by accident. Some give to God a careless service, a sort of hit or
miss obedience, but the Lord has not commanded such service, nor will he
accept it. His law demands the love of all our heart, soul, mind, and
strength; and a careless religion has none of these. We are also called
to zealous obedience. We are to keep the precepts abundantly: the
vessels of obedience should be filled to the brim, and the command
carried out to the full of its meaning. As a man diligent in business
arouses himself to do as much trade as he can, so must we be eager to
serve the Lord as much as possible. Nor must we spare pains to do so,
for a diligent obedience will also be laborious and self-denying. Those
who are diligent in business rise up early and sit up late, and deny
themselves much of comfort and repose. They are not soon tired, or if
they are they persevere even with aching brow and weary eyes. So should
we serve the Lord. Such a Master deserves diligent servants; such
service he demands, and will be content with nothing less. How seldom do
men render it, and hence many through their negligence miss the double
blessing spoken of in this Psalm.

Some are diligent in superstition and will worship; be it ours to be
diligent in keeping God's precepts. It is no use travelling fast if we
are not in the right road. Men have been diligent in a losing business,
and the more they have traded the more they have lost: this is bad
enough in commerce, we cannot afford to have it so in our religion.

God has not commanded us to be diligent in making precepts, but in
keeping them. Some bind yokes upon their own necks, and make bonds and
rules for others: but the wise course is to be satisfied with the rules
of holy Scripture, and to strive to keep them all, in all places,
towards all men, and in all respects. If we do not this, we may become
eminent in our own religion, but we shall not have kept the command of
God, nor shall we be accepted of him.

The Psalmist began with the third person: he is now coming near home,
and has already reached the first person plural, according to our
version; we shall soon hear him crying out personally and for himself.
As the heart glows with love to holiness, we long to have a personal
interest in it. The word of God is a heart-affecting book, and when we
begin to sing its praises it soon comes home to us, and sets us praying
to be ourselves conformed to its teachings.

[Psa 119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005)

"O that my ways were directed to keep thy statutes!" Divine commands
should direct us in the subject of our prayers. We cannot of ourselves
keep God's statutes as he would have them kept, and yet we long to do
so: what resort have we but prayer? We must ask the Lord to work our
works in us, or we shall never work out his commandments. This verse is
a sigh of regret because the Psalmist feels that he has not kept the
precepts diligently, it is a cry of weakness appealing for help to one
who can aid, it is a request of bewilderment from one who has lost his
way and would fain be directed in it, and it is a petition of faith from
one who loves God and trusts in him for grace.

Our ways are by nature opposed to the way of God, and must be turned by
the Lord's direction in another direction from that which they
originally take or they will lead us down to destruction. God can direct
the mind and will without violating our free agency, and he will do so
in answer to prayer; in fact, he has begun the work already in those who
are heartily praying after the fashion of this verse. It is for present
holiness that the desire arises in the heart. O that it were so now with
me: but future persevering holiness is also meant, for he longs for
grace to keep henceforth and for ever the statutes of the Lord.

The sigh of the text is really a prayer, though it does not exactly take
that form. Desires and longings are of the essence of supplication, and
it little matters what shape they take. "O that" is as acceptable a
prayer as "Our Father."

One would hardly have expected a prayer for direction; rather should we
have looked for a petition for enabling. Can we not direct ourselves?
What if we cannot row, we can steer. The Psalmist herein confesses that
even for the smallest part of his duty he felt unable without grace. He
longed for the Lord to influence his will, as well as to strengthen his
hands. We want a rod to point out the way as much as a staff to support
us in it.

The longing of the text is prompted by admiration of the blessedness of
holiness, by a contemplation of the righteous man's beauty of character,
and by a reverent awe of the command of God. It is a personal
application to the writer's own case of the truths which he had been
considering. "O that my ways," etc. It were well if all who hear and
read the word would copy this example and turn all that they hear into
prayer. We should have more keepers of the statutes if we had more who
sighed and cried after the grace to do so.

[Psa 119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006)

"Then shall I not be ashamed." He had known shame, and here he rejoices
in the prospect of being freed from it. Sin brings shame, and when sin
is gone, the reason for being ashamed is banished. What a deliverance
this is, for to some men death is preferable to shame! "When I have
respect unto all thy commandments." When he respects God he shall
respect himself and be respected. Whenever we err we prepare ourselves
for confusion of face and sinking of heart: if no one else is ashamed of
me I shall be ashamed of myself if I do iniquity. Our first parents
never knew shame till they made the acquaintance of the old serpent, and
it never left them till their gracious God had covered them with
sacrificial skins. Disobedience made them naked and ashamed. We,
ourselves, will always have cause for shame till every sin is
vanquished, and every duty is observed. When we pay a continual and
universal respect to the will of the Lord, then we shall be able to look
ourselves in the face in the looking-glass of the law, and we shall not
blush at the sight of men or devils, however eager their malice may be
to lay somewhat to our charge.

Many suffer from excessive diffidence. and this verse suggests a cure.
An abiding sense of duty will make us bold, we shall be afraid to be
afraid. No shame in the presence of man will hinder us when the fear of
God has taken full possession of our minds. When we are on the king's
highway by daylight, and are engaged upon royal business, we need ask no
man's leave. It would be a dishonour to a king to be ashamed of his
livery and his service; no such shame should ever crimson the cheek of a
Christian, nor will it if he has due reverence for the Lord his God.
There is nothing to be ashamed of in a holy life; a man may be ashamed
of his pride, ashamed of his wealth, ashamed of his own children, but he
will never be ashamed of having in all things regarded the will of the
Lord his God.

It is worthy of remark that David promises himself no immunity from
shame till he has carefully paid homage to all the precepts. Mind that
word "all," and leave not one command out of your respect. Partial
obedience still leaves us liable to be called to account for those
commands which we have neglected. A man may have a thousand virtues, and
yet a single failing may cover him with shame.

To a poor sinner who is buried in despair, it may seem a very unlikely
thing that he should ever be delivered from shame. He blushes, and is
confounded, and feels that he can never lift up his face again. Let him
read these words: "Then shall I not be ashamed." David is not dreaming,
nor picturing an impossible case. Be assured, dear friend, that the Holy
Spirit can renew in you the image of God, so that you shall yet look up
without fear. O for sanctification to direct us in God's way, for then
shall we have boldness both towards God and his people, and shall no
more crimson with confusion.

[Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007)

"I will praise thee." From prayer to praise is never a long or a
difficult journey. Be sure that he who prays for holiness will one day
praise for happiness. Shame having vanished, silence is broken, and the
formerly silent man declares, "I will praise thee." He cannot but
promise praise while he seeks sanctification. Mark how well he knows
upon what head to set the crown. "I will praise thee." He would himself
be praiseworthy, but he counts God alone worthy of praise. By the sorrow
and shame of sin he measures his obligations to the Lord who would teach
him the art of living as that he should clean escape from his former
misery.

"With uprightness of heart," His heart would be upright if the Lord
would teach him, and then it should praise its teacher. There is such a
thing as false and feigned praise, and this the Lord abhors; but there
is no music like that which comes from a pure soul which standeth in its
integrity. Heart praise is required, uprightness in that heart, and
teaching to make the heart upright. An upright heart is sure to bless
the Lord, for grateful adoration is a part of its uprightness; no man
can be right unless he is upright towards God, and this involves the
rendering to him the praise which is his due.

"When I shall have learned thy righteous judgments." We must learn to
praise, learn that we may praise, and praise when we have learned. If we
are ever to learn, the Lord must teach us, and especially upon such a
subject as his judgments, for they are a great deep. While these are
passing before our eyes, and we are learning from them, we ought to
praise God, for the original is not, "when I have learned," but, "in my
learning." While yet I am a scholar I will be a chorister: my upright
heart shall praise thine uprightness, my purified judgment shall admire
thy judgments. God's providence is a book full of teaching, and to those
whose hearts are right it is a music book, out of which they chant to
Jehovah's praise. God's word is full of the record of his righteous
providences, and as we read it we feel compelled to burst forth into
expressions of holy delight and ardent praise. When we both read of
God's judgments and become joyful partakers in them, we are doubly moved
to song - song in which there is neither formality, nor hypocrisy, nor
lukewarmness, for the heart is upright in the presentation of its
praise.

[Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008)

"I will keep thy statutes." A calm resolve. When praise calms down into
solid resolution it is well with the soul. Zeal which spends itself in
singing, and leaves no practical residuum of holy living, is little
worth: "I will praise" should be coupled with "I will keep." This firm
resolve is by no means boastful, like Peter's "though I should die with
thee, yet will I not forsake thee," for it is followed by a humble
prayer for divine help, "O forsake me not utterly." Feeling his own
incapacity he trembles lest he should be left to himself, and this fear
is increased by the horror which he has of falling into sin. The "I will
keep" sounds rightly enough now that the humble cry is heard with it.
This is a happy amalgam: resolution and dependence. We meet with those
who to all appearance humbly pray, but there is no force of character,
no decision in them, and consequently the pleading of the closet is not
embodied in the life: on the other hand, we meet with abundance of
resolve attended with an entire absence of dependence upon God, and this
makes as poor a character as the former. The Lord grant us to have such
a blending of excellences that we may be "perfect and entire, wanting
nothing."

This prayer is one which is certain to be heard, for assuredly it must
be highly pleasing to God to see a man set upon obeying his will, and
therefore it must be most agreeable to him to be present with such a
person, and to help him in his endeavours. How can he forsake one who
does not forsake his law?

The peculiar dread which tinges this prayer with a sombre hue is the
fear of utter forsaking. Well may the soul cry out against such a
calamity. To be left, that we may discover our weakness, is a sufficient
trial: to be altogether forsaken would be ruin and death. Hiding the
face in a little wrath for a moment brings us very low: an absolute
desertion would land us ultimately in the lowest hell. But the Lord
never has utterly forsaken his servants, and he never will, blessed be
his name. If we long to keep his statutes he will keep us; yea, his
grace will keep us keeping his law.

There is rather a descent from the mount of benediction with which [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) began to the almost wail of this
[Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008), yet this is spiritually a
growth, for from admiration of goodness we have come to a burning
longing after God and communion with him, and an intense horror lest it
should not be enjoyed. The sigh of [Psa
119:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#005) is now supplanted by an actual
prayer from the depths of a heart conscious of its undesert, and its
entire dependence upon divine love. The two "I wills" needed to be
seasoned with some such lowly petition, or it might have been thought
that the good man's dependence was in some degree fixed upon his own
determination. lie presents his resolutions like a sacrifice, but he
cries to heaven for the fire.

[Psalms 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 119:9</span></span>

9 Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way? by taking heed thereto
according to thy word.

10 With my whole heart have I sought thee: O let me not wander from thy
commandments.

11 Thy word have I hid in mine heart, that I might not sin against thee.

12 Blessed art thou, O Lord: teach me thy statutes.

13 With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth.

14 I have rejoiced in the way of thy testimonies, as much as in all
riches.

15 I will meditate in thy precepts, and have respect unto thy ways.

16 I will delight myself in thy statutes: I will not forget thy word.

[Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009)

"Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse his way?" How shall he become and
remain practically holy? He is but a young man, full of hot passions,
and poor in knowledge and experience; how shall he get right, and keep
right? Never was there a more important question for any man; never was
there a fitter time for asking it than at the commencement of life. It
is by no means an easy task which the prudent man sets before him. He
wishes to choose a clean way, to be himself clean in it, to cleanse it
of any foulness which may arise in the future, and to end by showing a
clear course from the first step to the last; but, alas, his way is
already unclean by actual sin which he has already committed, and he
himself has within his nature a tendency towards that which defileth.
Here, then, is the difficulty, first of beginning aright, next of being
always able to know and choose the right, and of continuing in the right
till perfection is ultimately reached' this is hard for any man, how
shall a youth accomplish it? The way, or life, of the man has to be
cleansed from the sins of his youth behind him, and kept clear of the
sins which temptation will place before him: this is the work, this is
the difficulty.

No nobler ambition can lie before a youth, none to which he is called by
so sure a calling; but none in which greater difficulties can be found.
Let him not, however, shrink from the glorious enterprise of living a
pure and gracious life; rather let him enquire the way by which all
obstacles may be overcome. Let him not think that he knows the road to
easy victory, nor dream that he can keep himself by his own wisdom; he
will do well to follow the Psalmist, and become an earnest enquirer
asking how he may cleanse his way. Let him become a practical disciple
of the holy God, who alone can teach him how to overcome the world, the
flesh, and the devil, that trinity of defilers by whom many a hopeful
life has been spoiled. He is young and unaccustomed to the road, let him
not be ashamed often to enquire his way of him who is so ready and so
able to instruct him in it.

Our "way" is a subject which concerns us deeply, and it is far better to
enquire about it than to speculate upon mysterious themes which rather
puzzle than enlighten the mind. Among all the questions which a young
man asks, and they are many, let this be the first and chief'
"Wherewithal shall I cleanse my way?" This is a question suggested by
common sense, and pressed home by daily occurrences; but it is not to be
answered by unaided reason, nor, when answered, can the directions be
carried out by unsupported human power. It is ours to ask the question,
it is God's to give the answer and enable us to carry it out.

"By taking heed thereto according to thy word." Young man, the Bible
must be your chart, and you must exercise great watchfulness that your
way may be according to its directions. You must take heed to your daily
life, as well as study your Bible, and you must study your Bible that
you may take heed to your daily life. With the greatest care a man will
go astray if his map misleads him; but with the most accurate map he
will still lose his road if he does not take heed to it. The narrow way
was never hit upon by chance, neither did any heedless man ever lead a
holy life. We can sin without thought, we have only to neglect the great
salvation and ruin our souls; but to obey the Lord and walk uprightly
will need all our heart and soul and mind. Let the careless remember
this.

Yet the "word" is absolutely necessary; for, otherwise, care will darken
into morbid anxiety, and conscientiousness may become superstition. A
captain may watch from his deck all night; but if he knows nothing of
the coast, and has no pilot on board, he may be carefully hastening on
to shipwreck. It is not enough to desire to be right; for ignorance may
make us think that we are doing God service when we are provoking him,
and the fact of our ignorance will not reverse the character of our
action, however much it may mitigate its criminality. Should a man
carefully measure out what he believes to be a dose of useful medicine,
he will die if it should turn out that he has taken up the wrong vial,
and has poured out a deadly poison' the fact that he did it ignorantly
will not alter the result. Even so, a young man may surround himself
with ten thousand ills, by carefully using an unenlightened judgment,
and refusing to receive instruction from the word of God. Wilful
ignorance is in itself wilful sin, and the evil which comes of it is
without excuse. Let each man, whether young or old, who desires to be
holy have a holy watchfulness in his heart, and keep his Holy Bible
before his open eye. There he will find every turn of the road marked
down, every slough and miry place pointed out, with the way to go
through unsoiled; and there, too, he will find light for his darkness,
comfort for his weariness, and company for his loneliness, so that by
its help he shall reach the benediction of [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) of the Psalm, which suggested
the Psalmist's enquiry, and awakened his desires.

Note how the first section of eight verses has for its first verse,
"Blessed are the undefiled in the way," and the second section runs
parallel to it, with the question "Wherewithal shall a young man cleanse
his way?" The blessedness which is set before us in a conditional
promise should be practically sought for in the way appointed. The Lord
saith, "For this will I be enquired of by the house of Israel to do it
for them."

[Psa 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010)

"With my whole heart have I sought thee." His heart had gone after God
himself: he had not only desired to obey his laws, but to commune with
his person. This is a right royal search and pursuit, and well may it be
followed with the whole heart. The surest mode of cleansing the way of
our life is to seek after God himself, and to endeavour to abide in
fellowship with him. Up to the good hour in which he was speaking to his
Lord, the Psalmist had been an eager seeker after the Lord, and if
faint, he was still pursuing. Had he not sought the Lord he would never
have been so anxious to cleanse his way.

It is pleasant to see how the writer's heart turns distinctly and
directly to God. He had been considering an important truth in the
preceding verse, but here he so powerfully feels the presence of his God
that he speaks to him, and prays to him as to one who is near. A true
heart cannot long live without fellowship with God.

His petition is founded on his life's purpose: he is seeking the Lord,
and he prays the Lord to prevent his going astray in or from his search.
It is by obedience that we follow after God, hence the prayer, "O let me
not wander from thy commandments;" for if we leave the ways of God's
appointment we certainly shall not find the God who appointed them. The
more a man's whole heart is set upon holiness the more does he dread
falling into sin; he is not so much fearful of deliberate transgression
as of inadvertent wandering: he cannot endure a wandering look, or a
rambling thought, which might stray beyond the pale of the precept. We
are to he such whole-hearted seekers that we have neither time nor will
to be wanderers, and yet with all our whole-heartedness we are to
cultivate a jealous fear lest even then we should wander from the path
of holiness.

Two things may be very like and yet altogether different: saints are
"strangers" - "I am a stranger in the earth" ([Psa
119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019)), but they are not wanderers:
they are passing through an enemy's country, but their route is direct;
they are seeking their Lord while they traverse this foreign land. Their
way is hidden from men; but yet they have not lost their way.

The man of God exerts himself, but does not trust himself: his heart is
in his walking with God; but he knows that even his whole strength is
not enough to keep him right unless his King shall be his keeper, and he
who made the commands shall make him constant in obeying them: hence the
prayer, "O let me not wander." Still, this sense of need, was never
turned into an argument for idleness; for while he prayed to be kept in
the right road he took care to run in it, with his whole heart seeking
the Lord.

It is curious again to note how the second part of the Psalm keeps step
with the first; for where [Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)
pronounces that man to be blessed who seeks the Lord with his whole
heart, the present verse claims the blessing by pleading the character:
"With my whole heart have I sought thee."

[Psa 119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)

When a godly man sues for a favour from God he should carefully use
every means for obtaining it, and accordingly, as the Psalmist had asked
to be preserved from wandering, he here shows us the holy precaution
which he had taken to prevent his falling into sin. "Thy word have I hid
in mine heart." His heart would be kept by the word because he kept the
word in his heart. All that he had of the word written, and all that had
been revealed to him by the voice of God, - all, without exception, he
had stored away in his affections, as a treasure to be preserved in a
casket, or as a choice seed to be buried in a fruitful soil: what soil
more fruitful than a renewed heart, wholly seeking the Lord? The word
was God's own, and therefore precious to God's servant. He did not wear
a text on his heart as a charm, but he hid it in his heart as a rule. He
laid it up in the place of love and life, and it filled the chamber with
sweetness and light. We must in this imitate David, copying his
heart-work as well as his outward character. First, we must mind that
what we believe is truly God's word; that being done, we must hide or
treasure it each man for himself; and we must see that this is done, not
as a mere feat of the memory, but as the joyful act of the affections.

"That I might not sin against thee." Here was the object aimed at. As
one has well said, - Here is the best thing, - "thy word;" hidden in the
best place, - "in my heart;" for the best of purposes, - "that I might
not sin against thee." This was done by the Psalmist with personal care,
as a man carefully hides away his money When he fears thieves, - in this
case the thief dreaded was sin. Sinning "against God" is the believer's
view of moral evil; other men care only when they offend against men.
God's word is the best preventive against offending God, for it tells us
his mind and will, and tends to bring our spirit into conformity with
the divine Spirit. No cure for sin in the life is equal to the word in
the seat of life, which is the heart. There is no hiding from sin unless
we hide the truth in our souls.

A very pleasant variety of meaning is obtained by laying stress upon the
words "thy" and "thee." He speaks to God, he loves the word because it
is God's word, and he hates sin because it is sin against God himself.
If he vexed others, he minded not so long as he did not offend his God.
If we would not cause God displeasure we must treasure up his own word.

The personal way in which the man of God did this is also noteworthy:
"With my whole heart have I sought thee." Whatever others might choose
to do he had already made his choice and placed the Word in his
innermost soul as his dearest delight, and however others might
transgress, his aim was after holiness: "That I might not sin against
thee." This was not what he purposed to do, but what he had already
done; many are great at promising, but the Psalmist had been true in
performing: hence he hoped to see a sure result. When the word is hidden
in the heart the life shall be hidden from sin.

The parallelism between the second octave and the first is still
continued. [Psa 119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003) speaks of doing
no iniquity, while this verse treats of the method of not sinning. When
we form an idea of a blessedly holy man ([Psa
119:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#003)) it becomes us to make an
earnest effort to attain unto the same sacred innocence and divine
happiness, and this can only be through heart-piety founded on the
Scriptures.

[Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012)

"Blessed art thou, O Lord." These are words of adoration arising out of
an intense admiration of the divine character, which the writer is
humbly aiming to imitate. He blesses God for all that he has revealed to
him, and wrought in him; he praises him with warmth of reverent love,
and depth of holy wonder. These are also words of perception uttered
from a remembrance of the great Jehovah's infinite happiness within
himself. The Lord is and must be blessed, for he is the perfection of
holiness; and this is probably the reason why this is used as a plea in
this place. It is as if David had said - I see that in conformity to
thyself my way to happiness must lie, for thou art supremely blessed;
and if I am made in my measure like to thee in holiness, I shall also
partake in thy blessedness.

No sooner is the word in the heart than a desire arises to mark and
learn it. When food is eaten, the next thing is to digest it; and when
the word is received into the soul the first prayer is - Lord, teach me
its meaning. "Teach me thy statutes"; for thus only can I learn the way
to be blessed. Thou art so blessed that I am sure thou wilt delight in
blessing others, and this boon I crave of thee that I may be instructed
in thy commands. Happy men usually rejoice to make others happy, and
surely the happy God will willingly impart the holiness which is the
fountain of happiness. Faith prompted this prayer and based it, not upon
anything in the praying man, but solely upon the perfection of the God
to whom he made supplication. Lord. thou art blessed. therefore bless me
by teaching me.

We need to be disciples or learners - "teach me;" but what an honour to
have God himself for a teacher: how bold is David to beg the blessed God
to teach him\[ Yet the Lord put the desire into his heart when the
sacred word was hidden there, and so we may be sure that he was not too
bold in expressing it. Who would not wish to enter the school of such a
Master to learn of him the art of holy living? To this Instructor we
must submit ourselves if we would practically keep the statutes of
righteousness. The King who ordained the statutes knows best their
meaning, and as they are the outcome of his own nature he can best
inspire us with their spirit. The petition commends itself to all who
wish to cleanse their way, since it is most practical, and asks for
teaching, not upon recondite lore, but upon statute-law. If we know the
Lord's statutes we have the most essential education.

Let us each one say, "Teach me thy statutes." This is a sweet prayer for
everyday use. It is a step above that of [Psa
119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010), "O let me not wander," as that
was a rise beyond that of [Psa 119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008),
"O forsake me not utterly." It finds its answer in [Psa
119:98-100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098) : "Thou through thy
commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies," etc.; but not till
it had been repeated even to the third time in the "Teach me" of [Psa
119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033) and [Psa
119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066), all of which I beg my reader
to peruse. Even after this third pleading the prayer occurs again in so
many words in [Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124) and [Psa
119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139), and the same longing comes
out near the close of the Psalm in [Psa
119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171) - "My lips shall utter praise
when thou hast taught me thy statutes."

[Psa 119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013)

"With my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth." The
taught one of [Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012) is here a
teacher himself. What we learn in secret we are to proclaim upon the
housetops. So had the Psalmist done. As much as he had known he had
spoken. God has revealed many of his judgments by his mouth, that is to
say, by a plain and open revelation; these it is our duty to repeat,
becoming, as it were, so many exact echoes of his one infallible voice.
There are judgments of God which are a great deep, which he does not
reveal, and with these it will be wise for us not to intermeddle. What
the Lord has veiled it would be presumption for us to uncover, but, on
the other hand, what the Lord has revealed it would be shameful for us
to conceal. It is a great comfort to a Christian in time of trouble when
in looking back upon his past life he can claim to have done his duty by
the word of God. To have been, like Noah, a preacher of righteousness,
is a great joy when the floods are rising, and tile ungodly world is
about to be destroyed. Lips which have' been used in proclaiming God's
statutes are sure to be acceptable when pleading God's promises. If we
have had such regard to that which cometh out of God's mouth that we
have published it far and wide, we may rest quite assured that God will
have respect unto the prayers which come out of our mouths.

It will be an effectual method of cleansing a young man's way if he
addicts himself continually to preaching the gospel. He cannot go far
wrong in judgment whose whole soul is occupied in setting forth the
judgments of the Lord. By teaching we learn; by training the tongue to
holy speech we master the whole body; by familiarity with the divine
procedure we are made to delight in righteousness; and thus in a
threefold manner our way is cleansed by our proclaiming the way of the
Lord.

[Psa 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014)

"I have rejoiced in the wag of thy testimonies." Delight in the word of
God is a sure proof that it has taken effect upon the heart, and so is
cleansing the life. The Psalmist not only says that he does rejoice, but
that he has rejoiced. For years it had been his joy and bliss to give
his soul to the teaching of the word. His rejoicing had not only arisen
out of the word of God, but out of the practical characteristics of it.
The Way was as dear to him as the Truth and the Life. There was no
picking and choosing with David, or if indeed he did make a selection,
he chose the most practical first. "As much as in all riches." He
compared his intense satisfaction with God's will with that of a man who
possesses large and varied estates, and the heart to enjoy them. David
knew the riches that come of sovereignty, and which grow out of
conquest; he valued the wealth which proceeds from labour, or is gotten
by inheritance: he knew "all riches." The gracious king had been glad to
see the gold and silver poured into his treasury that he might devote
vast masses of it to the building of the Temple of Jehovah upon Mount
Zion. He rejoiced in all sorts of riches consecrated and laid up for the
noblest uses, and yet the way of God's word had given him more pleasure
than even these. Observe that his joy was personal, distinct,
remembered, and abundant. Wonder not that in the previous verse he
glories in having spoken much of that which he had so much enjoyed' a
man may well talk of that which is his delight.

[Psa 119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015)

"I will meditate in thy precepts." He who has an inward delight in
anything will not long withdraw his mind from it. As the miser often
returns to look upon his treasure, so does the devout believer by
frequent meditation turn over the priceless wealth which he has
discovered in the book of the Lord. To some men meditation is a task; to
the man of cleansed way it is a joy. He who has meditated will meditate;
he who saith, "I have rejoiced," is the same who adds, "I will
meditate." No spiritual exercise is more profitable to the soul than
that of devout meditation; why are many of us so exceeding slack in it?
It is worthy of observation that the preceptory part of God's word was
David's special subject of meditation, and this was the more natural
because the question was still upon his mind as to how a young man
should cleanse his way. Practical godliness is vital godliness.

"And have respect unto. thy ways," that is to say, I will think much
about them so as to know what thy ways are; and next, I will think much
of them so as to have thy ways in great reverence and high esteem. I
will see what thy ways are towards me that I may be filled with
reverence, gratitude, and love; and then, I will observe what are those
ways which thou hast. prescribed for me, thy ways in which thou wouldest
have me follow thee; these I would watch carefully that I may become
obedient, and prove myself to be a true servant of such a Master.

Note how the verses grow more inward as they proceed; from the speech of
[Psa 119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013) we advanced to the
manifested joy of [Psa 119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014), and now
we come to the secret meditation of the happy spirit. The richest graces
are those which dwell deepest.

[Psa 119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016)

"I will delight myself in thy statutes." In this verse delight follows
meditation, of which it is the true flower and outgrowth. When we have
no other solace, but are quite alone, it will be a glad thing for the
heart to turn upon itself, and sweetly whisper, "I will delight myself.
What if no minstrel sings in the hall, I will delight myself. If the
time of the singing of birds has not yet arrived, and the voice of the
turtle is not heard in our land, yet I will delight myself." This is the
choicest and noblest of all rejoicing 4 in fact, it is the good part
which can never be taken from us; but there is no delighting ourselves
with anything below that which God intended to be the soul's eternal
satisfaction. The statute-book is intended to be the joy of every loyal
subject. When the believer once peruses the sacred pages his soul burns
within him as he turns first to one and then to another of the royal
words of the great King, words full and firm, immutable and divine.

"I will not forget thy word." Men do not readily forget that which they
have treasured up, that which they have meditated on ([Psa
119:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#015)), and that which they have
often spoken of ([Psa 119:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#013)). Yet
since we have treacherous memories it is well to bind them well with the
knotted cord of "I will not forget."

Note how two "I wills" follow upon two "I haves." We may not promise for
the future if we have altogether failed in the past; but where grace has
enabled us to accomplish something, we may hopefully expect that it will
enable us to do more.

It is curious to observe how this verse is moulded upon [Psa
119:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#008) : the changes are rung on the
same words, but the meaning is quite different, and there is no
suspicion of a vain repetition. The same thought is never given over
again in this Psalm; they are dullards who think so. Something in the
position of each verse affects its meaning, so that even where its words
are almost identical with those of another the sense is delightfully
varied. If we do not see an infinite variety of fine shades of thought
in this Psalm we may conclude that we are colour-blind; if we do not
hear many sweet harmonies, we may judge our ears to be dull of hearing,
but we may not suspect the Spirit of God of monotony.

[Psalms 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 119:17</span></span>

17 Deal bountifully with thy servant, that I may live, and keep thy
word.

18 Open thou mine eyes, that I may behold wondrous things out of thy
law.

19 I am a stranger in the earth: hide not thy commandments from me.

20 My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at
all times.

21 Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed, which do err from thy
commandments.

22 Remove from me reproach and contempt; for I have kept thy
testimonies.

23 Princes also did sit and speak against me: but thy servant did
meditate in thy statutes.

24 Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors.

In this section the trials of the way appear to be manifest to the
Psalmist's mind, and he prays accordingly for the help which will meet
his case. As in the last eight verses he prayed as a youth newly come
into the world, so here he pleads as a servant and a pilgrim, who
growingly finds himself to be a stranger in an enemy's country. His
appeal is to God alone, and his prayer is specially direct and personal.
He speaks with the Lord as a man speaketh with his friend.

[Psa 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)

"Deal bountifully with thy servant." He takes pleasure in owning his
duty to God, and counts it the joy of his heart to be in the service of
his God. Out of his condition he makes a plea, for a servant has some
hold upon a master; but in this case the wording of the plea shuts out
the idea of legal claim, since he seeks bounty rather than reward. Let
my wages be according to thy goodness, and not according to my merit.
Reward me according to the largeness of thy liberality, and not
according to the scantiness of my service. The hired servants of our
Father have all of them bread enough and to Spare, and he will not leave
one of his household to perish with hunger. If the Lord will only treat
us as he treats the least of his servants we may be well content, for
all his true servants are sons, princes of the blood, heirs of life
eternal. David felt that his great needs required a bountiful provision,
and that his little desert would never earn such a supply; hence he must
throw himself upon God's grace, and look for the great things he needed
from the great goodness of the Lord. He begs for a liberality of grace,
after the fashion of one who prayed. "O Lord, thou must give me great
mercy or no mercy, for little mercy will not serve my turn."

"That I may live." Without abundant mercy he could not live. It takes
great grace to keep a saint alive. Even life is a gift of divine bounty
to such undeserving ones as we are. Only the Lord can keep us in being,
and it is mighty grace which preserves to us the life which we have
forfeited by our sin. It is right to desire to live, it is meet to pray
to live, it is just to ascribe prolonged life to the favour of God.
Spiritual life, without which this natural life is mere existence, is
also to be sought of the Lord's bounty, for it is the noblest work of
divine grace, and in it the bounty of God is gloriously displayed. The
Lord's servants cannot serve him in their own strength, for they cannot
even live unless his grace abounds towards them.

"And keep thy word." This should be the rule, the object, and the joy of
our life. We may not wish to live and sin; but we may pray to live and
keep God's word. Being is a poor thing if it be not well-being. Life is
only worth keeping while we can keep God's word; indeed, there is no
life in the highest sense apart from holiness: life while we break the
law is but a name to live.

The prayer of this verse shows that it is only through divine bounty or
grace that we can live as faithful servants of God, and manifest
obedience to his commands. If we give God service it must be because he
gives us grace. We work for him because he works in us. Thus we may make
a chain out of the opening verses of the three first octaves of this
Psalm: [Psa 119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) blesses the holy
man, [Psa 119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009) asks how we can attain
to such holiness, and [Psa 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)
traces such holiness to its secret source, and shows us how to seek the
blessing. There more a man prizes holiness and the more earnestly he
strives after it, the more will he be driven towards God for help
therein, for he will plainly perceive that his own strength is
insufficient, and that he cannot even so much as live without the
bounteous assistance of the Lord his God.

[Psa 119:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#018)

"Open thou mine eyes." This is a part of the bountiful dealing which he
has asked for; no bounty is greater than that which benefits our person,
our soul, our mind, and benefits it in so important an organ as the eye.
It is far better to have the eyes opened than to be placed in the midst
of the noblest prospects and remain blind to their beauty. "That I may
behold wondrous things out of thy law." Some men can perceive no wonders
in the gospel, but David felt sure that there were glorious things in
the law: he had not half the Bible, but he prized it more than some men
prize the whole. He felt that God had laid up great bounties in his
word, and he begs for power to perceive, appreciate, and enjoy the same.
We need not so much that God should give us more benefits, as the
ability to see what he has given.

The prayer implies a conscious darkness, a dimness of spiritual vision,
a powerlessness to remove that defect, and a full assurance that God can
remove it. It shows also that the writer knew that there were vast
treasures in the word which he had not yet fully seen, marvels which he
had not yet beheld, mysteries which he had scarcely believed. The
Scriptures teem with marvels; the Bible is wonder-land; it not only
relates miracles, but it is itself a world of wonders. Yet what are
these to closed eyes? And what man can open his own eyes, since he is
born blind? God himself must reveal revelation to each heart. Scripture
needs opening, but not one half so much as our eyes do' the veil is not
on the book, but on our hearts. What perfect precepts, what precious
promises, what priceless privileges are neglected by us because we
wander among them like blind men amongst the beauties of nature, and
they are to us as a landscape shrouded in darkness!

The Psalmist had a measure of spiritual perception, or he would never
have known that there were wondrous things to be seen, nor would he have
prayed, "open thou mine eyes;" but what he had seen made him long for a
clearer and wider sight. This longing proved the genuineness of what he
possessed, for it is a test mark of the true knowledge of God that it
causes its possessor to thirst for deeper knowledge.

David's prayer in this verse is a good sequel to [Psa
119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010), which corresponds to it in
position in its octave. there he said, "O let me not wander," and who so
apt to wander as a blind man? and there, too, he declared, "with my
whole heart have I sought thee," and hence the desire to see the object
of his search. Very singular are the interlacings of the boughs of the
huge tree of this Psalm, which has many wonders even within itself if we
have opened eyes to mark them.

[Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019)

"I am a stranger in the earth." This is meant for a plea. By divine
command men are bound to be kind to strangers, and what God commands in
others he will exemplify in himself. The Psalmist was a stranger for
God's sake, else had he been as much at home as worldlings are; he was
not a stranger to God, but a stranger to the world, a banished man so
long as he was out of heaven. Therefore he pleads, "Hide not thy
commandments from me." If these are gone, what have I else? Since
nothing around me is mine, what can I do if I lose thy word? Since none
around me know or care to know the way to thyself, what shall I do if I
fail to see thy commands, by which alone I can guide my steps to the
land where thou dwellest? David implies that God's commands were his
solace in his exile' they reminded him of home, and they showed him the
way thither, and therefore he begged that they might never be hidden
from him, by his being unable either to understand them or to obey them.
If spiritual light be withdrawn the command is hidden, and this a
gracious heart greatly deprecates. What would be the use of opened eyes
if the best object of sight were hidden from their view? While we wander
here we can endure all the ills of this foreign land with patience if
the word of God is applied to our hearts by the Spirit of God; but if
the heavenly things which make for our peace were hid from our eyes we
should be in an evil case, - in fact, we should be at sea without a
compass, in a desert without a guide, in an enemy's country without a
friend.

This prayer is a supplement to "open thou mine eyes," and, as the one
prays to see, the other deprecates the negative of seeing, namely, the
command being hidden, and so out of sight. We do well to look at both
sides of the blessing we are seeking, and plead for it from every point
of view. The prayers are appropriate to the characters mentioned' as he
is a servant he asks for opened eves that his eyes may ever be towards
his Lord, as the eyes of a servant should be; as a stranger he begs that
he may not be strange to the way in which he is to walk towards his
home. In each case his entire dependence is upon God alone.

Note how the third of the second octave ([Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)) has the same keyword as this
third of the third octave: "Thy word have I hid," "Hide not thy
commandments from me." This invites a meditation upon the different
senses of hiding in and hiding from.

[Psa 119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020)

"My soul breaketh for the longing that it hath unto thy judgments at all
times." True godliness lies very much in desires. As we are not what we
shall be, so also we are not what we would be. The desires of gracious
men after holiness are intense, - they cause a wear of heart, a
straining of the mind, till it feels ready to snap with the heavenly
pull. A high value of the Lord's commandment leads to a pressing desire
to know and to do it, and this so weighs upon the soul that it is ready
to break in pieces under the crush of its own longings. What a blessing
it is when all our desires are after the things of God. We may well long
for such longings.

God's judgments are his decisions upon points which else had been in
dispute. Every precept is a judgment of the highest court upon a point
of action, an infallible and immutable decision upon a moral or
spiritual question. The word of God is a code of justice from which
there is no appeal.

"This is the Judge which ends the strife

Where wit and reason fail;

Our guide through devious paths of life,

Our shield when doubts assail."

David had such reverence for the word, and such a desire to know it, and
to be conformed to it, that his longings caused him a sort of
heart-break, which he here pleads before God. Longing is the soul of
praying, and when the soul longs till it breaks, it cannot be long
before the blessing will be granted. The most intimate communion between
the soul and its God is carried on by the process described in the text.
God reveals his will, and our heart longs to be conformed thereto. God
judges, and our heart rejoices in the verdict. This is fellowship of
heart most real and thorough.

Note well that our desire after the mind of God should be constant; we
should feel holy longings "at all times." Desires which can be put off
and on like our garments are at best but mere wishes, and possibly they
are hardly true enough to be called by that name, - they are temporary
emotions born of excitement, and doomed to die when the heat which
created them has cooled down. He who always longs to know and do the
right is the truly right man. His judgment is sound, for he loves all
God's judgments, and follows them with constancy. His times shall be
good, since he longs to be good and to do good at all times.

Remark how this fourth of the third eight chimes with the fourth of the
fourth eight. "My soul breaketh;" "my soul melteth." There is surely
some recondite poetic art about all this, and it is well for us to be
careful in studying what the Psalmist was so careful in composing.

[Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021)

"Thou hast rebuked the proud that are cursed." This is one of God's
judgments: he is sure to deal out a terrible portion to men of lofty
looks. God rebuked Pharaoh with sore plagues, and at the Red Sea "the
foundations of the world were discovered at thy rebuke, O Lord." In the
person of the haughty Egyptian he taught all the proud that he will
certainly abase them. Proud men are cursed men: nobody blesses them, and
they soon become a burden to themselves. In itself, pride is a plague
and torment. Even if no curse came from the law of God, there seems to
be a law of nature that proud men should be unhappy men. This led David
to abhor pride; he dreaded the rebuke of God and the curse of the law.
The proud sinners of his day were his enemies, and he felt happy that
God was in the quarrel as well as he.

"Which do err from thy commandments." Only humble hearts are obedient,
for they alone will yield to rule and government. Proud men's looks are
high, too high to mark their own feet and keep the Lord's way. Pride
lies at the root of all sin: if men were not arrogant they would not be
disobedient.

God rebukes pride even when the multitudes pay homage to it, for he sees
in it rebellion against his own majesty, and the seeds of yet further
rebellions. It is the sum of sin. Men talk of an honest pride; but if
they were candid they would see that it is of all sins the least honest,
and the least becoming in a creature, and especially in a fallen
creature: yet so little do proud men know their own true condition under
the curse of God, that they set up to censure the godly, and express
contempt for them, as may be seen in [Psa
119:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#022). They are themselves
contemptible, and yet they are contemptuous towards their betters. We
may well love the judgments of God when we see them so decisively
levelled against the haughty upstarts who would fain lord it over
righteous men; and we may well be of good comfort under the rebukes of
the ungodly since their power to hurt us is destroyed by the Lord
himself. "The Lord rebuke thee" is answer enough for all the accusations
of men or devils.

In the fifth of the former octave the Psalmist wrote, "I have declared
all the judgments of thy mouth, and here he continues in the same
strain, giving a particular instance of the Lord's judgments against
haughty rebels. In the next two portions the fifth verses deal with
lying and vanity, and pride is one of the most common forms of those
evils.

[Psa 119:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#022)

"Remove from me reproach and contempt." These are painful things to
tender minds. David could bear them for righteousness' sake, but they
were a heavy yoke, and he longed to be free from them. To be slandered,
and then to be despised in consequence of the vile accusation, is a
grievous affliction. No one likes to be traduced, or even to be
despised. He who says, "I care nothing for my reputation," is not a wise
man, for in Solomon's esteem "a good name is better than precious
ointment." The best way to deal with slander is to pray about it: God
will either remove it, or remove the sting from it. Our own attempts at
clearing ourselves are usually failures; we are like the boy who wished
to remove the blot from his copy, and by his bungling made it ten times
worse. When we suffer from a libel it is better to pray about it than go
to law over it, or even to demand an apology from the inventor. O ye who
are reproached, take your matters before the highest court, and leave
them with the Judge of all the earth. God will rebuke your proud
accuser; be ye quiet and let your advocate plead your cause.

"For I have kept thy testimonies." Innocence may justly ask to be
cleared from reproach. If there be truth in the charges alleged against
us what can we urge with God? If, however, we are wrongfully accused our
appeal has a locus standi in the court and cannot be refused. If through
fear of reproach we forsake the divine testimony we shall deserve the
coward's doom; our safety lies in sticking close to the true and to the
right. God will keep those who keep his testimonies. A good conscience
is the best security for a good name; reproach will not abide with those
who abide with Christ, neither will contempt remain upon those who
remain faithful to the ways of the Lord.

This verse stands as a parallel both in sense and position to [Psa
119:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#006), and it has the catchword of
"testimonies," by which it chimes with [Psa
119:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#014).

[Psa 119:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#023)

"Princes also did sit and speak against me." David was high game, and
the great ones of the earth went a hawking after him. Princes saw in him
a greatness which they envied, and therefore they abused him. On their
thrones they might have found something better to consider and speak
about, but they turned the seat of judgment into the seat of the
scorner. Most men covet a prince's good word, and to be spoken ill of by
a great man is a great discouragement to them, but the Psalmist bore his
trial with holy calmness. Many of the lordly ones were his enemies, and
made it their business to speak ill of him: they held sittings for
scandal, sessions for slander, parliaments of falsehood, and yet he
survived all their attempts upon him.

"But thy servant did meditate in thy statutes." This was brave indeed.
He was God's servant, and therefore he attended to his Master's
business; he was God's servant, and therefore felt sure that his Lord
would defend him. He gave no heed to his princely slanderers, he did not
even allow his thoughts to be disturbed by a knowledge of their plotting
in conclave. Who were these malignants that they should rob God of his
servant's attention, or deprive the Lord's chosen of a moment's devout
communion. The rabble of princes were not worth five minutes' thought,
if those five minutes had to be taken from holy meditation. It is very
beautiful to see the two sittings: the princes sitting to reproach
David, and David sitting with his God and his Bible, answering his
traducers by never answering them at all. Those who feed upon the word
grow strong and peaceful, and are by God's grace hidden from the strife
of tongues.

Note that in the close of the former octave he had said, "I will
meditate," and here he shows how he had redeemed his promise, even under
great provocation to forget it. It is a praiseworthy thing when the
resolve of our happy hours is duly carried out in our seasons of
affliction.

[Psa 119:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#024)

"Thy testimonies also are my delight and my counsellors." They were not
only themes for meditation, but "also" sources of delight and means of
guidance. While his enemies took counsel with each other the holy man
took counsel with the testimonies of God. The fowlers could not drive
the bird from its nest with all their noise. It was their delight to
slander and his delight to meditate. The words of the Lord serve us for
many purposes; in our sorrows they are our delight, and in our
difficulties they are our guide; we derive joy from them and discover
wisdom in them. If we desire to find comfort in the Scriptures we must
submit ourselves to their counsel, and when we follow their counsel it
must not be with reluctance but with delight. This is the safest way of
dealing with those who plot for our ruin; let us give more heed to the
true testimonies of the Lord than to the false witness of our foes. The
best answer to accusing princes is the word of the justifying King.

In [Psa 119:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#016) David said, "I will
delight in thy statutes," and here he says "they are my delight:" thus
resolutions formed in God's strength come to fruit, and spiritual
desires ripen into actual attainments. O that it might be so with all
the readers of these lines.

[Psalms 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 119:25</span></span>

25 My soul cleaveth unto the dust: quicken thou me according to thy
word.

26 I have declared my ways, and thou heardest me: teach me thy statutes.

27 Make me to understand the way of thy precepts: so shall I talk of thy
wondrous works.

28 My soul melteth for heaviness: strengthen thou me according unto thy
word.

29 Remove from me the way of lying: and grant me thy law graciously.

30 I have chosen the way of truth: thy judgments have I laid before me.

31 I have stuck unto thy testimonies: O Lord, put me not to shame.

32 I will run the way of thy commandments, when thou shalt enlarge my
heart.

Here, it seems to me, we have the Psalmist in trouble bewailing the
bondage to earthly things in which he finds his mind to be held. His
soul cleaves to the dust, melts for heaviness, and cries for enlargement
from its spiritual prison. In these verses we shall see the influence of
the divine word upon a heart which laments its downward tendencies, and
is filled with mourning because of its deadening surroundings. The word
of the Lord evidently arouses prayer ([Psa
119:25-29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025)), confirms choice ([Psa
119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030)), and inspires renewed resolve
([Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032)): it is in all
tribulation whether of body or mind the surest source of help.

This portion has D for its alphabetical letter: it sings of Depression,
in the spirit of Devotion, Determination, and Dependence.

[Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025)

"My soul cleaveth unto the dust." He means in part that he was full of
sorrow; for mourners in the east cast dust on their heads, and sat in
ashes, and the Psalmist felt as if these ensigns of woe were glued to
him, and his very soul was made to cleave to them because of his
powerlessness to rise above his grief. Does he not also mean that he
felt ready to die? Did he not feel his life absorbed and fast held by
the grave's mould, half choked by the death-dust? It may not be
straining the language if we conceive that he also felt and bemoaned his
earthly-mindedness and spiritual deadness. There was a tendency in his
soul to cling to earth which he greatly bewailed. Whatever was the cause
of his complaint, it was no surface evil, but an affair of his inmost
spirit; his soul cleaved to the dust; and it was not a casual and
accidental falling into the dust, but a continuous and powerful
tendency, or cleaving to the earth. But what a mercy that the good man
could feel and deplore whatever there was of evil in the cleaving! The
serpent's seed can find their meat in the dust, but never shall the seed
of the woman be thus degraded. Many are of the earth earthy, and never
lament it; only the heaven-born and heaven-soaring spirit pines at the
thought of being fastened to this world, and bird-limed by its sorrows
or its pleasures.

"Quicken thou me according to thy word." More life is the cure for all
our ailments. Only the Lord can give it. He can bestow it, bestow it at
once, and do it according to his word, without departing from the usual
course of his grace, as we see it mapped out in the Scriptures. It is
well to know what to pray for, - David seeks quickening: one would have
thought that he would have asked for comfort or upraising, but he knew
that these would come out of increased life, and therefore he sought
that blessing which is the root of the rest. When a person is depressed
in spirit, weak, and bent towards the ground, the main thing is to
increase his stamina and put more life into him: then his spirit
revives, and his body becomes erect. In reviving the life, the whole man
is renewed. Shaking off the dust is a little thing by itself, but when
it follows upon quickening, it is a blessing of the greatest value; just
as good spirits which flow from established health are among the
choicest of our mercies. The phrase, "according to thy word," means. -
according to thy revealed way of quickening thy saints. The word of God
shows us that he who first made us must keep us alive, and it tells us
of the Spirit of God who through the ordinances pours fresh life into
our souls; we beg the Lord to act towards us in this his own regular
method of grace. Perhaps David remembered the word of the Lord in [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039), where Jehovah claims both to
kill and to make alive, and he beseeches the Lord to exercise that
life-giving power upon his almost expiring servant. Certainly, the man
of God had not so many rich promises to rest upon as we have, but even a
single word was enough for him, and he right earnestly urges "according
to thy word." It is a grand thing to see a believer in the dust and yet
pleading the promise, a man at the grave's mouth crying, "quicken me,"
and hoping that it shall be done.

Note how his [Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025) tallies with
the first of the third ([Psa 119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)).
- "That I may live:"..."Quicken me." While in a happy state he begs for
bountiful dealing, and when in a forlorn condition he prays for
quickening. Life is in both cases the object of pursuit' that he may
have life, and have it more abundantly.

[Psa 119:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#026)

"I have declared my ways." Open confession is good for the soul. Nothing
brings more ease and more life to a man than a frank acknowledgment of
the evil which has caused the sorrow and the lethargy. Such a
declaration proves that the man knows his own condition, and is no
longer blinded by pride. Our confessions are not meant to make God know
our sins, but to make us know them. "And thou heardest me." His
confession had been accepted; it was not lost labour; God had drawn near
to him in it. We ought never to go from a duty till we have been
accepted in it. Pardon follows upon penitent confession, and David felt
that he had obtained it. It is God's way to forgive our sinful way when
we from our hearts confess the wrong.

"Teach me thy statutes." Being truly sorry for his fault, and having
obtained full forgiveness, he is anxious to avoid offending again, and
hence he begs to be taught obedience. He was not willing to sin through
ignorance, he wished to know all the mind of God by being taught it by
the best of teachers. He pined after holiness. Justified men always long
to be sanctified. When God forgives our sins we are all the more fearful
of sinning again. Mercy, which pardons transgression, sets us longing
for grace which prevents transgression. We may boldly ask for more when
God has given us much; he who has washed out the past stain will not
refuse that which will preserve us from present and future defilement.
This cry for teaching is frequent in the Psalm; in [Psa
119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012) it followed a sight of God,
here follows from a sight of serf. Every experience should lead us thus
to plead it with God.

[Psa 119:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#027)

"Make me to understand the way of thy precepts." Give me a deep insight
into the practical meaning of thy word; let me get a clear idea of the
tone and tenor of thy law. Blind obedience has but small beauty; God
would have us follow him with our eyes open. To obey the letter of the
word is all that the ignorant can hope for; if we wish to keep God's
precepts in their spirit we must come to an understanding of them, and
that can be gained nowhere but at the Lord's hands. Our understanding
needs enlightenment and direction- he who made our understanding must
also make us understand. The last sentence was, "teach me thy statutes,"
and the words, "make me to understand," are an instructive enlargement
and exposition of that sentence: we need to be so taught that we
understand what we learn. It is to be noted that the Psalmist is not
anxious to understand the prophecies, but the precepts, and he is not
concerned about the subtleties of the law, but the commonplaces and
everyday rules of it, which are described as "the way of thy precepts."

"So shall I talk of thy wondrous works." It is ill talking of what we do
not understand. We must be taught of God till we understand, and then we
may hope to communicate our knowledge to others with a hope of profiting
them. Talk without intelligence is mere talk, and idle talk; but the
words of the instructed are as pearls which adorn the ears of them that
hear. When our heart has been opened to understand, our lips should be
opened to impart knowledge; and we may hope to be taught ourselves when
we feel in our hearts a willingness to teach the way of the Lord to
those among whom we dwell.

"Thy wondrous works." Remark that the dearest understanding does not
cause us to cease from wondering at the ways and works of God. The fact
is that the more we know of God's doings the more we admire them, and
the more ready we are to speak upon them. Half the wonder in the world
is born of ignorance, but holy wonder is the child of understanding.
When a man understands the way of the divine precepts he never talks of
his own works, and as the tongue must have some theme to speak upon, he
begins to extol the works of the all-perfect Lord.

Some in this place read "meditate" or "muse" instead of "talk;" it is
singular that the words should be so near of kin, and yet it is right
that they should be, for none but foolish people will talk without
thinking. if we read the passage in this sense, we take it to mean that
in proportion as David understood the word of God he would meditate upon
it more and more. It is usually so; the thoughtless care not to know the
inner meaning of the Scriptures, while those who know them best are the
very men who strive after a greater familiarity with them, and therefore
give themselves up to musing upon them.

Observe [Psa 119:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#019), and see how the
sense is akin to this. There he was a stranger in the earth, and here he
prays to know his way; there, too, he prayed that the word might not be
hid from himself, and here he promises that he will not hide it from
others.

[Psa 119:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#028)

"My soul melteth for heaviness." He was dissolving away in tears. The
solid strength of his constitution was turning to liquid as if molten by
the furnace-heat of his afflictions. Heaviness of heart is a killing
thing, and when it abounds it threatens to turn life into a long death,
in which a man seems to drop away in a perpetual drip of grief. Tears
are the distillation of the heart; when a man weeps he wastes away his
soul. Some of us know what great heaviness means, for we have been
brought under its power again and again, and often have we felt
ourselves to be poured out like water, and near to being like water
spilt upon the ground, never again to be gathered up. There is one good
point in this downcast state, for it is better to be melted with grief
than to be hardened by impenitence.

"Strengthen thou me according unto thy word." He had found out an
ancient promise that the saints shall be strengthened, and here he
pleads it. His hope in his state of depression lies not in himself, but
in his God; if he may be strengthened from on high he will yet shake off
his heaviness and rise to joy again. Observe how he pleads the promise
of the word, and asks for nothing more than to be dealt with after the
recorded manner of the Lord of mercy. Had not Hannah sung, "He shall
give strength unto his King, and exalt the horn of his anointed?" God
strengthens us by infusing grace, through his word' the word which
creates can certainly sustain. Grace can enable us to bear the constant
fret of an abiding sorrow, it can repair the decay caused by the
perpetual tear-drip, and give to the believer the garment of praise for
the spirit of heaviness. Let us always resort to prayer in our
desponding times, for it is the surest and shortest way out of the
depths. In that prayer let us plead nothing but the word of God; for
there is no plea like a promise, no argument like a word from our
covenant God.

Note how David records his inner soul-life. In [Psa
119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020) he says, "My soul breaketh;" in
[Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025), "My soul cleaveth to the
dust;" and here, "My soul melteth." Further on, in [Psa
119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081), he cries, "My soul fainteth;"
in [Psa 119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109), "My soul is
continually in my hand;" in [Psa
119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167), "My soul hath kept thy
testimonies"; and lastly, in [Psa
119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175), "Let my soul live." Some
people do not even know that they have a soul, and here is David all
soul. What a difference there is between the spiritually living and the
spiritually dead.

[Psa 119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029)

"Remove from me the way of lying." This is the way of sin, error,
idolatry, folly, self-righteousness, formalism, hypocrisy. David would
not only be kept from that way, but have it kept from him; he cannot
endure to have it near him, he would have it swept away from his sight.
He desired to be right and upright, true and in the truth; but he feared
that a measure of falsehood would cling to him unless the Lord took it
away, and therefore he earnestly cried for its removal. False motives
may at times sway us, and we may fall into mistaken notions of our own
spiritual condition before God, which erroneous conceits may be kept up
by a natural prejudice in our own favour, and so we may be confirmed in
a delusion, and abide under error unless grace comes to the rescue. No
true heart can rest in a false view of itself; it finds no anchorage,
but is tossed to and fro till it gets into the truth and the truth into
it. The true-born child of heaven sighs out and cries against a lie,
desiring to have it taken away as much as a man desires to be set at a
distance from a venomous serpent or a raging lion.

"And grant me thy law graciously." He is in a gracious state who looks
upon the law itself as a gift of grace. David wishes to have the law
opened up to his understanding, engraved upon his heart, and carried out
in his life; for this he seeks the Lord, and pleads for it as a gracious
grant. No doubt he viewed this as the only mode of deliverance from the
power of falsehood: if the law be not in our hearts the lie will enter.
David would seem to have remembered those times when, according to the
eastern fashion, he had practised deceit for his own preservation, and
he saw that he had been weak and erring on that point; therefore he was
bowed down in spirit and begged to be quickened and delivered from
transgressing in that manner any more. Holy men cannot review their sins
without tears, nor weep over them without entreating to be saved from
further offending.

There is an evident opposition between falsehood and the gracious power
of God's law. The only way to expel the lie is to accept the truth.
Grace also has a clear affinity to truth: no sooner do we meet with the
sound of the word "graciously" than we hear the footfall of truth: "I
have chosen the way of truth." Grace and truth are ever linked together,
and a belief of the doctrines of grace is a grand preservative from
deadly error.

In [Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021) David cries out against
pride, and here against lying - these are much the same thing. Is not
pride the greatest of all lies?

[Psa 119:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#030)

"I have chosen the way of truth." As he abhorred the way of lying, so he
chose the way of truth: a man must Choose one or the other, for there
cannot be any neutrality in the case. Men do not drop into the right way
by chance; they must choose it, and continue to choose it, or they will
soon wander from it. Those whom God has chosen in due time choose his
way. There is a doctrinal way of truth which we ought to choose,
rejecting every dogma of man's devising; there is a ceremonial way of
truth which we should follow, detesting all the forms which apostate
churches have invented; and then there is a practical way of truth, the
way of holiness, to which we must adhere whatever may be our temptation
to forsake it. Let our election be made, and made irrevocably. Let us
answer to all seducers, "! have chosen, and what I have chosen I have
chosen." O Lord, by thy grace lead us with a hearty free-will to choose
to do thy will; thus shall thine eternal choice of us bring forth the
end which it designs.

"Thy judgments have I laid before me." What he had chosen he kept in
mind, laying it out before his mind's eye. Men do not become holy by a
careless wish: there must be study, consideration, deliberation, and
earnest enquiry, or the way of truth will be missed. The commands of God
must be set before us as the mark to aim at, the model to work by, the
road to walk in. If we put God's judgments into the background we shall
soon find ourselves departing from them.

Here again the sixth stanzas of the third and fourth octaves ring out a
similar note. "I have kept thy testimonies" (22), and "Thy judgments
have I laid before me," This is a happy confession, and there is no
wonder that it is repeated.

[Psa 119:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#031)

"I have stuck unto thy testimonies," - or I have cleaved, for the word
is the same as in [Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025). Though
cleaving to the dust of sorrow and of death, yet he kept fast hold of
the divine word. This was his comfort, and his faith stuck to it, his
love and his obedience held on to it, his heart and his mind abode in
meditation upon it. His choice was so heartily and deliberately made
that he stuck to it for life, and could not be removed from it by the
reproaches of those who despised the way of the Lord. What could he have
gained by quitting the sacred testimony? Say rather, what would he not
have lost if he had ceased to cleave to the divine word? It is pleasant
to look back upon past perseverance and to expect grace to continue
equally steadfast in the future. He who has enabled us to stick to him
will surely stick to us.

"O Lord, put me not to shame." This would happen if God's promises were
unfulfilled, and if the heart of God's servant were suffered to fail.
This we have no reason to fear, since the Lord is faithful to his word.
But it might also happen through the believer's acting in an
inconsistent manner, as David had himself once done, when he fell into
the way of lying, and pretended to be a madman. If we are not true to
our profession we may be left to reap the fruit of our folly, and that
will be the bitter thing called "shame." It is evident from this that a
believer ought never to be ashamed, but act the part of a brave man who
has done nothing to be ashamed of in believing his God, and does not
mean to adopt a craven tone in the presence of the Lord's enemies. If we
beseech the Lord not to put us to shame, surely we ought not ourselves
to be ashamed without cause.

The prayer of this verse is found in [Psa
119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039) : "Turn away my reproach which
I fear." It is evidently a petition which was often on the Psalmist's
heart. A brave heart is more wounded by shame than by any weapon which a
soldier's hand can wield.

[Psa 119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032)

"I will run the way of thy commandments." With energy, promptitude, and
zeal he would perform the will of God, but he needed more life and
liberty from the hand of God. "When thou shalt enlarge my heart." Yes,
the heart is the master; the feet soon run when the heart is free and
energetic. Let the affections be aroused and eagerly set on divine
things, and our actions will be full of force, swiftness, and delight.
God must work in us first, and then we shall will and do according to
his good pleasure. He must change the heart, unite the heart, encourage
the heart, strengthen the heart, and enlarge the heart, and then the
course of the life will be gracious, sincere, happy, and earnest; so
that from our lowest up to our highest state in grace we must attribute
all to the free favour of our God. We must run; for grace is not an
overwhelming force which compels unwilling minds to move contrary to
their will' our running is the spontaneous leaping forward of a mind
which has been set free by the hand of God, and delights to show its
freedom by its bounding speed.

What a change from [Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025) to the
present, from cleaving to the dust to running in the way. It is the
excellence of holy sorrow that it works in us the quickening for which
we seek, and then we show the sincerity of our grief and the reality of
our revival by being zealous in the ways of the Lord.

For the third time an octave closes with, "I will." These "I wills" of
the Psalms are right worthy of being each one the subject of study and
discourse.

Note how the heart has been spoken of up to this point: "whole heart"
([Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002)), "uprightness of heart"
([Psa 119:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#007)), "hid in mine heart"
([Psa 119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011)), "enlarge my heart."
There are many more allusions further on, and these all go to show what
heart-work David's religion was. It is one of the great lacks of our age
that heads count for more than hearts, and men are far more ready to
learn than to love, though they are by no means eager in either
direction.

[Psa 119:33-40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033)

33 Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes; and I shall keep it unto
the end.

34 Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law; yea, I shall observe
it with my whole heart.

35 Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I
delight.

36 Incline my heart unto thy testimonies, and not to covetousness.

37 Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity; and quicken thou me in thy
way.

38 Stablish thy word unto thy servant, who is devoted to thy fear.

39 Turn away my reproach which I fear- for thy judgments are good.

40 Behold, I have longed after thy precepts: quicken me in thy
righteousness.

A sense of dependence and a consciousness of extreme need pervade this
section, which is all made up of prayer and plea. [Psa
119:25-32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025) trembled with a sense of
sin, quivering with a childlike sense of weakness and folly, which
caused the man of God to cry out for the help by which alone his soul
could be preserved from falling back into sin.

[Psa 119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033)

"Teach me, O Lord, the way of thy statutes." Child-like, blessed words,
from the lips of an old, experienced believer, and he a king, and a man
inspired of God. Alas, for those who will never be taught. They dote
upon their own wisdom; but their folly is apparent to all who rightly
judge. The Psalmist will have the Lord for his teacher; for he feels
that his heart will not learn of any less effectual instructor. A sense
of great slowness to learn drives us to seek a great teacher. What
condescension it is on our great Jehovah's part that he deigns to teach
those who seek him. The lesson which is desired is thoroughly practical;
the holy man would not only learn the statutes, but the way of them, the
daily use of them, their tenor, spirit, direction, habit, tendency. He
would know that path of holiness which is hedged in by divine law, along
which the commands of the Lord stand as sign-posts of direction and
mile-stones of information, guiding and marking our progress. The very
desire to learn this way is in itself an assurance that we shall be
taught therein, for he who made us long to learn will be sure to gratify
the desire.

"And I shah keep it unto the end." Those who are taught of God never
forget their lessons. When divine grace sets a man in the true way he
will be true to it. Mere human wit and will have no such enduring
influence: there is an end to all perfection of the flesh, but there is
no end to heavenly grace except its own end, which is the perfecting of
holiness in the fear of the Lord. Perseverance to the end is most
certainly to be predicted of those whose beginning is in God, and with
God, and by God; but those who commence without the Lord's teaching soon
forget what they learn, and start aside from the way upon which they
professed to have entered. No one may boast that he will hold on his way
in his own strength, for that must depend upon the continual teaching of
the Lord: we shall fall like Peter, if we presume on our own firmness as
he did. If God keeps us we shall keep his way; and it is a great comfort
to know that it is the way with God to keep the feet of his saints. Yet
we are to watch as if our keeping of the way depended wholly on
ourselves; for, according to this verse, our perseverance rests not on
any force or compulsion, but on the teaching of the Lord, and assuredly
teaching; whoever be the teacher, requires learning on the part of the
taught one: no one can teach a man who refuses to learn. Earnestly,
then, let us drink in divine instruction, that so we may hold fast our
integrity, and to life's latest hour follow on in the path of
uprightness! If we receive the living and incorruptible seed of the word
of God we must live: apart from this we have no life eternal, but only a
name to live.

The "end" of which David speaks is the end of life, or the fulness of
obedience. He trusted in grace to make him faithful ot the utmost, never
drawing a line and saying to obedience, "Hitherto shalt thou go, but no
further." The end of our keeping the law will come only when we cease to
breathe; no good man will think of marking a date and saying, "It is
enough, I may now relax my watch, and live after the manner of men." As
Christ loves us to the end, so must we serve him to the end. The end of
divine teaching is that we may persevere to the end.

The portions of eight show a relationship still. Gimel begins with
prayer for life, that he may keep the word ([Psa
119:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#017)); Daleth cries for more life,
according to that word ([Psa 119:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#025));
and now He opens with a prayer for teaching, that he may keep the way of
God's statutes. If a keen eye is turned upon these verses a closer
affinity will be discerned.

[Psa 119:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#034)

"Give me understanding, and I shall keep thy law." This is the same
prayer enlarged, or rather it is a supplement which intensifies it. He
not only needs teaching, but the power to learn: he requires not only to
understand, but to obtain an understanding. How low has sin brought us;
for we even lack the faculty to understand spiritual things, and are
quite unable to know them till we are endowed with spiritual
discernment. Will God in very deed give us understanding? This is a
miracle of grace. It will, however, never be wrought upon us till we
know our need of it; and we shall not even discover that need till God
gives us a measure of understanding to perceive it. We are in a state of
complicated ruin, from which nothing but manifold grace can deliver us.
Those who feel their folly are by the example of the Psalmist encouraged
to pray for understanding: let each man by faith cry, "Give me
understanding." Others have had it, why may it not come to me? It was a
gift to them; will not the Lord also freely bestow it upon me?

We are not to seek this blessing that we may be famous for wisdom, but
that we may be abundant in our love to the law of God. He who has
understanding will learn, remember, treasure up, and obey the
commandment of the Lord. The gospel gives us grace to keep the law; the
free gift leads us to holy service; there is no way of reaching to
holiness but by accepting the gift of God. If God gives, we keep; but we
never keep the law in order to obtaining grace. The sure result of
regeneration, or the bestowal of understanding, is a devout reverence
for the law and a resolute keeping of it in the heart. The spirit of God
makes us to know the Lord and to understand somewhat of his love,
wisdom, holiness, and majesty; and the result is that we honour the lain
and yield our hearts to the obedience of the faith.

"Yea, I shall observe it with my whole heart." The understanding
operates upon the affections; it convinces the heart of the beauty of
the law, so that the soul loves it with all its powers; and then it
reveals the majesty of the lawgiver, and the whole nature bows before
his supreme will. An enlightened judgment heals the divisions of the
heart, and bends the united affections to a strict and watchful
observance of the one rule of life. He alone obeys God who can say, "My
Lord, I would serve thee, and do it with all my heart"; and none can
truly say this till they have received as a free grant the inward
illumination of the Holy Ghost. To observe God's law with all our heart
at all times is a great grace, and few there be that find it; yet it is
to be had if we will consent to be taught of the Lord.

Observe the parallel of [Psa 119:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#002) and
[Psa 119:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#010) where the whole heart is
spoken of in reference to seeking, and in [Psa
119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058) in pleading for mercy; these
are all second verses in their octonaries. The frequent repetition of
the phrase shows the importance of undivided love: the heart is never
whole or holy till it is whole or united. The heart is never one with
God till it is one within itself.

[Psa 119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035)

"Make me to go in the path of thy commandments; for therein do I
delight." "To will is present with me; but how to perform that which is
good I find not." Thou hast made me to love the way, now make me to move
in it. It is a plain path, which others are treading through thy grace;
I see it and admire it; cause me to travel in it. This is the cry of a
child that longs to walk, but is too feeble; of a pilgrim who is
exhausted, yet pants to be on the march; of a lame man who pines to be
able to run. It is a blessed thing to delight in holiness, and surely he
who gave us this delight will work in us the yet higher joy of
possessing and practising it. Here is our only hope; for we shall not go
in the narrow path till we are made to do so by the Maker's own power. O
thou who didst once make me, I pray thee make me again: thou hast made
me to know; now make me to go. Certainly I shall never be happy till I
do, for my sole delight lies in walking according to thy bidding.

The Psalmist does not ask the Lord to do for him what he ought to do for
himself: he wishes himself to "go" or tread in the path of the command.
He asks not to be carried while he lies passive; but to be made "to go."
Grace does not treat us as stocks and stones, to be dragged by horses or
engines, but as creatures endowed with life, reason, will, and active
powers, who are willing and able to go of themselves if once made to do
so. God worketh in us, but it is that we may both will and do according
to his good pleasure. The holiness we seek after is riot a forced
compliance with command, but the indulgence of a whole-hearted passion
for goodness, such as shall conform our life to the will of the Lord.
Can the reader say, "therein do I delight"? Is practical godliness the
very jewel of your soul, the coveted prize of your mind? If so, the
outward path of life, however rough will be clean,. and lead the soul
upward to delight ineffable. He who delights in the law should not doubt
but what he will be enabled to run in its ways, for where the heart
already finds its joy the feet are sure to follow.

Note that the corresponding verse in the former eight ([Psa
119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035))was "Make me to understand,"
and here we have "Make me to go." Remark the order, first understanding
and then going; for a clear understanding is a great assistance towards
practical action.

During the last few octaves the fourth has been the heart verse: see
[Psa 119:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#020), [Psa
119:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#028), and now [Psa
119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036). Indeed in all the preceeding
fourths great heartiness is observable. This also marks the care with
which this sacred song was composed.

[Psa 119:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#036)

"Incline my heart unto thy testimonies." Does not this prayer appear to
be superfluous, since it is evident that the Psalmist's heart was set
upon obedience? We are sure that there is never a word to spare in
Scripture. After asking for active virtue it was meet that the man of
God should beg that his heart might be in all that he did. What would
his goings be if his heart did not go? It may be that David felt a
wandering desire, an inordinate leaning of his soul to worldly gain, -
possibly it even intruded into his most devout meditations, and at once
he cried out for more grace. The only way to cure a wrong leaning is to
have the soul bent in the opposite direction. Holiness of heart is the
cure for covetousness. What a blessing it is that we may ask the Lord
even for an inclination. Our wills are free, and yet without violating
their liberty, grace can incline us in the right direction. This can be
done by enlightening the understanding as to the excellence of
obedience, by strengthening our habits of virtue, by giving us an
experience of the sweetness of piety, and by many other ways. If any one
duty is irksome to us it behoves us to offer this prayer with special
reference thereto: we are to love all the Lord's testimonies, and if we
fail in any one point we must pay double attention to it. The leaning of
the heart is the way in which the life will lean: hence the force of the
petition, "Incline my heart." Happy shall we be when we feel habitually
inclined to all that is good. This is not the way in which a carnal
heart ever leans; all its inclinations are in opposition to the divine
testimonies.

"And not to covetousness." This is the inclination of nature, and grace
must put a negative upon it. This vice is as injurious as it is common;
it is as mean as it is miserable. It is idolatry, and so it dethrones
God; it is selfishness, and so it is cruel to all in its power; it is
sordid greed, and so it would sell the Lord himself for pieces of
silver. It is a degrading, grovelling, hardening, deadening sin, which
withers everything around it that is lovely and Christlike. He who is
covetous is of the race of Judas, and will in all probability turn out
to be himself a son of perdition. The crime of covetousness is common,
but very few will confess it; for when a man heaps up gold in his heart
the dust of it blows into his eyes, and he cannot see his own fault. Our
hearts must have some object of desire, and the only way to keep out
worldly gain is to put in its place the testimonies of the Lord. If we
are inclined or bent one way, we shall be turned from the other; the
negative virtue is most surely attained by making sure of the positive
grace which inevitably produces it.

[Psa 119:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#037)

"Turn away mine eyes from beholding vanity." He had prayed about his
heart, and one would have thought that the eyes would so surely have
been influenced by the heart that there was no need to make them the
objects of a special petition; but our author is resolved to make
assurance doubly sure. If the eyes do not see, perhaps the heart my not
desire; at any rate, one door of temptation is closed when we do not
even look at the painted bauble. Sin first entered man's mind by the
eye, and it is still a favourite gate for the incoming of Satan's
allurements; hence the need of a double watch upon that portal. The
prayer is not so much that the eyes may be shut as "turned away;" for we
need to have them open, but directed to right objects. Perhaps we are
now gazing upon folly, we need to have our eyes turned away; and if we
are beholding heavenly things we shall be wise to beg that our eyes may
be kept away from vanity. Why should we look on vanity? - it melts away
as a vapour. Why not look upon things eternal? Sin is vanity, unjust
gain is vanity, self-conceit is vanity, and, indeed, all that is not of
God comes under the same head. From all this we must turn away. It is a
proof of the sense of weakness felt by the Psalmist and of his entire
dependence upon God that he even asks to have his eyes turned for him;
he meant not to make himself passive, but he intended to set forth his
own utter helplessness apart from the grace of God. For fear he should
forget himself and gaze with a lingering longing upon forbidden objects,
he entreats the Lord speedily to make him turn away his eyes, hurrying
him off from so dangerous a parley with iniquity. If we are kept from
looking on vanity we shall be preserved from loving iniquity.

"And quicken thou me in thy way." Give me so much life that dead vanity
may have no power over me. Enable me to travel so swiftly in the road to
heaven that I may not stop long enough within sight of vanity to be
fascinated thereby. The prayer indicates our greatest need - more life
in our obedience. It shows the preserving power of increased life to
keep us from the evils which are around us, and it, also, tells us where
that increased life must come from, namely, from the Lord alone.
Vitality is the cure of vanity. When the heart is full of grace the eyes
will be cleansed from impurity. On the other hand, if we would be full
of life as to the things of God we must keep ourselves apart from sin
and folly, or the eyes will soon captivate the mind, and, like Samson,
who could slay his thousands, we may ourselves be overcome through the
lusts which enter by the eye.

This verse is parallel to [Psa 119:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#021)
and [Psa 119:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#029) in the previous
eights: "rebuke," "remove, turn away;" or "proud," "lying, vanity."

[Psa 119:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#038)

"Stablish thy word unto thy servant." Make me sure of thy sure word:
make it sure to me and make me sure of it. If we possess the spirit of
service, and yet are troubled with sceptical thoughts we cannot do
better than pray to be established in the truth. Times will arise when
every doctrine and promise seems to be shaken, and our mind gets no
rest: then we must appeal to God for establishment in the faith, for he
would have all his servants to be well instructed and confirmed in his
word. But we must mind that we are the Lord's servants, for else we
shall not long be sound in his truth. Practical holiness is a great help
towards doctrinal certainty: if we are God's servants he will confirm
his word in our experience. "If any man will do his will, he shall know
of the doctrine"; and so know it as to be fully assured of it. Atheism
in the heart is a horrible plague to a God-fearing man, it brings more
torment with it than can well be described and nothing but a visitation
of grace can settle the soul after it has been violently assailed
thereby. Vanity or falsehood is bad for the eyes, but it is even worse
when it defiles the understanding and casts a doubt upon the word of the
living God.

"Who is devoted to thy fear," or simply - "to thy fear." That is, make
good thy word to godly fear wherever it exists; strengthen the whole
body of reverent men. Stablish thy word, not only to me, but to all the
godly ones under the sun. Or, again, it may mean - "Stablish thy word to
thy fear," namely, that men may be led to fear thee; since a sure faith
in the divine promise is the fountain and foundation of godly fear. Men
will never worship a God in whom they do not believe. More faith will
lead to more godly fear. We cannot look for the fulfilment of promises
in our experience unless we live under the influence of the fear of the
Lord: establishment in grace is the result of holy watchfulness and
prayerful energy. We shall never be rooted and grounded in our belief
unless we daily practise what we profess to believe. Full assurance is
the reward of obedience. Answers to prayer are given to those whose
hearts answer to the Lord's command. If we are devoted to God's fear we
shall be delivered from all other fear. He has no fear as to the truth
of the word who is filled with fear of the Author of the word.
Scepticism is both the parent and the child of impiety; but strong faith
both begets piety and is begotten of it. We commend this whole verse to
any devout man whose tendency is to scepticism: it will be an admirable
prayer for use in seasons of unusually strong misgivings.

[Psa 119:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#039)

"Turn away my reproach which I fear." He feared just reproach, trembling
lest he should cause the enemy to blaspheme through any glaring
inconsistency. We ought to fear this, and watch that we may avoid it.
Persecution in the form of calumny may also be prayed against, for it is
a sore trial, perhaps the sorest of trials to men of sensitive minds.
Many would sooner bear burning at the stake than the trial of cruel
mockings. David was quick tempered, and he probably had all the greater
dread of slander because it raised his anger, and he could hardly tell
what he might not do under great provocation. If God turns away our eyes
from falsehood, we may also expect that he will turn away falsehood from
injuring our good name. We shall be kept from lies if we keep from lies.

"For thy judgments are good." Therefore he is anxious that none may
speak evil of the ways of God through hearing an ill report about
himself. We mourn when we are slandered; because the shame is cast
rather upon our religion than ourselves. If men would be content to
attribute evil to us, and go no further, we might bear it, for we are
evil; but our sorrow is that they cast a slur upon the word and
character of God, who is so good, that there is none good in comparison
with him. When men rail at God's government of the world it is our duty
and privilege to stand up for him, and openly to declare before him,
"thy judgments are good;" and we should do the same when they assail the
Bible, the gospel, the law, or the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. But we
must take heed that they can bring no truthful accusation against us, or
our testimony will be so much wasted breath.

This prayer against reproach is parallel to [Psa
119:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#031), and in general to many other
of the seventh verses in the octaves, which usually imply opposition
from without and a sacred satisfaction within. Observe the things which
are good' "thy judgments are good; thou art good and doest good" ([Psa
119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068)); "good for me to have been
afflicted" ([Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071)); "teach me
good judgment" ([Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066)).

[Psa 119:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#040)

"Behold, I have longed after thy precepts." He can at least claim
sincerity. He is deeply bowed down by a sense of his weakness and need
of grace; but he does desire to be in all things conformed to the divine
will. Where our longings are, there are we in the sight of God. If we
have not attained perfection, it is something to have hungered after it.
He who has given us to desire, will also grant us to obtain. The
precepts are grievous to the ungodly, and therefore when we are so
changed as to long for them we have clear evidence of conversion, and we
may safely conclude that he who has begun the good work will carry it
on. "Quicken me in thy righteousness." Give me more life wherewith to
follow thy righteous law; or give me more life because thou hast
promised to hear prayer, and it is according to thy righteousness to
keep thy word. How often does David plead for quickening I But never
once too often. We need quickening every hour of the day for we are so
sadly apt to become slow and languid in the ways of God. It is the Holy
Spirit who can pour new life into us; let us not cease crying to him.
Let the life we already possess show itself by longing for more.

The last verses of the octaves have generally exhibited an onward look
of resolve, hope, and prayer. Here past fruits of grace are made the
plea for further blessing, Onward in the heavenly life is the cry of
this verse.

[Psalms 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 119:41</span></span>

41 Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord, even thy salvation,
according to thy word.

42 So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me: for I
trust in thy word.

43 And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth; for I have
hoped in thy judgments.

44 So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever.

45 And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts.

46 I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be
ashamed.

47 And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved.

48 My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have
loved; and I will meditate in thy statutes.

In these verses holy fear is apparent and prominent. The man of God
trembles lest in any way or degree the Lord should remove his favour
from him. The eight verses are one continued pleading for the abiding of
grace in his soul, and it is supported by such holy arguments as would
only suggest themselves to a spirit burning with love to God.

[Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041)

"Let thy mercies come also unto me, O Lord." He desires mercy as well as
teaching, for he was guilty as well as ignorant. He needed much mercy
and varied mercy, hence the request is in the plural. He needed mercy
from God rather than from man, and so he asks for "thy mercies." The way
sometimes seemed blocked, and therefore he begs that the mercies may
have their way cleared by God, and may "come" to him. He who said, "Let
there be light," can also say, "Let there be mercy." It may be that
under a sense of unworthiness the writer feared lest mercy should be
given to others, and not to himself; he therefore cries, "Bless me, even
me also, O my Father." Viewed in this light the words are tantamount to
our well-known verse -

"Lord, I hear of showers of blessing

Thou art scattering, full and free;

Showers, the thirsty land refreshing;

Let some droppings fall on me,

Even me."

Lord, thine enemies come to me to reproach me, let thy mercies come to
defend me; trials and troubles abound, and labours and sufferings not a
few approach me; Lord, let thy mercies in great number enter by the same
gate, and at the same hour; for art thou not the God of my mercy?

"Even thy salvation." This is the sum and crown of all mercies -
deliverance from all evil, both now and for ever. Here is the first
mention of salvation in the Psalm, and it is joined with mercy: "By
grace are ye saved." Salvation is styled "thy salvation," thus ascribing
it wholly to the Lord: "He that is our God is the God of salvation."
What a mass of mercies are heaped together in the one salvation of our
Lord Jesus! It includes the mercies which spare us before our
conversion, and lead up to it. Then comes calling mercy, regenerating
mercy, converting mercy, justifying mercy, pardoning mercy. Nor can we
exclude from complete salvation any of those many mercies which are
needed to conduct the believer safe to glory. Salvation is an aggregate
of mercies incalculable in number, priceless in value, incessant in
application, eternal in endurance. To the God of our mercies be glory,
world without end.

"According to thy word." The way of salvation is described in the word,
salvation itself is promised in the word, and its inward manifestation
is wrought by the word; so that in all respects the salvation which is
in Christ Jesus is in accordance with the word. David loved the
Scriptures, but he longed experimentally to know the salvation contained
in them: he was not satisfied to read the word, he longed treasure which
he had discovered in it. He was not to be contented with chapter and
verse, he wanted mercies and salvation.

Note that in the first verse of He ([Psa
119:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#033)) the Psalmist prayed to be
taught to keep God's word, and here in Vau he begs the Lord to keep his
word. In the first case he longed to come to the God of mercies, and
here he would have the Lord's mercies come to him: there he sought grace
to persevere in faith, and here he seeks the end of his faith, even the
salvation of his soul.

[Psa 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042)

"So shall I have wherewith to answer him that reproacheth me." This is
an unanswerable answer. When God, by granting us salvation, gives to our
prayers an answer of peace, we are ready at once to answer the
objections of the infidel, the quibbles of the sceptical, and the sneers
of the contemptuous. It is most desirable that revilers should be
answered, and hence we may expect the Lord to save his people in order
that a weapon may be put into their hands with which to rout his
adversaries. When those who reproach us are also reproaching God, we may
ask him to help us to silence them by sure proofs of his mercy and
faithfulness.

"For I trust in thy word." His faith was seen by his being trustful
while under trial, and he pleads it as a reason why he should be helped
to beat back reproaches by a happy experience. Faith is our argument
when we seek mercies and salvation; faith in the Lord who has spoken to
us in his word. "I trust in thy word" is a declaration more worth the
making than any other; for he who can truly make it has received power
to become a child of God, and so to be the heir of unnumbered mercies.
God hath more respect to a man's trust than to all else that is in him;
for the Lord hath chosen faith to be the hand into which he will place
his mercies and his salvation. If any reproach us for trusting in God,
we reply to them with arguments the most conclusive when we show that
God has kept his promises, heard our prayers, and supplied our needs.
Even the most sceptical are forced to bow before the logic of facts.

In [Psa 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042) the Psalmist makes a
confession of faith, and a declaration of his belief and experience.
Note that he does the same in the corresponding verses of the sections
which follow. See [Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050), "Thy
word hath quickened me"; [Psa 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058),
"I entreated thy favour"; [Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066),
"I have believed thy commandments"; [Psa
119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074), "I have hoped in thy word." A
wise preacher might find in these a series of experimental discourses.

[Psa 119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043)

"And take not the word of truth utterly out of my mouth." Do not prevent
my pleading for thee by leaving me without deliverance; for how could I
continue to proclaim thy word if I found it fail me? such would seem to
be the run of the meaning. The word of truth cannot be a joy to our
mouths unless we have an experience of it in our lives, and it may be
wise for us to be silent if we cannot support our testimonies by the
verdict of our consciousness. This prayer may also refer to other modes
by which we may be disabled from speaking in the name of the Lord' as,
for instance, by our falling into open sin, by our becoming depressed
and despairing, by our labouring under sickness or mental aberration, by
our finding no door of utterance, or meeting with no willing audience.
He who has once preached the gospel from his heart is filled with horror
at the idea of being put out of the ministry; he will crave to be
allowed a little share in the holy testimony, and will reckon his dumb
Sabbaths to be days of banishment and punishment.

"For I have hoped in thy judgments." He had expected God to appear and
vindicate his cause, that so he might speak with confidence concerning
his faithfulness. God is the author of our hopes, and we may most
fittingly entreat him to fulfil them. The judgments of his providence
are the outcome of his word; what he says in the Scriptures he actually
performs in his government; we may therefore look for him to show
himself strong on the behalf of his own threatenings and promises, and
we shall not look in vain.

God's ministers are sometimes silenced through the sins of their people,
and it becomes them to plead against such a judgment; better far that
they should suffer sickness or poverty than that the candle of the
gospel should be put out among them, and that thus they should be left
to perish without remedy. The Lord save us, who are his ministers, from
being made the instruments of inflicting such a penalty. Let us exhibit
a cheerful hopefulness in God, that we may plead it in prayer with him
when he threatens to close our lips.

In the close of this verse there is a declaration of what the Psalmist
had done in reference to the word of the Lord, and in this the thirds of
the octaves are often alike. See [Psa
119:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#035), "therein do I delight"; [Psa
119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043), "I have hoped in thy
judgments"; [Psa 119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051), "yet have I
not declined from thy law"; [Psa
119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059), "I turned my feet to thy
testimonies"; and [Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067), [Psa
119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083), [Psa
119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099), etc. These verses would
furnish an admirable series of meditations.

[Psa 119:44](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#044)

"So shall I keep thy law continually for ever and ever." Nothing more
effectually binds a man to the way of the Lord than an experience of the
truth of his word, embodied in the form of mercies and deliverances. Not
only does the Lord's faithfulness open our mouths against his
adversaries, but it also knits our hearts to his fear, and makes our
union with him more and more intense. Great mercies lead us to feel an
inexpressible gratitude which, failing to utter itself in time, promises
to engross eternity with praises. To a heart on flame with thankfulness,
the "always, unto eternity and perpetuity" of the text will not seem to
be redundant; yea, the hyperbole of Addison in his famous verse will
only appear to be solid sense: -

"Through all eternity to thee

A joyful song I'll raise;

But oh! eternity's too short

To utter all thy praise."

God's grace alone can enable us to keep his commandments without break
and without end; eternal love must grant us eternal life, and out of
this will come everlasting obedience. There is no other way to ensure
our perseverance in holiness but by the word of truth abiding in us, as
David prayed it might abide with him.

The verse begins with "So," as did [Psa
119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042). When God grants his salvation
we are so favoured that we silence our worst enemy and glorify our best
friend. Mercy answereth all things. If God doth but give us salvation we
can conquer hell and commune with heaven, answering reproaches and
keeping the law, and that to the end, world without end.

We may not overlook another sense which suggests itself here. David
prayed that the word of truth might not be taken out of his mouth, and
so would he keep God's law: that is to say, by public testimony as well
as by personal life he would fulfil the divine will, and confirm the
bonds which bound him to his Lord for ever. Undoubtedly the grace which
enables us to bear witness with the mouth is a great help to ourselves
as well as to others: we feel that the vows of the Lord are upon us, and
that we cannot run back.

[Psa 119:45](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#045)

"And I will walk at liberty: for I seek thy precepts." Saints find no
bondage in sanctity. The Spirit of holiness is a free spirit; he sets
men at liberty and enables them to resist every effort to bring them
under subjection. The way of holiness is not a track for slaves, but the
King's highway for freemen, who are joyfully journeying from the Egypt
of bondage to the Canaan of rest. God's mercies and his salvation, by
teaching us to love the precepts of the word, set us at a happy rest;
and the more we seek after the perfection of our obedience the more
shall we enjoy complete emancipation from every form of spiritual
slavery. David at one time of his life was in great bondage through
having followed a crooked policy. He deceived Achish so persistently
that he was driven to acts of ferocity to conceal it, and must have felt
very unhappy in his unnatural position as an ally of Philistines, and
captain of the body guard of their king. He must have feared lest
through his falling into the crooked ways of falsehood the truth would
no longer be on his tongue, and he therefore prayed God in some way to
work his deliverance, and set him at liberty from such slavery. By
terrible things in righteousness did the Lord answer him at Ziklag: the
snare was broken, and he escaped.

The verse is united to that which goes before, for it begins with the
word "And," which acts as a hook to attach it to the preceding verses.
It mentions another of the benefits expected from the coming of mercies
from God. The man of God had mentioned the silencing of his enemies
([Psa 119:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#042)), power to proceed in
testimony ([Psa 119:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#043)), and
perseverance in holiness; now he dwells upon liberty, which next to life
is dearest to all brave men. He says, "I shall walk," indicating his
daily progress through life; "at liberty," as one who is out of prison,
unimpeded by adversaries, unencumbered by burdens, unshackled, allowed a
wide range, and roaming without fear. Such liberty would be dangerous if
a man were seeking himself or his own lusts; but when the one object
sought after is the will of God, there can be no need to restrain the
searcher. We need not circumscribe the man who can say, "I seek thy
precepts." Observe, in the preceding verse he said he would keep the
law; but here he speaks of seeking it. Does he not mean that he will
obey what he knows, and endeavour to know more? Is not this the way to
the highest form of liberty, - to be always labouring to know the mind
of God and to be conformed to it? Those who keep the law are sure to
seek it, and bestir themselves to keep it more and more.

[Psa 119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046)

"I will speak of thy testimonies also before kings, and will not be
ashamed." This is part of his liberty; he is free from fear of the
greatest, proudest, and most tyrannical of men. David was called to
stand before kings when he was an exile; and afterwards, when he was
himself a monarch, he knew the tendency of men to sacrifice their
religion to pomp and statecraft; but it was his resolve to do nothing of
the kind. He would sanctify politics, and make cabinets know that the
Lord alone is governor among the nations. As a king he would speak to
kings concerning the King of kings. He says, "I will speak": prudence
might have suggested that his life and conduct would be enough, and that
it would be better not to touch upon religion in the presence of royal
personages who worshipped other gods, and claimed to be right in so
doing. He had already most fittingly preceded this resolve by the
declaration, "I will walk," but he does not make his personal conduct an
excuse for sinful silence, for he adds, "I will speak." David claimed
religious liberty, and took care to use it, for he spoke out what he
believed, even when he was in the highest company. In what he said he
took care to keep to God's own word, for he says, "I will speak of thy
testimonies." No theme is like this, and there is no way of handling
that theme like keeping close to the book, and using its thought and
language. The great hindrance to our speaking upon holy topics in all
companies is shame, but the Psalmist will "not be ashamed"; there is
nothing to be ashamed of, and there is no excuse for being ashamed, and
yet many are as quiet as the dead for fear some creature like themselves
should be offended. When God gives grace, cowardice soon vanishes. He
who speaks for God in God's power, will not be ashamed when beginning to
speak, nor while speaking, nor after speaking; for his theme is one
which is fit for kings, needful to kings, and beneficial to kings. If
kings object, we may well be ashamed of them, but never of our Master
who sent us, or of his message, or of his design in sending it.

[Psa 119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047)

"And I will delight myself in thy commandments, which I have loved."
Next to liberty and courage comes delight. When we have done our duty,
we find a great reward in it. If David had not spoken for his Master
before kings, he would have been afraid to think of the law which he had
neglected; but after speaking up for his Lord he feels a sweet serenity
of heart when musing upon the word. Obey the command, and you will love
it; carry the yoke, and it will be easy, and rest will come by it. After
speaking of the law the Psalmist was not wearied of his theme, but he
retired to meditate upon it; he discoursed and then he delighted, he
preached and then repaired to his study to renew his strength by feeding
yet again upon the precious truth. Whether he delighted others or not
when he was speaking, he never failed to delight himself when he was
musing on the word of the Lord. He declares that he loved the Lord's
commands, and by this avowal he unveils the reason for his delight in
them: where our love is, there is our delight. David did not delight in
the courts of kings, for there he found places of temptation to shame,
but in the Scriptures he found himself at home; his heart was in them,
and they yielded him supreme pleasure. No wonder that he spoke of
keeping the law, which he loved; Jesus says, "If a man love me, he will
keep my words." No wonder that he spoke of walking at liberty, and
speaking boldly, for true love is ever free and fearless. Love is the
fulfilling of the law; where love to the law of God reigns in the heart
the life must be full of blessedness. Lord, let thy mercies come to us
that we may love thy word and way, and find our whole delight therein.

The verse is in the future, and hence it sets forth, not only what David
had done, but what he would do; he would in time to come delight in his
Lord's commands. He knew that they would neither alter, nor fail to
yield him joy. He knew also that grace would keep him in the same
condition of heart towards the precepts of the Lord, so that he should
throughout his whole life take a supreme delight in holiness. His heart
was so fixed in love to God's will that he was sure that grace would
always hold him under its delightful influence.

All the Psalm is fragrant with love to the word, but here for the first
time love is expressly spoken of. It is here coupled with delight, and
in [Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165) with "great peace."
All the verses in which love declares itself in so many words are worthy
of note. See [Psa 119:47](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#047), [Psa
119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097), [Psa
119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113), [Psa
119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119), [Psa
119:127-140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127), [Psa
119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159), [Psa
119:163](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#163), [Psa
119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165), [Psa
119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167).

[Psa 119:48](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#048)

"My hands also will I lift up unto thy commandments, which I have
loved." He will stretch out towards perfection as far as he can, hoping
to reach it one day; when his hands hang down he will cheer himself out
of languor by the prospect of glorifying God by obedience, and he will
give solemn sign of his hearty assent and consent to all that his God
commands. The phrase "lift up my hands" is very full of meaning, and
doubtless the sweet singer meant all that we can see in it, and a great
deal more. Again he declares his love; for a true heart loves to express
itself; it is a kind of fire which must send forth its flames. It was
natural that he should reach out towards a law which he delighted in,
even as a child holds out its hands to receive a gift which it longs
for. When such a lovely object as holiness is set before us, we are
bound to rise towards it with our whole nature, and till that is fully
accomplished we should at least lift up our hands in prayer towards it.
Where holy hands and holy hearts go, the whole man will one day follow.

"And I will meditate in thy statutes." He can never have enough of
meditation upon the mind of God. Loving subjects wish to be familiar
with their sovereign's statutes, for they are anxious that they may not
offend through ignorance. Prayer with lifted hands, and meditation with
upward-glancing eyes will in happy union work out the best inward
results. The prayer of [Psa 119:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#041) is
already fulfilled in the man who is thus struggling upward and studying
deeply. The whole of this verse is in the future, and may be viewed not
only as a determination of David's mind, but as a result which he knew
would follow from the Lord's sending him his mercies and his salvation.
When mercy comes down, our hands will be lifted up; when God in favour
thinks upon us, we are sure to think of him. Happy is he who stands with
hands uplifted both to receive the blessing and to obey the precept; he
shall not wait upon the Lord in vain.

[Psalms 119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">psa 119:49</span></span>

49 Remember the word unto thy servant, upon which thou hast caused me to
hope.

50 This is my comfort in my affliction: for thy word hath quickened me.

51 The proud have had me greatly in derision: yet have I not declined
from thy law.

52 I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord, and have comforted myself.

53 Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy
law.

54 Thy statutes have been my songs in the house of my pilgrimage.

55 I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night, and have kept thy
law.

56 This I had, because I kept thy precepts.

This octrain deals with the comfort of the word. It begins by seeking
the main consolation, namely, the Lord's fulfilment of his promise, and
then it shows how the word sustains us under affliction, and makes us so
impervious to ridicule that we are moved by the harsh conduct of the
wicked rather to horror of their sin than to any submission to their
temptations. We are then shown how the Scripture furnishes songs for
pilgrims, and memories for night-watchers; and the Psalm concludes by
the general statement that the whole of this happiness and comfort
arises out of keeping the statutes of the Lord.

[Psa 119:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#049)

"Remember the word unto thy servant." He asks for no new promise, but to
have the old word fulfilled. He is grateful that he has received so good
a word, he embraces it with all his heart, and now entreats the Lord to
deal with him according to it. He does not say, "remember my service to
thee," but "thy word to me." The words of masters to servants are not
always such that servants wish their lords to remember them; for they
usually observe the faults and failings of the work done, inasmuch as it
does not tally with the word of command. But we who serve the best of
masters are not anxious to have one of his words fall to the ground,
since the Lord will so kindly remember his word of command as to give us
grace wherewith we may obey, and he will couple with it a remembrance of
his word of promise, so that our hearts shall be comforted. If God's
word to us as his servants is so precious, what shall we say of his word
to us as his sons?

The Psalmist does not fear a failure in the Lord's memory, but he makes
use of the promise as a plea, and this is the form in which he speaks,
after the manner of men when they plead with one another. When the Lord
remembers the sins of his servant, and brings them before his
conscience, the penitent cries, Lord, remember thy word of pardon, and
therefore remember my sins and iniquities no more. There is a world of
meaning in that word "remember," as it is addressed to God; it is used
in Scripture in the tenderest sense, and suits the sorrowing and the
depressed. Tim Psalmist cried, "Lord, remember David, and all his
afflictions": Job also prayed that the Lord would appoint him a set
time, and remember him. In the present instance the prayer is as
personal as the "Remember me" of the thief, for its essence lies in the
words - "unto thy servant" It would be all in vain for us if the promise
were remembered to all others if it did not come true to ourselves; but
there is no fear, for the Lord has never forgotten a single promise to a
single believer.

"Upon which thou hast caused me to hope." The argument is that God,
having given grace to hope in the promise, would surely never disappoint
that hope. He cannot have caused us to hope without cause. If we hope
upon his word we have a sure basis: our gracious Lord would never mock
us by exciting false hopes. Hope deferred maketh the heart sick, hence
the petition for immediate remembrance of the cheering word. Moreover,
it is the hope of a servant, and it is not possible that a great and
good master would disappoint his dependent; if such a master's word were
not kept it could only be through an oversight, hence the anxious cry,
"Remember." Our great Master will not forget his won servants, nor
disappoint the expectation which he himself has raised. because we are
the Lord's, and endeavour to remember his word by obeying it, we may be
sure that he will think upon his own servants, and remember his own
promise by making it good.

This verse is the prayer of love fearing to be forgotten, of humility
conscious of insignificance and anxious not to be overlooked, of
penitence trembling lest the evil of its sin should overshadow the
promise, of eager desire longing for the blessing, and of holy
confidence which feels that all that is wanted is comprehended in the
word. Let but the Lord remember his promise, and the promised act is as
good as done.

[Psa 119:50](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#050)

"This my comfort in my affliction. for thy word hath quickened me." He
means, - Thy word is my comfort, or the fact that thy word has brought
quickening to me is my comfort. Or he means that the hope which God had
given him was his comfort, for God had quickened him thereby. Whatever
may be the exact sense, it is clear that the Psalmist had affliction, -
affliction peculiar to himself which he calls "my affliction"; that he
had comfort in it, - comfort specially his own, for he styles it "my
comfort"; and that he knew what the comfort was, and where it came from,
for he exclaims - "this is my comfort." The worldling clutches his
money-bag, and says, "this is my comfort"; the spendthrift points to his
gaiety and shouts, "this is my comfort"; the drunkard lifts his glass
and sings, "this is my comfort"; but the man whose hope comes from God
feels the life- giving power of the word of the Lord, and he testifies,
"this is my comfort." Paul said, "I know whom I have believed." Comfort
is desirable at all times; but comfort in affliction is like a lamp in a
dark place. Some are unable to find comfort at such times; but it is not
so with believers, for their Saviour has said to them, "I will not leave
you comfortless." Some have comfort and no affliction, others have
affliction and no comfort; but the saints have comfort in their
affliction.

The word frequently comforts us by increasing the force of our inner
life; "this is my comfort; thy word hath quickened me." To quicken the
heart is to cheer the whole man. Often the near way to consolation is
sanctification and invigoration. If we cannot clear away the fog, it may
be better to rise to a higher level, and so to get above it. Troubles
which weigh us down while we are half dead become mere trifles when we
are full of life. Thus have we often been raised in spirit by quickening
grace, and the same thing will happen again, for the comforter is still
with us, the Consolation of Israel ever liveth, and the very God of
peace is evermore our Father. On looking back upon our past life there
is one ground of comfort as to our state - the word of God has made us
alive, and kept us so. We were dead, but we are dead no longer. From
this we gladly infer that if the Lord had meant to destroy he would not
have quickened us. If we were only hypocrites worthy of derision, as the
proud ones say, he would not have revived us by his grace An experience
of quickening is a fountain of good cheer.

See how this verse is turned into a prayer in [Psa
119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107). "Quicken me, O Lord,
according unto thy word." Experience teaches us how to pray, and
furnishes arguments in prayer.

[Psa 119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051)

"The proud have had me greatly in derision." Proud men never love
gracious men, and as they fear them they veil their fear under a
pretended contempt. In this case their hatred revealed itself in
ridicule, and that ridicule was loud and long. When they wanted sport
they made sport of David because he was God's servant. Men must have
strange eyes to be able to see farce in faith, and a comedy in holiness;
yet it is sadly the case that men who are short of wit can generally
provoke a broad grin by jesting at a saint. Conceited sinners make
footballs of godly men. They call it roaring fun to caricature a
faithful member of "The Holy Club"; his methods of careful living are
the material for their jokes about "the Methodist"; and his hatred of
sin sets their tongues a-wagging at long-faced Puritanism, and
strait-laced hypocrisy. If David was greatly derided, we may not expect
to escape the scorn of the ungodly. There are hosts of proud men still
upon the face of the earth, and if they find a believer in affliction
they will be mean enough and cruel enough to make jests at his expense.
It is the nature of the son of the bondwoman to mock the child of the
promise.

"Yet have I not declined from thy law." Thus the deriders missed their
aim: they laughed, but they did not win. The godly man, so far from
turning aside from the right way, did not even slacken his pace, or in
any sense fall off from his holy habits. Many would have declined, many
have declined, but David did not do so. It is paying too much honour to
fools to yield half a point to them. Their unhallowed mirth will not
harm us if we pay no attention to it, even as the moon suffers nothing
from the dogs that bay at her. God's law is our highway of peace and
safety, and those who would laugh us out of it wish us no good.

From [Psa 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061) we note that David
was not overcome by the spoiling of his goods any more than by these
cruel mockings: See also [Psa 119:157](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#157),
where the multitude of persecutors and enemies were baffled in their
attempts to make him decline from God's ways.

[Psa 119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052)

"I remembered thy judgments of old, O Lord; and have comforted myself."
He had asked the Lord to remember, and here he remembers God and his
judgments. When we see no present display of the divine power it is wise
to fall back upon the records of former ages, since they are just as
available as if the transactions were of yesterday, seeing the Lord is
always the same. Our true comfort must be found in what our God works on
behalf of truth and right, and as the histories of the olden times are
full of divine interpositions it is well to be thoroughly acquainted
with them. Moreover, if we are advanced in years we have the providences
of our early days to review, and these should by no means be forgotten
or left out of our thoughts. The argument is good and solid: he who has
shown himself strong on behalf of his believing people is the immutable
God, and therefore we may expect deliverance at his hands. The grinning
of the proud will not trouble us when we remember how the Lord dealt
with their predecessors in bygone periods; he destroyed them at the
deluge, he confounded them at Babel, he drowned them at the Bed Sea, he
drove them out of Canaan: he has in all ages bared his arm against the
haughty, and broken them as potters' vessels. While in our own hearts we
humbly drink of the mercy of God in quietude, we are not without comfort
in seasons of turmoil and derision; for then we resort to God's justice,
and remember how he scoffs at the scoffers: "He that sitteth in the
heavens doth laugh, the Lord doth have them in derision."

When he was greatly derided the Psalmist did not sit down in despair,
but rallied his spirits. He knew that comfort is needful for strength in
service, and for the endurance of persecution, and therefore he
comforted himself. In doing this he resorted not so much to the sweet as
to the stern side of the Lord's dealings, and dwelt upon his judgments.
If we can find sweetness in the divine justice, how much more shall we
perceive it in divine love and grace. How thoroughly must that man be at
peace with God who can find comfort, not only in his promises, but in
his judgments. Even the terrible things of God are cheering to
believers. They know that nothing is more to the advantage of all God's
creatures than to be ruled by a strong hand which will deal out justice.
The righteous man has no fear of the ruler's sword, which is only a
terror to evil doers. When the godly man is unjustly treated he finds
comfort in the fact that there is a Judge of all the earth who will
avenge his own elect, and redress the ills of these disordered times.

[Psa 119:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#053)

"Horror hath taken hold upon me because of the wicked that forsake thy
law." He was horrified at their action, at the pride which led them to
it, and at the punishment which would be sure to fall upon them for it.
When he thought upon the ancient judgments of God he was filled with
terror at the fate of the godless; as well he might be. Their laughter
had not distressed him, but he was distressed by a foresight of their
overthrow. Truths which were amusement to them caused amazement to him.
He saw them utterly turning away from the law of God, and leaving it as
a path forsaken and overgrown from want of traffic, and this forsaking
of the law filled him with the most painful emotions: he was astonished
at their wickedness, stunned by their presumption, alarmed by the
expectation of their sudden overthrow, amazed by the terror of their
certain doom.

See [Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106) and [Psa
119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158), and note the tenderness which
combined with all this. Those who are the firmest believers in the
eternal punishment of the wicked are the most grieved at their doom. It
is no proof of tenderness to shut one's eyes to the awful doom of the
ungodly. Compassion is far better shown in trying to save sinners than
in trying to make things pleasant all round. Oh that we were all more
distressed as we think of the portion of the ungodly in the lake of
fire! The popular plan is to shut your eyes and forget all about it, or
pretend to doubt it; but this is not the way of the faithful servant of
God.

[Psa 119:54](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#054)

"Thy statutes have been my songs in tile house of my pilgrimage." Like
others of God's servants, David knew that he was not at home in this
world, but a pilgrim through it, seeking a better country. He did not,
however, sigh over this fact, but he sang about it. He tells us nothing
about his pilgrim sighs, but speaks of his pilgrim songs. Even the
palace in which he dwelt was but "the house of his pilgrimage," the inn
at which he rested, the station at which he halted for a little while.
Men are wont to sing when they come to their inn, and so did this godly
sojourner; he sang the songs of Zion, the statutes of the great King.
The commands of God were as well known to him as the ballads of his
country, and they were pleasant to his taste and musical to his ear.
Happy is the heart which finds its joy in the commands of God, and makes
obedience its recreation. When religion is set to music it goes well.
When we sing in the ways of the Lord it shows that our hearts are in
them. Ours are pilgrim Psalms, songs of degrees; but they are such as we
may sing throughout eternity; for the statutes of the Lord are the
psalmody of heaven itself.

Saints find horror in sin, and harmony in holiness. The wicked shun the
law, and the righteous sing of it. In past days we have sung the Lord's
statutes, and in this fact we may find comfort in present affliction.
Since our songs are so very different from those of the proud, we may
expect to join a very different choir at the last, and sing in a place
far removed from their abode.

Note how in the sixth verses of their respective octaves we often find
resolves to bless God, or records of testimony. In [Psa
119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046) it is, "I will speak," and in
[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062), "I will give thanks,"
while here he speaks of songs.

[Psa 119:55](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#055)

"I have remembered thy name, O Lord, in the night." When others slept I
woke to think of thee, thy person, thy actions, thy covenant, thy name,
under which last term he comprehends the divine character as far as it
is revealed. He was so earnest after the living God that he woke up at
dead of night to think upon him. These were David's Night Thoughts. If
they were not Sunny Memories they were memories of the Sun of
Righteousness. It is well when our memory furnishes us with consolation,
so that we can say with the Psalmist, - Having early been taught to know
thee, I had only to remember the lessons of thy grace, and my heart was
comforted. This verse shows not only that the man of God had remembered,
but that he still remembered the Lord his God. We are to hallow the name
of God, and we cannot do so if it slips from our memory.

"And have kept. thy law." He found sanctification through meditation; by
the thoughts of the night he ruled the actions of the day. As the
actions of the day often create the dreams of the night, so do the
thoughts of the night produce the deeds of the day. If we do not keep
the name of God in our memory we shall not keep the law of God in our
conduct. Forgetfulness of minds leads up to forgetfulness of life.

When we hear the night songs of revellers we have in them sure evidence
that they do not keep God's law; but the quiet musings of gracious men
are proof positive that the name of the Lord is dear to them. We may
judge of nations by their songs, and so we may of men; and in the case
of the righteous, their singing and their thinking are both indications
of their love to God: whether they lift up their voices, or sit in
silence, they are still the Lord's. Blessed are the men whose
"night-thoughts" are memories of the eternal light; they shall be
remembered of their Lord when the night of death comes on. Reader, are
your thoughts in the dark full of light, because full of God? Is his
name the natural subject of your evening reflections? Then it will give
a tone to your morning and noonday hours. Or do you give your whole mind
to the fleeting cares and pleasures of this world? If so, it is little
wonder that you do not live as you ought to do. No man is holy by
chance. If we have no memory for the name of Jehovah we are not likely
to remember his commandments: if we do not think of him secretly we
shall not obey him openly.

[Psa 119:56](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#056)

"This I had, because I kept thy precepts." He had this comfort, this
remembrance of God, this power to sing, this courage to face the enemy,
this hope in the promise, because he had earnestly observed the commands
of God, and striven to walk in them. We are not rewarded for our works,
but there is a reward in them. Many a comfort is obtainable only by
careful living: we can surely say of such consolations, "This I had
because I kept thy precepts" How can we defy ridicule if we are living
inconsistently? how can we comfortably remember the name of the Lord if
we live carelessly? It may be that David means that he had been enabled
to keep the law because he had attended to the separate precepts: he had
taken the commands in detail, and so had reached to holiness of life.
Or, by keeping certain of the precepts he had gained spiritual strength
to keep others: for God give more grace to those who have some measure
of it, and those who improve their talents shall find themselves
improving. It may be best to leave the passage open just as our version
does; so that we may say of a thousand priceless blessings, "these came
to us in the way of obedience." All our possessions are the gifts of
grace, and yet some of them come in the shape of reward; yet even then
the reward is not of debt, but of grace. God first works in us good
works, and then rewards us for them.

Here we have an apt conclusion to this section of the Psalm, for this
verse is a strong argument for the prayer with which the section
commenced. The sweet singer had evidence of having kept God's precepts,
and therefore he could the more properly beg the Lord to keep his
promises. All through the passage we may find pleas, especially in the
two remembers. "I have remembered thy judgments," and "I have remembered
thy name"; "Remember thy word unto thy servant."

[Psalms 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">psa 119:57</span></span>

57 Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said that I would keep thy words.

58 I intreated thy favour with my whole heart: be merciful unto me
according to thy word.

59 I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies.

60 I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments.

61 The bands of the wicked have robbed me: but I have not forgotten thy
law.

62 At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy
righteous judgments.

63 I am a companion of all them that fear thee, and of them that keep
thy precepts.

64 The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy: teach me thy statutes.

In this section the Psalmist seems to take firm hold upon God himself;
appropriating him ([Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057)),
crying out for him ([Psa 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058)),
returning to him ([Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059)),
solacing himself in him ([Psa 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061),
[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062)), associating with his
people ([Psa 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063)), and sighing for
personal experience of his goodness ([Psa
119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064)). Note how [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057) is linked to the last of the
former one, of which indeed it is an expanded repetition. "This I had
because I kept thy precepts. Thou art my portion, O Lord: I have said
that I would keep thy words."

[Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057)

"Thou art my portion, O Lord." A broken sentence. The translators have
mended it by insertions, but perhaps it had been better to have left it
alone, and then it would have appeared as an exclamation, - "My portion,
O Lord!" The poet is lost in wonder while he sees that the great and
glorious God is all his own! Well might he be so, for there is no
possession like Jehovah himself. The form of the sentence expresses
joyous recognition and appropriation, - "My portion, O Jehovah!" David
had often seen the prey divided, and heard the victors shouting over it;
here he rejoices as one who seizes his share of the spoil; he chooses
the Lord to be his part of the treasure. Like the Levites, he took God
to be his portion, and left other matters to those who coveted them.
This is a large and lasting heritage, for it includes all, and more than
all, and it outlasts all; and yet no man chooses it for himself until
God has chosen and renewed him. Who that is truly wise could hesitate
for a moment when the infinitely blessed God is set before him to be the
object of his choice? David leaped at the opportunity, and grasped the
priceless boon. Our author here dares exhibit the title-deeds of his
portion before the eye of the Lord himself, for he addresses his joyful
utterance directly to God whom he boldly calls his own. With much else
to choose from, for he was a king, and a man of great resources, he
deliberately turns from all the treasures of the world, and declares
that the Lord, even Jehovah, is his portion.

"I have said that I would keep thy words." We cannot always look back
with comfort upon what we have said, but in this instance David had
spoken wisely and well. He had declared his choice: he preferred the
word of God to the wealth of worldlings. It was his firm resolve to keep
- that is, treasure up and observe - the words of his God, and as he had
aforetime solemnly expressed it in the presence of the Lord himself, so
here he confesses the binding obligation of his former vow. Jesus said,
"If a man love me, he will keep my words," and this is a case which he
might have quoted as an illustration; for the Psalmist's love to God as
his portion led to his keeping the words of God. David took God to be
his Prince as well as his Portion. He was confident as to his interest
in God, and therefore he was resolute in his obedience to him. Full
assurance is a powerful source of holiness. The very words of God are to
be stored up; for whether they relate to doctrine, promise, or precept,
they are most precious. When the heart is determined to keep these
words, and has registered its purpose in the court of heaven, it is
prepared for all the temptations and trials that may befall it; for,
with God as its heritage, it is always in good case.

[Psa 119:58](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#058)

"I intreated thy favour with my whole heart." A fully assured possession
be his God will seek his face, longing for his presence. Seeking God's
presence is the idea conveyed by the marginal reading, "thy face," and
this is true to the Hebrew. The presence of God is the highest form of
his favour, and therefore it is the most urgent desire of gracious
souls: the light of his countenance gives us an antepast of heaven. O
that we always enjoyed it! The good man entreated God's smile as one who
begged for his life, and the entire strength of his desire went with the
entreaty. Such eager pleadings are sure of success; that which comes
from our heart will certainly go to God's heart. The whole of God's
favours are ready for those who seek them with their whole hearts.

"Be merciful unto me according to thy word." He has entreated favour,
and the form in which he most needs it is that of mercy, for he is more
a sinner than anything else. He asks nothing beyond the promise, he only
begs for such mercy as the word reveals. And what more could he want or
wish for? God has revealed such an infinity of mercy in his word that it
would be impossible to conceive of more. See how the Psalmist dwells
upon favour and mercy, he never dreams of merit. He does not demand, but
entreat; for he feels his own unworthiness. Note how he remains a
suppliant, though he knows that he has all things in his God. God is his
portion, and yet he begs for a look at his face. The idea of any other
standing before God than that of an undeserving but favoured one never
entered his head. Here we have his "Be merciful unto me" rising with as
much intensity of humble pleading as if he still remained among the most
trembling of penitents. The confidence of faith makes us bold in prayer,
but it never teaches us to live without prayer, or justifies us in being
other than humble beggars at mercy's gate.

[Psa 119:59](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#059)

"I thought on my ways, and turned my feet unto thy testimonies." While
studying the word he was led to study his own life, and this caused a
mighty revolution. He came to the word, and then he came to himself, and
this made him arise and go to his father. Consideration is the
commencement of conversion: first we think and then we turn. When the
mind repents of ill ways the feet are soon led into good ways; but there
will be no repenting until there is deep, earnest thought. Many men are
averse to thought of any kind, and as to thought upon their ways, they
cannot endure it, for their ways will not bear thinking of. David's ways
had not been all that he could have wished them to be, and so his
thoughts were sobered o'er with the pale cast of regret; but he did not
end with idle lamentations, he set about a practical amendment; he
turned and returned, he sought the testimonies of the Lord, and hastened
to enjoy once more the conscious favour of his heavenly friend. Action
without thought is folly, and thought without action is sloth: to think
carefully and then to act promptly is a happy combination. He had
entreated for renewed fellowship, and now he proved the genuineness of
his desire by renewed obedience. If we are in the dark, and mourn an
absent God, our wisest method will be not so much to think upon our
sorrows as upon our ways: though we cannot turn the course of
providence, we can turn the way of our walking, and this will soon mend
matters. If we can get our feet right as to holy walking, we shall soon
get our hearts right as to happy living. God will turn to his saints
when they turn to him; yea, he has already favoured them with the light
of his face when they begin to think and turn.

[Psa 119:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#060)

"I made haste, and delayed not to keep thy commandments." He made all
speed to get back into the royal road from which he had wandered, and to
run in that road upon the King's errands. Speed in repentance and speed
in obedience are two excellent things. We are too often in haste to sin;
O that we may be in a greater hurry to obey. Delay in sin is increase of
sin. To be slow to keep the commands is really to break them. There is
much evil in a lagging pace when God's command is to be followed. A holy
alacrity in service is much to be cultivated. It is wrought in us by the
Spirit of God, and the preceding verses describe the method of it: we
are made to perceive and mourn our errors, we are led to return to the
right path, and then we are eager to make up for lost time by dashing
forward to fulfil the precept.

Whatever may be the slips and wanderings of an honest heart, there
remains enough of true life in it to produce ardent piety when once it
is quickened by the visitations of God. The Psalmist entreated for
mercy, and when he received it he became eager and vehement in the
Lord's ways. He had always loved them, and hence when he was enriched
with grace he displayed great vivacity and delight in them. He made
double speed: for positively he "made haste." and negatively he refused
to yield to any motive which suggested procrastination, - he "delayed
not." Thus he made rapid advances and accomplished much service,
fulfilling thereby the vow which is recorded in [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057) : "I said that I would keep thy
words." The commands which he was so eager to obey were not ordinances
of man, but precepts of the Most High. Many are zealous to obey custom
and society, and yet they are slack in serving God. It is a crying shame
that men should be served post-haste, and that God's work should have
the go-by, or be performed with dreamy negligence.

[Psa 119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061)

"The bands of the wicked have robbed me." Aforetime they derided him,
and now they have defrauded him. Ungodly men grow worse, and become more
and more daring, so that they go from ridicule to robbery. Much of this
bold opposition arose from their being banded together: men will dare to
do in company what they durst not have thought of alone. When firebrands
are laid together there is no telling what a flame they will create. It
seems that whole bands of men assailed this one child of God, they are
cowardly enough for anything; though they could not kill him, they
robbed him; the dogs of Satan will worry saints if they cannot devour
them. David's enemies did their utmost: first the serpents hissed, and
then they stung. Since words availed not, the wicked fell to blows. How
much the ungodly have plundered the saints in all ages, and how often
have the righteous borne gladly the spoiling of their goods!

"But I have not forgotten thy law." This was well. Neither his sense of
injustice, nor his sorrow at his losses, nor his attempts at defence
diverted him from the ways of God. He would not do wrong to prevent the
suffering of wrong, nor do ill to avenge ill. He carried the law in his
heart, and therefore no disturbance of mind could take him off from
following it. He might have forgotten himself if he had forgotten the
law' as it was, he was ready to forgive and forget the injuries done
him, for his heart was taken up with the word of God. The bands of the
wicked had not robbed him of his choicest treasure, since they had left
him his holiness and his happiness.

Some read this passage, "The bands of the wicked environ me." They
hemmed him in, they cut him off from succour, they shut up every avenue
of escape, but the man of God had his protector with him; a clear
conscience relied upon the promise, and a brave resolve stuck to the
precept. He could not be either bribed or bullied into sin. The cordon
of the ungodly could not keep God from him, nor him from God- this was
because God was his portion, and none could deprive him of it either by
force or fraud. That is true grace which can endure the test: some are
barely gracious among the circle of their friends, but this man was holy
amid a ring of foes.

[Psa 119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062)

"At midnight I will rise to give thanks unto thee because of thy
righteous judgments." He was not afraid of the robbers; he rose, not to
watch his house, but to praise his God. Midnight is the hour for
burglars, and there were bands of them around David, but they did not
occupy his thoughts; these were all up and away with the Lord his God.
He thought not of thieves, but of thanks; not of What they would steal,
but of what he would give to his God. A thankful heart is such a
blessing that it drives out fear and makes room for praise. Thanksgiving
turns night into day, and consecrates all hours to the worship of God.
Every hour is canonical to a saint.

The Psalmist observed posture; he did not lie in bed and praise. There
is not much in the position of the body, but there is something, and
that something is to be observed whenever it is helpful to devotion and
expressive of our diligence or humility. Many kneel without praying,
some pray without kneeling; but the best is to kneel and pray: so here.
it would have been no virtue to rise without giving thanks, and it would
have been no sin to give thanks without rising; but to rise and give
thanks is a happy combination. As for the season, it was quiet, lonely,
and such as proved his zeal. At midnight he would be unobserved and
undisturbed; it was his own time which he saved from his sleep, and so
he would be free from the charge of sacrificing public duties to private
devotions. Midnight ends one day and begins another, it was therefore
meet to give the solemn moments to communion with the Lord. At the turn
of the night he turned to his God. He had thanks to give for mercies
which God had given: he had on his mind the truth of [Psa
119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057), "Thou art my portion," and if
anything can make a man sing in the middle of the night that is it.

The righteous doing of the great Judge gladdened the heart of this godly
man. His judgments are the terrible side of God, but they have no terror
to the righteous; they admire them, and adore the Lord for them' they
rise at night to bless God that he will avenge his own elect. Some hate
the very notion of divine justice, and in this they are wide as the
poles asunder from this man of God, who was filled with joyful gratitude
at the memory of the sentences of the Judge of all the earth. Doubtless
in the expression, "thy righteous judgments," David refers also to the
written judgments of God upon various points of moral conduct; indeed,
all the divine precepts may be viewed in that light; they are all of
them the legal decisions of the Supreme Arbiter of right and wrong.
David was charmed with these judgments. Like Paul, he could say, "I
delight in the law of God after the inward man." He could not find time
enough by day to study the words of divine wisdom, or to bless God for
them, and so he gave up his sleep that he might tell out his gratitude
for such a law and such a Law-giver.

This verse is an advance upon the sense of [Psa
119:52](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#052), and contains in addition the
essence of fifty-five. Our author never repeats himself: though he runs
up and down the same scale, his music has an infinite variety. The
permutations and combinations which may be formed in connection with a
few vital truths are innumerable.

[Psa 119:63](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#063)

"I am a companion of all them that fear thee." The last verse said, "I
will," and this says, "am" We can hardly hope to be right in the future
unless we are right now. The holy man spent his nights with God and his
days with God's people. Those who fear God love those who fear him, and
they make small choice in their company so long as the men are truly
God-fearing. David was a king, and yet he consorted with "all" who
feared the Lord, whether they were obscure or famous, poor or rich. He
was a fellow-commoner of the College of All-saints.

He did not select a few specially eminent saints and leave ordinary
believers alone. No, he was glad of the society of those who had only
the beginning of wisdom in the shape of "the fear of the Lord" he was
pleased to sit with them on the lower forms of the school of faith. He
looked for inward godly fear, but he also expected to see outward piety
in those whom he admitted to his society; hence he adds, "and of them
that keep thy precepts." If they would keep the Lord's commands the
Lord's servant would keep their company. David was known to be on the
godly side, he was ever of the Puritanic party: the men of Belial hated
him for this, and no doubt despised him for keeping such unfashionable
company as that of humble men and women who were strait-laced and
religious; but the man of God is by no means ashamed of his associates;
so far from this, he even glories to avow his union with them, let his
enemies make what they can of it. He found both pleasure and profit in
saintly society; he grew better by consorting with the good, and derived
honour from keeping right honourable company. What says the reader? Does
he relish holy society? Is he at home among gracious people? If so, he
may derive comfort from the fact. Birds of a feather flock together. A
man is known by his company. Those who have no fear of God before their
eyes seldom desire the society of saints; it is too slow, too dull for
them. Be this our comfort, that when we are let go by death we shall go
to our own company, and those who loved the saints on earth shall be
numbered with them in heaven.

There is a measure of parellelism between this seventh of its octave and
the seventh of Teth ([Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071)) and
of Jod ([Psa 119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079)); but, as a rule,
the similarities which were so manifest in earlier verses are now
becoming dim. As the sense deepens, the artificial form of expression is
less regarded.

[Psa 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064)

"The earth, O Lord, is full of thy mercy." David had been exiled, but he
had never been driven beyond the range of mercy, fox he found the world
to be everywhere filled with it. He had wandered in deserts and hidden
in caves, and there he had seen and felt the lovingkindness of the Lord.
He had learned that far beyond the bounds of the land of promise and the
race of Israel the love of Jehovah extended, and in this verse he
expressed that large-hearted idea of God which is so seldom seen in the
modern Jew. How sweet it is to us to know that not only is there mercy
all over the world, but there is such an abundance of it that the earth
is "full" of it. It is little wonder that the Psalmist, since he knew
the Lord to be his portion, hoped to obtain a measure of this mercy for
himself, and so was encouraged to pray, "teach me thy statutes." It was
to him the beau-ideal of mercy to be taught of God, and taught in God's
own law. He could not think of a greater mercy than this. Surely he who
fills the universe with Iris grace will grant such a request as this to
his own child. Let us breathe the desire to the All-merciful Jehovah,
and we may be assured of its fulfilment.

[Psa 119:57](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#057) is fragrant with full
assurance and strong resolve, and [Psa
119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064) overflows with a sense of the
divine fulness, and of the Psalmist's personal dependence. This is an
illustration of the fact that full assurance neither damps prayer nor
hinders humility. It would be no error if we said that it creates
lowliness and suggests supplication. "Thou art my portion, O Lord," is
well followed by "teach me"; for the heir of a great estate should be
thoroughly educated, that his behaviour may comport with his fortune.
What manner of disciples ought we to be whose inheritance is the Lord of
hosts? Those who have God for their Portion long to have him for their
Teacher. Moreover, those who have resolved to obey are the most eager to
be taught. "I have said that I would keep thy words" is beautifully
succeeded by "teach me thy statutes." Those who wish to keep a law are
anxious to know all its clauses and provisions lest they should offend
through inadvertence. He who dares not care to be instructed of the Lord
has never honestly resolved to be holy.

[Psalms 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">psa 119:65</span></span>

65 Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy
word.

66 Teach me good judgment and knowledge. for I have believed thy
commandments.

67 Before I was afflicted I went astray: but now have I kept thy word.

68 Thou art good, and doest good; teach me thy statutes.

69 The proud have forged a lie against me: but I will keep thy precepts
with my whole heart.

70 Their heart is as fat as grease; but I delight in thy law.

71 It is good for me that I have been afflicted; that I might learn thy
statutes.

72 The law of thy mouth is better unto me than thousands of gold and
silver.

In this ninth section the verses all begin with the letter Teth. They
are the witness of experience, testifying to the goodness of God, the
graciousness of his dealings, and the preciousness of his word.
Especially the Psalmist proclaims the excellent uses of adversity, and
the goodness of God in afflicting him. [Psa
119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065) is the text of the entire
octave.

[Psa 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065)

"Thou hast dealt well with thy servant, O Lord, according unto thy
word." This is the summary of his life, and assuredly it is the sum of
ours. The Psalmist tells the Lord the verdict of his heart; he cannot be
silent, he must speak his gratitude in the presence of Jehovah, his God.
From the universal goodness of God in nature, in [Psa
119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064), it is an easy and pleasant
step to a confession of the Lord's uniform goodness to ourselves
personally. It is something that God has dealt at all with such
insignificant and undeserving beings as we are, and it is far more that
he has dealt well with us, and so well, so wondrously well. He hath done
all things well: the rule has no exception. In providence and in grace,
in giving prosperity and sending adversity, in everything Jehovah hath
dealt well with us. It is dealing well on our part to tell the Lord that
we feel that he hath dealt well with us; for praise of this kind is
specially fitting and comely. This kindness of the Lord is, however, no
chance matter: he promised to do so, and he has done it according to his
word. It is very precious to see the word of the Lord fulfilled in our
happy experience; it endears the Scripture to us, and makes us love the
Lord of the Scripture. The book of providence tallies with the book of
promise: what we read in the page of inspiration we meet with again in
the leaves of our life-story. We may not have thought that it would be
so, but our unbelief is repented of now that we see the mercy of the
Lord to us, and his faithfulness to his word; henceforth we are bound to
display a firmer faith both in God and in his promise. He has spoken
well, and he has dealt well. He is the best of Masters; for it is to a
very unworthy and incapable servant that he has acted thus blessedly:
does not this cause us to delight in his service more and more? We
cannot say that we have dealt well with our Master; for when we have
done all, we are unprofitable servants; but as for our Lord, he has
given us light work, large maintenance, loving encouragement, and
liberal wages. It is a wonder that he has not long ago discharged us, or
at least reduced our allowances, or handled us roughly; yet we have had
no hard dealings, all has been ordered with as much consideration as if
we had rendered perfect obedience. We have had bread enough and to
spare, our livery has been duly supplied, and his service has ennobled
us and made us happy as kings. Complaints we have none. We lose
ourselves in adoring thanksgiving, and find ourselves again in careful
thanks-living.

[Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066)

"Teach me good judgment and knowledge." Again he begs for teaching, as
in [Psa 119:64](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#064), and again he uses
God's mercy as an argument. Since God had dealt well with him, he is
encouraged to pray for judgment to appreciate the Lord's goodness. Good
judgment is the form of goodness which the godly man most needs and most
desires, and it is one which the Lord is most ready to bestow. David
felt that he had frequently failed in judgment in the matter of the
Lord's dealings with him: from want of knowledge he had misjudged the
chastening hand of the heavenly Father, and therefore he now asks to be
better instructed, since he perceives the injustice which he had done to
the Lord by his hasty conclusions. He means to say - Lord, thou didst
deal well with me when I thought thee hard and stern, be pleased to give
me more wit, that I may not a second time think so ill of my Lord. A
sight of our errors and a sense of our ignorance should make us
teachable. We are not able to judge, for our knowledge is so sadly
inaccurate and imperfect; if the Lord teaches us knowledge we shall
attain to good judgment, but not otherwise. The Holy Ghost alone can
fill us with light, and set the understanding upon a proper balance: let
us ardently long for his teachings, since it is most desirable that we
should be no longer mere children in knowledge and understanding.

"For I have believed thy commandments." His heart was right, and
therefore he hoped his head would be made right. He had faith, and
therefore he hoped to receive wisdom. His mind had been settled in the
conviction that the precepts of the word were from the Lord, and were
therefore just, wise, kind, and profitable; he believed in holiness, and
as that belief is no mean work of grace upon the soul, he looked for yet
further operations of divine grace. He who believes the commands is the
man to know and understand the doctrines and the promises. If in looking
back upon our mistakes and ignorances we can yet see that we heartily
loved the precepts of the divine will, we have good reason to hope that
we are Christ's disciples, and that he will teach us and make us men of
good judgment and sound knowledge. A man who has learned discernment by
experience, and has thus become a man of sound judgment, is a valuable
member of a church, and the means of much edification to others. Let all
who would be greatly useful offer the prayer of this verse: "Teach me
good judgment and knowledge."

[Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067)

"Before I was afflicted I went astray." Partly, perhaps, through the
absence of trial. Often our trials act as a thorn hedge to keep us in
the good pasture, but our prosperity is a gap through which we go
astray. If any of us remember a time in which we had no trouble, we also
probably recollect that then grace was low, and temptation was strong.
It may be that some believer cries, "O that it were with me as in those
summer days before I was afflicted." Such a sigh is most unwise, and
arises from a carnal love of ease: the spiritual man who prizes growth
in grace will bless God that those dangerous days are over, and that if
the weather be more stormy it is also more healthy. It is well when the
mind is open and candid, as in this instance: perhaps David would never
have known and confessed his own strayings if he had not smarted under
the rod. Let us join in his humble acknowledgments, for doubtless we
have imitated him in his strayings. Why is it that a little ease works
in us so much disease? Can we never rest without rusting? Never be
filled without waxing fat? Never rise as to one world without going down
as to another? What weak creatures we are to be unable to bear a little
pleasure! What base hearts are those which turn the abundance of God's
goodness into an occasion for sin.

"But now have I kept thy word." Grace is in that heart which profits by
its chastening. It is of no use to plough barren soil. When there is no
spiritual life affliction works no spiritual benefit; but where the
heart is sound trouble awakens conscience, wandering is confessed, the
soul becomes again obedient to the command, and continues to be so.
Whipping will not turn a rebel into a child; but to the true child a
touch of the rod is a sure corrective. In the Psalmist's case the
medicine of affliction worked a change - "but"; an immediate change -
"now"; a lasting change - "have I"; an inward change - "have I kept"; a
change Godward - "thy word." Before his trouble he wandered, but after
it he kept within the hedge of the word, and found good pasture for his
soul: the trial tethered him to his proper place; it kept him, and then
he kept god's word. Sweet are the uses of adversity, and this is one of
them, it puts a bridle upon transgression and furnishes a spur for
holiness.

[Psa 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068)

"Thou art good, and doest good." Even in affliction God is good, and
does good. This is the confession of experience. God is essential
goodness in himself, and in every attribute of his nature he is good in
the fullest sense of the term; indeed, he has a monopoly of goodness,
for there is none good but one, that is God. His acts are according to
his nature: from a pure source flow pure streams. God is not latent and
inactive goodness; he displays himself by his doings, he is actively
beneficent, he does good. How much good he does no tongue can tell! How
good he is no heart can conceive! It is well to worship the Lord as the
poet here does by describing him. Facts about God are the best praise of
God. All the glory we can give to God is to reflect his own glory upon
himself. We can say no more good of God than God is and does. We believe
in his goodness, and so honour him by our faith; we admire that
goodness, and so glorify him by our love; we declare that goodness, and
so magnify him by our testimony.

"Teach me thy statutes." The same prayer as before, backed with the same
argument. He prays, "Lord be good, and do good to me that I may both be
good and do good through thy teaching." The man of God was a learner,
and delighted to learn: he ascribed this to the goodness of the Lord,
and hoped that for the same reason he would be allowed to remain in the
school and learn on till he could perfectly practise every lesson. His
chosen class-book was the royal statutes, he wanted no other. He knew
the sad result of breaking those statutes, and by a painful experience
he had been led back to the way of righteousness; and therefore he
begged as the greatest possible instance of the divine goodness that he
might be taught a perfect knowledge of the law, and a complete
conformity to it. He who mourns that he has not kept the word longs to
be taught it, and he who rejoices that by grace he has been taught to
keep it is not less anxious for the like instruction to be continued to
him.

In [Psa 119:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#012), which is the fourth
verse of Beth, we have much the same sense as in this fourth verse of
Teth.

[Psa 119:69](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#069)

"The proud have forged a lie against me." They first derided him ([Psa
119:51](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#051)), then defrauded him ([Psa
119:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#061)), and now they have defamed
him. To injure his character they resorted to falsehood, for they could
find nothing against him if they spoke the truth. They forged a lie as a
blacksmith beats out a weapon of iron, or they counterfeited the truth
as men forge false coin. The original may suggest a common expression -
"They have patched up a lie against me." They were not too proud to lie.
Pride is a lie, and when a proud man utters lies "he speaketh of his
own." Proud men are usually the bitterest opponents of the righteous:
they are envious of their good fame and are eager to ruin it. Slander is
a cheap and handy weapon if the object is the destruction of a gracious
reputation; and when many proud ones conspire to concoct, exaggerate,
and spread abroad a malicious falsehood, they generally succeed in
wounding their victim, and it is no fault of theirs if they do not kill
him outright. O the venom which lies under the tongue of a liar! Many a
happy life has been embittered by it, and many a good repute has been
poisoned as with the deadliest drug. It is painful to the last degree to
hear unscrupulous men hammering away at the devil's anvil forging a new
calumny; the only help against it is the sweet promise, "No weapon that
is formed against thee shall prosper, and every tongue that riseth
against thee in judgment thou shalt condemn."

"But I will keep thy precepts with my whole heart." My one anxiety shall
be to mind my own business and stick to the commandments of the Lord. If
the mud which is thrown at us does not blind our eyes or bruise our
integrity it will do us little harm. If we keep the precepts, the
precepts will keep us in the day of contumely and slander. David renews
his resolve - "I will keep"; he takes a new look at the commands, and
sees them to be really the Lord's - "thy precepts"; and he arouses his
entire nature to the work - "with my whole heart." When slanders drive
us to more resolute and careful obedience they work our lasting good;
falsehood hurled against us may be made to promote our fidelity to the
truth, and the malice of men may increase our love to God. If we try to
answer lies by our words we may be beaten in the battle; but a holy life
is an unanswerable refutation of all calumnies. Spite is balked if we
persevere in holiness despite all opposition.

[Psa 119:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#070)

"Their heart is as fat as grease." They delight in fatness, but I
delight in thee. Their hearts, through sensual indulgence, have grown
insensible, coarse, and grovelling; but thou hast saved me from such a
fate through thy chastening hand Proud men grow fat through carnal
luxuries, and this makes them prouder still. They riot in their
prosperity, and fill their hearts therewith till they become insensible,
effeminate, and self-indulgent. A greasy heart is something horrible; it
is a fatness which makes a man fatuous, a fatty degeneration of the
heart which leads to feebleness and death. The fat in such men is
killing the life in them. Dryden wrote -

"O souls! In whom no heavenly fire is found,

Fat minds and ever grovelling on the ground."

In this condition men have no heart except for luxury, their very being
seems to swim and stew in the fat of cookery and banqueting. Living on
the fat of the land, their nature is subdued to that which they have fed
upon; the muscle of their nature has gone to softness and grease.

"But I delight in thy law." How much better is it to joy in the law of
the Lord than to joy in sensual indulgences I This makes the heart
healthy, and keeps the mind lowly. No one who loves holiness has the
slightest cause to envy the prosperity of the worldling. Delight in the
law elevates and ennobles, while carnal pleasure clogs the intellect and
degrades the affections. There is and always ought to be a vivid
contrast between the believer and the sensualist, and that contrast is
as much seen in the affections of the heart as in the actions of the
life: their heart is as fat as grease, and our heart is delighted with
the law of the Lord. Our delights are a better test of our character
than anything else: as a man's heart is, so is the man. David oiled the
wheels of life with his delight in God's law, and not with the fat of
sensuality. He had his relishes and dainties, his festivals and
delights, and all these he found in doing the will of the Lord his God.
When law becomes delight, obedience is bliss. Holiness in the heart
causes the soul to eat the fat of the land. To have the law for our
delight will breed in our hearts the very opposite of the effects of
pride; deadness, sensuality, and obstinacy will be cured, and we shall
become teachable, sensitive, and spiritual. How careful should we be to
live under the influence of the divine law that we fall not under the
law of sin and death.

[Psa 119:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#071)

"It is good for me that I have been afflicted." Even though the
affliction came from bad men, it was overruled for good ends; though it
was bad as it came from them it was good for David. It benefited him in
many ways, and he knew it. Whatever he may have thought while under the
trial, he perceived himself to be the better for it when it was over. It
was not good to the proud to be prosperous, for their hearts grew
sensual and insensible; but affliction was good for the Psalmist. Our
worst is better for us than the sinner's best. It is bad for sinners to
rejoice, and good for saints to sorrow. A thousand benefits have come to
us through our pains and griefs, and among the rest is this - that we
have thus been schooled in the law. "That I might learn thy statutes."
These we have come to know and to keep by feeling the smart of the rod.
We prayed the Lord to teach us ([Psa
119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066)), and now we see how he has
already been doing it. Truly he has dealt well with us, for he has dealt
wisely with us. We have been kept from the ignorance of the
greasy-hearted by our trials, and this, if there were nothing else, is
just cause for constant gratitude. To be larded by prosperity is not
good for the proud; but for the truth to be learned by adversity is good
for the humble. Very little is to be learned without affliction. If we
would be scholars we must be sufferers. As the Latins say, Experientia
docet, experience teaches. There is no royal road to learning the royal
statutes; God's commands are best read by eyes wet with tears.

[Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072)

"The law of thy mouth." A sweetly expressive name for the word of God.
It comes from God's own mouth with freshness and power to our souls.
Things written are as dried herbs; but speech has a liveliness and dew
about it. We do well to look upon the word of the Lord as though it were
newly spoken into our ear; for in very truth it is not decayed by years,
but is as forcible and sure as though newly uttered. Precepts are prized
when it is seen that they come forth from the lips of our Father who is
in heaven. The same lips which spoke us into existence have spoken the
law by which we are to govern that existence. Whence could a law so
sweetly proceed as from the mouth of our covenant God? Well may we prize
beyond all price that which comes from such a source.

"Is better unto me than thousands of gold and silver." If a poor man had
said this, the world's witlings would have hinted that the grapes are
sour, and that men who have no wealth are the first to despise it; but
this is the verdict of a man who owned his thousands, and could judge by
actual experience of the value of money and the value of truth. He
speaks of great riches, he heaps it up by thousands, he mentions the
varieties of its forms, - "gold and silver"; and then he sets the word
of God before it all, as better to him, even if others did not think it
better to them. Wealth is good in some respects, but obedience is better
in all respects. It is well to keep the treasures of this life; but far
more commendable to keep the law of the Lord. The law is better than
gold and silver, for these may be stolen from us, but not the word;
these take to themselves wings, but the word of God remains; these are
useless in the hour of death, but then it is that the promise is most
dear. Instructed Christians recognize the value of the Lord's word, and
warmly express it, not only in their testimony to their fellow-men, but
in their devotions to God. It is a sure sign of a heart which has
learned God's statutes when it prizes them above all earthly
possessions; and it is an equally certain mark of grace when the
precepts of Scripture are as precious as its promises. The Lord cause us
thus to prize the law of his mouth.

See How this portion of the Psalm is flavoured with goodness. God's
dealings are good ([Psa 119:65](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#065)), holy
judgment is good ([Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066)),
affliction is good ([Psa 119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067)), God
is good ([Psa 119:68](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#068)), and here the
law is not only good, but better than the best of treasure. Lord, make
us good through thy good word. Amen.

[Psalms 119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_073">psa 119:73</span></span>

73 Thy hands have made me and fashioned me: give me understanding, that
I may learn thy commandments.

74 They that fear thee will be glad when they see me; because I have
hoped in thy word.

75 I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that thou in
faithfulness hast afflicted me.

76 Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according
to thy word unto thy servant.

77 Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live' for thy law is
my delight.

78 Let the proud be ashamed; for they dealt perversely with me without a
cause: but I will meditate in thy precepts.

79 Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known thy
testimonies.

80 Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed.

We have now come to the tenth portion, which in each stanza begins with
Jod, but it certainly does not treat of jots and titles and other
trifles. Its subject would seem to be personal experience and its
attractive influence upon others. The prophet is in deep sorrow, but
looks to be delivered and made a blessing. Endeavouring to teach, the
Psalmist first seeks to be taught ([Psa
119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073)), persuades himself that he win
be well received ([Psa 119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074)), and
rehearses the testimony which he intends to bear ([Psa
119:75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075)). He prays for more experience
([Psa 119:76, 19 119:77](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#076)), for the
baffling of the proud ([Psa 119:78](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#078)),
for the gathering together of the godly to him ([Psa
119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079)), and for himself again that he
may be fully equipped for his witness-bearing and may be sustained in it
([Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080)). This is the anxious yet
hopeful cry of one who is heavily afflicted by cruel adversaries, and
therefore makes his appeal to God as his only friend.

[Psa 119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073)

"Thy hands have made me and fashioned me." It is profitable to remember
our creation, it is pleasant to see that the divine hand has had much to
do with us, for it never moves apart from the divine thought. It excites
reverence, gratitude, and affection towards God when we view him as our
Maker, putting forth the careful skill and power of his hands in our
forming and fashioning. He took a personal interest in us, making us
with his own hands; he was doubly thoughtful, for he is represented both
as making and moulding us. In both giving existence and arranging
existence he manifested love and wisdom; and therefore we find reasons
for praise, confidence, and expectation in our being and well-being.
"Give me understanding, that I may learn thy commandments." As thou hast
made me, teach me. Here is the vessel which thou hast fashioned; Lord,
fill it. Thou hast given me both soul and body; grant me now thy grace
that my soul may know thy will, and my body may join in the performance
of it. The plea is very forcible; it is an enlargement of the cry,
"Forsake not the work of thine own hands." Without understanding the
divine law and rendering obedience to it we are imperfect and useless;
but we may reasonably hope that the great Potter will complete his work
and give the finishing touch to it by imparting to it sacred knowledge
and holy practice. If God had roughly made us, and had not also
elaborately fashioned us, this argument would lose much of its force;
but surely from the delicate art and marvellous skill which the Lord has
shown in the formation of the human body, we may infer that he is
prepared to take equal pains with the soul till it shall perfectly bear
his image.

A man without a mind is an idiot, the mere mockery of a man; and a mind'
without grace is wicked, the sad perversion of a mind. We pray that we
may not be left without a spiritual judgment: for this the Psalmist
prayed in [Psa 119:66](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#066), and he here
pleads for it again; there is no true knowing and keeping of the
commandments without it. Fools can sin; but only those who are taught of
God can be holy. We often speak of gifted men; but he has the best gifts
to whom God has given a sanctified understanding wherewith to know and
prize the ways of the Lord. Note well that David's prayer for
understanding is not for the sake of speculative knowledge, and the
gratification of his curiosity: he desires an enlightened judgment that
he may learn God's commandments, and so become obedient and holy. This
is the best of learning. A man may abide in the College where this
science is taught all his days, and yet cry out for ability to learn
more. The commandment of God is exceeding broad, and so it affords scope
for the most vigorous and instructed mind' in fact, no man has by nature
an understanding capable of compassing so wide a field, and hence the
prayer, "give me understanding"; - as much as to say - I can learn other
things with the mind I have, but thy law is so pure, so perfect,
spiritual and sublime, that I need to have my mind enlarged before I can
become proficient in it. He appeals to his maker to do this, as if he
felt that no power short of that which made him could make him wise unto
holiness. We need a new creation, and who can grant us that but the
Creator himself? He who made us to live must make us to learn; he who
gave us power to stand must give us grace to understand. Let us each one
breathe to heaven the prayer of this verse ere we advance a step
further, for we shall be lost even in these petitions unless we pray our
way through them, and cry to God for understanding.

[Psa 119:74](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#074)

"They that fear thee will be glad when they see me: because I have hoped
in thy word." When a man of God obtains grace for himself he becomes a
blessing to others, especially if that grace has made him a man of sound
understanding and holy knowledge. God-fearing men are encouraged when
they meet with experienced believers. A hopeful man is a God-send when
things are declining or in danger. When the hopes of one believer are
fulfilled his companions are cheered and established, and led to hope
also. It is good for the eyes to see a man whose witness is that the
Lord is true; it is one of the joys of saints to hold converse with
their more advanced brethren. The fear of God is not a left-handed
grace, as some have called it; it is quite consistent with gladness; for
if even the sight of a comrade gladdens the God-fearing, how glad must
they be in the presence of the Lord himself l We do not only meet to
share each others' burdens, but to partake in each others' joys, and
some men contribute largely to the stock of mutual gladness. Hopeful men
bring gladness with them. Despondent spirits spread the infection of
depression, and hence few are glad to see them, while those whose hopes
are grounded upon God's word carry sunshine in their faces, and are
welcomed by their fellows. There are professors whose presence scatters
sadness, and the godly quietly steal out of their company: may this
never be the case with us.

[Psa 119:75](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#075)

"I know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right." He who would learn most
must be thankful for what he already knows, and be willing to confess it
to the glory of God. The Psalmist had been sorely tried, but he had
continued to hope in God under his trial, and now he avows his
conviction that he had been justly and wisely chastened. This he not
only thought but knew, so that he was positive about it, and spoke
without a moment's hesitation. Saints are sure about the rightness of
their troubles, even when they cannot see the intent of them. It made
the godly glad to hear David say this, "And that thou in faithfulness
hast afflicted me." Because love required severity, therefore the Lord
exercised it. It was not because God was unfaithful that the believer
found himself in a sore strait, but for just the opposite reason: it was
the faithfulness of God to his covenant which brought the chosen one
under the rod. It might not be needful that others should be tried just
then; but it was necessary to the Psalmist, and therefore the Lord did
not withhold the blessing. Our heavenly Father is no Eli: he will not
suffer his children to sin without rebuke, his love is too intense for
that. The man who makes the confession of this verse is already
progressing in the school of grace, and is learning the commandments.
This third verse of the section corresponds to the third of Teth ([Psa
119:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#067)), and in a degree to several
other verses which make the thirds in their octaves.

[Psa 119:76](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#076)

"Let, I pray thee, thy merciful kindness be for my comfort, according to
thy word unto thy servant." Having confessed the righteousness of the
Lord, he now appeals to his mercy, and while he does not ask that the
rod may be removed, he earnestly begs for comfort under it.
Righteousness and faithfulness afford us no consolation if we cannot
also taste of mercy, and, blessed be God, this is promised us in the
word, and therefore we may expect it. The words "merciful kindness," are
a happy combination, and express exactly what we need in affliction:
mercy to forgive the sin. and kindness to sustain under the sorrow. With
these we can be comfortable in the cloudy and dark day, and without them
we are wretched indeed; for these, therefore, let us pray unto the Lord,
whom we have grieved by our sin, and let us plead the word of his grace
as our sole reason for expecting his favour. Blessed be his name,
notwithstanding our faults we are still his servants, and we serve a
compassionate Master. Some read the last clause, "according to thy
saying unto thy servant"; some special saying of the Lord was remembered
and pleaded' can we not remember some such "faithful saying," and make
it the groundwork of our petitioning? That phrase, "according to thy
word," is a very favourite one; it shows the motive for mercy and the
manner of mercy. Our prayers are according to the mind of God when they
are according to the word of God.

[Psa 119:77](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#077)

"Let thy tender mercies come unto me, that I may live." He was so hard
pressed that he was at death's door if God did not succour him. He
needed not only mercy, but "mercies," and these must be of a very
gracious and considerate kind, even "tender mercies," for he was sore
with his wounds. These gentle favours must be of the Lord's giving, for
nothing less would suffice; and they must "come" all the way to the
sufferer's heart, for he was not able to journey after them; all he
could do was to sigh out, "Oh that they would come." If deliverance did
not soon come, he felt ready to expire, and yet he told us but a verse
or so ago that he hoped in God's word' how true it is that hope lives on
when death seems written on all besides. A heathen said, "dum spiro
spero," while I breathe I hope; but the Christian can say, "dum expiro
spero," even when I expire I still expect the blessing. Yet no true
child of God can live without the tender mercy of the Lord; it is death
to him to be under God's displeasure. Notice, again, the happy
combination of the words of our English version. Was there ever a
sweeter sound than this - "tender mercies"? He who has been grievously
afflicted, and yet tenderly succoured is the only man who knows the
meaning of such choice language.

How truly we live when tender mercy comes to us. Then we do not merely
exist, but live; we are lively, full of life, vivacious, and vigorous.
We know not what life is till we know God. Some are said to die by the
visitation of God, but we live by it.

"For thy law is my delight." O blessed faith! He is no mean believer who
rejoices in the law even when its broken precepts cause him to suffer.
To delight in the word when it rebukes us, is proof that we are
profiting under it. Surely this is a plea which will prevail with God,
however bitter our griefs may be; if we still delight in the law of the
Lord he cannot let us die, he must and will cast a tender look upon us
and comfort our hearts.

[Psa 119:78](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#078)

"Let the proud be ashamed." He begged that the judgments of God might no
longer fall upon himself, but upon his cruel adversaries. God will not
suffer those who hope in his word to be put to shame, for he reserves
that reward for haughty spirits: they shall yet be overtaken with
confusion, and become the subjects of contempt, while God's afflicted
ones shall again lift up their heads. Shame is for the proud, for it is
a shameful thing to be proud. Shame is not for the holy, for there is
nothing in holiness to be ashamed of.

"For they dealt perversely with me without a cause." Their malice was
wanton, he had not provoked them. Falsehood was employed to forge an
accusation against him; they had to bend his actions out of their true
shape before they could assail his character. Evidently the,Psalmist
keenly felt the malice of his foes. His consciousness of innocence with
regard to them created a burning sense of injustice, and he appealed to
the righteous Lord to take his part and clothe his false accusers with
shame. Probably he mentioned them as "the proud," because he knew that
the Lord always takes vengeance on proud men, and vindicates the cause
of those whom they oppress. Sometimes he mentions the proud, and
sometimes the wicked, but he always means the same persons; the words
are interchangeable' he who is proud is sure to be wicked, and proud
persecutors are the worst of wicked men.

"But I will meditate in thy precepts." He would leave the proud in God's
hands, and give himself up to holy studies and contemplations. To obey
the divine precepts we have need to know them, and think much of them,
hence this persecuted saint felt that meditation must be his chief
employment. He would study the law of God and not the law of
retaliation. The proud are not worth a thought. The worst injury they
can do us is to take us away from our devotions; let us baffle them by
keeping all the closer to our God when they are most malicious in their
onslaughts.

In a similar position to this we have met with the proud in other
octaves, and shall meet them yet again. They are evidently a great
plague to the Psalmist but he rises above them.

[Psa 119:79](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#079)

"Let those that fear thee turn unto me, and those that have known the
testimonies." Perhaps the tongue of slander had alienated some of the
godly, and probably the actual faults of David had grieved many more. He
begs God to turn to him, and then to turn his people towards him. Those
who are right with God are also anxious to be right with his children.
David craved the love and sympathy of gracious men of all grades, - of
those who were beginners in grace, and of those who were mature in piety
- "those that fear thee," and "those that have known thy testimonies."
We cannot afford to lose the love of the least of the saints, and if we
have lost their esteem we may most properly pray to have it restored.
David was the leader of the godly party in the nation, and it wounded
him to the heart when he perceived that those who feared God were not as
glad to see him as aforetime they had been. He did not bluster and say
that if they could do without him he could Very well do without them;
but he so deeply felt the value of their sympathy, that he made it a
matter of prayer that the Lord would turn their hearts to him again.
Those who are dear to God, and are instructed in his word, should be
very precious in our eyes, and we should do our utmost to be upon good
terms with them.

David has two descriptions for the saints, they are God-fearing and
God-knowing. They possess both devotion and instruction; they have both
the spirit and the science of true religion. We know some believers who
are gracious, but not intelligent; and, on the other hand, we also know
certain professors who have all head and no heart- he is the man who
combines devotion with intelligence. We neither care for devout dunces
nor for intellectual icebergs. When fearing and knowing walk hand in
hand they cause men to be thoroughly furnished unto every good work. If
these are my choice companions I may hope that I am one of their order.
Let such persons ever turn to me because they find in me congenial
company.

[Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080)

"Let my heart be sound in thy statutes; that I be not ashamed." This is
even more important than to be held in esteem by good men. This is the
root of the matter. If the heart be sound in obedience to God, all is
well, or will be well. If right at heart we are right in the main. If we
be not sound before God, our name for piety is an empty sound. Mere
profession will fail, and undeserved esteem will disappear like a bubble
when it bursts; only sincerity and truth will endure in the evil day. He
who is right at heart has no reason for shame, and he never shall have
any; hypocrites ought to be ashamed now, and they shall one day be put
to shame without end; their hearts are rotten, and their names shall
rot. This [Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080) is a variation
of the prayer of [Psa 119:73](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#073); there he
sought sound understanding, here he goes deeper, and begs for a sound
heart. Those who have learned their own frailty by sad experience, are
led to dive beneath the surface, and cry to the Lord for truth in the
inward parts. In closing the consideration of these eight verses, let us
join with the writer in the prayer, "Let my heart be sound in thy
statutes."

[Psalms 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_081">psa 119:81</span></span>

81 My soul fainteth for thy salvation: but I hope in thy word.

82 Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?

83 For I am become like a bottle in the smoke; yet do I not forget thy
statutes.

84 How many are the days of thy servant? when wilt thou execute judgment
on them that persecute me?

85 The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law.

86 All thy commandments are faithful: they persecute me wrongfully: help
thou me.

87 They had almost consumed me upon earth; but I forsook not thy
precepts.

88 Quicken me after thy lovingkindness; so shall I keep the testimony of
thy mouth.

This portion of the gigantic Psalm sees the Psalmist in extremis. His
enemies have brought him to the lowest condition of anguish and
depression; yet he is faithful to the law and trustful in his God. This
octave is the midnight of the Psalm, and very dark and black it is.
Stars, however, shine out, and the last verse gives promise of the dawn.
The strain will after this become more cheerful; but meanwhile it should
minister comfort to us to see so eminent a servant of God so hardly used
by the ungodly: evidently in our own persecutions, no strange thing has
happened unto us.

[Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081)

"My soul fainteth for thy salvation." He wished for no deliverance but
that which came from God, his one desire was for "thy salvation." But
for that divine deliverance he was eager to the last degree, - up to the
full measure of his strength, yea, and beyond it till he fainted. So
strong was his desire that it produced prostration of spirit. He grew
weary with waiting, faint with watching, sick with urgent need. Thus the
sincerity and the eagerness of his desires were proved. Nothing else
could satisfy him but deliverance wrought out by the hand of God, his
inmost nature yearned and pined for salvation from the God of all grace,
and he must have it or utterly fail. "But I hope in thy word." Therefore
he felt that salvation would come, for God cannot break his promise, nor
disappoint the hope which his own word has excited: yea, the fulfilment
of his word is near at hand when our hope is firm and our desire
fervent. Hope alone can keep the soul from fainting by using the
smelling-bottle of the promise. Yet hope does not quench desire for a
speedy answer to prayer; it increases our importunity, for it both
stimulates ardour and sustains the heart under delays. To faint for
salvation, and to be kept from utterly failing by the hope of it, is the
frequent experience of the Christian man. We are "faint yet pursuing."
Hope sustains when desire exhausts. While the grace of desire throws us
down, the grace of hope lifts us up again.

[Psa 119:82](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#082)

"Mine eyes fail for thy word, saying, When wilt thou comfort me?" His
eyes gave out with eagerly gazing for the kind appearance of the Lord,
while his heart in weariness cried out for speedy comfort. To read the
word till the eyes can no longer see is but a small thing compared with
watching for the fulfilment of the promise till the inner eyes of
expectancy begin to grow dim with hope deferred. We may not set times to
God, for this is to limit the Holy One of Israel; yet we may urge our
suit with importunity, and make fervent enquiry as to why the promise
tarries. David sought no comfort except that which comes from God; his
question is, "When wilt thou comfort me?" If help does not come from
heaven it will never come at all: all the good man's hopes look that
way, he has not a glance to dart in any other direction. This experience
of waiting and fainting is well-known by full-grown saints, and it
teaches them many precious lessons which they would never learn by any
other means. Among the choice results is this one - that the body rises
into sympathy with the soul, both heart and flesh cry out for the living
God, and even the eyes find a tongue, "saying, When wilt thou comfort
me?" It must be an intense longing which is not satisfied to express
itself by the lips, but speaks with the eyes, by those eyes failing
through intense watching. Eyes can speak right eloquently; they use both
mutes and liquids, and can sometimes say more than tongues. David says
in another place, "The Lord hath heard the voice of my weeping" ([Psa
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)). Specially are our eyes eloquent
when they begin to fail with weariness and woe. A humble eye lifted up
to heaven in silent prayer may flash such flame as shall melt the bolts
which bar the entrance of vocal prayer, and so heaven shall be taken by
storm with the artillery of tears. Blessed are the eyes that are
strained in looking after God. The eyes of the Lord will see to it that
such eyes do not actually fail. How much better to watch for the Lord
with aching eyes than to have them sparkling at the glitter of vanity.

[Psa 119:83](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#083)

"For I am become like a bottle in the smoke." The skins used for
containing wine, when emptied, were hung up in the tent, and when the
place reeked with smoke the skins grew black and sooty, and in the heat
they became wrinkled and worn. The Psalmist's face through sorrow had
become dark and dismal, furrowed and lined; indeed, his whole body had
so sympathized with his sorrowing mind as to have lost its natural
moisture, and to have become like a skin dried and tanned. His character
had been smoked with slander, and his mind parched with persecution; he
was half afraid that he would become useless and incapable through so
much mental suffering, and that men would look upon him as an old
worn-out skin bottle, which could hold nothing and answer no purpose.
What a metaphor for a man to use who was certainly a poet, a divine, and
a master in Israel, if not a king, and a man after God's own heart! It
is little wonder if we, commoner folk, are made to think very little of
ourselves, and are filled with distress of mind. Some of us know the
inner meaning of this simile, for we, too, have felt dingy, mean, and
worthless, only fit to be cast away. Very black and hot has been the
smoke which has enveloped us; it seemed to come not alone from the
Egyptian furnace, but from the bottomless pit; and it had a clinging
power which made the soot of it fasten upon us and blacken us with
miserable thoughts.

"Yet do I not forget thy statutes." Here is the patience of the saints
and the victory of faith. Blackened the man of God might be by
falsehood, but the truth was in him, and he never gave it up. He was
faithful to his King when he seemed deserted and left to the vilest
uses. The promises came to his mind, and, what was a still better
evidence of his loyalty, the statutes were there too - he stuck to his
duties as well as to his comforts. The worst circumstances cannot
destroy the true believer's hold upon his God. Grace is a living power
which survives that which would suffocate all other forms of existence.
Fire cannot consume it, and smoke cannot smother it. A man may be
reduced to skin and bone, and all his comfort may be dried out of him,
and yet he may hold fast his integrity and glorify his God. It is,
however, no marvel that in such a case the eyes which are tormented with
the smoke cry out for the Lord's delivering hand, and the heart heated
and faint longs for the divine salvation.

[Psa 119:84](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#084)

"How many are the days of thy servant?" I cannot hope to live long in
such a condition, thou must come speedily to my rescue or I shall die.
Shall all my short life be consumed in such destroying sorrows? The
brevity of life is a good argument against the length of an affliction.
Perhaps the Psalmist means that his days seemed too many when they were
spent in such distress. He half wished that they were ended, and
therefore he asked in trouble, "How many are the days of thy servant?"
Like a hired servant, he had a certain term to serve, and he would not
complain; but still the time seemed long because his griefs were so
heavy. No one knows the appointed number of our days except the Lord,
and therefore to him the appeal is made that he would not prolong them
beyond his servant's strength. It cannot be the Lord's mind that his own
servant should always be treated so unjustly; there must be an end to
it; when would it be?

"When wilt thou execute judgment on them that persecute me?" He had
placed his case in the Lord's hands, and he prayed that sentence might
be given and put into execution. He desired nothing but justice, that
his character might be cleared and his persecutors silenced. He knew
that God would certainly avenge his own elect, but the day of rescue
tarried, the hours dragged heavily along, and the persecuted one cried
day and night for deliverance.

[Psa 119:85](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#085)

"The proud have digged pits for me, which are not after thy law." As men
who hunt wild beasts are wont to make pitfalls and snares, so did
David's foes endeavour to entrap him. They went laboriously and
cunningly to work to ruin him, "they digged pits"; not one, but many. If
one would not take him, perhaps another would, and so they digged again
and again. One would think that such haughty people would not have
soiled their fingers with digging; but they swallowed their pride in
hopes of swallowing their victim. Whereas they ought to have been
ashamed of such meanness, they were conscious of no shame, but, on the
contrary, were proud of their cleverness; proud of setting a trap for a
godly man. "Which ate not after thy law." Neither the men nor their pits
were according to the divine law: they were cruel and crafty deceivers,
and their pits were contrary to the Levitical law, and contrary to the
command which bids us love our neighbour. If men would keep to the
statutes of the Lord, they would lift the fallen out of the pit, or fill
up the pit so that none might stumble into it; but they would never
spend a moment in working injury to others. When, however, they become
proud, they are sure to despise others; and for this reason they seek to
circumvent them, that they may afterwards hold them up to ridicule.

It was well for David that his enemies were God's enemies, and that
their attacks upon him had no sanction from the Lord. It was also much
to his gain that he was not ignorant of their devices, for he was thus
put upon his guard, and led to watch his ways lest he should fall into
their pits. While he kept to the law of the Lord he was safe, though
even then it was an uncomfortable thing to have his path made dangerous
by the craft of wanton malice.

[Psa 119:86](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#086)

"All thy commandments are faithful." He had no fault to find with God's
law, even though he had fallen into sad trouble through obedience to it.
Whatever the command might cost him it was worth it; he felt that God's
way might be rough, but it was right; it might make him enemies, but
still it was his best friend. He believed that in the-end God's command
would turn out to his own profit, and that he should be no loser by
obeying it.

"They persecute me wrongfully." The fault lay with his persecutors, and
neither with his God nor with himself. He had done no injury to anyone,
nor acted otherwise than according to truth and justice; therefore he
confidently appeals to his God, and cries, "Help thou me." This is a
golden prayer, as precious as it is short. The words are few, but the
meaning is full. Help was needed that the persecuted one might avoid the
snare, might bear up under reproach, and might act so prudently as to
baffle his foes. God's hell is our hope. Whoever may hurt us, it matters
not so long as the Lord helps us; for if indeed the Lord help us, none
can really hurt us. Many a time have these words been groaned out by
troubled saints, for they are such as suit a thousand conditions of
need, pain, distress, weakness, and sin. "Help, Lord," will be a fitting
prayer for youth and age, for labour and suffering, for life and death.
No other help is sufficient, but God's help is all-sufficient and we
cast ourselves upon it without fear.

[Psa 119:87](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#087)

"They had almost consumed me upon earth." His foes had almost destroyed
him so as to make him altogether fail. If they could they would have
eaten him, or burned him alive; anything so that they could have made a
full end of the good man. Evidently he had fallen under their power to a
large extent, and they had so used that power that he was well nigh
consumed. He was almost gone from off the earth; but almost is not
altogether, and so he escaped by the skin of his teeth. The lions are
chained: they can rage no further than our God permits. The Psalmist
perceives the limit of their power: they could only touch his earthly
life and earthly goods. Upon earth they almost ate him up, but he had an
eternal portion which they could not even nibble at. "But I forsook not
thy precepts." Nothing could drive him from obeying the Lord. If we
stick to the precepts we shall be rescued by the promises. If ill-usage
could have driven the oppressed saint from the way of right the purpose
of the wicked would have been answered, and we should have heard no more
of David. If we are resolved to die sooner than forsake the Lord, we may
depend upon it that we Shall not die, but shall live to see the
overthrow of them that hate us.

[Psa 119:88](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#088)

"Quicken me after thy lovingkindness." Most wise, most blessed prayer!
If we are revived in our own personal piety we shall be out of reach of
our assailants. Our best protection from tempters and persecutors is
more life. Lovingkindness itself cannot do us greater service than by
making us to have life more abundantly. When we are quickened we are
able to bear affliction, to baffle cunning, and to conquer sin. We look
to the lovingkindness of God as the source of spiritual revival, and we
entreat the Lord to quicken us, not according to our deserts, but after
the boundless energy of his grace. What a blessed word is this
"lovingkindness." Take it to pieces, and admire its double force of
love. "So shall I keep the testimony of thy mouth." If quickened by the
Holy Ghost we shall be sure to exhibit a holy character. We shall be
faithful to sound doctrine when the Spirit visits us and makes us
faithful. None keep the word of the Lord's mouth unless the word of the
Lord's mouth quickens them. We ought greatly to admire the spiritual
prudence of the Psalmist, who does not so much pray for freedom from
trial as for renewed life that he may he supported under it. When the
inner life is vigorous all is well. David prayed for a sound heart in
[Psa 119:80](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#080), and here he seeks a
revived heart; this is going to the root of the matter, by seeking that
which is the most needful of all things. Lord let it be heart-work with
us, and let our hearts be right with thee.

[Psalms 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_089">psa 119:89</span></span>

89 For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven.

90 Thy faithfulness is unto all generations: thou hast established the
earth, and it abideth.

91 They continue this day according to thine ordinances: for all are thy
servants.

92 Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in
mine affliction.

93 I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened
me.

94 I am thine, save me; for I have sought thy precepts.

95 The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies.

96 I have seen an end of all perfection: but thy commandment is
exceeding broad.

[Psa 119:89](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#089)

"For ever, O Lord, thy word is settled in heaven." The strain is more
joyful, for experience has given the sweet singer a comfortable
knowledge of the word of the Lord, and this makes a glad theme. After
tossing about on a sea of trouble the Psalmist here leaps to shore and
stands upon a rock. Jehovah's word is not fickle nor uncertain; it is
settled, determined, fixed, sure, immovable. Man's teachings change so
often that there is never time for them to be settled; but the Lord's
word is from of old the same, and will remain unchanged eternally. Some
men are never happier than when they are unsettling everything and
everybody; but God's mind is not with them. The power and glory of
heaven have confirmed each sentence which the mouth of the Lord has
spoken, and so confirmed it that to all eternity it must stand the same,
- settled in heaven, where nothing can reach it. In the former section
David's soul fainted, but here the good man looks out of self and
perceives that the Lord fainteth not, neither is weary, neither is there
any failure in his word.

The verse takes the form of an ascription of praise: the faithfulness
and immutability of God are fit themes for holy song, and when we are
tired with gazing upon the shifting scene of this life, the thought of
the immutable promise fills our mouth with singing. God's purposes,
promises, and precepts are all settled in his own mind, and none of them
shall be disturbed. Covenant settlements will not be removed, however
unsettled the thoughts of men may become; let us therefore settle it in
our minds that we abide in the faith of our Jehovah as long as we have
any being.

[Psa 119:90](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#090)

"Thy faithfulness is unto all generations." This is an additional glory:
God is not affected by the lapse of ages; he is not only faithful to one
man throughout his lifetime, but to his children's children after him,
yea, and to all generations so long as they keep his covenant and
remember his commandments to do them. The promises are ancient things,
yet they are not worn out by centuries of use, for the divine
faithfulness endureth for ever. He who succoured his servants thousands
of years ago still shows himself strong on the behalf of all them that
trust in him. "Thou hast established the earth, and it abideth." Nature
is governed by fixed laws; the globe keeps its course by the divine
command, and displays no erratic movements: the seasons observe their
predestined order, the sea obeys the rule of ebb and flow, and all
things else are marshalled in their appointed order. There is an analogy
between the word of God and the works of God, and specially in this,
that they are both of them constant, fixed, and unchangeable. God's word
which established the world is the same as that which he has embodied in
the Scriptures; by the word of the Lord were the heavens made, and
specially by him who is emphatically THE WORD. When we see the world
keeping its place and all its laws abiding the same, we have herein
assurance that the Lord will be faithful to his covenant, and will not
allow the faith of his people to be put to shame. If the earth abideth
the spiritual creation will abide; if God's word suffices to establish
the world surely it is enough for the establishment of the individual
believer.

[Psa 119:91](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#091)

"They continue this day according to thine ordinances." Because the Lord
has bid the universe abide, therefore it stands, and all its laws
continue to operate with precision and power. Because the might of God
is ever present to maintain them, therefore do all things continue. The
word which spake all things into existence has supported them till now,
and still supports them both in being and in well-being. God's ordinance
is the reason for the continued existence of creation. What important
forces these ordinances are! "For all are thy servants." Created by thy
word they obey that word, thus answering the purpose of their existence,
and working out the design of their Creator. Both great things and small
pay homage to the Lord. No atom escapes his rule, no world avoids his
government. Shall we wish to be free of the Lord's sway and become lords
unto ourselves? If we were so, we should be dreadful exceptions to a law
which secures the well-being of the universe. Rather while we read
concerning all things else - they continue and they serve, let us
continue to serve, and to serve more perfectly as our lives are
continued. By that word which is settled may we be settled; by that
voice which establishes the earth may we be established; and by that
command which all created things obey may we be made the servants of the
Lord God Almighty.

[Psa 119:92](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#092)

"Unless thy law had been my delights, I should then have perished in
mine affliction." That word which has preserved the heavens and the
earth also preserves the people of God in their time of trial. With that
word we are charmed; it is a mine of delight to us. We take a double and
treble delight in it, and derive a multiplied delight from it, and this
stands us in good stead when all other delights are taken from us. We
should have felt ready to lie down and die of our griefs if the
spiritual comforts of God's word had not uplifted us; but by their
sustaining influence we have been borne above all the depressions and
despairs which naturally grow out of severe affliction. Some of us can
set our seal to this statement. Our affliction, if it had not been for
divine grace, would have crushed us out of existence, so that we should
have perished. In our darkest seasons nothing has kept us from
desperation but the promise of the Lord - yea, at times nothing has
stood between us and self-destruction save faith in the eternal word of
God. When worn with pain until the brain has become dazed and the reason
well-nigh extinguished, a sweet text has whispered to us its
heart-cheering assurance, and our poor struggling mind has reposed upon
the bosom of God. That which was our delight in prosperity has been our
light in adversity; that which in the day kept us from presuming has in
the night kept us from perishing. This verse contains a mournful
supposition - "unless"; describes a horrible condition - "perished in
mine affliction"; and implies a glorious deliverance, for he did not
die, but lived to proclaim the honours of the word of God.

[Psa 119:93](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#093)

"I will never forget thy precepts: for with them thou hast quickened
me." When we have felt the quickening power of a precept we never can
forget it. We may read it, learn it, repeat it, and think we have it,
and yet it may slip out of our minds; but if it has once given us life
or renewed that life, there is no fear of its falling from our
recollection. Experience teaches, and teaches effectually. How blessed a
thing it is to have the precepts written on the heart with the golden
pen of experience, and graven on the memory with the divine stylus of
grace. Forgetfulness is a great evil in holy things; we see here the man
of God fighting against it, and feeling sure of victory because he knew
the life-giving energy of the word in his own soul. That which quickens
the heart is sure to quicken the memory.

It seems singular that he should ascribe quickening to the precepts, and
yet it lies in them and in all the words of the Lord alike. It is to be
noted that when the Lord raised the dead he addressed to them the word
of command. He said, "Lazarus, come forth," or, "Maid, arise." We need
not fear to address gospel precepts to dead sinners, since by them the
Spirit gives them life. Remark that the Psalmist does not say that the
precepts quickened him, but that the Lord quickened him by their means:
thus he traces the life from the channel to the source, and places the
glory where it is due. Yet at the same time he prized the instruments of
the blessing, and resolved never to forget them. He had already
remembered them when he likened himself to a bottle in the smoke, and
now he feels that whether in the smoke or in the fire the memory of the
Lord's precepts shall never depart from him.

[Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094)

"I am thine, save me." A comprehensive prayer with a prevailing
argument. Consecration is a good plea for preservation. If we are
conscious that we are the Lord's we may be confident that he will save
us. We are the Lord's by creation, election, redemption, surrender, and
acceptance; and hence our firm hope and assured belief that he will save
us. A man will surely save his own child: Lord, save me. The need of
salvation is better seen by the Lord's people than by any others, and
hence their prayer - '"save me"; they know that only God can save them,
and hence they cry to him alone; and they know that no merit can be
found in themselves, and hence they urge a reason fetched from the grace
of God, - "I am thine." "For I have sought thy precepts." Thus had he
proved that he was the Lord's. He might not have attained to all the
holiness which he desired, but he had studiously aimed at being obedient
to the Lord, and hence he begged to be saved even to the end. A man may
be seeking the doctrines and the promises, and yet be unrenewed in
heart; but to seek the precepts is a sure sign of grace; no one ever
heard of a rebel or a hypocrite seeking the precepts. The Lord had
evidently wrought a great work upon the Psalmist, and he besought him to
carry it on to completion. Saving is linked with seeking, "save me, for
I have sought"; and when the Lord sets us seeking he will not refuse us
the saving. He who seeks holiness is already saved; if we have sought
the Lord we may be sure that the Lord has sought us, and will certainly
save us.

[Psa 119:95](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#095)

"The wicked have waited for me to destroy me: but I will consider thy
testimonies." They were like wild beasts crouching by the way, or
highwaymen waylaying a defenceless traveller; but the Psalmist went on
his way without considering them, for he was considering something
better, namely, the witness or testimony which God has borne to the sons
of men. He did not allow the malice of the wicked to take him off from
his holy study of the divine word, he was so calm that he could
"consider"; so holy that he loved to consider the Lord's "testimonies";
so victorious over all their plots that he did not allow them to drive
him from his pious contemplations. If the enemy cannot cause us to
withdraw our thoughts from holy study, or our feet from holy walking, or
our hearts from holy aspirations, he has met with poor success in his
assaults. The wicked are the natural enemies of holy men and holy
thoughts; if they could, they would not only damage us but destroy us,
and if they cannot do this to-day they will wait for further
opportunities, ever hoping that their evil designs may be compassed.
They have waited hitherto in vain, and they will have to wait much
longer yet; for if we are so unmoved that we do not even give them a
thought their hope of destroying us must be a very poor one.

Note the double waiting, - the patience of the wicked who watch long and
carefully for an opportunity to destroy the godly, and then the patience
of the saint who will not quit his meditations, even to quiet his foes.
See how the serpent seed lie in wait as an adder that biteth at the
horse's heels; but see how the chosen of the Lord live above their
venom, and take no more notice of them than if they had no existence.

[Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096)

"I have seen an end of all perfection." He had seen its limit, for it
went but a little way; he had seen its evaporation under the trials of
life, its detection under the searching glance of truth, its exposure by
the confession of the penitent. There is no perfection beneath the moon.
Perfect men, in the absolute sense of the word, live only in a perfect
world. Some men see no end to their own perfection, but this is because
they are perfectly blind. The experienced believer has seen an end of
all perfection in himself, in his brethren, in the best man's best
works. It would be well if some who profess to be perfect could even see
the beginning of perfection, for we fear they cannot have begun aright,
or they would not talk so exceeding proudly. Is it not the beginning of
perfection to lament your imperfection? There is no such thing as
perfection in anything which is the work of man. "But thy commandment is
exceeding broad." When the breadth of the law is known the notion of
perfection in the flesh vanishes: that law touches every act, word, and
thought, and is of such a spiritual nature that it judges the motives,
desires, and emotions of the soul. It reveals a perfection which
convicts us for shortcomings as well as for transgressions, and does not
allow us to make up for deficiencies in one direction by special
carefulness in others. The divine ideal of holiness is far too broad for
us to hope to cover all its wide arena, and yet it is no broader than it
ought to be. Who would wish to have an imperfect law? Nay, its
perfection is its glory; but it is the death of all glorying in our own
perfection. There is a breadth about the commandment which has never
been met to the full by a corresponding breadth of holiness in any mere
man while here below; only in Jesus do we see it fully embodied. The law
is in all respects a perfect code; each separate precept of it is
far-reaching in its hallowed meaning, and the whole ten cover all, and
leave no space wherein to please our passions. We may well adore the
infinity of divine holiness, and then measure ourselves by its standard,
and bow before the Lord in all lowliness, acknowledging how far we fall
short of it.

[Psalms 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_097">psa 119:97</span></span>

97 O How love I thy law! it is my meditation all the day.

98 Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies:
for they are ever with me.

99 I have more understanding than all my teachers - for they testimonies
are my meditation.

100 I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts.

101 have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy
word.

102 I have not departed from thy judgments - for thou hast taught me.

103 How sweet are thy words unto my taste! yea, sweeter than honey to my
mouth!

104 Through thy precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every
false way.

[Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097)

"O how love I thy law!" It is a note of exclamation. He loves so much
that he must express his love, and in making the attempt he perceives
that it is inexpressible - and therefore cries, "O how I love!" We not
only reverence but love the law, we obey it out of love, and even when
it chides us for disobedience we love it none the less. The law is God's
law, and therefore it is our love. We love it for its holiness, and pine
to be holy; we love it for its wisdom, and study to be wise; we love it
for its perfection, and long to be perfect. Those who know the power of
the gospel perceive an infinite loveliness in the law as they see it
fulfilled and embodied in Christ Jesus. "It is my meditation all the
day." This was both the effect of his love and the cause of it. He
meditated in God's word because he loved it, and then loved it the more
because he meditated in it. He could not have enough of it, so ardently
did he love it: all the day was not too long for his converse with it.
His matin prayer, his noonday thought, his evensong were all out of Holy
Writ; yea, in his worldly business he still kept his mind saturated with
the law of the Lord. It is said of some men that the more you know them
the less you admire them; but the reverse is true of God's word.
Familiarity with the word of God breeds affection, and affection seeks
yet greater familiarity. When "thy law," and "my meditation" are
together all the day, the day grows holy, devout, and happy, and the
heart lives with God. David turned away from all else; for in [Psa
119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096) he tells us that he had seen an
end of all perfection; but he turned in unto the law and tarried there
the whole day of his life on earth, growing henceforth wiser and holier.

[Psa 119:98](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#098)

"Thou through thy commandments hast made me wiser than mine enemies."
The commands were his book, but God was his teacher. The letter can make
us knowing, but only the divine Spirit can make us wise. Wisdom is
knowledge put to practical use. Wisdom comes to us through obedience:
"If any man will do his will he shall know of the doctrine." We learn
not only from promise, and doctrine, and sacred history, but also from
precept and command; in fact, from the commandments we gather the most
practical wisdom, and that which enables us best to cope with our
adversaries. A holy life is the highest wisdom and the surest defence.
Our enemies are renowned for subtlety, from the first father of them,
the old serpent, down to the last cockatrice that has been hatched from
the egg; and it would be vain for us to try to be a match with them in
the craft and mystery of cunning, for the children of this world are in
their generation wiser than the children of light. We must go to another
school and learn of a different instructor, and then by uprightness we
shall baffle fraud, by simple truth we shall vanquish deep-laid
scheming, and by open candour we shall defeat slander. A thoroughly
straightforward man, devoid of all policy, is a terrible puzzle to
diplomatists; they suspect him of a subtle duplicity through which they
cannot see, while he, indifferent to their suspicions, holds on the even
tenor of his way, and baffles all their arts. Yes, "honesty is the best
policy." He who is taught of God has a practical wisdom such as malice
cannot supply to the crafty; while harmless as a dove he also exhibits
more than the serpent's wisdom.

"For they are ever with me." He was always studying or obeying the
commandments; they were his choice and constant companions. If we wish
to become proficient we must be indefatigable. If we keep the wise law
ever near us we shall become wise, and when our adversaries assail us we
shall be prepared for them with that ready wit which lies in having the
word of God at our fingers' ends. As a soldier in battle must never lay
aside his shield, so must we never have the word of God out of our
minds; it must be ever with us.

[Psa 119:99](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#099)

"I have more understanding than all my teachers." That which the Lord
had taught him had been useful in the camp, and now he finds it equally
valuable in the schools. Our teachers are not always to be trusted; in
fact, we may not follow any of them implicitly, for God holds us to
account for our personal judgments. It behooves us then to follow
closely the chart of the Word of God, that we may be able to save the
vessel when even the pilot errs. If our teachers should be in all things
sound and safe, they will be right glad for us to excel them, and they
will ever be ready to own that the teaching of the Lord is better than
any teaching which they can give us. Disciples of Christ who sit at his
feet are often better skilled in divine things than doctors of divinity.
"For thy testimonies are my meditation." This is the best mode of
acquiring understanding. We may hear the wisest teachers and remain
fools, but if we meditate upon the sacred word we must become wise.
There is more wisdom in the testimonies of the Lord than in all the
teachings of men if they were all gathered into one vast library. The
one book outweighs all the rest.

David does not hesitate to speak the truth in this place concerning
himself, for he is quite innocent of serf-consciousness. In speaking of
his understanding he means to extol the law and the Lord, and not
himself. There is not a grain of boasting in these bold expressions, but
only a sincere childlike desire to set forth the excellence of the
Lord's word. He who knows the truths taught in the Bible will be guilty
of no egotism if he believes himself to be possessed of more important
truth than all the agnostic professors buried and unburied.

[Psa 119:100](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#100)

"I understand more than the ancients, because I keep thy precepts." The
men of old age, and the men of old time, were outdone by the holier and
more youthful learner. He had been taught to observe in heart and life
the precepts of the Lord, and this was more than the most venerable
sinner had ever learned, more than the philosopher of antiquity had so
much as aspired to know. He had the word with him, and so outstripped
his foes; he meditated on it, and so outran his friends; he practised
it, and so outshone his elders. The instruction derived from Holy
Scripture is useful in many directions, superior from many points of
view, unrivaled everywhere and in every way. As our soul may make her
boast in the Lord, so may we boast in his word. "There is none like it:
give it me," said David as to Goliath's sword, and we may say the same
as to the word of the Lord. If men prize antiquity they have it here.
The ancients are had in high repute, but what did they all know compared
with that which we perceive in the divine precepts? "The old is better"
says one: but the oldest of all is the best of all, and what is that but
the word of the Ancient of days.

[Psa 119:101](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#101)

"I have refrained my feet from every evil way, that I might keep thy
word." There is no treasuring up the holy word unless there is a casting
out of all unholiness: if we keep the good word we must let go the evil.
David had zealously watched his steps and put a check upon his conduct -
he had refrained his feet. No one evil way could entice him, for he knew
that if be went astray but in one road he had practically left the way
of righteousness, therefore he avoided every false way. The by-paths
were smooth and flowery, but he knew right well that they were evil, and
so he turned his feet away, and held on along the straight and thorny
pathway which leads to God. It is a pleasure to look back upon
self-conquests, - '"I have refrained," and a greater delight still to
know that we did this out of no mere desire to stand well with our
fellows, but with the one motive of keeping the law of the Lord. Sin
avoided that obedience may be perfected is the essence of this verse; or
it may be that the Psalmist would teach us that there is no real
reverence for the book where there is not carefulness to avoid every
transgression of its precepts. How can we keep God's word if we do not
keep our own works from becoming vile?

[Psa 119:102](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#102)

"I have not departed from thy judgments: for thou hast taught me." They
are well taught whom God teaches. What we learn from the Lord we never
forget. God's instruction has a practical effect, - we follow his way
when he teaches us; and it has an abiding effect, - we do not depart
from holiness. Read this verse in connection with the preceding and you
get the believer's "I have," and his "I have not," he is good both
positively and negatively. What he did, namely, "refrained his feet,"
preserved him from doing that which otherwise he might have done,
namely, "departed from thy judgments." He who is careful not to go an
inch aside will not leave the road. He who never touches the
intoxicating cup will never be drunk. He who never utters an idle word
will never be profane. If we begin to depart a little we can never tell
where we shall end. The Lord brings us to persevere in holiness by
abstinence from the beginning of sin; but whatever be the method he is
the worker of our perseverance, and to him be all the glory.

[Psa 119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)

"How sweet are thy words unto my taste!" He had not only heard the words
of God, but fed upon them, they affected his palate as well as his ear.
God's words are many and varied, and the whole of them make up what we
call "the word": David loved them each one, individually, and the whole
of them as a whole; he tasted an indescribable sweetness in them. He
expresses the fact of their sweetness, but as he cannot express the
degree of their sweetness he cries, "How sweet!" Being God's words they
were divinely sweet to God's servant; he who put the sweetness into them
had prepared the taste of his servant to discern and enjoy it. David
makes no distinction between promises and precepts, doctrines and
threatenings; they are all included in God's words, and all are precious
in his esteem. Oh for a deep love to all that the Lord has revealed,
whatever form it may take.

"Yea, sweeter than honey to my mouth." When he did not only eat but also
speak the word, by instructing others, he felt an increased delight in
it. The sweetest of all temporal things fall short of the infinite
deliciousness of the eternal word, honey itself is outstripped in
sweetness by the word of the Lord. When the Psalmist fed on it he found
it sweet; but when he bore witness of it it became sweeter still. How
wise it will be on our part to keep the word on our palate by meditation
and on our tongue by confession. It must be sweet to our taste when we
think of it, or it will not be sweet to our mouth when we talk of it.

[Psa 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104)

"Through thy precepts I get understanding." God's direction is our
instruction. Obedience to the divine will begets wisdom of mind and
action. As God's way is always best, those who follow it are sure to be
justified by the result. If the Lawgiver were foolish his law would be
the same, and obedience to such a law would involve us in a thousand
mistakes; but as the reverse is the case, we may count ourselves happy
to have such a wise, prudent, and beneficial law to be the rule of our
lives. We are wise if we obey and we grow wise by obeying!

"Therefore I hate every false way," Because he had understanding, and
because of the divine precepts, he detested sin and falsehood. Every sin
is a falsehood; we commit sin because we believe a lie, and in the end
the flattering evil turns a liar to us and we find ourselves betrayed.
True hearts are not indifferent about falsehood, they grow warm in
indignation; as they love the truth, so they hate the lie. Saints have a
universal horror of all that is untrue, they tolerate no falsehood or
folly, they set their faces against all error of doctrine or wickedness
of life. He who is a lover of one sin is in league with the whole army
of sins; we must have neither truce nor parley with even one of these
Amalekites, for the Lord hath war with them from generation to
generation, and so must we. It is well to be a good hater. And what is
that? A hater of no living being, but a hater of "every false way." The
way of self-will, of self-righteousness, of worldliness, of pride, of
unbelief, of hypocrisy, - these are all false ways, and therefore not
only to be shunned, but to be abhorred.

This [Psa 119:104](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#104) marks a great
advance in character, and shows that the man of God is growing stronger,
bolder, and happier than aforetime. He has been taught of the Lord, so
that he discerns between the precious and the vile, and while he loves
the truth fervently he hates falsehood intensely. May all of us reach
this state of discrimination and determination, so that we may greatly
glorify God.

[Psalms 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_105">psa 119:105</span></span>

105 Thy word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path.

106 I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments.

107 I am afflicted very much, quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy
word.

108 Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord,
and teach me thy judgments.

109 My soul is continually in my hand, yet do I not forget thy law.

110 The wicked have laid a snare for me: yet I erred not from thy
precepts.

111 Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever, for they are
the rejoicing of my heart.

112 I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto
the end.

[Psa 119:105](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#105)

"Thy word is a lamp unto my feet." We are walkers through the city of
this world, and we are often called to go out into its darkness; let us
never venture there without the light-giving word, lest we slip with our
feet. Each man should use the word of God personally, practically, and
habitually, that he may see his way and see what lies in it. When
darkness settles down upon all around me, the word of the Lord, like a
flaming torch, reveals my way. Having no fixed lamps in eastern towns,
in old time each passenger carried a lantern with him that he might not
fall into the open sewer, or stumble over the heaps of ordure which
defiled the road. This is a true picture of our path through this dark
world, we should not know the way, or how to walk in it, if the
Scripture, like a blazing flambeau, did not reveal it. One of the most
practical benefits of Holy Writ is guidance in the acts of daily life;
it is not sent to astound us with its brilliance, but to guide us by its
instruction. It is true the head needs illumination, but even more the
feet need direction, else head and feet may both fall into a ditch.
Happy is the man who personally appropriates God's word, and practically
uses it as his comfort and counsellor, - a lamp to his own feet. "And a
light unto my path." It is a lamp by night, a light by day, and a
delight at all times. David guided his own steps by it, and also saw the
difficulties of his road by its beams. He who walks in darkness is sure,
sooner or later, to stumble; while he who walks by the light of day, or
by the lamp of night, stumbleth not, but keeps his uprightness.
Ignorance is painful upon practical subjects; it breeds indecision and
suspense, and these are uncomfortable: the word of God, by imparting
heavenly knowledge, leads to decision, and when that is followed by
determined resolution, as in this case, it brings with it great
restfulness of heart.

This verse converses with God in adoring and yet familiar tones. Have we
not something of like tenor to address to our heavenly Father?

Note how like this verse is to [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001), and [Psa
119:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#009) and other octaves. The seconds
also are often in unison.

[Psa 119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106)

"I have sworn, and I will perform it, that I will keep thy righteous
judgments." Under the influence of the clear light of knowledge he had
firmly made up his mind and solemnly declared his resolve in the sight
of God. Perhaps mistrusting his own fickle mind, he had pledged himself
in sacred form to abide faithful to the determinations and decisions of
his God. Whatever path might open before him, he was sworn to follow
that only upon which the lamp of the word was shining. The Scriptures
are God's judgments, or verdicts, upon great moral questions; these are
all righteous, and hence righteous men should be resolved to keep them
at all hazards, since it must always be right to do right. Experience
shows that the less of covenanting and swearing men formally enter upon
the better, and the genius of our Saviour's teaching is against all
supererogatory pledging and swearing; and yet under the gospel we ought
to feel ourselves as much bound to obey the word of the Lord as if we
had taken an oath so to do. The bonds of love are not less sacred than
the fetters of law. When a man has vowed he must be careful to "perform
it," and when a man has not vowed in so many words to keep the Lord's
judgments, yet is he equally bound to do so by obligations which exist
apart from any promise on our part, - obligations founded in the eternal
fitness of things, and confirmed by the abounding goodness of the Lord
our God. Will not every believer own that he is under bonds to the
redeeming Lord to follow his example, and keep his words? Yes, the vows
of the Lord are upon us, especially upon such as have made profession of
discipleship, have been baptized into the thrice-holy name, have eaten
of the consecrated memorials, and have spoken in the name of the Lord
Jesus. We are enlisted, and sworn in, and are bound to be loyal soldiers
all through the war. Thus having taken the word into our hearts by a
firm resolve to obey it, we have a lamp within our souls as well as in
the Book, and our course will be light unto the end.

[Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)

"I am afflicted very much." According to [Psa
119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106) he had been sworn in as a
soldier of the Lord, and in [Psa
119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107) he is called to suffer
hardness in that capacity. Our service of the Lord does not screen us
from trial, but rather secures it for us. The Psalmist was a consecrated
man, and yet a chastened man; nor were his chastisements light; for it
seemed as if the more he was obedient the more her was afflicted. He
evidently felt the rod to be cutting deep, and this he pleads before the
Lord. He speaks not by way of murmuring, but by way of pleading; from
the very much affliction he argues for very much quickening.

"Quicken me, O Lord, according unto thy word." This is the best remedy
for tribulation; the soul is raised above the thought of present
distress, and is filled with that holy joy which attends all vigorous
spiritual life, and so the affliction grows light. Jehovah alone can
quicken, he has life in himself, and therefore can communicate it
readily; he can give us life at any moment, yea, at this present
instant; for it is of the nature of quickening to be quick in its
operation. The Lord has promised, prepared, and provided this blessing
of renewed life for all his waiting servants' it is a covenant blessing,
and it is as obtainable as it is needful. Frequently the affliction is
made the means of the quickening, even as the stirring of a fire
promotes the heat of the flame. In their affliction some desire death,
let us pray for life. Our forebodings under trial are often very gloomy,
let us entreat the Lord to deal with us, not according to our fears, but
according to his own word. David had but few promises to quote, and
probably these were in his own Psalms, yet he pleads the word of the
Lord; how much more should we do so, since to us so many holy men have
spoken by the Spirit of the Lord in that wonderful library which is now
our Bible. Seeing we have more promises, let us offer more prayers.

[Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)

"Accept, I beseech thee, the freewill offerings of my mouth, O Lord."
The living praise the living God, and therefore the quickened one
presents his sacrifice. He offers prayer, praise, confession, and
testimony - these, presented with his voice in the presence of an
audience, were the tribute of his mouth unto Jehovah. He trembles lest
these should be so ill uttered as to displease the Lord, and therefore
he implores acceptance. He pleads that the homage of his mouth was
cheerfully and spontaneously rendered; all his utterances were freewill
offerings. There can be no value in extorted confessions, God's revenues
are not derived from forced taxation, but from freewill donation. There
can be no acceptance where there is no willingness; there is no work of
free grace where there is no fruit of free will. Acceptance is a favour
to be sought from the Lord with all earnestness, for without it our
offerings are worse than useless. What a wonder of grace that the Lord
will accept anything of such unworthy ones as we are!

"And teach me thy judgments." When we render unto the Lord our best, we
become all the more concerned to do better. If, indeed, the Lord shall
accept us, we then desire to be further instructed, that we may still be
more acceptable. After quickening we need teaching, life without light,
or zeal without knowledge, would be but half a blessing. These repeated
cries for teaching show the humility of the man of God, and also
discover to us our own need of similar instruction. Our judgment needs
educating till it knows, agrees with, and acts upon, the judgments of
the Lord. Those judgments are not always so clear as to be seen at once;
we need to be taught in them till we admire their wisdom and adore their
goodness as soon as ever we perceive them.

[Psa 119:109](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#109)

"My soul is continually in my hand." He lived in the midst of danger. He
had to be always fighting for existence - hiding in caves, or contending
in battles. This is a very uncomfortable and trying state of affairs,
and men are apt to think any expedient justifiable by which they can end
such a condition - but David did not turn aside to find safety in sin,
for he says, "Yet do I not forget thy law." They say that all things are
fair in love and war; but the holy man thought not so, while he carried
his life in his hand, he also carried the law in his heart. No danger of
body should make us endanger our souls by forgetting that which is
right. Trouble makes many a man forget his duty, and it would have had
the same effect upon the Psalmist if he had not obtained quickening
([Psa 119:107](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#107)) and teaching ([Psa
119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)). In his memory of the Lord's
law lay his safety; he was certain not to be forgotten of God, for God
was not forgotten of him. It is a special proof of grace when nothing
can drive truth out of our thoughts, or holiness out of our lives. If we
remember the law even when death stares us in the face, we may be well
assured that the Lord is remembering us.

[Psa 119:110](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#110)

"The wicked have laid a snare for me." Spiritual life is the scene Of
constant danger: the believer lives with his life in his hand, and
meanwhile all seem plotting to take it from him, by cunning if they
cannot by violence. We shall not find it an easy thing to live the life
of the faithful. Wicked spirits and wicked men will leave no stone
unturned for our destruction. If all other devices fail, and even hidden
pits do not succeed, the wicked still persevere in their treacherous
endeavours, and, becoming craftier still, they set snares for the victim
of their hate. The smaller species of game are usually taken by this
method, by gin, or trap, or net, or noose. Wicked men are quite
indifferent as to the manner in which they can destroy the good man -
they think no more of him than if he were a rabbit or a rat, cunning and
treachery are always the allies of malice, and everything like a
generous or chivalrous feeling is unknown among the graceless, who treat
the godly as if they were vermin to be exterminated. When a man knows
that he is thus assailed, he is too apt to become timorous, and rush
upon some hasty device for deliverance, not without sin in the
endeavour; but David calmly kept his way, and was able to write, "Yet I
erred not from thy precepts." He was not snared, for he kept his eyes
open, and kept near his God. He was not entrapped and robbed for he
followed the King's highway of holiness, where God secures safety to
every traveller. He did not err from the right, and he was not deterred
from following it, because he referred to the Lord for guidance, and
obtained it. If we err from the precepts, we part with the promises; if
we get away from God's presence, we wander into the wilds where the
fowlers freely spread their nets. From this verse let us learn to be on
our guard, for we, too, have enemies both crafty and wicked. Hunters set
their traps in the animals' usual runs, and our worst snares are laid in
our own ways. By keeping to the ways of the Lord we shall escape the
snares of our adversaries, for his ways are safe and free from
treachery.

[Psa 119:111](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#111)

"Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for ever." He chose them as
his lot, his portion, his estate; and what is more, he laid hold upon
them and made them so, - taking them into possession and enjoyment.
David's choice is our choice. If we might have our desire, we would
desire to keep the commands of God perfectly. To know the doctrine, to
enjoy the promise to practise the command, - be this a kingdom large
enough for me. Here we have an inheritance which cannot fade and cannot
be alienated; it is for ever, and ours for ever, if we have so taken it.
Sometimes, like Israel at the first coming into Canaan, we have to take
our heritage by hard fighting, and, if so, it is worthy of all our
labour and suffering; but always it has to be taken by a decided choice
of the heart and grip of the will. What God gives we must take. "For
they are the rejoicing of my heart." The gladness which had come to him
through the word of the Lord had caused him to make an unalterable
choice of it. All the parts of Scripture had been pleasing to David, and
were so still, and therefore he stuck to them, and meant to stick to
them for ever. That which rejoices the heart is sure to be chosen and
treasured. It is not the head-knowledge but the heart-experience which
brings the joy.

In this verse, which is the seventh of its octave, we have reached the
same sweetness as in the last seventh ([Psa
119:103](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#103)), indeed, in several of the
adjoining sevenths, delight is evident. How good a thing it is when
experience ripens into joy, passing up through sorrow, prayer, conflict,
hope, decision, and holy content into rejoicing! Joy fixes the spirit -
when once a man's heart rejoices in the divine word, he greatly values
it, and is for ever united to it.

[Psa 119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112)

"I have inclined mine heart to perform thy statutes alway, even unto the
end." He was not half inclined to virtue, but heartily inclined to it.
His whole heart was bent on practical, persevering godliness. He was
resolved to keep the statutes of the Lord with all his heart, throughout
all his time, without erring or ending. He made it his end to keep the
law unto the end, and that without end. He had by prayer, and
meditation, and resolution made his whole being lean towards God's
commands; or as we should say in other words - the grace of God had
inclined him to incline his heart in a sanctified direction. Many are
inclined to preach, but the Psalmist was inclined to practise; many are
inclined to perform ceremonies, but he was inclined to perform statutes;
many are inclined to obey occasionally, but David would obey alway; and,
alas, many are inclined for temporary religion, but this godly man was
bound for eternity, he would perform the statutes of his Lord and King
even unto the end Lord, send us such a heavenly inclination of heart as
this: then shall we show that thou hast quickened and taught us. To this
end create in us a clean heart, and daily renew a right spirit within
us, for only so shall we incline in the right direction.

[Psalms 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_113">psa 119:113</span></span>

113 I hate vain thoughts; but thy law do I love.

114 Thou art my hiding place and my shield - I hope in thy word.

115 Depart from me, ye evildoers: for I will keep the commandments of my
God.

116 Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live: and let me not
be ashamed of my hope.

117 Hold thou me up, and I shall be safe: and I will have respect unto
thy statutes continually.

118 Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes: for
their deceit is falsehood.

119 Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross: therefore
I love thy testimonies.

120 My flesh trembleth for fear of thee; and I am afraid of thy
judgments.

[Psa 119:113](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#113)

"I hate vain thoughts: but thy law do I love." In this paragraph the
Psalmist deals with thoughts and things and persons which are the
opposite of God's holy thoughts and ways. He is evidently in great fear
of the powers of darkness, and of their allies, and his whole soul is
stirred up to stand against them with a determined opposition. Just as
he began the octave, [Psa 119:97](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#097), with
"O how I love thy law," so here he begins with a declaration of hatred
against that which breaks the law. The opposite of the fixed and
infallible law of God is the wavering, changing opinion of men David had
an utter contempt and abhorrence for this; all his reverence and regard
went to the sure word of testimony. In proportion to his love to the law
was his hate of men's inventions. The thoughts of men are vanity; but
the thoughts of God are verity. We hear much in these days of "men of
thought," "thoughtful preachers," and "modern thought": what is this but
the old pride of the human heart? Vain man would be wise. The Psalmist
did not glory in his thoughts; and that which was called "thought" in
his day was a thing which be detested. When man thinks his best, his
highest thoughts are as far below those of divine revelation as the
earth is beneath the heavens. Some of our thoughts are specially vain in
the sense of vain-glory, pride, conceit, and self-trust; others in the
sense of bringing disappointment, such as fond ambition, sinful
dreaming, and confidence in man; in the sense of emptiness and
frivolity, such as the idle thoughts and vacant romancings in which so
many indulge; and, yet once more, too many of our thoughts are vain in
the sense of being sinful, evil, and foolish. The Psalmist is not
indifferent to evil thoughts as the careless are; but upon them he looks
with a hate as true as was the love with which he clung to the pure
thoughts of God.

The last octave was practical, this is thoughtful; there the man of God
attended to his feet, and here to his heart, the emotions of the soul
are as important as the acts of the life, for they are the fountain and
spring from which the actions proceed. When we love the law it becomes a
law of love, and we cling to it with our whole heart.

[Psa 119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114)

"Thou art my hiding place and my shield." To his God he ran for shelter
from vain thoughts; there he hid himself away from their tormenting
intrusions, and in solemn silence of the soul he found God to be his
hiding-place. When called into the world, if he could not be alone with
God as his hiding-place, he could have the Lord with him as his shield,
and by this means he could ward off the attacks of wicked suggestions.
This is an experimental verse, and it testifies to that which the writer
knew of his own personal knowledge: he could not fight with his own
thoughts, or escape from them, till he flew to his God, and then he
found deliverance. Observe that he does not speak of God's word as being
his double defence, but he ascribes that to God himself. When we are
beset by very spiritual assaults, such as those which arise out of vain
thoughts, we shall do well to fly distinctly to the person of our Lord,
and to cast ourselves upon his real presence. Happy is he who can truly
say to the triune God, "Thou art my hiding-place." He has beheld God
under that glorious covenant aspect which ensures to the beholder the
surest consolation. "I hope in thy word." And well he might, since he
had tried and proved it: he looked for protection from all danger, and
preservation from all temptation to him who had hitherto been the tower
of his defence on former occasions. It is easy to exercise hope where we
have experienced help. Sometimes when gloomy thoughts afflict us, the
only thing we can do is to hope, and, happily, the word of God always
sets before us objects of hope and reasons for hope, so that it becomes
the very sphere and support of hope, and thus tiresome thoughts are
overcome. Amid fret and worry a hope of heaven is an effectual quietus.

[Psa 119:115](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#115)

"Depart from me, ye evildoers." Those who make a conscience of their
thoughts are not likely to tolerate evil company. If we fly to God from
vain thoughts, much more shall we avoid vain men. Kings are all too apt
to be surrounded by a class of men who flatter them, and at the same
time take liberty to break the laws of God, David purged his palace of
such parasites; he would not harbour them beneath his roof. No doubt
they would have brought upon him an ill name, for their doings would
have been imputed to him, since the acts of courtiers are generally set
down as acts of the court itself; therefore the king sent them packing
bag and baggage, saying, - '"Depart from me." Herein he anticipated the
sentence of the last great day, when the Son of David shall say, "Depart
from me, ye workers of iniquity." We cannot thus send all malefactors
out of our houses, but it will often become a duty to do so where there
is right and reason for it. A house is all the better for being rid of
liars, pilferera, lewd talkers, and slanderers. We are bound at all
hazards to keep ourselves clear of such companions as come to us by our
own choice if we have any reason to believe that their character is
vicious. Evildoers make evil counsellors. Those who say unto God,
"Depart from us," ought to hear the immediate echo of their words from
the mouths of God's children, "Depart from us. We cannot eat bread with
traitors."

"For I will keep the commandments of my God." Since he found it hard to
keep the commandments in the company of the ungodly, he gave them their
marching orders. He must keep the commandments, but he did not need to
keep their company. What a beautiful title for the Lord this verse
contains! The word God only occurs in this one place in all this
lengthened Psalm, and then it is attended by the personal word "my" -
"my God."

"My God! I how charming is the sound!

How pleasant to repeat!

Well may that heart with pleasure bound,

Where God hath fix'd his seat."

Because Jehovah is our God therefore we resolve to obey him, and to
chase out of our sight those who would hinder us in his service. It is a
grand thing for the mind to have come to a point, and to be steadfastly
fixed in the holy determination, - '"I will keep the commandments."
God's law is our pleasure when the God of the law is our God.

[Psa 119:116](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#116)

"Uphold me according unto thy word, that I may live." It was so
necessary that the Lord should hold up his servant, that he could not
even live without it. Our soul would die if the Lord did not continually
sustain it, and every grace which makes spiritual life to be truly life
would decay if he withdrew his upholding hand. It is a sweet comfort
that this great necessity of upholding is provided for in the word, and
we have not to ask for it as for an uncovenanted mercy, but simply to
plead for the fulfilment of a promise, saying, "Uphold me according to
thy word." He who has given us eternal life hath in that gift secured to
us all that is essential thereto, and as gracious upholding is one of
the necessary things we may be sure that we shall have it. "And let me
not be ashamed of my hope." In [Psa
119:114](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#114) he had spoken of his hope as
founded on the word, and now he begs for the fulfilment of that word
that his hope might be justified in the sight of all. A man would be
ashamed of his hope if it turned out that it was not based upon a sure
foundation; but this will never happen in our case. We may be ashamed of
our thoughts, and our words, and our deeds, for they spring from
ourselves; but we never shall be ashamed of our hope, for that springs
from the Lord our God. Such is the frailty of our nature that unless we
are continually upheld by grace, we shall fall so foully as to be
ashamed of ourselves, and ashamed of all those glorious hopes which are
now the crown and glory of our life. The man of God had uttered the most
positive resolves, but he felt that he could not trust in his own solemn
determination: hence these prayers. It is not wrong to make resolutions,
but it will be useless to do so unless we salt them well with believing
cries to God. David meant to keep the law of the Lord, but he first
needed the Lord of the law to keep him.

[Psa 119:117](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#117)

"Hold thou me up" as a nurse holds up a little child. "And I shall be
safe," and not else; for unless thou hold me up I shall be falling about
like an infant that is weak upon its knees. We are saved by past grace,
but we are not safe unless we receive present grace. The Psalmist had
vowed to keep the Lord's commands, but here he pleads with the Lord to
keep him, a very sensible course of procedure. Our version reads the
word "uphold," and then "hold up;" and truly we need this blessing in
every shape in which it can come, for in all manner of ways our
adversaries seek to cast us down. To be safe is a happy condition; there
is only one door to it, and that is to be held up by God himself; thank
God, that door is open to the least among us. "And I will have respect
unto thy statutes continually." In obedience is safety; in being held up
is obedience. No man will outwardly keep the Lord's statutes for long
together unless he has an inward respect for them, and this will never
be unless the hand of the Lord perpetually upholds the heart in holy
love. Perseverance to the end, obedience continually, comes only through
the divine power; we start aside as a deceitful bow unless we are kept
right by him that first gave us grace. Happy is the man who realizes
this verse in his life; upheld through his whole life in a course of
unswerving integrity, he becomes a safe and trusted man, and maintains a
sacred delicacy of conscience which is unknown to others. He feels a
tender respect for the statutes of the Lord, which keeps him clear of
inconsistencies and conformities to the world that are so common among
others, and hence he is a pillar in the house of the Lord. Alas, we know
some professors who are not upright, and therefore they lean to sin till
they fall over, and though they are restored they are never safe or
reliable, neither have they that sweet purity of soul which is the charm
of the more sanctified who have been kept from falling into the mire.

[Psa 119:118](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#118)

"Thou hast trodden down all them that err from thy statutes." There is
no holding up for them; they are thrown down and then trodden down, for
they choose to go down into the wandering ways of sin. Sooner or later
God will set his foot on those who turn their foot from his commands: it
has always been so, and it always will be so to the end. If the salt has
lost its savour, what is it fit for but to be trodden under foot? God
puts away the wicked like dross, which is only fit to be cast out as
road-metal to be trodden down.

"For their deceit is falsehood." They call it far-seeing policy, but it
is absolute falsehood, and it shall be treated as such. Ordinary men
call it clever diplomacy, but the man of God calls a spade a spade, and
declares it to be falsehood, and nothing less, for he knows that it is
so in the sight of God. Men who err from the right road invent pretty
excuses with which to deceive themselves and others, and so quiet their
consciences and maintain their credits; but their mask of falsehood is
too transparent. God treads down falsehoods; they are only fit to be
spurned by his feet, and crushed into the dust. How horrified must those
be who have spent all their lives in contriving a confectionery
religion, and then see it all trodden upon by God as a sham which he
cannot endure!

[Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119)

"Thou puttest away all the wicked of the earth like dross." He does not
trifle with them, or handle them with kid gloves. No, he judges them to
be the scum of the earth, and he treats them accordingly by putting them
away. He puts them away from his church, away from their honours, away
from the earth, and at last away from himself. "Depart," saith he, "ye
cursed." If even a good man feels forced to put away the evil-doers from
him, much more must the thrice holy God put away the wicked. They looked
like precious metal, they were intimately mixed up with it, they were
laid up in the same heap; but the Lord is a refiner, and every day he
removes some of the wicked from among his people, either by making a
shameful discovery of their hypocrisy or by consuming them from off the
earth. They are put away as dross, never to be recalled. As the metal is
the better for losing its alloy, so is the church the better for having
the wicked removed. These wicked ones are "of the earth," - '"the wicked
of the earth," and they have no right to be with those who are not of
the world; the Lord perceives them to be out of place and injurious, and
therefore he puts them away, all of them, leaving none of them to
deteriorate his church. The process will one day be perfect; no dross
will be spared, no gold will be left impure. Where shall we be when that
great work is finished?

"Therefore I love thy testimonies." Even the severities of the Lord
excite the love of his people. If he allowed men to sin with impunity,
he would not be so fully the object of our loving admiration; he is
glorious in holiness because he thus rids his kingdom of rebels, and his
temple of them that defile it. In these evil days, when God's punishment
of sinners has become the butt of proud sceptical contentions, we may
regard as a mark of the true man of God that he loves the Lord none the
less, but a great deal the more, because of his condign judgment of the
ungodly.

[Psa 119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120)

"My flesh trembleth for fear of thee." Such was his awe in the presence
of the Judge of all the earth, whose judgment he had just now been
considering, that he did exceedingly fear and quake. Even the grosser
part of his being, - his flesh felt a solemn dread at the thought of
offending one so good and great, who would so effectually sever the
wicked from among the just. Alas, poor flesh, this is the highest thing
to which thou canst attain! "And I am afraid of thy judgments." God's
words of judgment are solemn, and his deeds of judgment are terrible;
they may well make us afraid. At the thought of the Judge of all, - his
piercing eye, his books of record, his day of assize, and the operations
of his justice, - we may well cry for cleansed thoughts, and hearts, and
ways, lest his judgments should light on us. When we see the great
Refiner separating the precious from the vile, we may well feel a godly
fear, lest we should be put away by him, and left to be trodden under
his feet.

Love in [Psa 119:119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#119) is quite
consistent with fear in this verse, the fear which hath torment is cast
out, but not the filial fear which leads to reverence and obedience.

[Psalms 119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_121">psa 119:121</span></span>

121 I have done judgment and justice - leave me not to mine oppressors.

122 Be surety for thy servant for good: let not the proud oppress me.

123 Mine eyes fail for thy salvation, and for the word of thy
righteousness.

124 Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy, and teach me thy
statutes.

125 I am thy servant; give me understanding, that I may know thy
testimonies.

126 It is time for thee, Lord, to work - for they have made void thy
law.

127 Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold.

128 Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be
right; and I hate every false way.

[Psa 119:121](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121)

"I have done judgment and justice." This was a great thing for an
Eastern ruler to say at any time, for these despots mostly cared more
for gain than justice. Some of them altogether neglected their duty, and
would not even do judgment at all, preferring their pleasures to their
duties; and many more of them sold their judgments to the highest
bidders by taking bribes, or regarding the persons of men. Some rulers
gave neither judgment nor justice, others gave judgment without justice,
but David gave judgment and justice, and saw that his sentences were
carried out. He could claim before the Lord that he had dealt out
even-handed justice, and was doing so still. On this fact he founded a
plea with which he backed the prayer - "Leave me not to mine
oppressors." He who, as far as his power goes, has been doing right, may
hope to be delivered from his superiors when attempts are made by them
to do him wrong. If I will not oppress others, I may hopefully pray that
others may not oppress me. A course of upright conduct is one which
gives us boldness in appealing to the Great Judge for deliverance from
the injustice of others. Nor is this kind of pleading to be censured as
self-righteous: when we are dealing with God as to our shortcomings, we
use a very different tone from that with which we face the censures of
our fellow-men; when they are in the question, and we are guiltless
towards them, we are justified in pleading our innocence.

[Psa 119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122)

"Be surety for thy servant for good." Answer for me. Do not leave thy
poor servant to die by the hand of his enemy and thine. Take up my
interests and weave them with thine own, and stand for me. As my Master,
undertake thy servants' cause, and represent me before the faces of
haughty men till they see what an august ally I have in the Lord my God.

"Let not the proud oppress me." Thine interposition will answer the
purpose of my rescue, when the proud see that thou art my advocate they
will hide their heads. We should have been crushed beneath our proud
adversary the devil if our Lord Jesus had not stood between us and the
accuser, and become a surety for us. It is by his suretiship that we
escape like a bird from the snare of the fowler. What a blessing to be
able to leave our matters in our Surety's hands, knowing that all will
be well, since he has an answer for every accuser, a rebuke for every
reviler.

Good men dread oppression, for it makes even a wise man mad, and they
send up their cries to heaven for deliverance; nor shall they cry in
vain, for the Lord will undertake the cause of his servants, and fight
their battles against the proud. The word "servant" is wisely used as a
plea for favour for himself, and the word "proud" as an argument against
his enemies. It seems to be inevitable that proud men should become
oppressors, and that they should take most delight in oppressing really
gracious men.

[Psa 119:123](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#123)

"Mine eyes fail for thy salvation." He wept, waited, and watched for
God's saving hand, and these exercises tried the eyes of his faith till
they were almost ready to give out. He looked to God alone, he looked
eagerly, he looked long, he looked till his eyes ached. The mercy is,
that if our eyes fail, God does not fail, nor do his eyes fail. Eyes are
tender things, and so are our faith, hope and expectancy, the Lord will
not try them above what they are able to bear. "And for the word of thy
righteousness:" a word that would silence the unrighteous words of his
oppressors. His eyes as well as his ears waited for the Lord's word: he
looked to see the divine word come forth as a flat for his deliverance.
He was "waiting for the verdict" - the verdict of righteousness itself.
How happy are we if we have righteousness on our side; for then that
which is the sinners' terror is our hope, that which the proud dread is
our expectation and desire. David left his reputation entirely in the
Lord's hand, and was eager to be cleared by the word of the Judge rather
than by any defence of his own. He knew that he had done right, and,
therefore, instead of avoiding the supreme court, he begged for the
sentence which he knew would work out his deliverance. He even watched
with eager eyes for the judgment and the deliverance, the word of
righteousness from God which meant salvation to himself.

[Psa 119:124](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#124)

"Deal with thy servant according unto thy mercy." Here he recollects
himself: although before men he was so clear that he could challenge the
word of righteousness, yet before the Lord, as his servant, he felt that
he must appeal to mercy. We feel safest here. Our heart has more rest in
the cry, "God be merciful to me," than in appealing to justice. It is
well to be able to say, "I have done judgment and justice," and then to
add in all lowliness, yet "deal with thy servant according unto thy
mercy." The title of servant covers a plea; a master should clear the
character of his servant if he be falsely accused, and rescue him from
those who would oppress him; and, moreover, the master should show mercy
to a servant, even if he deal severely with a stranger. The Lord
condescendingly deals, or has communications with his servants, not
spurning them, but communing with them; and this he does in a tender and
merciful way, for in any other form of dealing we should be crushed into
the dust. "And teach me thy statutes." This will be one way of dealing
with us in mercy. We may expect a master to teach his own servant the
meaning of his own orders. Yet since our ignorance arises from our own
sinful stupidity, it is great mercy on God's part that he condescends to
instruct us in his commands. For our ruler to become our teacher is an
act of great grace, for which we cannot be too grateful. Among our
mercies this is one of the choicest.

[Psa 119:125](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#125)

"I am thy servant." This is the third time he has repeated this title in
this one section: he is evidently fond of the name, and conceives it to
be a very effective plea. We who rejoice that we are sons of God are by
no means the less delighted to be his servants. Did not the firstborn
Son assume the servant's form and fulfil the servant's labour to the
full? What higher honour can the younger brethren desire than to be made
like the Heir of all things?

"Give me understanding, that I may know thy testimonies." In the
previous verse he sought teaching; but here he goes much further, and
craves for under - standing. Usually, if the instructor supplies the
teaching, the pupil finds the understanding; but in our case we are far
more dependent, and must beg for under - standing as well as teaching:
this the ordinary teacher cannot give, and we are thrice happy that our
Divine Tutor can furnish us with it. We are to confess ourselves fools,
and then our Lord will make us wise, as well as give us knowledge. The
best understanding is that which enables us to render perfect obedience
and to exhibit intelligent faith, and it is this which David desires, -
"understanding, that I may know thy testimonies." Some would rather not
know these things; they prefer to be at ease in the dark rather than
possess the light which leads to repentance and diligence. The servant
of God longs to know in an understanding manner all that the Lord
reveals of man and to man; he wishes to be so instructed that he may
apprehend and comprehend that which is taught him. A servant should not
be ignorant concerning his master, or his master's business; he should
study the mind, will, purpose, and aim of him whom he serves, for so
only can he complete his service; and as no man knows these things so
well as his master himself, he should often go to him for instructions,
lest his very zeal should only serve to make him the greater blunderer.

It is remarkable that the Psalmist does not pray for understanding
through acquiring knowledge, but begs of the Lord first that he may have
the gracious gift of understanding, and then may obtain the desired
instruction. All that we know before we have understanding is apt to
spoil us and breed vanity in us; but if there be first an understanding
heart, then the stores of knowledge enrich the soul, and bring neither
sin nor sorrow therewith. Moreover, this gift of understanding acts also
in the form of discernment, and thus the good man is preserved from
hoarding up that which is false and dangerous: he knows what are and
what are not the testimonies of the Lord.

[Psa 119:126](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#126)

"It is time for thee, Lord, to work: for they have made void thy law."
David was a servant, and therefore it was always his time to work: but
being oppressed by a sight of man's ungodly behaviour, he feels that his
Master's hand is wanted, and therefore he appeals to him to work against
the working of evil. Men make void the law of God by denying it to be
his law, by promulgating commands and doctrines in opposition to it, by
setting up tradition in its place, or by utterly disregarding and
scorning the authority of the lawgiver. Then sin becomes fashionable,
and a holy walk is regarded as a contemptible puritanism; vice is styled
pleasure, and vanity bears the bell. Then the saints sigh for the
presence and power of their God: Oh for an hour of the King upon the
throne and the rod of iron! Oh for another Pentecost with all its
wonders, to reveal the energy of God to gainsayers, and make them see
that there is a God in Israeli Man's extremity, whether of need or sin,
is God's opportunity. When the earth was without form and void, the
Spirit came and moved upon the face of the waters; should he not come
when society is returning to a like chaos? When Israel in Egypt were
reduced to the lowest point, and it seemed that the covenant would be
void, then Moses appeared and wrought mighty miracles; so, too, when the
church of God is trampled down, and her message is derided, we may
expect to see the hand of the Lord stretched out for the revival of
religion, the defence of the truth, and the glorifying of the divine
name. The Lord can work either by judgments which hurl down the ramparts
of the foe; or by revivals which build up the walls of his own
Jerusalem. How heartily may we pray the Lord to raise up new
evangelists, to quicken those we already have, to set his whole church
on fire, and to bring the world to his feet. God's work is ever
honourable and glorious; as for our work, it is as nothing apart from
him.

[Psa 119:127](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#127)

"Therefore I love thy commandments above gold; yea, above fine gold." As
it was God's time to work so it was David's time to love. So far from
being swayed by the example of evil men, so as to join them in slighting
the Scriptures, he was the rather led into a more vehement love of them.
As he saw the commandments slighted by the ungodly, his heart was in
sympathy with God, and he felt a burning affection for his holy
precepts. It is the mark of a true believer that he does not depend upon
others for his religion, but drinks water out of his own well, which
springs up even when the cisterns of earth are all dried. Our holy poet
amid a general depreciation of the law felt his own esteem of it rising
so high that gold and silver sank in comparison. Wealth brings with it
so many conveniences that men naturally esteem it, and gold as the
symbol of it is much set by; and yet, in the judgment of the wise, God's
laws are more enriching, and bring with them more comfort than all the
choicest treasures. The Psalmist could not boast that he always kept the
commands; but he could declare that he loved them; he was perfect in
heart, and would fain have been perfect in life. He judged God's holy
commands to be better than the best earthly thing, yea, better than the
best sort of the best earthly thing; and this esteem was confirmed and
forced into expression by those very oppositions of the world which
drive hypocrites to forsake the Lord and his ways.

"The dearer, for their rage,

Thy words I love and own, -

A wealthier heritage

Than gold and precious stone"

[Psa 119:128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#128)

"Therefore I esteem all thy precepts concerning all things to be right."
Because the ungodly found fault with the precepts of God, therefore
David was all the more sure of their being right. The censure of the
wicked is a certificate of merit; that which they sanction we may justly
suspect, but that which they abominate we may ardently admire. The good
man's delight in God's law is unreserved, he believes in all God's
precepts concerning all things.

"And I hate every false way." Love to truth begat hatred of falsehood.
This godly man was not indifferent to anything, but that which he did
not love he hated. He was no chip in the porridge without flavour; he
was a good lover or a good hater, but he was never a waverer. He knew
what he felt, and expressed it. He was no Gallio, caring for none of the
things. His detestation was as unreserved as his affection; he had not a
good word for any practice which would not bear the light of truth. The
fact that such large multitudes follow the broad road had no influence
upon this holy man, except to make him more determined to avoid every
form of error and sin. May the Holy Spirit so rule in our hearts that
our affections may be in the same decided condition towards the precepts
of the word.

[Psalms 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_129">psa 119:129</span></span>

129 Thy testimonies are wonderful: therefore doth my soul keep them.

130 The entrance of thy words giveth light; it giveth understanding unto
the simple.

131 I opened my mouth, and panted - for I longed for thy commandments.

132 Look thou upon me, and be merciful unto me, as thou usest to do unto
those that love thy name.

133 Order my steps in thy word: and let not any iniquity have dominion
over me.

134 Deliver me from the oppression of man - so will I keep thy precepts.

135 Make thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes.

136 Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law.

[Psa 119:129](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129)

"Thy testimonies are wonderful." Full of wonderful revelations, commands
and promises. Wonderful in their nature, as being free from all error,
and bearing within themselves overwhelming self-evidence of their truth;
wonderful in their effects as instructing, elevating, strengthening, and
comforting the soul. Jesus the eternal Word is called Wonderful, and all
the uttered words of God are wonderful in their degree. Those who know
them best wonder at them most. It is wonderful that God should have
borne testimony at all to sinful men, and more wonderful still that his
testimony should be of such a character, so clear, so full, so gracious,
so mighty. "Therefore doth my soul keep them." Their wonderful character
so impressed itself upon his mind that he kept them in his memory, their
wonderful excellence so charmed his heart that he kept them in his life.
Some men wonder at the words of God, and use them for their speculation;
but David was always practical, and the more he wondered the more he
obeyed. Note that his religion was soul work; not with head and hand
alone did he keep the testimonies; but his soul, his truest and most
real self, held fast to them.

[Psa 119:130](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#130)

"The entrance of thy words giveth light." No sooner do they gain
admission into the soul than they enlighten it, what light may be
expected from their pro - longed indwelling! Their very entrance floods
the mind with instruction, for they are so full, so clear; but, on the
other hand, there must be such an "entrance," or there will be no
illumination, The mere hearing of the word with the external ear is of
small value by itself, but when the words of God enter into the chambers
of the heart then light is scattered on all sides. The word finds no
entrance into some minds because they are blocked up with self-conceit,
or prejudice, or indifference; but where due attention is given, divine
illumination must surely follow upon knowledge of the mind of God. Oh,
that thy words, like the beams of the sun, may enter through the window
of my understanding, and dispel the darkness of my mind! "It giveth
understanding unto the simple." The sincere and candid are the true
disciples of the word. To such it gives not only knowledge, but under -
standing. These simple-hearted ones are frequently despised, and their
simplicity has another meaning infused into it, so as to be made the
theme of ridicule; but what matters it? Those whom the world dubs as
fools are among the truly wise if they are taught of God. What a divine
power rests in the word of God, since it not only bestows light, but
gives that very mental eye by which the light is received - '"It giveth
understanding." Hence the value of the words of God to the simple, who
cannot receive mysterious truth unless their minds are aided to see it
and prepared to grasp it.

[Psa 119:131](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#131)

"I opened my mouth, and panted." So animated was his desire that he
looked into the animal world to find a picture of it. He was filled with
an intense longing, and was not ashamed to describe it by a most
expressive, natural, and yet singular symbol. Like a stag that has been
hunted in the chase, and is hard pressed, and therefore pants for
breath, so did the Psalmist pant for the entrance of God's word into his
soul. Nothing else could content him. All that the world could yield him
left him still panting with open mouth. "For I longed for thy
commandments." Longed to know them, longed to obey them, longed to be
conformed to their spirit, longed to teach them to others. He was a
servant of God, and his industrious mind longed to receive orders; he
was a learner in the school of grace, and his eager spirit longed to be
taught of the Lord.

[Psa 119:132](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#132)

"Look thou upon me." A godly man cannot long be without prayer. During
the previous verses he had been expressing his love to God's word, but
here he is upon his knees again. This prayer is specially short, but
exceedingly sententious, "Look thou upon me." While he stood with open
mouth panting for the commandments, he besought the Lord to look upon
him, and let his condition and his unexpressed longings plead for him.
He desires to be known of God, and daily observed by him. He wishes also
to be favoured with the divine smile which is included in that word -
'"look." If a look from us to God has Saving efficacy in it, what may we
not expect from a look from God to us. "And be merciful unto me."
Christ's look at Peter was a look of mercy, and all the looks of the
heavenly Father are of the same kind. If he looked in stern justice his
eyes would not endure us, but looking in mercy he spares and blesses us.
If God looks and sees us panting, he will not fail to be merciful to us.
"As thou usest to do unto those that love thy name." Look on me as thou
lookest on those who love thee; be merciful to me as thou art accustomed
to be towards those who truly serve thee. There is a use and wont which
God observes towards them that love him, and David craved that he might
experience it. He would not have the Lord deal better or worse with him
than he was accustomed to deal with his saints - worse would not save
him, better could not be. In effect he prays, "I am thy servant; treat
me as thou treatest thy servants. I am thy child; deal with me as with a
son." Especially is it clear from the context that he desired such an
entering in of the word, and such a clear understanding of it as God
usually gives to his own, according to the promise, "All thy children
shall be taught of the Lord."

Reader, do you love the name of the Lord? Is his character most
honourable in your sight? most dear to your heart? This is a sure mark
of grace, for no soul ever loved the Lord except as the result of love
received from the Lord himself.

[Psa 119:133](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#133)

"Order my steps in thy word." This is one of the Lord's customary
mercies to his chosen, - '"He keepeth the feet of his saints." By his
grace he enables us to put our feet step by step in the very place which
his word ordains. This prayer seeks a very choice favour, namely, that
every distinct act, every step, might be arranged and governed by the
will of God. This does not stop short of perfect holiness, neither will
the believer's desires be satisfied with anything beneath that blessed
consummation. "And let not any iniquity have dominion over me." This is
the negative side of the blessing. We ask to do all that is right, and
to fall under the power of nothing that is wrong. God is our sovereign,
and we would have every thought in subjection to his sway. Believers
have no choice, darling sins to which they would be willing to bow. They
pant for perfect liberty from the power of evil, and being conscious
that they cannot obtain it of themselves, they cry unto God for it.

[Psa 119:134](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#134)

"Deliver me from the oppression of man." David had tasted all the
bitterness of this great evil. It had made him an exile from his
country, and banished him from the sanctuary of the Lord: therefore he
pleads to be saved from it. It is said that oppression makes a wise man
mad, and no doubt it has made many a righteous man sinful. oppression is
in itself wicked, and it drives men to wickedness. We little know how
much of our virtue is due to our liberty; if we had been in bonds under
haughty tyrants we might have yielded to them, and instead of being
confessors we might now have been apostates. He who taught us to pray,
"Lead us not into temptation," will sanction this prayer, which is of
much the same tenor, since to be oppressed is to be tempted. "So will I
keep thy statutes." When the stress of oppression was taken off he would
go his own way, and that way would be the way of the Lord. Although we
ought not to yield to the threatenings of men, yet many do so; the wife
is sometimes compelled by the oppression of her husband to act against
her conscience - children and servants, and even whole nations have been
brought into the same difficulty. Their sins will be largely laid at the
oppressor's door, and it usually pleases God ere long to overthrow those
powers and dominions which compel men to do evil. The worst of it is
that some persons, when the pressure is taken off from them, follow
after unrighteousness of their own accord. These give evidence of being
sinners in grain. As for the righteous, it happens to them as it did to
the apostles of old, "Being let go, they went to their own company."
When saints are freed from the tyrant they joyfully pay homage to their
king.

[Psa 119:135](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#135)

"Make thy face to shine upon thy servant." Oppressors frown, but do thou
smile. They darken my life, but do thou shine upon me, and all will be
bright. The Psalmist again declares that he is God's servant, and he
seeks for no favour from others, but only from his own Lord and Master.
"And teach me thy statutes." This is the favour which he considers to be
the shining of the face of God upon him. If the Lord will be exceeding
gracious, and make him his favourite, he will ask no higher blessing
than still to be taught the royal statutes. See how he craves after
holiness; this is the choicest of all gems in his esteem. As we say
among men that a good education is a great fortune, so to be taught of
the Lord is a gift of special grace. The most favoured believer needs
teaching; even when he walks in the light of God's countenance he has
still to be taught the divine statutes or he will transgress.

[Psa 119:136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#136)

"Rivers of waters run down mine eyes, because they keep not thy law." He
wept in sympathy with God to see the holy law despised and broken. He
wept in pity for men who were thus drawing down upon themselves the
fiery wrath of God. His grief was such that he could scarcely give it
vent; his tears were not mere drops of sorrow, but torrents of woe. In
this he became like the Lord Jesus who beheld the city, and wept over
it; and like unto Jehovah himself, who hath no pleasure in the death of
him that dieth, but that he turn unto him and live. The experience of
this verse indicates a great advance upon anything we have had before:
the Psalm and the Psalmist are both growing. That man is a ripe believer
who sorrows because of the sins of others. In [Psa
119:120](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#120) his flesh trembled at the
presence of God, and here it seems to melt and flow away in floods of
tears. None are so affected by heavenly things as those who are much in
the study of the word, and are thereby taught the truth and essence of
things, Carnal men are afraid of brute force, and weep over losses and
crosses; but spiritual men feel a holy fear of the Lord himself, and
most of all lament when they see dishonour cast upon his holy name.

"Lord, let me weep for nought but sin,

And after none but thee,

And then I would, O that I might!

A constant weeper be."

[Psalms 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_137">psa 119:137</span></span>

137 Righteous art thou, O Lord, and upright are thy judgments.

138 Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very
faithful.

139 My zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy
words.

140 Thy word is very pure - therefore thy servant loveth it.

141 I am small and despised, yet do not I forget thy precepts.

142 Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy law is
the truth.

143 Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me - yet thy commandments are
my delights.

144 The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting, give me
understanding, and I shall live.

This passage deals with the perfect righteousness of Jehovah and his
word, and expresses the struggles of a holy soul in reference to that
righteousness. The initial letter with which every verse commences
sounds like the Hebrew word for righteousness: our keynote is
righteousness.

[Psa 119:137](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137)

"Righteous art thou, O Lord." The Psalmist has not often used the name
of Jehovah in this vast composition. The whole Psalm shows him to have
been a deeply religious man, thoroughly familiar with the things of God;
and such persons never use the holy name of God carelessly, nor do they
even use it at all frequently in comparison with the thoughtless and the
ungodly. Familiarity begets reverence in this case. Here he uses the
sacred name in worship. He praises God by ascribing to him perfect
righteousness. God is always right, and he is always actively right,
that is, righteous. This quality is bound up in our very idea of God. We
cannot imagine an unrighteous God. "And upright are thy judgments." Here
he extols God's word, or recorded judgments, as being right, even as
their Author is righteous. That which comes from the righteous God is
itself righteous. Jehovah both saith and doth that which is right, and
that alone. This is a great stay to the soul in time of trouble. When we
are most sorely afflicted, and cannot see the reason for the
dispensation, we may fall back upon this most sure and certain fact,
that God is righteous, and his dealings with us are righteous too. It
should be our glory to sing this brave confession when all things around
us appear to suggest the contrary. This is the richest adoration - this
which rises from the lips of faith when carnal reason utters about undue
severity, and the like.

[Psa 119:138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#138)

"Thy testimonies that thou hast commanded are righteous and very
faithful." All that which God hath testified in his word is right and
truthful. It is righteous, and may be relied upon for the present; it is
faithful, and may be trusted in for the future. About every portion of
the inspired testimonies there is a divine authority, they are issued
and published by God's command, and they bear the impress of the royal
style which carries omnipotence about it. Not only the precepts but the
promises also are commanded of the Lord, and so are all the teachings of
Scripture. It is not left to our choice whether we will accept them or
no; they are issued by royal command, and are not to be questioned.
Their characteristic is that they are like the Lord who has proclaimed
them, they are the essence of justice and the soul of truth. God's word
is righteous and cannot be impeached; it is faithful and cannot be
questioned; it is true from the beginning, and it will be true unto the
end.

Dwell upon that sweet word - "very faithful." What a mercy that we have
a God to deal with who is scrupulously faithful, true to all the items
and details of his promises, punctual to time, steadfast during all
time. Well may we risk all upon a word which is "ever faithful, ever
sure."

[Psa 119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139)

In [Psa 119:137-138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137) David spoke
concerning his God and his law; here he speaks of himself, and says, "My
zeal hath consumed me, because mine enemies have forgotten thy words",
this was no doubt occasioned by his having so clear a sense of the
admirable character of God's word. His zeal was like a fire burning
within his soul. The sight of man's forgetfulness of God acted as a
fierce blast to excite the fire to a more vehement flame, and it blazed
until it was ready to consume him. David could not bear that men should
forget God's words. He was ready to forget himself, ay, to consume
himself, because these men forgot God. The ungodly were David's enemies:
his enemies because they hated him for his godliness; his enemies,
because he abhorred them for their ungodliness. These men had gone so
far in iniquity that they not only violated and neglected the commands
of God, but they appeared actually to have forgotten them. This put
David into a great heat; he burned with indignation. How dare they
trample on sacred things! How could they utterly ignore the commands of
God himself! He was astonished, and filled with holy anger.

[Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140)

"Thy word is very pare." It is truth distilled, holiness in its
quintessence. In the word of God there is no admixture of error or sin.
It is pure in its sense, pure in its language, pure in its spirit, pure
in its influence, and all this to the very highest degree - "very pure."
"Therefore thy servant loveth it," which is a proof that he himself was
pure in heart, for only those who are pure love God's word because of
its purity. His heart was knit to the word because of its glorious
holiness and truth. He admired it, delighted in it, sought to practise
it, and longed to come under its purifying power.

[Psa 119:141](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#141)

"I am small and despised: yet do not I forget thy precepts." That fault
of forgetfulness which he condemned in others ([Psa
119:139](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#139)) could not be charged upon
himself. His enemies made no account of him, regarded him as a man
without power or ability, and therefore looked down upon him. He appears
to accept the situation and humbly take the lowest room, but he carries
God's word with him. How many a man has been driven to do some ill
action in order to reply to the contempt of his enemies: to make himself
conspicuous he has either spoken or acted in a manner which he could not
justify. The beauty of the Psalmist's piety was that it was calm and
well-balanced, and as he was not carried away by flattery, so was he not
overcome by shame. If small, he the more jealously attended to the
smaller duties; and if despised, he was the more in earnest to keep the
despised commandments of God.

[Psa 119:142](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#142)

"Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness." Having in a
previous verse ascribed righteousness to God, he now goes on to declare
that that righteousness is unchanging and endures from age to age. This
is the joy and glory of the saints, that what God is he always will be,
and his mode of procedure towards the sons of men is immutable, having
kept his promise, and dealt out justice among his people, he will do so
world without end. Both the righteousnesses and the un-righteousnesses
of man come to an end, but the righteousness of God is without end. "And
thy law is the truth." As God is love, so his law is the truth, the very
essence of truth, truth applied to ethics, truth in action, truth upon
the judgment-seat. We hear great disputes about, "What is truth?" The
holy Scriptures are the only answer to that question. Note, that they
are not only true, but the truth itself. We may not say of them that
they contain the truth, but that they are the truth: "thy law is the
truth." There is nothing false about the law or preceptory part of
Scripture. Those who are obedient thereto shall find that they are
walking in a way consistent with fact, while those who act contrary
thereto are walking in a vain show.

[Psa 119:143](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#143)

"Trouble and anguish have taken hold on me." This affliction may have
arisen from his circumstances, or from the cruelty of his enemies, or
from his own internal conflicts, but certain it is that he was the
subject of much distress, a distress which apprehended him, and carried
him away a captive to its power. His griefs, like fierce dogs, had taken
hold upon him; he felt their teeth. He had double trouble: trouble
without and anguish within, as the apostle Paul put it, "without were
rightings and within were fears." "Yet thy commandments are my
delights." Thus he became a riddle; troubled, and yet delighted; in
anguish, and yet in pleasure. The child of God can understand this
enigma, for well he knows that while he is cast down on account of what
he sees within himself he is all the more lifted up by what he sees in
the word. He is delighted with the commandments, although he is troubled
because he cannot perfectly obey them. He finds abundant light in the
commandments, and by the influence of that light he discovers and mourns
over his own darkness. Only the man who is acquainted with the struggles
of the spiritual life will understand the expression before us. Let the
reader herein find a balance in which to weigh himself. Does he find
even when he is begirt with sorrow that it is a delightful thing to do
the will of the Lord? Does he find more joy in being sanctified than
sorrow in being chastised? Then the spot of God's children is upon him.

[Psa 119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144)

"The righteousness of thy testimonies is everlasting." First he had said
that God's testimonies were righteous, then that they were everlasting,
and now that their righteousness is everlasting. Thus he gives us a
larger and more detailed account of the word of God the longer he is
engaged in writing upon it. The more we say in praise of holy writ, the
more we may say and the more we can say. God's testimonies to man cannot
be assailed, they are righteous from beginning to end; and though
ungodly men have opposed the divine justice, especially in the plan of
salvation, they have always failed to establish any charge against the
Most High. Long as the earth shall stand long as there shall be a single
intelligent creature in the universe it will be confessed that God's
plans of mercy are in all respects marvellous proofs of his love of
justice, even that he may be gracious Jehovah will not be unjust. "Give
me understanding and I shall live." This is a prayer which he is
constantly praying, that God would give him understanding. Here he
evidently considers that such a gift is essential to his living. To live
without understanding is not to live the life of a man, but to be dead
while we live. Only as we know and apprehend the things of God can we be
said to enter into life. The more the Lord teaches us to admire the
eternal rightness of his word, and the more he quickens us to the love
of such rightness, the happier and the better we shall be. As we love
life, and seek many days that we may see good, it behoves us to seek
immortality in the everlasting word which liveth and abideth for ever,
and to seek good in that renewal of our entire nature which begins with
the enlightenment of the understanding and passes on to the regeneration
of the entire man. Here is our need of the Holy Spirit, the Lord and
giver of life, and the guide of all the quickened ones, who shall lead
us into all truth. O for the visitations of his grace at this good hour!

[Psalms 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_145">psa 119:145</span></span>

145 I cried with my whole heart; hear me, O Lord, I will keep thy
statutes.

146 I cried unto thee; save me, and I shall keep thy testimonies.

147 I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried, I hoped in thy
word.

148 Mine eyes prevent the night watches, that I might meditate in thy
word.

149 Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness, O Lord, quicken me
according to thy judgment.

150 They draw nigh that follow after mischief: they are far from thy
law.

151 Thou art near, O Lord; and all thy commandments are truth.

152 Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast
founded them for ever.

This section is given up to memories of prayer. The Psalmist describes
the time and the manner of his devotions, and pleads with God for
deliverance from his troubles. He who has been with God in the closet
will find God with him in the furnace. If we have cried we shall be
answered. Delayed answers may drive us to importunity; but we need not
fear the ultimate result, since God's promises are not uncertain, but
are "founded for ever." The whole passage shows us: How he prayed ([Psa
119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145)). What he prayed for ([Psa
119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146)). When he prayed ([Psa
119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147)). How long he prayed ([Psa
119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148)). What he pleaded ([Psa
119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149)). What happened ([Psa
119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150)). How he was rescued ([Psa
119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151)). What was his witness as to
the whole matter ([Psa 119:152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#152)).

[Psa 119:145](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145)

"I cried with my whole heart." His prayer was a sincere, plaintive,
painful, natural utterance, as of a creature in pain. We cannot tell
whether at all times he used his voice when he thus cried; but we are
informed of something which is of much greater consequence, he cried
with his heart. Heart-cries are the essence of prayer. He mentions the
unity of his heart in this holy engagement. His whole soul pleaded with
God, his entire affections, his united desires all went out towards the
living God. It is well when a man can say as much as this of his
prayers: it is to be feared that many never cried to God with their
whole heart in all their lives. There may be no beauty of elocution
about such prayers, no length of expression, no depth of doctrine, nor
accuracy of diction; but if the whole heart be in them they will find
their way to the heart of God. "Hear me, O Lord." He desires of Jehovah
that his cries may not die upon the air, but that God may have respect
to them. True supplicants are not satisfied with the exercise itself,
they have an end and object in praying, and they look out for it. If God
does not hear prayer we pray in vain. The term "hear" is often used in
Scripture to express attention and consideration. In one sense God hears
every sound that is made on earth, and every desire of every heart; but
David meant much more; he desired a kindly, sympathetic hearing, such as
a physician gives to his patient when he tells him his pitiful story. He
asked that the Lord would draw near, and listen with friendly ear to the
voice of his complaint, with the view of pitying him and helping him.
Observe, that his whole-hearted prayer goes to the Lord alone; he has no
second hope or help. "Hear me, O Lord," is the full range of his
petition and expectation. "I will keep thy statutes." He could not
expect the Lord to hear him if he did not hear the Lord, neither would
it be true that he prayed with his whole heart unless it was manifest
that he laboured with all his might to be obedient to the divine will.
His object in seeking deliverance was that he might be free to fulfil
his religion and carry out every ordinance of the Lord. He would be a
free man that he might be at liberty to serve the Lord. Note well that a
holy resolution goes well with an importunate supplication: David is
determined to be holy, his whole heart goes with that resolve as well as
with his prayers. He will keep God's statutes in his memory, in his
affections, and in his actions. He will not wilfully neglect or violate
any one of the divine laws.

[Psa 119:146](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#146)

"I cried unto thee." Again he mentions that his prayer was unto God
alone. The sentence imports that he prayed vehemently, and very often;
and that it had become one of the greatest facts of his life that he
cried unto God. "Save me." This was his prayer; very short, but very
full. He needed saving, none but the Lord could save him, to him he
cried, "Save me" from the dangers which surround me, from the enemies
that pursue me, from the temptations which beset me, from the sins which
accuse me. He did not multiply words, and men never do so when they are
in downright earnest. He did not multiply objects, and men seldom do so
when they are intent upon the one thing needful: "save me" was his one
and only prayer. "And I shall keep thy testimonies." This was his great
object in desiring salvation, that he might be able to continue in a
blameless life of obedience to God, that he might be able to believe the
witness of God, and also to become himself a witness for God. It is a
great thing when men seek salvation for so high an end. He did not ask
to be delivered that he might sin with impunity; his cry was to be
delivered from sin itself. He had vowed to keep the statutes or laws,
here he resolves to keep the testimonies or doctrines, and so to be
sound of head as well as clean of hand. Salvation brings all these good
things in its train. David had no idea of a salvation which would allow
him to live in sin, or abide in error: he knew right well that there is
no saving a man while he abides in disobedience and ignorance.

[Psa 119:147](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#147)

"I prevented the dawning of the morning, and cried." He was up before
the sun, and began his pleadings before the dew began to leave the
grass. Whatever is worth doing is worth doing speedily. This is the
third time that he mentions that he cried. He cried, and cried, and
cried again. His supplications had become so frequent, fervent, and
intense, that he might hardly be said to be doing anything else from
morning to night but crying unto his God. So strong was his desire after
salvation that he could not rest in his bed; so eagerly did he seek it
that at the first possible moment he was on his knees. "I hoped in thy
word." Hope is a very powerful means of strengthening us in prayer. Who
would pray if he had no hope that God would hear him? Who would not pray
when he has a good hope of a blessed issue to his entreaties? His hope
was fixed upon God's word, and this is a sure anchorage, because God is
true, and in no case has he ever run back from his promise, or altered
the thing that has gone forth from his mouth. He who is diligent in
prayer will never be destitute of hope. Observe that as the early bird
gets the worm, so the early prayer is soon refreshed with hope.

[Psa 119:148](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#148)

"Mine eyes prevent the night watches." Or rather, the watches. Before
the watchman cried the hour, he was crying to God. He did not need to be
informed as to how the hours were flying, for every hour his heart was
flying towards heaven. He began the day with prayer, and he continued in
prayer through the watches of the day, and the watches of the night. The
soldiers changed guard, but David did not change his holy occupation.
Specially, however, at night did he keep his eyes open, and drive away
sleep, that he might maintain communion with his God. He worshipped on
from watch to watch as travellers journey from stage to stage. "That I
might meditate in thy word." This had become meat and drink to him.
Meditation was the food of his hope, and the solace of his sorrow: the
one theme upon which his thoughts ran was that blessed "word" which he
continually mentions, and in which his heart rejoices. He preferred
study to slumber; and he learned to forego his necessary sleep for much
more necessary devotion. It is instructive to find meditation so
constantly connected with fervent prayer, it is the fuel which sustains
the flame. How rare an article is it in these days.

[Psa 119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149)

"Hear my voice according unto thy lovingkindness." Men find it very
helpful to use their voices in prayer; it is difficult long to maintain
the intensity of devotion unless we hear ourselves speak; hence David at
length broke through his silence, arose from his quiet meditations, and
began crying with voice as well as heart unto the Lord his God. Note,
that he does not plead his own deservings, nor for a moment appeal for
payment of a debt on account of merit; he takes the free-grace way, and
puts it, "according unto thy lovingkindness." When God hears prayer
according to his lovingkindness he overlooks all the imperfections of
the prayer, he forgets the sinfulness of the offerer, and in pitying
love he grants the desire though the suppliant be unworthy. It is
according to God's lovingkindness to answer speedily, to answer
frequently, to answer abundantly, yea, exceeding abundantly above all
that we ask or even think. Lovingkindness is one of the sweetest words
in our language. Kindness has much in it that is most precious, but
lovingkindness is doubly dear; it is the cream of kindness. "O Lord,
quicken me according to thy judgment." This is another of David's wise
and ardent prayers. He first cried, "Save me;" then, "Hear me;" and now,
"Quicken me." This is often the very best way of delivering us from
trouble, - to give us more life that we may escape from death; and to
add more strength to that life that we may not be overloaded with its
burdens. Observe, that he asks to receive quickening according to God's
judgment, that is, in such a way as should be consistent with infinite
wisdom and prudence. God's methods of communicating greater vigour to
our spiritual life are exceedingly wise; it would probably be in vain
for us to attempt to understand them; and it will be our wisdom to wish
to receive grace, not according to our notion of how it should come to
us, but according to God's heavenly method of bestowing it. It is his
prerogative to make alive as well as to kill, and that sovereign act is
best left to his infallible judgment. Hath he not already given us to
have life more and more abundantly? "Wherein he hath abounded toward us
in all wisdom and prudence."

[Psa 119:150](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#150)

"They draw nigh that follow after mischief." He could hear their
footfalls close behind him. They are not following him for his benefit,
but for his hurt, and therefore the sound of their approach is to be
dreaded. They are not prosecuting a good object, but persecuting a good
man. As if they had not enough mischief in their own hearts, they are
hunting after more. He sees them going a steeple-chase over hedge and
ditch in order to bring mischief to himself, and he points them out to
God, and entreats the Lord to fix his eyes upon them, and deal with them
to their confusion. They were already upon him, and he was almost in
their grip, and therefore he cries the more earnestly. "They are far
from thy law." A mischievous life cannot be an obedient one. Before
these men could become persecutors of David they were obliged to get
away from the restraints of God's law. They could not hate a saint and
yet love the law. Those who keep God's law neither do harm to themselves
nor to others. Sin is the greatest mischief in the world. David mentions
this to the Lord in prayer, feeling some kind of comfort in the fact
that those who hated him hated God also, and found it needful to get
away from God before they could be free to act their cruel parts towards
himself. When we know that our enemies are God's enemies, and ours
because they are his, we may well take comfort to ourselves.

[Psa 119:151](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#151)

"Thou art near, O Lord." Near as the enemy might be, God was nearer:
this is one of the choicest comforts of the persecuted child of God. The
Lord is near to hear our cries, and to speedily afford us succour. He is
near to chase away our enemies, and to give us rest and peace. "And all
thy commandments are truth." God neither commands a lie, nor lies in his
commands. Virtue is truth in action, and this is what God commands. Sin
is falsehood in action, and this is what God forbids. If all God's
commands are truth, then the true man will be glad to keep near to them,
and therein he will find the true God near him. This sentence will be
the persecuted man's protection from the false hearts that seek to do
him mischief, God is near and God is true, therefore his people are
safe. If at any time we fall into danger through keeping the commands of
God we need not suppose that we have acted unwisely.: we may, on the
contrary, be quite sure that we are in the right way; for God's precepts
are right and true. It is for this very reason that wicked men assail
us: they hate the truth, and therefore hate those who do the truth.
Their opposition may be our consolation; while God's presence upon our
side is our glory and delight.

[Psa 119:152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#152)

"Concerning thy testimonies, I have known of old that thou hast founded
them for ever." David found of old that God had founded them of old, and
that they would stand firm throughout all ages. It is a very blessed
thing to be so early taught of God that we know substantial doctrines
even from our youth. Those who think that David was a young man when he
wrote this Psalm will find it rather difficult to reconcile this verse
with the theory; it is much more probable that he was now grown grey,
and was looking back upon what he had known long before. He knew at the
very first that the doctrines of God's word were settled before the
world began, that they had never altered, and never could by any
possibility be altered. He had begun by building on a rock, by seeing
that God's testimonies were "founded," that is, grounded, laid as
foundations, settled and established; and that with a view to all the
ages that should come, during all the changes that should intervene. It
was because David knew this that he had such confidence in prayer, and
was so importunate in It. It is sweet to plead immutable promises with
an immutable God. It was because of this that David learned to hope: a
man cannot have much expectation from a changing friend, but he may well
have confidence in a God who cannot change. It was because of this that
he delighted in being near the Lord, for it is a most blessed thing to
keep up close intercourse with a Friend who never varies. Let those who
choose follow at the heels of the modern school and look for fresh light
to break forth which will put the old light out of countenance; we are
satisfied with the truth which is old as the hills and as fixed as the
great mountains. Let "cultured intellects" invent another god, more
gentle and effeminate than the God of Abraham; we are well content to
worship Jehovah, who is eternally the same. Things everlastingly
established are the joy of established saints. Bubbles please boys, but
men prize those things which are solid and substantial, with a
foundation and a bottom to them which will bear the test of ages.

[Psalms 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_153">psa 119:153</span></span>

153 Consider mine affliction, and deliver me, for I do not forget thy
law.

154 Plead my cause, and deliver me: quicken me according to thy word.

155 Salvation is far from the wicked: for they seek not thy statutes.

156 Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord: quicken me according to thy
judgments.

157 Many are my persecutors and mine enemies; yet do I not decline from
thy testimonies.

158 I beheld the transgressors, and was grieved; because they kept not
thy word.

159 Consider how I love thy precepts: quicken me, O Lord, according to
thy lovingkindness.

160 Thy word is true from the beginning: and every one of thy righteous
judgments endureth for ever.

In this section the Psalmist seems to draw still nearer to God in
prayer, and to state his case and to invoke the divine help with more of
boldness and expectation. It is a pleading passage, and the key-word of
it is, "Consider." With much boldness he pleads his intimate union with
the Lord's cause as a reason why he should be aided. The special aid
that he seeks is personal quickening, for which he cries to the Lord
again and again.

[Psa 119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153)

"Consider mine affliction, and deliver me." The writer has a good case,
though it be a grievous one, and he is ready, yea anxious, to submit it
to the divine arbitration. His matters are right, and he is ready to lay
them before the supreme Court. His manner is that of one who feels safe
at the throne. Yet there is no impatience: he does not ask for hasty
action, but for consideration. In effect he cries - "Look into my grief,
and see whether I do not need to be delivered. From my sorrowful
condition judge as to the proper method and time for my rescue." The
Psalmist desires two things, and these two things blended: first, a full
consideration of his sorrow; secondly, deliverance; and, then, that this
deliverance should come with a consideration of his affliction. It
should be the desire of every gracious man who is in adversity that the
Lord should look upon his need, and relieve it in such a way as shall be
most for the divine glory, and for his own benefit. The words, "mine
affliction," are picturesque; they seem to portion off a special spot of
woe as the writer's own inheritance: he possesses it as no one else had
ever done, and he begs the Lord to have that special spot under his eye:
even as a husbandman looking over all his fields may yet take double
care of a certain selected plot. His prayer is eminently practical, for
he seeks to be delivered; that is, brought out of the trouble and
preserved from sustaining any serious damage by it. For God to consider
is to act in due season, men consider and do nothing; but such is never
the case with out God. "For I do not forget thy law." His affliction was
not sufficient, with all its bitterness, to drive out of his mind the
memory of God's law; nor could it lead him to act contrary to the divine
command. He forgot prosperity, but he did not forget obedience. This is
a good plea when it can be honestly urged, if we are kept faithful to
God's law we may be sure that God will remain faithful to his promise.
If we do not forget his law the Lord will not forget us. He will not
long leave that man in trouble whose only fear in trouble is lest he
should leave the way of right.

[Psa 119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154)

"Plead my cause, and deliver me." In [Psa
119:153](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153) he had prayed, "Deliver me,"
and here he specifies one method in which that deliverance might be
vouchsafed, namely, by the advocacy of his cause. In providence the Lord
has many ways of clearing the slandered of the accusations brought
against them. He can make it manifest to all that they have been belied,
and in this way he can practically plead their cause. He can, moreover,
raise up friends for the godly who will leave no stone unturned till
their characters are cleared; or he can smite their enemies with such
fearfulness of heart that they will be forced to confess their
falsehood, and thus the righteous will be delivered without the striking
of a blow. Alexander reads it, "Strive my strife, and redeem me" - that
is, stand in my stead, bear my burden, fight my fight, pay my price, and
bring me out to liberty. When we feel ourselves dumb before the foe,
here is a prayer made to our hand. What a comfort that if we sin we have
an advocate, and if we do not sin the same pleader is engaged on our
side. "Quicken me." We had this prayer in the last section, and we shall
have it again and again in this. It is a desire which cannot be too
often felt and expressed. As the soul is the centre of everything, so to
be quickened is the central blessing. It means more love, more grace,
more faith, more courage, more strength, and if we get these we can hold
up our heads before our adversaries. God alone can give this quickening;
but to the Lord and giver of life the work is easy enough, and he
delights to perform it. "According to thy word." David had found such a
blessing among the promised things, or at least he perceived that it was
according to the general tenor of God's word that tried believers should
be quickened and brought up again from the dust of the earth; therefore
he pleads the word, and desires the Lord to act to him according to the
usual run of that word. What a mighty plea is this - '"according to thy
word." No gun in all our arsenals can match it.

[Psa 119:155](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#155)

"Salvation is far from the wicked." By their perseverance in evil they
have almost put themselves out of the pale of hope. They talk about
being saved, but they cannot have known anything of it or they would not
remain wicked. Every step they have taken in the path of evil has
removed them further from the kingdom of grace: they go from one degree
of hardness to another till their hearts become as stone. When they fall
into trouble it will be irremediable. Yet they talk big, as if they
either needed no salvation or could save themselves whenever their fancy
turned that way. "For they seek not thy statutes." They do not endeavour
to be obedient, but quite the reverse; they seek themselves, they seek
evil, and therefore they never find the way of peace and righteousness.
When men have broken the statutes of the Lord their wisest course is by
repentance to seek forgiveth, and by faith to seek salvation: then
salvation is near them, so near them that they shall not miss it; but
when the wicked continue to seek after mischief, salvation is set
further and further from them. Salvation and God's statutes go together:
those who are saved by the King of grace love the statutes of the King
of glory.

[Psa 119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156)

This verse is exceedingly like [Psa
119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149), and yet it is no vain
repetition There is such a difference in the main idea that the one
verse stands out distinct from the other. In the first case he mentions
his prayer, but leaves the method of its accomplishment with the wisdom
or judgment of God; while here he pleads no prayer of his own, but
simply the mercies of the Lord, and begs to be quickened by judgments
rather than to be left to spiritual lethargy. We may take it for granted
that an inspired author is never so short of thought as to be obliged to
repeat himself: where we think we have the same idea in this Psalm we
are mislead by our neglect of careful study. Each verse is a distinct
pearl. Each blade of grass in this field has its own drop of heavenly
dew. "Great are thy tender mercies, O Lord." Here the Psalmist pleads
the largeness of God's mercy, the immensity of his tender love; yea, he
speaks of mercies - mercies many, mercies tender, mercies great; and
with the glorious Jehovah he makes this a plea for his one leading
prayer, the prayer for quickening. Quickening is a great and tender
mercy; and it is many mercies in one. Shall one so greatly good permit
his servant to die? Will not one so tender breathe new life into him?
"Quicken me according to thy judgments." A measure of awakening comes
with the judgments of God; they are startling and arousing; and hence
the believer's quickening thereby. David would have every severe stroke
sanctified to his benefit, as well as every tender mercy. The first
clause of this verse may run, "Many," or, "manifold are thy compassions,
O Jehovah." This he remembers in connection) with the "many persecutors"
of whom he will speak in the next verse. By all these many mercies he
pleads for enlivening grace, and thus he has many strings to his bow. We
shall never be short of arguments if we draw them from God himself, and
urge both his mercies and his judgments as reasons for our quickening.

[Psa 119:157](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#157)

"Many are my persecutors and mine enemies." Those who actually assail
me, or who secretly abhor me, are many. He sets this over against the
many tender mercies of God. It seems a strange thing that a truly godly
man, as David was, should have many enemies; but it is inevitable. The
disciple cannot be loved where his Master is hated. The seed of the
serpent must oppose the seed of the woman: it is their nature. "Yet do I
not decline from thy testimonies." He did not deviate from the truth of
God, but proceeded in the straight way, however many adversaries might
endeavour to block up his path. Some men have been led astray by one
enemy, but here is a saint who held on his way in the teeth of many
persecutors. There is enough in the testimonies of God to recompense us
for pushing forward against all the hosts that may combine against us.
So long as they cannot drive or draw us into a spiritual decline our
foes have done us no great harm, and they have accomplished nothing by
their malice. If we do not decline they are defeated. If they cannot
make us sin they have missed their mark. Faithfulness to the truth is
victory over our enemies.

[Psa 119:158](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#158)

"I beheld the transgressors." I saw the traitors; I understood their
character, their object, their way, and their end. I could not help
seeing them, for they pushed themselves into my way. As I was obliged to
see them I fixed my eyes on them, to learn what I could from them. "And
was grieved." I was sorry to see such sinners. I was sick of them,
disgusted with them, I could not endure them. I found no pleasure in
them, they were a sad sight to me, however fine their clothing or witty
their chattering. Even when they were most mirthful a sight of them made
my heart heavy; I could not tolerate either them or their doings.
"Because they kept not thy word." My grief was occasioned more by their
sin against God than by their enmity against myself. I could bear their
evil treatment of my words, but not their neglect of thy word. Thy word
is so precious to me that those who will not keep it move me to
indignation; I cannot keep the company of those who keep not God's word.
That they should have no love for me is a trifle; but to despise the
teaching of the Lord is abominable.

[Psa 119:159](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#159)

"Consider," or see, "how I love thy precepts." A second time he asks for
consideration. As he said before, "Consider mine affliction," so now he
says, "Consider mine affection." He loved the precepts of God - loved
them unspeakably - loved them so as to be grieved with those who did not
love them. This is a sure test: many there are who have a warm side
towards the promises, but as for the precepts, they cannot endure them.
The Psalmist so loved everything that was good and excellent that he
loved all God had commanded. The precepts are all of them wise and holy,
therefore the man of God loved them extremely, loved to know them, to
think of them, to proclaim them, and principally to practise them. He
asked the Lord to remember and consider this, not upon the ground of
merit, but that it should serve as an answer to the slanderous
accusations which at this time were the great sting of his sorrow.
"Quicken me, O Lord, according to thy lovingkindness." Here he comes
back to his former prayer, "Quicken me" ([Psa
119:154](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#154)), "quicken me" ([Psa
119:156](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#156)). "Quicken me." He prays again
the third time, using the same words. We may understand that David felt
like one who was half stunned with the assaults of his foes, ready to
faint under their incessant malice. What he wanted was revival,
restoration, renewal; therefore he pleaded for more life, O thou who
didst quicken me when I was dead, quicken me again that I may not return
to the dead! Quicken me that I may outlive the blows of my enemies, the
faintness of my faith, and the swooning of my sorrow. This time he does
not say, "Quicken me according to thy judgments," but "Quicken me, O
Lord, according to thy lovingkindness." This is the great gun which he
brings up last to the conflict: it is his ultimate argument, if this
succeed not he must fail. He has long been knocking at mercy's gate, and
with this plea he strikes his heaviest blow. When he had fallen into
great sin this was his plea, "Have mercy upon me, O God, according to
thy lovingkindness," and now that he is in great trouble he flies to the
same effectual reasoning. Because God is love he will give us life;
because he is kind he will again kindle the heavenly flame within us.

[Psa 119:160](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#160)

The sweet singer finishes up this section in the same way as the last by
dwelling upon the sureness of the truth of God. It will be well for the
reader to note the likeness between [Psa
119:144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#144), [Psa
119:152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#152), and [Psa
119:160](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#160). "Thy word is true." Whatever
the transgressors may say, God is true, and his word is true. The
ungodly are false, but God's word is true. They charge us with being
false, but our solace is that God's true word will clear us. "From the
beginning." God's word has been true from the first moment in which it
was spoken, true throughout the whole of history, true to us from the
instant in which we believed it, ay, true to us before we were true to
it. Some read it, "Thy word is true from the head;" true as a whole,
true from top to bottom. Experience had taught David this lesson, and
experience is teaching us the same. The Scriptures are as true in
Genesis as in Revelation, and the five books of Moses are as inspired as
the four Gospels. "And every one of thy righteous judgments endureth for
ever." That which thou hast decided remains irreversible in every case.
Against the decisions of the Lord no writ of error can be demanded;
neither will there ever be a repealing of any of the acts of his
sovereignty. There is not one single mistake either in the word of God
or in the providential dealings of God. Neither in the book of
revelation nor of providence will there be any need to put a single note
of errata. The Lord has nothing to regret or to retract, nothing to
amend or to reverse. All God's judgments, decrees, commands, and
purposes are righteous, and as righteous things are lasting things,
every one of them will outlive the stars. "Till heaven and earth pass,
one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass from the law, till all be
fulfilled." God's justice endureth for ever. This is a cheering thought,
but there is a much sweeter one, which of old was the song of the
priests in the temple; let it be ours, "His mercy endureth for ever."

[Psalms 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_161">psa 119:161</span></span>

161 Princes have persecuted me without a cause, but my heart standeth in
awe of thy word.

162 I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil.

163 I hate and abhor lying: but thy law do I love.

164 Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous
judgments.

165 Great peace have they which love thy law: and nothing shall offend
them.

166 Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments.

167 My soul hath kept thy testimonies; and I love them exceedingly.

168 I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies; for all my ways are
before thee.

[Psa 119:161](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161)

"Princes have persecuted me without a cause." Such persons ought to have
known better; they should have had sympathy with one of their own rank.
A man expects a fair trial at the hand of his peers: it is ignoble to be
prejudiced. Moreover, if honour be banished from all other breasts it
should remain in the bosom of kings, and honour forbids the persecution
of the innocent. Princes are appointed to protect the innocent and
avenge the oppressed, and it is a shame when they themselves become the
assailants of the righteous. It was a sad case when the man of God found
himself attacked by the judges of the earth, for eminent position added
weight and venom to their enmity. It was well that the sufferer could
truthfully assert that this persecution was without cause. He had not
broken their laws, he had not injured them, he had not even desired to
see them injured, he had not been an advocate of rebellion or anarchy,
he had neither openly nor secretly opposed their power, and therefore,
while this made their oppression the more inexcusable, it took away a
part of its sting, and helped the brave-hearted servant of God to bear
up. "But my heart standeth in awe of thy word." He might have been
overcome by awe of the princes had it not been that a greater fear drove
out the less, and he was swayed by awe of God's word. How little do
crowns and sceptres become in the judgment of that man who perceives a
more majestic royalty in the commands of his God. We are not likely to
be disheartened by persecution, or driven by it into sin, if the word of
God continually has supreme power over our minds.

[Psa 119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162)

"I rejoice at thy word, as one that findeth great spoil." His awe did
not prevent hi, joy; his fear of God was not of the kind which perfect
love casts out, but of the sort which it nourishes. He trembled at the
word of the Lord, and yet rejoiced at it. He compares his joy to that of
one who has been long in battle, and has at last won the victory and is
dividing the spoil. This usually falls to the lot of princes, and though
David was not one with them in their persecutions, yet he had his
victories, and his spoil was equal to their greatest gains. The profits
made in searching the Scriptures were greater than the trophies of war.
We too have to fight for divine truth; every doctrine costs us a battle,
but when we gain a full understanding of it by personal struggles it
becomes doubly precious to us. In these days godly men have a full share
of battling for the word of God; may we have for our spoil a firmer hold
upon the priceless word. Perhaps, however, the Psalmist may have
rejoiced as one who comes upon hidden treasure for which he had not
fought, in which case we find the analogy in the man of God who, while
reading the Bible, makes grand and blessed discoveries of the grace of
God laid up for him, - discoveries which surprise him, for he looked not
to find such a prize. Whether we come by the truth as finders or as
warriors fighting for it, the heavenly treasure should be equally dear
to us. With what quiet joy does the ploughman steal home with his golden
find! How victors shout as they share the plunder! How glad should that
man be who has discovered his portion in the promises of holy writ, and
is able to enjoy it for himself, knowing by the witness of the Holy
Spirit that it is all his own.

[Psa 119:163](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#163)

"I hate and abhor lying." A double expression for an inexpressible
loathing. Falsehood in doctrine, in life, or in speech, falsehood in any
form or shape, had become utterly detestable to the Psalmist. This was a
remarkable state for an Oriental, for generally lying is the delight of
Easterns, and the only wrong they see in it is a want of skill in its
exercise so that the liar is found out. David himself had made much
progress when he had come to this. He does not, however, alone refer to
falsehood in conversation; he evidently intends perversity in faith and
teaching. He set down all opposition to the God of truth as lying, and
then he turned his whole soul against it in the intensest form of
indignation. Godly men should detest false doctrine even as they abhor a
lie. "But thy law do I love," because it is all truth. His love was as
ardent as his hate. True men love truth, and hate lying. It is well for
us to know which way our hates and loves run, and we may do essential
service to others by declaring what are their objects. Both love and
hate are contagious, and when they are sanctified the wider their
influence the better.

[Psa 119:164](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#164)

"Seven times a day do I praise thee because of thy righteous judgments."
He laboured perfectly to praise his perfect God, and therefore fulfilled
the perfect number of songs. Seven may also intend frequency. Frequently
he lifted up his heart in thanksgiving to God for his divine teachings
in the word, and for his divine actions in providence. With his voice he
extolled the righteousness of the Judge of all the earth. As often as
ever he thought of God's ways a song leaped to his lips. At the sight of
the oppressive princes, and at the hearing of the abounding falsehood
around him, he felt all the more bound to adore and magnify God - who in
all things is truth and righteousness. When others rob us of our praise
it should be a caution to us not to fall into the same conduct towards
our God, who is so much more worthy of honour. If we praise God when we
are persecuted our music will be all the sweeter to him because of our
constancy in suffering. If we keep clear of all lying, our song will be
the more acceptable because it comes out of pure lips. If we never
flatter men we shall be in the better condition for honouring the Lord.
Do we praise God seven times a day? Do we praise him once in seven days?

[Psa 119:165](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#165)

"Great peace have they which love thy law." What a charming verse is
this! It deals not with those who perfectly keep the law, for where
should such men be found? but with those who love it, whose hearts and
hands are made to square with its precepts and demands. These men are
ever striving, with all their hearts, to walk in obedience to the law,
and though they are often persecuted they have peace, yea, great peace;
for they have learned the secret of the reconciling blood, they have
felt the power of the comforting Spirit, and they stand before the
Father as men accepted. The Lord has given them to feel his peace, which
passed all understanding. They have many troubles, and are likely to be
persecuted by the proud, but their usual condition is that of deep calm
- a peace too great for this little world to break. "And nothing shall
offend them," or, "shall really injure them." "All things work together
for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to
his purpose." It must needs be that offences come, but these lovers of
the law are peacemakers, and so they neither give nor take offence. That
peace which is founded upon conformity to God's will is a living and
lasting one, worth writing of with enthusiasm, as the Psalmist here
does.

[Psa 119:166](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#166)

"Lord, I have hoped for thy salvation, and done thy commandments." Here
we have salvation by grace, and the fruits thereof. All David's hope was
fixed upon God, he looked to him alone for salvation; and then he
endeavoured most earnestly to fulfil the commands of his law. Those who
place least reliance upon good works are very frequently those who have
the most of them; that same divine teaching which delivers us from
confidence in our own doings leads us to abound in every good work to
the glory of God. In times of trouble there are two things to be done,
the first is to hope in God, and the second is to do that which is
right. The first without the second would be mere presumption: the
second without the first mere formalism. It is well if in looking back
we can claim to have acted in the way which is commanded of the Lord. If
we have acted rightly towards God we are sure that he will act kindly
with us.

[Psa 119:167](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#167)

"My soul hath kept thy testimonies." My outward life has kept thy
precepts, and my inward life - my soul, has kept thy testimonies. God
has borne testimony to many sacred truths, and these we hold fast as for
life itself. The gracious man stores up the truth of God within his
heart as a treasure exceedingly dear and precious - he keeps it. His
secret soul, his inmost self, becomes the guardian of these divine
teachings which are his sole authority in soul matters. "And I love them
exceedingly." This was why he kept them, and having kept them this was
the result of the keeping. He did not merely store up revealed truth by
way of duty, but because of a deep, unutterable affection for it. He
felt that he could sooner die than give up any part of the revelation of
God. The more we store our minds with heavenly truth, the more deeply
shall we be in love with it: the more we see the exceeding riches of the
Bible the more will our love exceed measure, and exceed expression.

[Psa 119:168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#168)

"I have kept thy precepts and thy testimonies." Both the practical and
the doctrinal parts of God's word he had stored up, and preserved, and
followed. It is a blessed thing to see the two forms of the divine word,
equally known, equally valued, equally confessed: there should be no
picking and choosing as to the mind of God. We know those who endeavour
to be careful as to the precepts, but who seem to think that the
doctrines of the gospel are mere matters of opinion, which they may
shape for themselves. This is not a perfect condition of things. We have
known others again who are very rigid as to the doctrines, and painfully
lax with reference to the precepts. This also is far from right. When
the two are "kept" with equal earnestness then have we the perfect man.
"For all my ways are before thee." Probably he means to say that this
was the motive of his endeavouring to be right both in head and heart,
because he knew that God saw him, and under the sense of the divine
presence he was afraid to err. Or else he is thus appealing to God to
bear witness to the truth of what he has said. In either case it is no
small consolation to feel that our heavenly Father knows all about us,
and that if princes speak against us, and worldlings fill their mouths
with cruel lies, yet he can vindicate us, for there is nothing secret or
hidden from him.

We are struck with the contrast between this verse, which is the last of
its octave, and [Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176), which is
similarly placed in the next octave. This is a protest of innocence, "I
have kept thy precepts," and that a confession of sin, "I have gone
astray like a lost sheep." Both were sincere, both accurate. Experience
makes many a paradox plain, and this is one. Before God we may be clear
of open fault and yet at the same time mourn over a thousand
heart-wanderings which need his restoring hand.

[Psalms 119:169](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_169">psa 119:169</span></span>

169 Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord, give me understanding
according to thy word.

170 Let my supplication come before thee - deliver me according to thy
word.

171 My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes.

172 My tongue shall speak of thy word, for all thy commandments are
righteousness.

173 Let thine hand help me; for I have chosen thy precepts.

174 I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord; and thy law is my delight.

175 Let my soul live, and it shall praise thee; and let thy judgments
help me.

176 I have gone astray like a lost sheep; seek thy servant, for I do not
forget thy commandments.

The Psalmist is approaching the end of the Psalm, and his petitions
gather force and fervency; he seems to break into the inner circle of
divine fellowship, and to come even to the feet of the great God whose
help he is imploring. This nearness creates the most lowly view of
himself, and leads him to close the Psalm upon his face in deepest
self-humiliation, begging to be sought out like a lost sheep.

[Psa 119:169](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169)

"Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord." He is tremblingly afraid
lest he should not be heard. He is conscious that his prayer is nothing
better than the cry of a poor child, or the groan of a wounded beast. He
dreads lest it should be shut out from the ear of the most High, but he
very boldly prays that it may come before God, that it may be in his
sight, under his notice, and looked upon with his acceptance; yea, he
goes further, and entreats, "Let my cry come near before thee, O Lord."
He wants the Lord's attention to his prayer to be very close and
considerate. He uses a figure of speech and personifies his prayer. We
may picture his prayer as Esther, venturing into the royal presence,
entreating an audience, and begging to find favour in the eight of the
blessed and only Potentate. It is a very sweet thing to a suppliant when
he knows of a surety that his prayer has obtained audience, when it has
trodden the sea of glass before the throne, and has come even to the
footstool of the glorious seat around which heaven and earth adore. It
is to Jehovah that this prayer is expressed with trembling earnestness -
our translators, filled with holy reverence, translate the word, "O
Lord." We crave audience of none else, for we have confidence in none
beside. "Give me understanding according to thy word." This is the
prayer about which the Psalmist is so exceedingly anxious. With all his
gettings he would get understanding, and whatever he misses he is
resolved not to miss this priceless boon. He desires spiritual light and
understanding as it is promised in God's word, as it proceeds from God's
word, and as it produces obedience to God's word. He pleads as though he
had no understanding whatever of his own, and asks to have one given to
him. "Give me understanding." In truth, he had an understanding
according to the judgment of men, but what he sought was an
understanding according to God's word, which is quite another thing. To
understand spiritual things is the gift of God. To have a judgment
enlightened by heavenly light and conformed to divine truth is a
privilege which only grace can give. Many a man who is accounted wise
after the manner of this world is a fool according to the word of the
Lord. May we be among those happy children who shall all be taught of
the Lord.

[Psa 119:170](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#170)

"Let my supplication come before thee." It is the same entreaty with a
slight change of words. He humbly calls his cry a supplication, a sort
of beggar's petition; and again he asks for audience and for answer.
There might be hindrances in the way to an audience, and he begs for
their removal - let it come. Other believers are heard - let my prayer
come before thee. "Deliver me according to thy word." Rid me of mine
adversaries, clear me of my slanderers, preserve me from my tempters,
and bring me up out of all my afflictions even as thy word has led me to
expect thou wilt do. It is for this that he seeks understanding. His
enemies would succeed through his folly, if they succeeded at all; but
if he exercised a sound discretion they would be baffled, and he would
escape from them. The Lord in answer to prayer frequently delivers his
children by making them wise as serpents as well as harmless as doves.

[Psa 119:171](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#171)

"My lips shall utter praise, when thou hast taught me thy statutes." He
will not always be pleading for himself, he will rise above all
selfishness, and render thanks for the benefit received. He promises to
praise God when he has obtained practical instruction in the life of
godliness: this is something to praise for, no blessing is more
precious. The best possible praise is that which proceeds from men who
honour God, not only with their lips, but in their lives. We learn the
music of heaven in the school of holy living. He whose life honours the
Lord is sure to be a man of praise. David would not only be grateful in
silence, but he would express that gratitude in appropriate terms: his
lips would utter what his life had practised. Eminent disciples are wont
to speak well of the master who instructed them, and this holy man, when
taught the statutes of the Lord, promises to give all the glory to him
to whom it is due.

[Psa 119:172](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#172)

"My tongue shall speak of thy word." When he had done singing he began
preaching. God's tender mercies are such that they may be either said or
sung. When the tongue speaks of God's word it has a most fruitful
subject; such speaking will be as a tree of life, whose leaves shall be
for the healing of the people. Men will gather together to listen to
such talk, and they will treasure it up in their hearts. The worst of us
is that for the most part we are full of our own words, and speak but
little of God's word. Oh, that we could come to the same resolve as this
godly man, and say henceforth, "My tongue shall speak of thy word." Then
should we break through our sinful silence; we should no more be
cowardly and halfhearted, but should be true witnesses for Jesus. It is
not only of God's works that we are to speak, but of his word. We may
extol its truth, its wisdom, its preciousness, its grace, its power; and
then we may tell of all it has revealed, all it has promised, all it has
commanded, all it has effected. The subject gives us plenty of sea-room;
we may speak on for ever: the tale is for ever telling, yet untold. "For
all thy commandments are righteousness." David appears to have been
mainly enamoured of the preceptive part of the word of God, and
concerning the precept his chief delight lay in its purity and
excellence. When a man can speak this from his heart, his heart is
indeed a temple of the Holy Ghost. He had said aforetime ([Psa
119:138](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#138)), "Thy testimonies are
righteous," but here he declares that they are righteousness itself. The
law of God is not only the standard of right, but it is the essence of
righteousness. This the Psalmist affirms of each and every one of the
precepts without exception. He felt like Paul - '"The law is holy, and
the commandment holy and just good." When a man has so high an opinion
of God's commandments it is little wonder that his lips should be ready
to extol the ever-glorious One.

[Psa 119:173](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#173)

"Let thine hand help me." Give me practical succour. Do not entrust me
to my friends or thy friends, but put thine own hand to the work. Thy
hand has both skill and power, readiness and force: display all these
qualities on my behalf. I am willing to do the utmost that I am able to
do; but what I need is thine help, and this is so urgently required that
if I have it not I shall sink. Do not refuse thy succour. Great as thy
hand is, let it light on me, even me. The prayer reminds us of Peter
walking on the sea and beginning to sink; he, too, cried, "Lord, help
me," and the hand of his Master was stretched out for his rescue. "For I
have chosen thy precepts." A good argument. A man may fitly ask help
from God's hand when he has dedicated his own hand entirely to the
obedience of the faith. "I have chosen thy precepts." His election was
made, his mind was made up. In reference to all earthly rules and ways,
in preference even to his own will, he had chosen to be obedient to the
divine commands. Will not God help such a man in holy work and sacred
service? Assuredly he will. If grace has given us the heart with which
to will, it will also give us the hand with which to perform. Whenever,
under the constraints of a divine call, we are engaged in any high and
lofty enterprise, and feel it to be too much for our strength, we may
always invoke the right hand of God in words like these.

[Psa 119:174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#174)

"I have longed for thy salvation, O Lord." He speaks like old Jacob on
his deathbed; indeed, all saints, both in prayer and in death, appear as
one, in word, and deed, and mind. He knew God's salvation, and yet he
longed for it; that is to say, he had experienced a share of it, and he
was therefore led to expect something yet higher and more complete.
There is a salvation yet to come, when we shall be clean delivered from
the body of this death, set free from all the turmoil and trouble of
this mortal life, raised above the temptations and assaults of Satan,
and brought near unto our God, to be like him and with him for ever and
ever. "I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah; and thy law is my
delight." The first clause tells us what the saint longs for, and this
informs us what is his present satisfaction. God's law, contained in the
ten commandments, gives joy to believers. God's law, that is, the entire
Bible, is a well-spring of consolation and enjoyment to all who receive
it. Though we have not yet reached the fulness of our salvation, yet we
find in God's word so much concerning a present salvation that we are
even now delighted.

[Psa 119:175](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#175)

"Let my soul live." Fill it full of life, preserve it from wandering
into the ways of death, give it to enjoy the indwelling of the Holy
Ghost, let it live to the fulness of life, to the utmost possibilities
of its new-created being. "And it shall praise thee." It shall praise
thee for life, for new life, for thou art the Lord and Giver of Life.
The more it shall live, the more it shall praise, and when it shall live
in perfection it shall praise thee in perfection. Spiritual life is
prayer and praise. "And let thy judgments help me." While I read the
record of what thou hast done, in terror or in love, let me be quickened
and developed. While I see thy hand actually at work upon me, and upon
others, chastening sin, and smiling upon righteousness, let me be helped
both to live aright and to praise thee. Let all thy deeds in providence
instruct me, and aid me in the struggle to overcome sin and to practise
holiness. This is the second time he has asked for help in this portion;
he was always in need of it, and so are we.

[Psa 119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176)

This is the finale, the conclusion of the whole matter, "I have gone
astray like a lost sheep" - often, wilfully, wantonly, and even
hopelessly, but for thine interposing grace. In times gone by, before I
was afflicted, and before thou hadst fully taught me thy statutes, "I
went astray" from the practical precepts, from the instructive
doctrines, and from the heavenly experiences which thou hadst set before
me. I lost my road, and I lost myself. Even now I am apt to wander, and,
in fact, have roamed already; therefore, Lord, restore me. "Seek thy
servant." He was not like a dog, that somehow or other can find its way
back; but he was like a lost sheep, which goes further and further away
from home; yet still he was a sheep, and the Lord's sheep, his property,
and precious in his sight, and therefore he hoped to be sought in order
to be restored. However far he might have wandered he was still not only
a sheep, but God's "servant," and therefore he desired to be in his
Master's house again, and once more honoured with commissions for his
Lord. Had he been only a lost sheep he would not have prayed to be
sought; but being also a "servant" he had the power to pray. He cries,
"Seek thy servant," and he hopes to be not only sought, but forgiven,
accepted, and taken into work again by his gracious Master.

Notice this confession; many times in the Psalm David has defended his
own innocence against foul-mouthed accusers, but when he comes into the
presence of the Lord his God he is ready enough to confess his
transgressions. He here sums up, not only his past, but even his present
life, under the image of a sheep which has broken from its pasture,
forsaken the flock, left the shepherd, and brought itself into the wild
wilderness, where it has become as a lost thing. The sheep bleats, and
David prays, "Seek thy servant." His argument is a forcible one, - "Fir
I do not forget thy commandments." I know the right, I approve and
admire the right, what is more, I love the right, and long for it. I
cannot be satisfied to continue in sin, I must be restored to the ways
of righteousness. I have a homesickness after my God, I pine after the
ways of peace; I do not and I cannot forget thy commandments, nor cease
to know that I am always happiest and safest when I scrupulously obey
them, and find all my joy in doing so. Now, if the grace of God enables
us to maintain in our hearts the loving memory of God's commandments it
will surely yet restore us to practical holiness. That man cannot be
utterly lost whose heart is still with God. If he be gone astray in many
respects, yet still, if he be true in his soul's inmost desires, he will
be found again, and fully restored. Yet let the reader remember [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001) while he reads [Psa
119:176](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#176), the major blessedness lies
not in being restored from wandering, but in being upheld In a blameless
way even to the end. Be it ours to keep the crown of the causeway, never
leaving the King's highway for By-path Meadow, or any other flowery path
of sin May the Lord uphold us even to the end. Yet even then we shall
not be able to boast with the Pharisee, but shall still pray with the
publican, "God be merciful to me a sinner;" and with the Psalmist, "Seek
thy servant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 120](psa120)

</div>
