<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa149.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 150](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 150:0</span></span>

We have now reached the last summit of the mountain chain of Psalms. It
rises high into the clear azure, and its brow is bathed in the sunlight
of the eternal world of worship. It is a rapture. The poet-prophet is
full of inspiration and enthusiasm. He stays not to argue, to teach, to
explain: but cries with burning words, "Praise him, Praise him, Praise
ye the Lord."

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md). - "Praise God in his
sanctuary."

I. In his personal holiness.

II\. In the person of his Son.

III\. In heaven.

IV\. In the assembly of saints.

V. In the silence of the heart.

[Psa 150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md). - God should be praised.
Where? ([Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001).md). Wherefore? ([Psa
150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002).md). Wherewith? ([Psa
150:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003).md). By whom? ([Psa
150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006).md). - C. A. D.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md). - "His excellent
greatness." Wherein the greatness of God is specially excellent, and
where it is best seen.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md). - "Praise him for his
mighty acts."

I. For us. Election. Redemption. Inspiration.

II\. In us. The work of enlightenment in the understanding; purification
in the heart; quickening in the conscience, subjugation in the will.

III\. By us. Thought through us; felt through us, spoken through us;
worked through us. To him be all the glory! - W. J.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md). - "Praise him according to
his excellent greatness."

I. Reverently according to the greatness of his being.

II\. Gratefully, according to the greatness of his love.

III\. Retrospectively, according to the greatness of his gifts.

IV\. Prospectively, according to the greatness of his promises - W. J.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md). - What the exhortation
requires.

I. That men should study God's works, and observe the glory of God in
them.

II\. That they should meditate on his greatness till they realize its
excellence.

III\. That they should openly proclaim the honour due to him.

IV\. That they should not contradict in their life the praise they
speak. - J. F.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md). - "Praise him with the
sound of the trumpet."

I. When you fight.

II\. When you conquer.

III\. When you assemble.

IV\. When you proclaim his Word.

V. When you welcome Jubilee.

[Psa 150:3-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md). -

I. The variety of the ancient service of worship necessitating serious
expenditure; consecration of high talent; hard and constant toil.

II\. The lessons of such service.

1\. God should be worshipped loyally.

2\. The efforts of the best genius are his rightful tribute.

3\. All human ability cannot place a worthy offering at his feet.

III\. The soul and essential of true worship.

IV\. God's requirements as to worship in these present times. - W. B. H.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md). -

I. The august Giver of "life, and breath, and all things."

II\. The due and true use of the gifts of life.

III\. The resultant swathing of earth in consecrated atmosphere, and
millennial hallelujahs. - W. B. H.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md). - A fitting close to the
Psalter, considered as a desire, a prayer, or an exhortation.

I. As a desire, it realizes the glory due to God, the worship ennobling
to man, the disposition of heart which would make all the world into a
holy brotherhood.

II\. As a prayer, it seeks the downfall of every superstition, the
universal spread of the truth, the conversion of every soul.

III\. As an exhortation it is plain, pertinent, pure in its piety,
perfect in its charity. - J. F.

HALLELUJAH!

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

Each of the last five Psalms begins and ends with Hallelujah! - "Praise
ye the Lord." And each Psalm increases in praise, love, and joy, unto
the last, which is praise celebrating its ecstasy. The elect soul, the
heir of God, becomes "eaten up" with the love of God. He begins every
sentence with Hallelujah; and his sentences are very short, for he is in
haste to utter his next Hallelujah, and his next, and his next. He is as
one out of breath with enthusiasm, or as one on tiptoe, in the act of
rising from earth to heaven. The greatest number of words between any
two Hallelujahs is four, and that only once, in every other instance,
between one Hallelujah and another there are but two words. It is as
though the soul gave utterance to its whole life and feeling in the one
word, Hallelujah! The words, "Praise ye the Lord!" or, "Praise him!"
"Praise him!" "Praise him!" are reiterated no fewer than twelve times in
a short Psalm of six short verses. - John Pulsford, in "Quiet Hours,"
1857.

Whole Psalm

And now, in the last Psalm of all, we see an echo to the first Psalm.
The first Psalm began with "Blessed," and it ended with "Blessed," -
"Blessed are all they that meditate on God's law and do it." Such was
the theme of the first Psalm; and now the fruit of that blessedness is
shown in this Psalm, which begins and ends with Hallelujah. -
Christopher Wordsworth.

Whole Psalm

In his Coats de Litterature, the celebrated Lamartine, probably
regarding the last four Psalms (the Hallelujah Psalms) as one whole (as
Hengstenberg also does), thus speaks: - "The last Psalm ends with a
chorus to the praise of God, in which the poet calls on all people, all
instruments of sacred music, all the elements, and all the stars to
join. Sublime finale of that opera of sixty years sung by the shepherd,
the hero, the king, and the old man! In this closing Psalm we see the
almost inarticulate enthusiasm of the lyric poet; so rapidly do the
words press to his lips, floating upwards towards God, their source,
like the smoke of a great fire of the soul waited by the tempest! Here
we see David, or rather the human heart itself with all its God-given
notes of grief, joy, tears, and adoration - poetry sanctified to its
highest expression; a vase of perfume broken on the step of the temple,
and shedding abroad its odours from the heart of David to the heart of
all humanity! Hebrew, Christian, or even Mohammedan, every religion,
every complaint, every prayer has taken from this vase, shed on the
heights of Jerusalem, wherewith to give forth their accents. The little
shepherd has become the master of the sacred choir of the Universe.
There is not a worship on earth which prays not with his words, or sings
not with his voice. A chord of his harp is to be found in all choirs,
resounding everywhere and for ever in unison with the echoes of Horeb
and Engedi! David is the Psalmist of eternity; what a destiny - what a
power hath poetry when inspired by God! As for myself, when my spirit is
excited, or devotional, or sad, and seeks for an echo to its enthusiasm,
its devotion, or its melancholy, I do not open Pindar or Horace, or
Hafiz, those purely Academic poets; neither do I find within myself
murmurings to express my emotion. I open the Book of Psalms, and there I
find words which seem to issue from the soul of the ages, and which
penetrate even to the heart of all generations. Happy the bard who has
thus become the eternal hymn, the personified prayer and complaint of
all humanity! If we look back to that remote age when such songs
resounded over the world; if we consider that while the lyric poetry of
all the most cultivated nations only sang of wine, love, blood, and the
victories of coursers at the games of Elidus, we are seized with
profound astonishment at the mystic accents of the shepherd prophet, who
speaks to God the Creator as one friend to another, who understands and
praises his great works, admires his justice, implores his mercy, and
becomes, as it were, an anticipative echo of the evangelic poetry,
speaking the soft words of Christ before his coming. Prophet or not, as
he may be considered by Christian or sceptic, none can deny in the
poet-king an inspiration granted to no other man. Head Greek or Latin
poetry after a Psalm, and see how pale it looks." - William Swan Plumer.

Whole Psalm

The first and last of the Psalms have both the same number of verses,
are both short and very memorable; but the scope of them is very
different; the first Psalm is an elaborate instruction in our duty, to
prepare us for the comforts of our devotion; this is all rapture and
transport, and perhaps was penned on purpose to be the conclusion of
those sacred songs, to, show what is the design of them all, and that
is, to assist us in praising God. - Matthew Henry.

Whole Psalm

Thirteen hallelujahs, according to the number of the tribes (Levi,
Ephraim and Manasseh making three), one for each. - John Henry
Michaelis, 1668-1738.

Whole Psalm

Some say this Psalm was sung by the Israelites, when they came with the
first fruits into the sanctuary, with the baskets on their shoulders.
Thirteen times in this short Psalm is the word praise used; not on
account of thirteen perfections or properties in God, as Kimchi thinks;
but it is so frequently, and in every clause used, to show the vehement
desire of the Psalmist that the Lord might be praised; and to express
his sense of things, how worthy he is of praise; and that all ways and
means to praise him should be made use of, all being little enough to
set forth his honour and glory. - John Gill.

Whole Psalm

There is an interesting association connected with this Psalm which
deserves to be recorded: that in former times, when the casting of
church bells was more of a religious ceremony, this Psalm was chanted by
the brethren of the guild as they stood ranged around the furnace, and
while the molten metal was prepared to be let off into the mould ready
to receive it. One may picture these swarthy sons of the furnace with
the ruddy glow of the fire upon their faces as they stand around, while
their deep voices rung forth this Hymn of Praise. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

"Praise ye the Lord." Praise God with a strong faith; praise him with
holy love and delight; praise him with an entire confidence in Christ;
praise him with a believing triumph over the powers of darkness; praise
him with an earnest desire towards him, and a full satisfaction in him;
praise him by a universal respect to all his commands; praise him by a
cheerful submission to all his disposals; praise him by rejoicing in his
love, and solacing yourselves in his great goodness; praise him by
promoting the interests of the kingdom of his grace; praise him by a
lively hope and expectation of the kingdom of his glory. - Matthew
Henry.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

"In his sanctuary." בּקדשׁו. Many have been the notions of the
commentators as to the shade of meaning here; for the word differs from
the form in [Psa 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002.md). מקּודש (from
the sanctuary). The Vulgate adopts the plural rendering, in sanctis
ejus, "in his holy places." Campensis renders it, ob insignem
sanctitatem ipsius, "because of his excellent holiness." Some see under
the word an allusion to the holy tabernacle of Deity, the flesh of
Christ. Luther, in his German version, translates thus in seinem
Heiligthum, "in his holiness." The same harmony of comparative thought
appears in the two clauses of this verse as in such passages as [Kg1
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#013.md), [Kg1
8:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#049.md); [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015.md). The place of worship where God
specially hears prayer and accepts praise, and the firmament where
angels fly at his command, and veil their faces in adoration, are each a
sanctuary. The sanctuary is manifestly here looked at as the temple of
grace, the firmament as the temple of power. So the verse proclaims both
grace and glory. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

"Praise God in his sanctuary." The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and the
eastern versions, render it, "in his holy ones"; among his saints, in
the assembly of them, where he is to be feared and praised, it may be
translated, "in his holy One," and be understood of Christ, as it is by
Cocceius Some render it, "for" or "because of his holiness." The
perfection of holiness in him; in which he is glorious and fearful in
the praises of, and which appears in all his works of providence and
grace. - John Gill.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

"Praise God." In many places we have the compound word, הללו־יה,
halelujah, praise ye Jehovah; but this is the first place in which we
find, הללו־אל, halelu-el, praise God, or the strong God. Praise him who
is Jehovah, the infinite and self-existent Being; and praise him who is
God, El, or Elohim, the great God in covenant with mankind, to bless and
save them unto eternal life. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

[Psa 150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md) gives the full praise to
Jehovah in a double character, the sanctuary and the firmament of his
power, for his ways which come from the firmament of his power were
always according to the sanctuary in which he governed Israel, and made
good the revelation of himself there. - John Nelson Darby, 1800-1882.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md)

"Praise him for his mighty acts," etc. The reasons of that praise which
it becomes all intelligent creatures, and especially redeemed men, to
render to Jehovah, are here assigned. We are to praise Jehovah "in his
sanctuary," in the place where his glory dwells, where his holiness
shines forth with ineffable splendour; we are to praise him in the wide
expanse over which he has spread the tokens of his power, whether in the
heaven above, or in the earth beneath; we are to praise him for those
omnipotent acts whereby he hath shown himself to be above all gods; we
are to praise him in a manner suited to the excellent majesty of a Being
whom all the heavens adore, and who is wonderful in counsel and
excellent in working. His holiness, the infinity of his operations, the
miraculous power which he has displayed, the unspotted excellence of his
administration, call for loudest songs of praise from all whose reason
enables them to rise to the contemplation of the great Supreme. - John
Morison.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md)

"Praise him according to his excellent greatness." There is required
special understanding and knowledge of the nature and worth of the mercy
for which the duty of praise is undertaken; for God will not be praised
confusedly, but distinctly and proportionably to his dispensation:
"Praise him according to his wondrous works"; which is to be the prime
and proper matter of their high praises, even his more proper and
peculiar high acts, then to be remembered, as is largely expressed in
Moses' praise for the particular mercy of coming safe through the Red
Sea (Exod. 15); and Deborah's high praise for deliverance from the host
of Sisera (Judges v.); where the chiefest and highest part of the
celebration and exaltation of God in his praise consists in the
declaration and commemoration of the particulars of God's special
goodness in their present deliverance. Thus, you see, the first thing
that God looks for is proportionable praise, great praise for a great
God, doing great things, and high praises for a high God, doing high
things. - Samuel Fairclough.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md)

"Praise him according to his excellent greatness," or, as the words may
bear, "according to his muchness of greatness"; for when the Scripture
saith "God is great," this positive is to be taken as a superlative.
"God is great," that is, he is greatest, he is greater than all; so
great that all persons and all things are little, yea, nothing before
him. [Isa 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#015.md), "Behold, the nations
are (to him but) as a drop of a bucket, and are counted as the small
dust of the balance: behold, he taketh up the isles as a very little
thing. And Lebanon is not sufficient to burn, nor the beasts thereof
sufficient for a burnt offering. All nations before him are as nothing;
and they are counted to him less than nothing, and vanity." How great is
God, in comparison of whom the greatest things are little things, yea,
the greatest things are nothing! - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)

Trumpets and horns are the only instruments concerning which any
directions are given in the law. - James Anderson.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)

"Trumpet." Of natural horns and of instruments in the shape of horns the
antiquity and general use are evinced by every extensive collection of
antiquities The Hebrew word shophar, rendered "trumpet," seems, first to
denote horns of the straighter kind, including, probably, those of
neat-cattle, and all the instruments which were eventually made in
imitation of and in improvement upon such horns. The name shopbar means
bright or clear, and the instrument may be conceived to have been so
called from its clear and shrill sound, just as we call an instrument a
"clarion," and speak of a musical tone as "brilliant" or "clear." In the
service of God this shopbar or trumpet, was only employed in making
announcements, and for calling the people together in the time of the
holy solemnities, of war, of rebellion, or of any other great occasion.
The strong sound of the instrument would have confounded a choir of
singers, rather than have elevated their music. (John Kitto.) The
shophar is especially interesting to us as being the only Hebrew
instrument whose use on certain solemn occasions seems to be retained to
this day. Engel, with his usual trustworthy research, has traced out and
examined some of those in modern synagogues. Of those shown in our
engraving, one is from the synagogue of Spanish and Portugese Jews,
Beyis Marks, and is, he says, one foot in length; the other is one used
in the Great Synagogue, St. James's place, Aldgate, twenty-one inches in
length. Both are made of horn. - James Stainer.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)

The "Psaltery" was a ten-stringed instrument. It is constantly mentioned
with the "harp." The Psaltery was struck with a plectrum, the harp more
gently with the fingers. "Psaltery and harp" speak to us in figure of
"law and gospel." - Thomas Le Blanc

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)

On "Psaltery" (nebel) see Note on [Psa
144:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#009.md), and on "harp" see Note on [Psa
149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003.md).

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md), [Psa
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md), [Psa
150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

As St. Augustine says here, "No kind of faculty is here omitted. All are
enlisted in praising God." The breath is employed in blowing the
trumpet; the fingers are used in striking the strings of the psaltery
and the harp; the whole hand is exerted in beating the timbrel; the feet
move in the dance; there are stringed instruments (literally strings);
there is the organ (the 'ugab, syrinx) composed of many pipes, implying
combination, and the cymbals clang one upon another. - G. Wordsworth.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md), [Psa
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md), [Psa
150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

The variety of musical instruments, some of them made use of in the
camp, as trumpets; some of them more suitable to a peaceable condition,
as psalteries and harps; some of them sounding by blowing wind in them;
some of them sounding by lighter touching of them, as stringed
instruments; some of them by beating on them more sharply, as tabrets,
drums and cymbals; some of them sounding by touching and blowing also,
as organs: all of them giving some certain sound, some more quiet, and
some making more noise, some of them having a harmony by themselves;
some of them making a concert with other instruments, or with the
motions of the body in dancings, some of them serving for one use, some
of them serving for another, and all of them serving to set forth God's
glory, and to shadow forth the duty of worshippers, and the privileges
of the saints. The plurality and variety (I say) of these instruments
were fit to represent divers conditions of the spiritual man, and of the
greatness of his joy to be found in God, and to teach what stirring up
should be of the affections and powers of our soul, and of one another,
unto God's worship; what harmony should be among the worshippers of God,
what melody each should make in himself, singing to God with grace in
his heart, and to show the excellency of God's praise, which no means
nor instrument, nor any expression of the body joined thereunto, could
sufficiently set forth in these exhortations to praise God with trumpet,
psaltery, etc. - David Dickson.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md), [Psa
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md), [Psa
150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

Patrick has an interesting note on the many instruments of music in [Psa
149:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001.md), which we quote here, "The
ancient inhabitants of Etruria used the trumpet; the Arcadians, the
whistle; the Sicilians, the pectid; the Cretians, the harp; the
Thracians, the cornet; the Lacedemonians, the pipe; the Egyptians, the
drum; the Arabians, the cymbal. (Clem. Paedag. [Psa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#004)..md) May we not say that in this
Psalm's enumeration of musical instruments, there is a reference to the
variety which exists among men in the mode of expressing joy, and
exciting to feeling? - Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md)

"Stringed instruments." Minnim \[which is derived from a root signifying
"division," or "distribution," hence strings\] occurs in [Psa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md), and [Psa
150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md), and is supposed by some to
denote a stringed instrument, but it seems merely a poetical allusion to
the strings of any instrument. Thus, in [Psa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md), we would read, "Out of the ivory
palaces the strings (i.e. concerts of music) have made thee glad"; and
so in [Psa 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md), "Praise him with
strings (stringed instruments), and 'ugabs." - John Kitto.

[Psa 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md)

"Organs." עוּגב, 'ugab is the word rendered "organ" in our version. The
Targum renders the word simply by אבובא, a pipe; the Septuagint varies,
it has κοθάρα in Genesis, ψάλμος in Job, and ὄργανον in the Psalms. The
last is the sense which the Arabic, Syriac, Latin, English, and most
other versions have adopted. The organon simply denotes a double or
manifold pipe, and hence, in particular, the Pandaean or shepherd's
pipe, which is at this day called a "mouth organ," among ourselves.
(Kitto.) A collection of tubes of different sizes, stopped at one end
and blown at the other, forms the musical instrument, known as Pan's
pipes, in the Greek syrinx, σῦρυγξ... Was the 'ugab a syrinx or an
organ? As the former seems to have been the more ancient of the two, and
as 'ugab is included in the very first allusion to musical instruments
in the Bible, it would seem reasonable to say at once that it was
syrinx, especially as this instrument was, and is to this day, commonly
met with in various parts of Asia. Yet it would, indeed, be strange if
such an instrument were selected for use in divine worship; and that the
ugab was so used is proved beyond a doubt by its mention in [Psa
150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md) : "Praise him with the minnim
and 'ugab." "Its mention here in antithesis to a collective name for
stringed instruments, surely points to the fact of its being a more
important instrument than a few river-reeds fixed together with wax. Let
us not forget that we have but one and the same name for the single row
of about fifty pipes, placed, perhaps, in a little room, and the mighty
instrument of five thousand pipes, occupying as much space as an
ordinary dwelling-house.... Each is an organ. May it not have been the
case that the 'ugab, which in [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021.md) is mentioned as the
simply-constructed wind-instrument, in contrast to the simple
stringed-instrument, the kinnor, was a greatly inferior instrument to
that which in [Psa 150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md) is thought
worthy of mention by the side of a term for the whole string power? - J.
Stainer.

[Psa 150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

"Loud cymbals.... high-sounding cymbals." This important passage clearly
points to two instruments under the same name, and leaves us to conclude
that the Hebrews had both hand-cymbals and finger-cymbals (or
castanets), although it may not in all cases be easy to say which of the
two is intended in particular texts. - John Kitto.

[Psa 150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

(Prayer Book Version). - "Praise him upon the well-tuned cymbals' praise
him upon the loud cymbals." As I have heard these words read monthly in
our churches, it has often come into my thoughts that when we intend to
glorify God with our cymbals, it should not be our only care to have
them loud enough, but our first care should be to have them well tuned,
else the louder the worse. Zeal does very well - there is great, yea,
necessary use for it in every part of God's service. The cymbal will be
fiat, it will have no life or spirit in it, it will not be loud enough
without it. But if meekness, peaceableness, and moderation do not first
put the cymbal into good tune, the loudness will but make it the more
ungrateful in the player, the more ungrateful to the hearer. - Robert
Sanderson, 1587-1662.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md)

"Praise ye the Lord." As the life of the faithful, and the history of
the church, so also the Psalter, with all its cries from the depths,
runs out into a Hallelujah. - E. W. Hengstenberg.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md)

"Praise ye the Lord." When we have said all we are able to say for God's
praise, we are but to begin anew; for this are we taught by the renewing
of the exhortation, in the close of sundry Psalms, and here also at the
end of all the Psalms, "Praise ye the Lord." - David Dickson.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md)

"Let all breath praise Jah! Hallelujah." The very ambiguity of "all
breath" gives extraordinary richness of meaning to this closing
sentence. From the simple idea of wind instruments, mentioned in the
context, it leads us, by a beautiful transition, to that of vocal,
articulate, intelligent praise, uttered by the breath of living men, as
distinguished from mere lifeless instruments. Then, lastly, by a natural
association, we ascend to the idea expressed in the common version,
"everything that hath breath," not merely all that lives, but all that
has a voice to praise God. There is nothing in the Psalter more majestic
or more beautiful than this brief but most significant finale, in which
solemnity of tone predominates, without however in the least disturbing
the exhilaration which the close of the Psalter seems intended to
produce, as if in emblematical allusion to the triumph which awaits the
church and all its members, when through much tribulation they shall
enter into rest. - Joseph Addison Alexander.

[Psalms 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 150:1</span></span>

1 Praise ye the Lord. Praise God in his sanctuary, praise him in the
firmament of his power.

2 Praise him for his mighty acts; praise him according to his excellent
greatness.

3 Praise him with the sound of the trumpet: praise him with the psaltery
and harp.

4 Praise him with the timbrel and dance - praise him with stringed
instruments and organs.

5 Praise him upon the loud cymbals; praise him upon the high sounding
cymbals.

6 Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord. Praise ye the Lord.

[Psa 150:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001.md)

"Praise ye the Lord." Hallelujah! The exhortation is to all things in
earth or in heaven. Should they not all declare the glory of him for
whose glory they are, and were created? Jehovah, the one God, should be
the one object of adoration. To give the least particle of his honour to
another is shameful treason; to refuse to render it to him is heartless
robbery. "Praise God in his sanctuary." Praise El, or the strong one, in
his holy place. See how power is mentioned with holiness in this change
of names. Praise begins at home. "In God's own house pronounce his
praise." The holy place should be filled with praise, even as of old the
high-priest filled the sanctum sanctorum with the smoke of
sweet-smelling incense. In his church below and in his courts above
hallelujahs should be continually presented. In the person of Jesus God
finds a holy dwelling or sanctuary, and there he is greatly to be
praised. He may also be said to dwell in holiness, for all his ways are
right and good; for this we ought to extol him with heart and with
voice. Whenever we assemble for holy purposes our main work should be to
present praises unto the Lord our God. "Praise him in the firmament of
his power." It is a blessed thing that in our God holiness and power are
united. Power without righteousness would be oppression, and
righteousness without power would be too weak for usefulness; but put
the two together in an infinite degree and we have God. What an expanse
we have in the boundless firmament of divine power! Let it all be filled
with praise. Let the heavens, so great and strong, echo with the praise
of the thrice holy Jehovah, while the sanctuaries of earth magnify the
Almighty One.

[Psa 150:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#002.md)

"Praise him for his mighty acts." Here is a reason for praise. In these
deeds of power we see himself. These doings of his omnipotence are
always on behalf of truth and righteousness. His works of creation,
providence, and redemption all call for praise; they are his acts, and
his acts of might, therefore let him be praised for them. "Praise him
according to his excellent greatness." His being is unlimited, and his
praise should correspond therewith. He possesses a multitude or a
plenitude of greatness, and therefore he should be greatly praised.
There is nothing little about God, and there is nothing great apart from
him. If we were always careful to make our worship fit and appropriate
for our great Lord how much better should we sing! How much more
reverently should we adore! Such excellent deeds should have excellent
praise.

[Psa 150:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#003.md)

"Praise him with the sound of the trumpet." With the loudest, clearest
note call the people together. Make all men to know that we are not
ashamed to worship. Summon them with unmistakable sound to bow before
their God. The sound of trumpet is associated with the grandest and most
solemn events, such as the giving of the law, the proclamation of
jubilee, the coronation of Jewish kings, and the raging of war. It is to
be thought of in reference to the coming of our Lord in his second
advent and the raising of the dead. If we cannot give voice to this
martial instrument, at least let our praise be as decided and bold as if
we could give a blast upon the horn. Let us never sound a trumpet before
us to our own honour, but reserve all our trumpeting for God's glory.
When the people have been gathered by blast of trumpet, then proceed to
"praise him with the psaltery and harp." Stringed instruments are to be
used as well as those which are rendered vocal by wind. Dulcet notes are
to be consecrated as well as more startling sounds. The gospel meaning
is that all powers and faculties should praise the Lord - all sorts of
persons, under all circumstances, and with differing constitutions,
should do honour unto the Lord of all. If there be any virtue, if there
be any talent, if there be any influence, let all be consecrated to the
service of the universal Benefactor. Harp and lyre - the choicest, the
sweetest, must be all our Lord's.

[Psa 150:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#004.md)

"Praise him with the timbrel and dance." Associated with the deliverance
at the Red Sea, this form of worship set forth the most jubilant and
exultant of worship. The hands, and the feet were both employed, and the
entire body moved in sympathy with the members. Are there not periods of
life when we feel so glad that we would fain dance for joy? Let not such
exhilaration be spent upon common themes, but let the name of God stir
us to ecstasy. Let us exult as we cry, -

"In the heavenly Lamb thrice happy I am,

And my heart it doth dance at the sound of his name."

There is enough in our holy faith to create and to justify the utmost
degree of rapturous delight. If men are dull in the worship of the Lord
our God they are not acting consistently with the character of their
religion. "Praise him with stringed instruments and organs." We have
here the three kinds of musical instruments: timbrels, which are struck,
and strings, and pipes: let all be educated to praise the Lord. Nothing
is common and unclean: all may be sanctified to highest uses. Many men,
many minds, and these as different as strings and pipes; but there is
only one God, and that one God all should worship. The word translated
"organs" signifies pipe - a simpler form of wind instrument than the
more modern and more elaborate organ. Doubtless many a pious shepherd
has poured out gracious pastorals from a reed or oaten pipe, and so has
magnified his God.

[Psa 150:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#005.md)

"Praise him upon the loud cymbals' praise him upon the high sounding
cymbals." Let the clash of the loudest music be the Lord's' let the
joyful clang of the loftiest notes be all for him. Praise has beaten the
timbrel, swept the harp, and sounded the trumpet, and now for a last
effort, awakening the most heavy of slumberers, and startling the most
indifferent of onlookers, she dashes together the disks of brass, and
with sounds both loud and high proclaims the glories of the Lord.

[Psa 150:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#006.md)

"Let everything that hath breath praise the Lord." "Let all breath
praise him": that is to say, all living beings. He gave them breath, let
them breathe his praise. His name is in the Hebrew composed rather of
breathings than of letters, to show that all breath comes from him:
therefore let it be used for him. Join all ye living things in the
eternal song. Be ye least or greatest, withhold not your praises. What a
day will it be when all things in all places unite to glorify the one
only living and true God! This will be the final triumph of the church
of God.

"Praise ye the Lord." Once more, Hallelujah! Thus is the Psalm rounded
with the note of praise; and thus is the Book of Psalms ended by a
glowing word of adoration. Reader, wilt not thou at this moment pause a
while and worship the Lord thy God? Hallelujah!
