<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa116)  [Next](psa118.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 117](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 117:0</span></span>

Subject. - This Psalm, which is very little in its letter, is
exceedingly large in its spirit; for, bursting beyond all bounds of race
or nationality, it calls upon all mankind to praise the name of the
Lord. In all probability it was frequently used as a brie! hymn suitable
for almost every occasion, and especially when the time for worship was
short. Perhaps it was also sung at the commencement or at the close of
other Psalms, just as we now use the doxology. It would have served
either to open a service or to conclude it. It is both short and sweet.
The same divine Spirit which expatiates in [Psa
119:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#001.md), here condenses his utterances
into two short verses, but yet the same infinite fulness is present and
perceptible. It may be worth noting that this is at once the shortest
chapter of the Scriptures and the central portion of the whole Bible.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. - The universal kingdom.

I. The same God.

II\. The same worship.

III\. The same reason for it.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md). - "Merciful kindness." In
God's kindness there is mercy, because,

I. Our sin deserves the reverse of kindness.

II\. Our weakness requires great tenderness.

III\. Our fears can only be so removed.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002) (last clause.md). -

I. In his attribute - he is always faithful.

II\. In his revelation - always infallible.

III\. In his action - always according to promise.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

A very short Psalm if you regard the words, but of very great compass
and most excellent if you thoughtfully consider the meaning. There are
here five principal points of doctrine.

First, the calling of the Gentiles, the Apostle being the interpreter,
[Rom 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#011.md); but in vain might the
Prophet invite the Gentiles to praise Jehovah, unless they were to be
gathered into the unity of the faith together with the children of
Abraham.

Second, The summary of the Gospel, namely, the manifestation of grace
and truth, the Holy Spirit being the interpreter, [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md).

Third, The end of so great a blessing, namely, the worship of God in
spirit and in truth, as we know that the kingdom of the Messiah is
spiritual.

Fourth, the employment of the subjects of the great King is to praise
and glorify Jehovah.

Lastly, the privilege of these servants: that, as to the Jews, so also
to the Gentiles, who know and serve God the Saviour, eternal life and
blessedness are brought, assured in this life, and prepared in heaven. -
Mollerus.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm, the shortest portion of the Book of God, is quoted, and
given much value to, in Rom. 15. And upon this it has been profitably
observed, "It is a small portion of Scripture, and as such we might
easily overlook it. But not so the Holy Ghost. He gleans up this
precious little testimony which speaks of grace to the Gentiles, and
presses it on our attention." - From Bellett's Short Meditations on the
Psalms, chiefly in their Prophetic character, 1871.

Whole Psalm

The occasion and the author of this Psalm are alike unknown. De Wette
regards it as a Temple-Psalm, and agrees with Rosenmller in the
supposition that it was sung either at the beginning or the end of the
service in the temple. Knapp supposes that it was used as an
intermediate service, sung during the progress of the general service to
vary the devotion, and to awaken a new interest in the service, either
sung by the choir or by the whole people. - Albert Barnes.

Whole Psalm

In God's worship it is not always necessary to be long; few words
sometimes say what is sufficient, as this short Psalm giveth us to
understand. - David Dickson.

Whole Psalm

This is the shortest, and the next but one is the longest, of the
Psalms. There are times for short hymns and long hymns, for short
prayers and long prayers, for short sermons and long sermons, for short
speeches and long speeches. It is better to be too short than too long,
as it can more easily be mended. Short addresses need no formal
divisions: long addresses require them, as in the next Psalm but one. -
G. Rogers.

[Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

"O praise the Lord," etc. The praise of God is here made both the
beginning and the end of the Psalm; to show, that in praising God the
saints are never satisfied with their own efforts, and would infinitely
magnify him, even as his perfections are infinite. Here they make a
circle, the beginning, middle, and end whereof is hallelujah. In the
last Psalm, when David had said, "Let everything that hath breath praise
the Lord," and so in all likelihood had made an end, yet he repeats the
hallelujah again, and cries, "Praise ye the Lord." The Psalmist had made
an end and yet he had not done; to signify, that when we have said our
utmost for God's praise, we must not be content, but begin anew. There
is hardly any duty more pressed in the Old Testament upon us, though
less practised, than this of praising God. To quicken us therefore to a
duty so necessary, but so much neglected, this and many other Psalms
were penned by David, purposely to excite us, that are the nations here
meant, to consecrate our whole lives to the singing and setting forth of
God's worthy praises. - Abraham Wright.

[Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

"All ye nations." Note: each nation of the world has some special gift
bestowed on it by God, which is not given to the others, whether you
have regard to nature or grace, for which it ought to praise God. - Le
Blanc.

[Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

"Praise him." A different word is here used for "praise" than in the
former clause- a word which is more frequently used in the Chaldee,
Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic languages; and signifies the celebration of
the praises of God with a high voice. - John Gill.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

"For his merciful kindness is great toward us." We cannot part from this
Psalm without remarking that even in the Old Testament we have more than
one instance of a recognition on the part of those that were without the
pale of the church that God's favour to Israel was a source of blessing
to themselves. Such were probably to some extent the sentiments of Hiram
and the Queen of Sheba, the contemporaries of Solomon; such the
experience of Naaman; such the virtual acknowledgments of Nebuchadnezzar
and Darius the Mede. They beheld "his merciful kindness" toward his
servants of the house of Israel, and they praised him accordingly. -
John Francis Thrupp.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

"For his merciful kindness is great toward us." Albeit there be matter
of praise unto God in himself, though we should not be partakers of any
benefit from him, yet the Lord doth give his people cause to praise him
for favours to them in their own particular cases. - David Dickson.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

"For his merciful kindness is great." גּבר, gabar, is strong: it is not
only great in bulk or number; but it is powerful; it prevails over sin,
Satan, death and hell. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

"Merciful kindness.... and the truth of the Lord." Here, and so in
divers other Psalms, God's mercy and truth are joined together; to show
that all passages and proceedings, both in ordinances and in
providences, whereby he cometh and communicateth himself to his people
are not only mercy, though that is very sweet, but truth also. Their
blessings come to them in the way of promise from God, as bound to them
by the truth of his covenant. This is soul-satisfying indeed; this turns
all that a man hath to cream, when every mercy is a present sent from
heaven by virtue of a promise. Upon this account, God's mercy is
ordinarily in the Psalms bounded by his truth; that none may either
presume him more merciful than he hath declared himself in his word; nor
despair of finding mercy gratis, according to the truth of his promise.
Therefore, though thy sins be great, believe the text, and know that
God's mercy is greater than thy sins. The high heaven covereth as well
tall mountains as small molehills, and mercy can cover all. The more
desperate thy disease, the greater is the glory of thy physician, who
hath perfectly cured thee. - Abraham Wright.

[Psalms 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 117:1</span></span>

1 O Praise the Lord, all ye nations: praise him, all ye people.

2 For his merciful kindness is great toward us: and the truth of the
Lord endureth for ever. Praise ye the Lord.

[Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md)

"O praise the Lord, all ye nations." This is an exhortation to the
Gentiles to glorify Jehovah, and a clear proof that the Old Testament
spirit differed widely from that narrow and contracted national bigotry
with which the Jews of our Lord's day became so inveterately diseased.
The nations could not be expected to join in the praise of Jehovah
unless they were also to be partakers of the benefits which Israel
enjoyed; and hence the Psalm was an intimation to Israel that the grace
and mercy of their God were not to be confined to one nation, but would
in happier days be extended to all the race of man, even as Moses had
prophesied when he said, "Rejoice, O ye nations, his people." ([Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043).md), for so the Hebrew has it. The
nations were to be his people. He would call them a people that were not
a people, and her beloved that was not beloved. We know and believe that
no one tribe of men shall be unrepresented in the universal song which
shall ascend unto the Lord of all. Individuals have already been
gathered out of every kindred and people and tongue by the preaching of
the gospel, and these have right heartily joined in magnifying the grace
which sought them out, and brought them to know the Saviour. These are
but the advance-guard of a number which no man can number who will come
ere long to worship the all-glorious One. "Praise him, all ye people."
Having done it once, do it again, and do it still more fervently, daily
increasing in the reverence and zeal with which you extol the Most High.
Not only praise him nationally by your rulers, but popularly in your
masses. The multitude of the common folk shall bless the Lord. Inasmuch
as the matter is spoken of twice, its certainty is confirmed, and the
Gentiles must and shall extol Jehovah - all of them, without exception.
Under the gospel dispensation we worship no new god, but the God of
Abraham is our God for ever and ever; the God of the whole earth shall
he be called.

[Psa 117:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#002.md)

"For his merciful kindness is great toward us." By which is meant not
only his great love toward the Jewish people, but towards the whole
family of man. The Lord is kind to us as his creatures, and merciful to
us as sinners, hence his merciful kindness to us as sinful creatures.
This mercy has been very great, or powerful. The mighty grace of God has
prevailed even as the waters of the flood prevailed over the earth:
breaking over all bounds, it has flowed towards all portions of the
multiplied race of man. In Christ Jesus, God has shown mercy mixed with
kindness, and that to the very highest degree. We can all join in this
grateful acknowledgment, and in the praise which is therefore due. "And
the truth of the Lord endureth for ever." He has kept his covenant
promise that in the seed of Abraham should all nations of the earth be
blessed, and he will eternally keep every single promise of that
covenant to all those who put their trust in him. This should be a cause
of constant and grateful praise, wherefore the Psalm concludes as it
began, with another Hallelujah, "Praise ye the Lord."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 118](psa118.md)

</div>
