<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa113)  [Next](psa115.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 114](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 114:0</span></span>

Subject and Division. - This sublime song of the Exodus is one and
indivisible. True poetry has here reached its climax: no human mind has
ever been able to equal, much less to excel, the grandeur of this Psalm.
God is spoken of as leading forth his people from Egypt to Canaan, and
causing the whole earth to be moved at his coming. Things inanimate are
represented as imitating the actions of living creatures when the Lord
passes by. They are apostrophised and questioned with marvellous force
of language, till one seems to look upon the actual scene. The God of
Jacob is exalted as having command over river, sea, and mountain, and
causing all nature to pall homage and tribute before his glorious
majesty.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md), [Psa
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md). - The time of first delivery
from sin a season notable for the peculiar presence of God.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md), [Psa
114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md). - The Lord was to his people -

I. A deliverer.

II\. A priest - "his sanctuary."

III\. A king - "his dominion."

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md), [Psa
114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md). - "The house of Jacob" and "the
God of Jacob," the relation between the two.

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md). - The church the temple of
sanctity and the domain of obedience.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md). - The impenitence of
sinners rebuked by the inanimate creation.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md). - "Jordan was driven
back," or death overcome.

[Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md). - The movableness of
things which appear to be fixed and settled. God's power of creating a
stir in lethargic minds, among ancient systems, and prejudiced persons
of the highest rank.

[Psa 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md), [Psa
114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md). - Holy awe.

I. Should be caused by the fact of the divine presence.

II\. Should be increased by his covenant character - "the God of Jacob."

III\. Should culminate when we see displays of his grace towards his
people - "which turned," etc.

IV\. Should become universal.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md). - Wonders akin to the
miracle at the rock.

I. Christ's death the source of life.

II\. Adversity a means of prosperity.

III\. Hard hearts made penitent.

IV\. Barrenness of soul turned into abundance.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md). - Divine supplies.

1\. Sure - for he will fetch them even from a rock.

2\. Plentiful - "a mere or standing water."

3\. Continual "fountain of waters."

4\. Instructive. Should create in us holy awe at the power, etc., of the
Lord.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md) appears to me to be an
admirable ode, and I began to turn it into our own language. As I was
describing the journey of Israel from Egypt, and added the Divine
Presence amongst them, I perceived a beauty in this Psalm, which was
entirely new to me, and which I was going to lose; and that is, that the
poet utterly conceals the presence of God in the beginning of it, and
rather lets a possessive pronoun go without a substantive, than he will
so much as mention anything of divinity there. "Judah was his sanctuary,
and Israel his dominion" or kingdom. The reason now seems evident, and
this conduct necessary; for, if God had appeared before, there could be
no wonder why the mountains should leap and the sea retire; therefore,
that this convulsion of nature may be brought in with due surprise, his
name is not mentioned till afterwards; and then with a very agreeable
turn of thought, God is introduced at once in all his majesty. This is
what I have attempted to imitate in a translation without paraphrase,
and to preserve what I could of the spirit of the sacred author.

When Israel, freed from Pharaoh's hand,

Left the proud tyrant and his land,

The tribes with cheerful homage own

Their King, and Judah was his throne.

Across the deep their journey lay,

The deep divides to make them way;

The streams of Jordan saw, and fled

With backward current to their head.

The mountains shook like frightened sheep,

Like lambs the little hillocks leap;

Not Sinai on her base could stand,

Conscious of sovereign power at hand.

What power could make the deep divide?

Make Jordan backward roll his tide?

Why did ye leap, ye little hills?

And whence the fright that Sinai feels?

Let ev'ry mountain, ev'ry flood,

Retire, and know th' approaching God,

The King of Israeli see him here:

Tremble, thou earth, adore and fear.

He thunders - and all nature mourns;

The rock to standing pools he turns;

Flints spring with fountains at his word,

And fires and seas confess their Lord.

Isaac Watts, in "The Spectator," 1712.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"When Israel went out of Egypt." Out of the midst of that nation, that
is, out of the bowels of the Egyptians, who had, as it were, devoured
them; thus the Jew-doctors gloss upon this text. - John Trapp.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"Israel went out of Egypt." This was an emblem of the Lord's people in
effectual vocation, coming out of bondage into liberty, out of darkness
into light, out of superstition, and idolatry, and profaneness, to the
service of the true God in righteousness and true holiness; and from a
people of strange language to those that speak the language of Canaan, a
pure language, in which they can understand one another when they
converse together, either about experience or doctrine; and the manner
of their coming out is much the same, by strength of hand, by the power
of divine grace, yet willingly and cheerfully, with great riches, the
riches of grace, and a title to the riches of glory, and with much
spiritual strength; for though weak in themselves, yet they are strong
in Christ. - John Gill.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"The house of Jacob." The Israelites though they were a great number
when they went forth from Egypt, nevertheless formed one house or
family; thus the church at the present time dispersed throughout the
whole world is called one house: [Ti1
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md); [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md); [Pe1
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005.md) : and that because of one faith,
one God, one Father, one baptism, [Eph
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#005.md). - Marloratus.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"A people of strange language." When we find in [Psa
114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md), as in [Psa
81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005.md), Egypt spoken of as a land where
the people were of a "strange tongue," it seems likely that the
reference is to their being a people who could not speak of God, as
Israel could; even as [Zep 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009.md) tells
of the "pure lip," viz. the lip that calls on the name of the Lord. -
Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"A people of strange language." Mant translates this "tyrant land," and
has the following note: - The Hebrew word here rendered "tyrant," has
been supposed to signify "barbarous"; that is, "using a barbarous or
foreign language or pronunciation." But, says Parkhurst, the word seems
rather to refer to the "violence" of the Egyptians towards the
Israelites, or "the barbarity of their behaviour," which was more to the
Psalmist's purpose than "the barbarity of their language"; even
supposing the reality of the latter in the time of Moses. The epithet
"barbarous" would leave the same ambiguity as Parkhurst supposes to
belong to the text. Bishop Horsley renders "a tyrannical people."

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"A people of strange language." The strange language is evidently an
annoyance. Israel could not feel at home in Egypt. - Justus Olshausen.

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

"Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion." These people were
God's sanctification and dominion, that is, witnesses of his holy
majesty in adopting them, and of his mighty power in delivering them:
or, his sanctification, as having his holy priests to govern them in the
points of piety; and dominion, as having godly magistrates ordained from
above to rule them in matters of policy: or, his sanctuary, both
actually, because sanctifying him; and passively, because sanctified of
him.... This one verse expounds and exemplifies two prime petitions of
the Lord's Prayer. "Hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come": for Judah
was God's sanctuary, because hallowing his name; and Israel his
dominion, as desiring his kingdom to come. Let every man examine himself
by this pattern, whether he be truly the servant of Jesus his Saviour,
or the vassal of Satan the destroyer. If any man submit himself
willingly to the domineering of the devil, and suffer sin to reign in
his mortal members, obeying the lusts thereof, and working all
uncleanness even with greediness; assuredly that man is yet a chapel of
Satan, and a slave to sin. On the contrary, whosoever unfeignedly
desires that God's kingdom may come, being ever ready to be ruled
according to his holy word, acknowledging it a lantern to his feet, and
a guide to his paths; admitting obediently his laws, and submitting
himself alway to the same; what is he, but a citizen of heaven, a
subject of God, a saint, a sanctuary? - John Boys.

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

"Judah was his sanctuary," etc. Header, do not fail to remark when
Israel was brought out of Egypt the Lord set up his tabernacle among
them, and manifested his presence to them. And what is it now, when the
Lord Jesus brings out his people from the Egypt of the world? Doth he
not fulfil that sweet promise, "Lo, I am with you alway, even unto the
end of the world"? Is it not the privilege of his people, to live to
him, to live with him, and to live upon him? Doth he not in every act
declare, "I will say, it is my people; and they shall say, the Lord is
my God"? [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md); [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009.md). - Robert Hawker.

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

"Judah was his sanctuary." Meaning not the tribe of Judah only, though
they in many things had the pre-eminence; the kingdom belonged to it,
the chief ruler being out of it, especially the Messiah; its standard
was pitched and moved first; it offered first to the service of the
Lord; and the Jews have a tradition, mentioned by Jarchi and Kimchi,
that this tribe with its prince at the head of it, went into the Red Sea
first; the others fearing, but afterwards followed, encouraged by their
example. In this place all the tribes are meant, the whole body of the
people. - John Gill.

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

One peculiarity of [Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md) requires
attention. It twice uses the word "his," without naming any one. There
are two theories to account for this circumstance. One is that [Psa
114:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md) was always sung in immediate
connection with [Psa 113:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001.md), in which
the name of God occurs no less than six times, so that the continuance
of the train of thought made a fresh repetition of it here unnecessary.
But this view, to be fully consistent with itself, must assume that the
two Psalms are really one, with a merely arbitrary division, which does
not, on the face of the matter, seem by any means probable, as the scope
of thought in the two is perfectly distinct. The other, which is more
satisfactory, regards the omission of the Holy Name in this part of the
Psalm as a practical artifice to heighten the effect of the answer to
the sudden apostrophe in verses five and six. There would be nothing
marvellous in the agitation of the sea, and river, and mountains in the
presence of God, but it may well appear wonderful till that potent cause
is revealed, as it is most forcibly in the dignified words of the
seventh verse. - Ewald and Perowne, in Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"The sea saw it": to wit this glorious work of God in bringing his
people out of Egypt. - Matthew Pool.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"The sea saw it." Saw there that "Judah" was "God's sanctuary," "and
Israel his dominion," and therefore "fled"; for nothing could be more
awful. It was this that drove Jordan back, and was an invincible darn to
his streams; God was at the head of that people, and therefore they must
give way to them, must make room for them, they must retire, contrary to
their nature, when God speaks the word. - Matthew Henry.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"The sea saw it, and fled."

The waves on either side

Unloose their close embraces, and divide,

And backwards press, as in some solemn show

The crowding people do,

(Though just before no space was seen,)

To let the admired triumph pass between.

The wondering army saw, on either hand,

The no less wondering waves like rocks of crystal stand.

They marched betwixt, and boldly trod

The secret paths of God.

Abraham Cowley, 1618-1667.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"Jordan was driven back." And now the glorious day was come when, by a
stupendous miracle, Jehovah had determined to show how able he was to
remove every obstacle in the way of his people, and to subdue every
enemy before their face. By his appointment the host, amounting probably
to two millions-and-a-half of persons (about the same number as had
crossed the Red Sea on foot), had removed to the banks of the river
three days before, and now in marching array awaited the signal to cross
the stream. At any time the passage of the river by such a multitude,
with their women and children, their flocks and herds, and all their
baggage, would have presented formidable difficulties; but now the
channel was filled with a deep and impetuous torrent, which overflowed
its banks and spread widely on each side, probably extending nearly a
mile in width; while in the very sight of the scene were the Canaanitish
hosts, who might be expected to pour out from their gates, and
exterminate the invading multitude before they could reach the shore.
Yet these difficulties were nothing to Almighty power, and only served
to heighten the effect of the stupendous miracle about to be wrought.

By the command of Jehovah, the priests, bearing the ark of the covenant,
the sacred symbol of the Divine presence, marched more than haft-a-mile
in front of the people, who were forbidden to come any nearer to it.
Thus it was manifest that Jehovah needed not protection from Israel, but
was their guard and guide, since the unarmed priests feared not to
separate themselves from the host, and to venture with the ark into the
river in the face of their enemies. And thus the army, standing aloof,
had a better opportunity of seeing the wondrous results, and of admiring
the mighty power of God exerted on their behalf; for no sooner had the
feet of the priests touched the brim of the overflowing river, than the
swelling waters receded from them; and not only the broad lower valley,
but even the deep bed of the stream was presently emptied of water, and
its pebbly bottom became dry. The waters which had been in the channel
speedily ran off, and were lost in the Dead Sea; whilst those which
would naturally have replaced them from above, were miraculously
suspended, and accumulated in a glassy heap far above the city Adam,
that is beside Zaretan. These places are supposed to have been at least
forty miles above the Dead Sea, and may possibly have been much more; so
that nearly the whole channel of the Lower Jordan, from a little below
the Lake of Tiberias to the Dead Sea, was dry.... What a glorious
termination of the long pilgrimage of Israel was this! and how worthy of
the power, wisdom, and goodness of their Divine Protector! "The passage
of this deep and rapid river," remarks Dr. Hales, "at the most
unfavourable season, was more manifestly miraculous, if possible, than
that of the Red Sea; because here was no natural agency whatever
employed; no mighty wind to sweep. a passage, as in the former case; no
reflux of the tide, on which minute philosophers might fasten to
depreciate the miracle. It seems, therefore, to have been providentially
designed to silence cavils respecting the former; and it was done at
noon-day, in the face of the sun, and in the presence, we may be sure,
of the neighbouring inhabitants, and struck terror into the kings of the
Canaanites and Amorites west-ward of the river." - Philip Henry Gosse,
in "Sacred Streams," 1877.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"Jordan was driven back." The waters know their Maker: that Jordan which
flowed with full streams when Christ went into it to be baptized, now
gives way when the same God must pass through it in state: then there
was use of his water, now of his sand. I hear no more news of any rod to
strike the waters; the presence of the ark of the Lord God, Lord of all
the world, is sign enough to these waves, which now, as if a sinew were
broken, run back to their issues, and dare not so much as wet the feet
of the priests that bare it. How subservient are all the creatures to
the God that made them! How glorious a God do we serve; whom all the
powers of the heavens and elements are willingly subject unto, and
gladly take that nature which he pleaseth to give them. - Abraham
Wright.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"Jordan was driven back." It was probably at the point near the present
southern fords, crossed at the time of the Christian era by a bridge.
The river was at its usual state of flood at the spring of the year, so
as to fill the whole of the bed, up to the margin of the jungle with
which the river banks are lined. On the broken edge of the swollen
stream, the band of priests stood with the ark on their shoulders. At
the distance of nearly a mile in the rear was the mass of the army.
Suddenly the full bed of the Jordan was dried before them. High up the
river, "far, far away," "in Adam, the city which is beside Zaretan," "as
far as the parts of Kirjath-jearim" ([Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016).md), that is, at a distance of
thirty miles from the place of the Israelite encampment, the waters
there stood which "descended" "from the heights above," - stood and rose
up, as if gathered into a waterskin; as if in a barrier or heap, as if
congealed; and those that "descended" towards the sea of "the desert,"
the salt Sea, "failed and were cut off." Thus the scene presented is of
the "descending stream" (the words employed seem to have a special
reference to that peculiar and most significant name of the "Jordan"),
not parted asunder, as we generally fancy, but, as the Psalm expresses
it, "turned backwards"; the whole bed of the river left dry from north
to south, through its long windings; the huge stones lying bare here and
there, imbedded in the soft bottom; or the shingly pebbles drifted along
the course of the channel. - Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, in "The History of
the Jewish Church," 1870.

[Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

"The mountains skipped like rams," etc. The figure drawn from the lambs
and rams would appear to be inferior to the magnitude of the subject.
But it was the prophet's intention to express in the homeliest way the
incredible manner in which God, on these occasions, displayed his power.
The stability of the earth being, as it were, founded on the mountains,
what connection can they have with rams and lambs, that they should be
agitated, skipping hither and thither? In speaking in this homely style,
he does not mean to detract from the greatness of the miracle, but more
forcibly to engrave these extraordinary tokens of God's power on the
illiterate. - John Calvin.

[Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

"Skipped." A poetic description of the concussion caused by the thunder
and lightning that accompanied the divine presence. - James G. Murphy.

[Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

At the giving of the law at Sinai, Horeb and the mountains around, both
great and small, shook with a sudden and mighty earthquake, like rams
leaping in a grassy plain, with the young sheep frisking round them. -
Plain Commentary.

[Psa 114:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

When Christ descends upon the soul in the work of conversion, what
strength doth he put forth! The strongholds of sin are battered down,
every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of Christ is
brought into captivity to the obedience of his sceptre, [Co2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#004.md), [Co2
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005.md). Devils are cast out of the
possession which they have kept for many years without the least
disturbance. Strong lusts are mortified and the very constitution of the
soul is changed. "What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou
Jordan, that thou wast driven back? ye mountains, that ye skipped like
rams?" etc. The prophet speaks those words of the powerful entrance of
the children of Israel into Canaan. The like is done by Christ in the
conversion of a sinner. Jordan is driven back, the whole course of the
soul is altered, the mountains skip like rams. There are many mountains
in the soul of a sinner, as pride, unbelief, self-conceitedness,
atheism, profaneness, etc. These mountains are plucked up by the roots
in a moment when Christ begins the work of conversion. - Ralph Robinson.

[Psa 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md)

Fly where thou wilt, O sea!

And Jordan's current cease!

Jordan, there is no need of thee,

For at God's word, whene'er he please,

The rocks shall weep new waters forth instead of these.

Abraham Cowley.

[Psa 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md), [Psa
114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md)

A singular animation and an almost dramatic force are given to the poem
by the beautiful apostrophe in [Psa
114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md), [Psa
114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md), and the effect of this is
heightened in a remarkable degree by the use of the present tenses. The
awe and the trembling of nature are a spectacle on which the poet is
looking. The parted sea through which Israel walks as on dry land, the
rushing Jordan arrested in its course, the granite cliffs of Sinai
shaken to their base - he sees it all, and asks in wonder what it means?
- J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md), [Psa
114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md)

This questioning teaches us that we should ourselves consider and
inquire concerning the reason of those things, which we see to have been
done in a wondrous way, out of the course of nature. There are signs in
the sun, moon, stars, heaven, etc., concerning which Christ has spoken.
Let us inquire the reason why they are, that we be not stupid and
inaccurate spectators. The things which are done miraculously do speak:
and they can give answer why they are done. Nay, rather, portents,
signs, earthquakes, extraordinary appearances are loudspeaking, and they
declare from themselves what they are: namely, that they fire prophetic
of the anger and future vengeance of God. Such inquiry as this is not
prying curiosity, but is pious and useful, working to this end, that we
become observant of the judgments of God, with which he visits this
world, and yield ourselves to his grace, and so we escape the coming
vengeance. - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md), [Psa
114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md)

What ails thee, sea, to part,

Thee, Jordan, back to start?

Ye mountains, like the rams to leap,

Ye little hills, like sheep?

John Keble.

[Psa 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md)

"Tremble, thou earth." Hebrew, Be in pain, as a travailing woman; for if
the giving of the law had such dreadful effects, what should the
breaking thereof have? - John Trapp.

[Psa 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md)

"At the presence of the Lord be in pangs, O earth.'

"Lord," Adon, the Sovereign Ruler. "Pangs," Chuli: [Mic
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010.md). The convulsions of nature, which
accompanied the Exodus, were as the birth-throes of the Israelite
people. "A nation was born in a day." But the deliverance out of Babylon
saw the prelude to a far more wondrous truth; - that of him, in whom
nature was to be regenerated. - William Kay.

[Psa 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md), [Psa
114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

"Tremble," etc. This is an answer to the preceding question: as if he
had said, It is no wonder that Sinai, and Horeb, and a few adjoining
hills should tremble at the majestic presence of God; for the whole
earth must do so, whenever he pleases. - Thomas Fenton.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

"Which turned the rock into a standing water." Into a pool. The divine
poet represents the very substance of the rock as being converted into
water, not literally, but poetically; thus ornamenttrig his sketch of
the wondrous power displayed on this occasion. - William Walford.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

The remarkable rock ill Sinai which tradition regards as the one which
Moses smote, is at least well chosen in regard to its situation,
whatever opinion we may form of the truth of that tradition, which it
seems to be the disposition of late travellers to regard with more
respect than was formerly entertained. It is an isolated mass of
granite, nearly twenty feet square and high, with its base concealed in
the earth - we are left to conjecture to what depth. In the face of the
rock are a number of horizontal fissures, at unequal distances from each
other; some near the top, and others at a little distance from the
surface of the ground. An American traveller says: "The colour and whole
appearance of the rock are such that, if seen elsewhere, and
disconnected from all traditions, no one would hesitate to believe that
they had been produced by water flowing from these fissures. I think it
would be extremely difficult to form these fissures or produce these
appearances by art. It is not less difficult to believe that a natural
fountain should flow at the height of a dozen feet out of the face of an
isolated rock. Believing, as I do, that the water, alas brought out of a
rock belonging to this mountain, I can see nothing incredible in the
opinion that this is the identical rock, and that these fissures, and
the other appearances, should be regarded as evidences of the fact." -
John Kitto.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

Shall the hard rock be turned into a standing water, and the flint-stone
into a springing well? and shall not our hard and flinty hearts, in
consideration of our own miseries, and God's unspeakable mercies in
delivering us from evil, (if not gush forth into fountains of tears)
express so much as a little standing water in our eyes? It is our hard
heart indeed, quod nec compunctione scinditur, nec pietate mollitur, nec
movetur precibus, minis non cedit, flagellis duratur, etc. O Lord, touch
thou the mountains and they Shall smoke, touch our lips with a coal from
thine altar, and our mouth shall show forth thy praise. Smite, Lord, our
flinty hearts as hard as the nether millstone, with the hammer of thy
word, and mollify them also with the drops of thy mercies and dew of thy
Spirit; make them humble, fleshy, flexible, circumcised, soft, obedient,
new, clean, broken, and then "a broken and a contrite heart, O God,
shalt thou not despise." [Psa 51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md).
"O Lord my God, give me grace from the very bottom of my heart to desire
thee; in desiring, to seek thee; in seeking, to find; in finding, to
love thee; in loving, utterly to loathe my former wickedness;" that
living in thy fear, and dying in thy favour, when I have passed through
this Egypt and wilderness of this world, I may possess the heavenly
Canaan and happy land of promise, prepared for all such as love thy
coming, even for every Christian one, which is thy "dominion" and
"sanctuary." - John Boys.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

The same almighty power that turned waters into a rock to be a wall to
Israel ([Exo 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022).md), turned the rock
into waters to be a well to Israel. As they were protected, so they were
provided for, by miracles, standing miracles; for such was the standing
water, that fountain of waters, into which the rock, the flinty rock,
was turned "and that rock was Christ," [Co1
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004.md). For he is a fountain of living
waters to his Israel, from whom they receive grace for grace. - Matthew
Henry.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

"The flint into a fountain of waters." The causing of water to gush
forth out of the flinty rock is a practical proof of unlimited
omnipotence and of the grace which converts death into life. Let the
earth then tremble before the Lord, the God of Jacob. It has always
trembled before him, and before him let it tremble. For that which he
has been he still ever is; and as he came once he will come again. -
Franz Delitzsch.

[Psalms 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 114:1</span></span>

1 When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of
strange language;

2 Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion.

3 The sea saw it, and fled: Jordan was driven back.

4 The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs.

5 What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that
thou wast driven back?

6 Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like
lambs?

7 Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of
the God of Jacob;

8 Which turned the rock into a standing water, the flint into a fountain
of waters.

[Psa 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

"When Israel went out of Egypt." The song begins with a burst, as if the
poetic fury could not be restrained, but overleaped all bounds. The soul
elevated and filled with: a sense of divine glory cannot wait to fashion
a preface, but springs at once into the middle of its theme. Israel
emphatically came out of Egypt, out of the population among whom they
had been scattered, from under the yoke of bondage, and from under the
personal grasp of the king who had made the people into national slaves.
Israel came out with a high hand and a stretched-out arm, defying all
the power of the empire, and making the whole of Egypt to travail with
sore anguish, as the chosen nation was as it were born out of its midst.
"The house of Jacob from a people of strange language." They had gone
down into Egypt as a single family - "the house of Jacob"; and, though
they had multiplied greatly, they were still so united, and were so
fully regarded by God as a single unit, that they are rightly spoken of
as the house of Jacob. They were as one man in their willingness to
leave Goshen; numerous as they were, not a single individual stayed
behind. Unanimity is a pleasing token of the divine presence, and one of
its sweetest fruits. One of their inconveniences in Egypt was the
difference of languages, which was very great. The Israelites appear to
have regarded the Egyptians as stammerers and babblers, since they could
not understand them, and they very naturally considered the Egyptians to
be barbarians, as they would no doubt often beat them because they did
not comprehend their orders. The language of foreign taskmasters is
never musical in an exile's ear. How sweet it is to a Christian who has
been compelled to hear the filthy conversation of the wicked, when at
last he is brought out from their midst to dwell among his own people!

[Psa 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

"Judah was his sanctuary, and Israel his dominion." The pronoun "his"
comes in where we should have looked for the name of God; but the poet
is so full of thought concerning the Lord that he forgets to mention his
name, like the spouse in the Song, who begins, "Let him kiss me," or
Magdalene when she cried, "Tell me where thou hast laid him." From the
mention of Judah and Israel certain critics have inferred that this
Psalm must have been written after the division of the two kingdoms; but
this is only another instance of the extremely slender basis upon which
an hypothesis is often built up. Before the formation of the two
kingdoms-David had said, "Go, number Israel and Judah," and this was
common parlance, for Uriah the Hittite said, "The ark and Israel, and
Judah abide in tents"; so that nothing can be inferred from the use of
the two names. No division into two kingdoms can have been intended
here, for the poet is speaking of the coming out of Egypt when the
people were so united that he has just before called them "the house of
Judah." It would be quite as fair to prove from [Psa
114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md) that the Psalm was written, when
the people were in union as to prove from the second that its authorship
dates from their separation. Judah was the tribe which led the way in
the wilderness march, and it was forseen in prophecy to be the royal
tribe, hence its poetical mention in this place. The meaning of the
passage is that the whole people at the coming out of Egypt were
separated unto the Lord to be a peculiar people, a nation of priests
whose motto should be, "Holiness unto the Lord." Judah was the Lord's
"holy thing," set apart for his special use. The nation was peculiarly
Jehovah's dominion, for it was governed by a theocracy in which God
alone was King. It was his domain in a sense in which the rest of the
world was outside his kingdom. These were the young days of Israel, the
time of her espousals, when she went after the Lord into the wilderness,
her God leading the way with signs and miracles. The whole people were
the shrine of Deity, and their camp was one great temple. What a change
there must have been for the godly amongst them from the idolatries and
blasphemies of the Egyptians to the holy worship and righteous rule of
the great King in Jeshurun. They lived in a world of wonders, where God
was seen in the wondrous bread they ate and in the water they drank, as
well as in the solemn worship of his holy place. When the Lord is
manifestly present in a church, and his gracious rule obediently owned,
what a golden age has come, and what honourable privileges his people
enjoy! May it be so among us.

[Psa 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

"The sea saw it, and fled"; or rather, "The sea saw and fled" - it saw
God and all his people following his lead, and it was struck with awe
and fled away. A bold figure I The Bed Sea mirrored the hosts which had
come down to its shore, and reflected the cloud which towered high over
all, as the symbol of the presence of the Lord- never had such a scene
been imagined upon the surface of the Bed Sea, or any other sea, before.
It could not endure the unusual and astounding sight, and fleeing to the
right and to the left, opened a passage for the elect people. A like
miracle happened at the end of the great march of Israel, for "Jordan
was driven back." This was a swiftly-flowing river, pouring itself down
a steep decline, and it was not merely divided, but its current was
driven back so that the rapid torrent, contrary to nature, flowed
up-hill. This was God's work' the poet does not sing of the suspension
of natural laws, or of a singular phenomenon not readily to be
explained; but to him the presence of God with his people is everything,
and in his lofty song he tells how the river was driven back because the
Lord was there. In this case poetry is nothing but the literal fact, and
the fiction lies on the side of the atheistic critics who will suggest
any explanation of the miracle rather than admit that the Lord made bare
his holy arm in the eyes of all his people. The division of the sea and
the drying up of the river are placed together though forty years
intervened, because they were the opening and closing scenes of one
great event. We may thus unite by faith our new birth and our departure
out of the world into the promised inheritance, for the God who led us
out of the Egypt of our bondage under sin will also conduct us through
the Jordan of death out of our wilderness wanderings in the desert of
this tried and changeful life. It is all one and the same deliverance,
and the beginning ensures the end.

[Psa 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

"The mountains skipped like rams, and the little hills like lambs." At
the coming of the Lord to Mount Sinai, the hills moved; either leaping
for joy in the presence of their Creator like young lambs; or, if you
will, springing from their places in affright at the terrible majesty of
Jehovah, and flying like a flock of sheep when alarmed. Men fear the
mountains, but the mountains tremble before the Lord. Sheep and lambs
move lightly in the meadows; but the hills, which we are wont to call
eternal, were as readily made to move as the most active creatures. Rams
in their strength, and lambs in their play, are not more stirred than
were the solid hills when Jehovah marched by. Nothing is immovable but
God himself' the mountains shall depart, and the hills be removed, but
the covenant of his grace abideth fast for ever and ever. Even thus do
mountains of sin and hills of trouble move when the Lord comes forth to
lead his people to their eternal Canaan. Let us never fear, but rather
let our faith say unto this mountain, "Be thou removed hence and cast
into the sea," and it shall be done.

[Psa 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md)

"What ailed thee, O thou sea?" Were thou terribly afraid? Did thy
strength fail thee? Did thy very heart dry up? "What ailed thee, O thou
sea, that thou fleddest?" Thou wert neighbour to the power of Pharaoh,
but thou didst never fear his hosts; stormy wind could never prevail
against thee so as to divide thee in twain; but when the way of the Lord
was in thy great waters thou wast seized with affright, and thou
becamest a fugitive from before him. "Thou Jordan, that thou wast driven
back?" What ailed thee, O quick descending river? Thy fountains had not
dried up, neither had a chasm opened to engulph thee! The near approach
of Israel and her God sufficed to make thee retrace thy steps. What
aileth all our enemies that they fly when the Lord is on our side? What
aileth hell itself that it is utterly routed when Jesus lifts up a
standard against it? "Fear took hold upon them there," for fear of him
the stoutest hearted did quake, and became as dead men.

[Psa 114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md)

"Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams; and ye little hills, like
lambs?" What ailed ye that ye were thus moved? There is but one reply:
the majesty of God made you to leap. A gracious mind will chide human
nature for its strange insensibility, when the sea and the river, the
mountains and the hills, are all sensitive to the presence of God. Man
is endowed with reason and intelligence, and yet he sees unmoved that
which the material creation beholds with fear. God has come nearer to us
than ever he did to Sinai, or to Jordan, for he has assumed our nature,
and yet the mass of mankind are neither driven back from their sins, nor
moved in the paths of obedience.

[Psa 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md)

"Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord, at the presence of
the God of Jacob." Or "from before the Lord, the Adonai, the Master and
King." Very fitly does the Psalm call upon all nature again to feel a
holy awe because its Ruler is still in its midst.

"Quake when Jehovah walks abroad,

Quake, earth, at sight of Israel's God."

Let the believer feel that God is near, and he will serve the Lord with
fear and rejoice with trembling. Awe is not cast out by faith, but the
rather it becomes deeper and more profound. The Lord is most reverenced
where he is most loved.

[Psa 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

"Which turned the rock into a standing water," causing a mere or lake to
stand at its foot, making the wilderness a pool: so abundant was the
supply of water from the rock that it remained like water in a
reservoir. "The flint into a fountain of waters," which flowed freely in
streams, following the tribes in their devious marches. Behold what God
can do! It seemed impossible that the flinty rock should become a
fountain; but he speaks, and it is done. Not only do mountains move, but
rocks yield rivers when the God of Israel wills that it should be so.

"From stone and solid rock he brings

The spreading lake, the gushing springs."

"O magnify the Lord with me, and let us exalt his name together," for he
it is and he alone who doeth such wonders as these. He supplies our
temporal needs from sources of the most unlikely kind, and never suffers
the stream of his liberality to fail. As for our spiritual necessities
they are all met by the water and the blood which gushed of old from the
riven rock, Christ Jesus' therefore let us extol the Lord our God.

Our deliverance from under the yoke of sin is strikingly typified in the
going up of Israel from Egypt, and so also was the victory of our Lord
over the powers of death and hell. The Exodus should therefore be
earnestly remembered by Christian hearts. Did not Moses on the mount of
transfiguration speak to our Lord of "the exodus" which he should
shortly accomplish at Jerusalem; and is it not written of the hosts
above that they sing the song of Moses the servant of God, and of the
Lamb? Do we not ourselves expect another coming of the Lord, when before
his face heaven and earth shall flee away and there shall be no more
sea? We join hen with the singers around the Passover table and make
their Hallel ours, for we too have been led out of bondage and guided
like a flock through a desert land, wherein the Lord supplies our wants
with heavenly manna and water from the Rock of ages. Praise ye the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 115](psa115.md)

</div>
