<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa122)  [Next](psa124.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 123](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 123:0</span></span>

Title. - A Song of degrees. We are climbing. The first step ([Psa
120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001).md) saw us lamenting our
troublesome surroundings, and the next saw us lifting our eyes to the
hills and resting in assured security; from this we rose to delight in
the house of the Lord; but here we look to the Lord himself and this is
the highest ascent of all by many degrees. The eyes are now looking
above the hills, and above Jehovah's footstool on earth, to his throne
in the heavens. Let us know it as "the Psalm of the eyes." Old authors
call it Oculus Sperans, or the eye of hope. It is a short Psalm, written
with singular art, containing one thought, and expressing it in a most
engaging manner. Doubtless it would be a favourite song among the people
of God. It has been conjectured that this brief song, or rather sigh,
may have first been heard in the days of Nehemiah, or under the
persecutions of Antiochus. It may be so, but there is no evidence of it;
it seems to us quite as probable that afflicted ones in all periods
after David's time found this Psalm ready to their hand. If it appears
to describe days remote from David, it is all the more evident that the
Psalmist was also a prophet, and sang what he saw in vision.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. - We have here,

I. The prayer of dependence, [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md).

II\. The prayer of apprehension, "Unto thee," etc.

III\. The spirit of obedience: "As the eyes of servants," etc.

IV\. The patience of the saints: "Until he have mercy upon us." - R.
Nisbet.

Whole Psalm. - Eyes and no eyes.

I. EYES.

1\. Upward, in confidence, in prayer, in thought.

2\. "Unto," in reverence, watchfulness, obedience.

3\. Inward, producing a cry for mercy.

II\. No EYES.

1\. No sight of the excellence of the godly.

2\. No sense of their own danger: "at ease."

3\. No humility before God: "proud."

4\. No unlifted eyes in hope, prayer, expectation.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md). - The eyes of faith.

I. Need uplifting.

II\. See best upward.

III\. Have always something to see upward.

IV\. Let us look up, and so turn our eyes from too much introspection
and retrospection.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md). -

I. The language of Adoration, "Thou that dwellest in the heavens."

II\. The language of Confession.

1\. Of need.

2\. Of helplessness.

III\. The language of Supplication, "Unto thee," etc.

IV\. The language of Expectation; as shown in [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md). - G. R.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md). - ([Psa
121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004) with this verse..md) Two beholds.

I. God's watchful eye over us.

II\. The saint's watchful eye upon God.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md). - "Our eyes wait upon the
Lord our God."

I. What it is to wait with the eye.

II\. What peculiar aspect of the Lord suggests such waiting, "Jehovah
our God." The covenant God is the trusted God.

III\. What comes of such waiting - "mercy."

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md). - The guiding hand.

I. A beckoning hand - to go near.

II\. A directing hand into go here and there.

III\. A quiescent hand - to remain where we are. - G. R.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md). - Homely metaphors, or
what may be learned from maids and their mistresses.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003) (first portion.md). - The
Sinner's Litany. The Saint's Entreaty.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003) (second portion.md). - The
world's contempt, the abundance of it, the reason of it, the bitterness
of it, the comfort under it.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md), [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md). -

I. The occasion of the prayer, the contempt of men. This is often the
most difficult to bear.

1\. Because it is most unreasonable. Why ridicule men for yielding to
their own convictions of what is right?

2\. Most undeserved. True religion injures no man, but seeks the good of
all.

3\. Most profane. To reproach the people of God because they are his
people is to reproach God himself.

II\. The subject of the prayer.

1\. The prayer, is not for justice, which might be desired, but for
mercy.

2\. The plea, "For we are," etc. The reproaches of men are an
encouragement to look for special help from God. The harp hung upon the
willows sends forth its sweetest tones. The less it is in human hands
the more freely it is played upon by the Spirit of God. - G. R.

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md). - "Those that are at
ease."

I. Explain their state, "at ease."

II\. Show their ordinary state of mind, "proud."

III\. Denounce their frequent sin: scorn of the godly.

IV\. Exhibit their terrible danger.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

This Psalm (as ye see) is but short, and therefore a very fit example to
show the force of prayer not to consist in many words, but in fervency
of spirit. For great and weighty matters may be comprised in a few
words, if they proceed from the spirit and the unspeakable groanings of
the heart, especially when our necessity is such as will not suffer any
long prayer. Every prayer is long enough if it be fervent and proceed
from a heart that understandeth the necessity of the saints. - Martin
Luther.

Whole Psalm

The change of performers in this Psalm is very evident; the pronoun in
the first distich is in the first person singular, in the rest of Psalm
the first plural is used. - Stephen Street.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm has one distinction which is to be found in "scarcely any
other piece in the Old Testament." In the Hebrew it has many rhymes. But
these rhymes are purely accidental. They result simply from the fact
that many words are used in it with the same inflexions, and therefore
with the same or similar terminations. Regularly recurring and
intentional rhymes are not a characteristic of Hebrew poetry, any more
than they were of Greek or Latin poetry. - Samuel Cox.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee lift I up mine eyes." He who previously lifted his eyes unto
the hills, now hath raised his heart's eyes to the Lord himself. - The
Venerable Bede (672-735), in Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee lift I up mine eyes," etc. This is the sigh of the pilgrim
who ascendeth and loveth, and ascendeth because he loveth. He is
ascending from earth to heaven, and while he is ascending, unto whom
shall he lift his eyes, but unto him that dwelleth in heaven? We ascend
to heaven each time we think of God. In that ascent lies all goodness:
if we would repent, we must look not on ourselves, but on him; if we
would be humble, we must look not on ourselves, but on him; if we would
truly love, we must look not on ourselves, but on him who dwelleth in
the heavens. If we would have him turn his eyes from our sins, we must
turn our eyes unto his mercy and truth. - "Plain Commentary."

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee lift I up mine eyes." Praying by the glances of the eye
rather than by words; mine afflictions having swollen my heart too big
for my mouth. - John Trapp.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee do I lift up mine eyes." You feel the greatness of the
contrast these words imply. Earth and heaven, dust and deity; the poor,
weeping, sinful children of mortality, the holy, ever-blessed, eternal
God, how wide is the interval of separation between them! But over the
awful chasm, broader than ocean though it be, love and wisdom in the
person of Jesus Christ, have thrown a passage, by which the most sinful
may repair unterrified to his presence, and find the shame and the fears
of guilt exchanged for the peace of forgiveness and the hope that is
full of immortality. - Robert Nisbet.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

There are many testimonies in the lifting up of the eyes to heaven.

I. It is the testimony of a believing, humble heart. Infidelity will
never carry a man above the earth. Pride can carry a man no higher than
the earth either.

II\. It is the testimony of an obedient heart. A man that lifts up his
eye to God, he acknowledgeth thus much, - Lord, I am thy servant.

III\. It is the testimony of a thankful heart; acknowledging that every
good blessing, every perfect gift, is from the hand of God.

IV\. It is the testimony of a heavenly heart. He that lifts up his eyes
to heaven acknowledgeth that he is weary of the earth; his heart is not
there; his hope and desire is above.

V. It is the testimony of a devout heart: there is no part of the body
besides the tongue that is so great an agent in prayer as the eye. -
Condensed from Richard Holdsworth.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"O thou that dwellest in the heavens." "That sittest." The Lord is here
contemplated as enthroned in heaven, where he administers the affairs of
the universe executes judgment, and hears prayer. - James G. Murphy.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md), [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

The lifting up the eyes, implies faith and confident persuasion that God
is ready and willing to help us. The very lifting up of the bodily eyes
towards heaven is an expression of this inward trust, so David in effect
saith, From thee, Lord, I expect relief, and the fulfilling of thy
promises. So that there is faith in it, that faith which is the evidence
of things not seen. How great soever the darkness of our calamities be,
though the clouds of present troubles thicken about us, and hide the
Lord's care and loving-kindness from us, yet faith must look through all
to his power and constancy of truth and love. The eye of faith is a
clear, piercing, eagle eye, Moses "endured, as seeing him who is
invisible'" [Heb 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#027.md).... Faith seeth
things afar off in the promises ([Heb
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#013).md), at a greater distance than the
eye of nature can reach to. Take it either for the eye of the body, or
the mind, faith will draw comfort not only from that which is invisible,
but also from that which is future as well as invisible; its supports
lie in the other world, and in things which are yet to come. - Thomas
Manton.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md), [Psa
123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

In the first strophe the poet places himself before us as standing in
the presence of the Majesty of Heaven, with his eyes fixed on the hand
of God, absorbed in watchful expectation of some sign or gesture,
however slight, which may indicate the Divine will. He is like a slave
standing silent but alert, in the presence of the Oriental "lord," with
hands folded on his breast, and eyes fixed on his master, seeking to
read, and to anticipate, if possible, his every wish. He is like a
maiden in attendance on her mistress, anxiously striving to see her mind
in her looks, to discover and administer to her moods and wants. The
grave, reserved Orientals, as we know, seldom speak to their attendants,
at least on public occasions. They intimate their wishes and commands by
a wave of the hand, by a glance of the eye, by slight movements and
gestures which might escape notice were they not watched for with eager
attention. Their slaves "hang upon their faces;" they "fasten their
eyes" on the eyes of their master; they watch and obey every turn of his
hand, every movement of his finger. Thus the Psalmist conceives of
himself as waiting on God, looking to him alone, watching for the
faintest signal bent on catching and obeying it. - Samuel Cox.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Behold." An ordinary word, but here it hath an extraordinary position.
Ordinarily it is a term of attention, used for the awakening of man, to
stir up their admiration and audience; but here it is a word not only
prefixed for the exciting of men, but of God himself. David is speaking
to God in his meditations. "Behold," saith he. As we take it with
respect to God, so it is a precatory particle, he beseecheth God to look
down upon him, while he looks up unto God, Look on us, as we look to
thee; "Behold, Lord, as the eyes of servants," etc. If we take it as it
hath respect to man, so it is an exemplary particle, to stir them up to
do the like. "Behold" what we do, and do likewise; let your eyes be like
ours. "Behold, as the eyes of servants are to the hand of their masters,
so are our eyes to the Lord our God." Let yours have the same fixing. So
it is a word that draws all eyes after it to imitation. - Richard
Holdsworth.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Behold, as the eyes of servants look," etc. For direction, defence,
maintenance, mercy in time of correction, help when the service is
over-hard, etc., "so do our eyes wait upon the Lord our God," viz., for
direction and benediction. - John Trapp.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Eyes of servants unto the hand," etc. Our eyes ought to be to the hand
of the Lord our God: - First, that we may admire his works. Secondly,
that we may show that our service is pleasant to us; and to show our
dependence on such a benign, mighty, and bountiful hand. Thirdly, that
we may evince to him our love, and devoted willingness to do all things
which he shall command by the slightest movement of a finger. Fourthly,
that from him we may receive food, and all things necessary for
sustenance. Fifthly, that he may be a defence for us against the enemies
that molest us, either by smiting them with the sword, or by shooting of
arrows; or by repelling others by the movement of a finger; or, at
least, by covering us with the shield of his good-will. Sixthly and
lastly, that, moved by mercy, he would cease from chastisement. -
Condensed from Le Blanc.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"As the eyes of servants look ante the hand of their masters," etc. A
traveller says, "I have seen a fine illustration of this passage in a
gentleman's house at Damascus. The people of the East do not speak so
much or so quick as those in the West, and a sign of the hand is
frequently the only instructions given to the servants in waiting. As
soon as we were introduced and seated on the divan, a wave of the
master's hand indicated that sherbet was to be served. Another wave
brought coffee and pipes; another brought sweetmeats. At another signal
dinner was made ready. The attendants watched their master's eye and
hand, to know his will and do it instantly." Such is the attention with
which we ought to wait upon the Lord, anxious to fulfil his holy
pleasure, - our great desire being, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to
do?" An equally pointed and more homely illustration may be seen any
day, on our own river Thames, or in any of our large seaport towns,
where the call-boy watches attentively the hand of the captain of the
boat, and conveys his will to the engine-men. - "The Sunday at Home."

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"As the eyes of slaves," watching anxiously the least movement, the
smallest sign of their master's will. The image expresses complete and
absolute dependence. Savary (in his Letters on Egypt, p. 135), says,
"The slaves stand silent at the bottom of the rooms with their hands
crossed over their breasts. With their eyes fixed upon their master they
seek to anticipate every one of his wishes.".... In the Psalm the eye
directed to the hand of God is the oculus sperans, the eye which waits,
and hopes, and is patient, looking only to him and none other for help.
- J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"As the eyes of servants," etc. The true explanation, I should
apprehend, is this: As a slave, ordered by a master or mistress to be
chastised for a fault, turns his or her imploring eyes to that superior,
till that motion of the hand appears that puts an end to the bitterness
that is felt; so our eyes are up to thee, our God, till thy hand shall
give the signal for putting an end to our sorrows: for our enemies, O
Lord, we are sensible, are only executing thy orders, and chastening us
according to thy pleasure. - Thomas Harmer.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Servants." Note how humbly the faithful think of themselves in the
sight of God. They are called and chosen to this dignity, to be the
heirs and children of God, and are exalted above the angels, and yet,
notwithstanding, they count themselves no better in God's sight than
"servants." They say not here, Behold, like as children look to the hand
of their fattiers, but "as servants" to the hand of their masters. This
is the humility and modesty of the godly, and it is so far off that
hereby they lose the dignity of God's children, to the which they are
called, that by this means it is made to them more sure and certain. -
Martin Luther.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

From the everyday conduct of domestic servants we should learn our duty
Godwards. Not without cause did our Saviour take his parables from
common, everyday things, from fields, vines, trees, marriages, etc.,
that thus we might have everywhere apt reminders. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Servants." "A maiden." Consider that there be two sorts of servants set
down here, man-servants and maid-servants' and this is to let us know
that both sexes may be confident in God. Not only may men be confident
in the power of God, but even women also, who are more frail and feeble.
Not only may women mourn to God for wrongs done to them, and have
repentance for sin, but they may be confident in God also. And therefore
see, in that rehearsal of believers and cloud of witnesses, not only is
the faith of men noted and commended by the Spirit of God, but also the
faith of women: and among the judges, Deborah, Jael, etc., are commended
as worthies, and courageous in God. And the women also in the New
Testament are noted for their following of Christ - even when all fled
from him, then they followed him. - From a sermon by Alexander
Henderson, 1583-1646.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Servants." "A maiden." - We know how shamefully servants were treated
in ancient times, and what reproaches must be east upon them, whilst yet
they durst not move a finger to repel the outrage. Being therefore
deprived of all means of defending themselves, the only thing which
remained for them to do was, what is here stated, to crave the
protection of their masters. The same explanation is equally applicable
to the case of handmaids. Their condition was indeed shameful and
degrading; but there is no reason why we should be ashamed of, or
offended at, being compared to slaves, provided God is our defender, and
takes our lives under his guardianship; God, I say, who purposely
disarms us and strips us of all worldly aid, that we may learn to rely
upon his grace, and to be contented with it alone. It having been
anciently a capital crime for bondmen to carry a sword or any other
weapon about them, and as they were exposed to injuries of every
description, their masters were wont to defend them with so much the
more spirit, when anyone causelessly did them violence. Nor can it be
doubted that God, when he sees us placing an exclusive dependence upon
his protection, and renouncing all confidence in our own resources,
will, as our defender, encounter and shield us from all the molestation
that shall be offered to us. - John Calvin.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Hand." With the hand we demand, we promise, we call, dismiss, threaten,
entreat, supplicate, deny, refuse, interrogate, admire, reckon, confess,
repent; express fear, express shame, express doubt; We instruct,
command, unite, encourage, swear, testify, accuse, condemn, acquit,
insult, despise, defy, disdain, flatter, applaud, bless, abase,
ridicule, reconcile, recommend, exalt, regale, gladden, complain,
afflict, discomfort, discourage, astonish; exclaim, indicate silence,
and what not? with a variety and a multiplication that keep pace with
the tongue. - Michael de Montaigne, 1533-1592.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Masters." It is said of Mr. George Herbert, that divine poet, that, to
satisfy his independency upon all others, and to quicken his diligence
in God's service, he used in his ordinary speech, when he made mention
of the blessed name of Jesus, to add, "my Master." And, without any
doubt, if men were unfeignedly of his mind, their respects would be more
to Christ's command, to Christ's will, to Christ's pleasure. - From
Spencer's "Things New and Old."

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Our eyes wait." Here the Psalmist uses another word: it is the eye
waiting. What is the reason of the second word? Now he leaves the
similitude in the first line; for in the first line it is thus, - "As
the eyes of servants look, and the eyes of a maiden look"; here it is
the eye waits. There is good reason, to wait is more than to look: to
wait is to look constantly, with patience and submission, by subjecting
our affections and wills and desires to God's will; that is to wait.
David in the second part, in the second line, gives a better word, he
betters his copy. There is the duty of a Christian, to better his
example; the eyes of servants look, David's eyes shall wait, "So our
eyes wait." It is true indeed this word is not in the original,
therefore you may observe it is in a small letter in your Bibles, to
note that it is a word of necessity, added for the supply of the sense,
because the Holy Ghost left it not imperfect, but more perfect, that he
put not in the verb; because it is left to every man's heart to supply a
verb to his own comfort, and a better he cannot than this. And that this
word must be added appears by the next words: "until that he have mercy
upon us." To look till he have mercy on us is to wait; so there is good
reason why this word is added. If we look to the thing begged - "mercy"
- it is so precious that we may wait for it. It was "servants" that he
mentioned, and it is their duty to wait upon their masters; they wait
upon their trenchers at meat; they wait when they go to bed and when
they rise; they wait in every place. Therefore, because he had mentioned
the first word, he takes the proper duty; there is nothing more proper
to servants than waiting, and if we are the servants of God we must
wait. There is good reason in that respect, because it is a word so
significant, therefore the Spirit of God varies it; he keeps not exactly
to the line, "So do our eyes look," but he puts it, "So do our eyes
wait." - Richard Holdsworth.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md)

"Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us!" Note how a godly man
speaks. He does not say, "Have mercy upon me, O Lord, have mercy upon me
I because I am disgraced;" but, "Have mercy upon us, O Lord, for we are
filled with contempt!" The godly man is not so grieved for his own and
individual contempt as he is for the general contempt of the good and
faithful. There is an accord of the godly, not only in the cross, but
also in groanings, and in the invocation of divine grace. - Wolfgang
Musculus.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md)

"For we are exceedingly filled." The Hebrew word here used means "to be
saturated"; to have the appetite fully satisfied - as applied to one who
is hungry or thirsty. Then it comes to mean to be entirely full, and the
idea here is, that as much contempt had been thrown upon them as could
be; they could experience no more. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md)

"We are exceedingly filled with contempt." Men of the world regard the
Temple Pilgrims and their religion with the quiet smile of disdain,
wondering that those who have so much to engage them in a present life
should be weak enough to concern themselves about frames and feelings,
about an unseen God, and unknown eternity; and this is a trial they find
hard to bear. Their soul, too, is filled exceedingly with the scorning
of those that are at ease. The prosperous of their neighbours declare
that they have found the world a generous and happy scene to all who
deserve its gifts. Poverty and sorrow they attribute to unworthiness
alone. "Let them exert themselves," is the unfeeling cry; "let them
bestir themselves instead of praying, and with them as with us it will
soon be well;" and these words of harsh and unfeeling ignorance are like
poison to the wounds of the bleeding heart. They have further "the
contempt of the proud" to mourn; of those who give expression to their
fierce disdain by assailing them with words of contumely, and who seek
to draw them by reproaches both from peace and from piety. These are
still the trials of Zion's worshippers: silent contempt, open
misrepresentation, fierce opposition. Religion, their last comfort, is
despised; peace, their first desire, is denied. Anxious to devote
themselves in the spirit of humble and earnest piety to the duties of
their appointed sphere, they find enemies in open outcry and array
against them. But God is their refuge, and to him they go. - Robert
Nisbet.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md), [Psa
123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

The second strophe takes up the "have mercy upon us," as it were in
echo. It begins with a Kyrie eleison, which is confirmed in a crescendo
manner after the form of steps. - Franz Delitszch.

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

"Exceedingly filled," or perhaps, "has long been filled." (Compare [Psa
120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006).md). This expression, together with
the earnestness of the repeated prayer, "Be gracious-unto us," shows
that the "scorn" and "contempt" have long pressed upon the people, and
their faith has accordingly been exposed to a severe trial. The more
remarkable is the entire absence of anything like impatience in the
language of the Psalm. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

"The scorning of those that are at ease." When men go on prosperously,
they are apt wrongfully to trouble others, and then to shout at them in
their misery, and to despise the person and cause of God's people. This
is the sure effect of great arrogancy and pride. They think they may do
what they please; they have no changes, therefore they fear not God, but
put forth their hands against such as be at peace with them ([Psa
55:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#019.md), [Psa
55:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#020).md); whilst they go on prosperously
and undisturbedly, they cannot abstain from violence and oppression.
This is certainly pride, for it is a lifting up of the heart above God
and against God and without God. And they do not consider his
providence, which alternately lifts up and casts down, that adversity
may not be without a cordial, nor prosperity without a curb and bridle.
When men sit fast, and are well at ease, they are apt to be insolent and
scornful. Riches and worldly greatness make men insolent and despisers
of others, and not to care what burdens they impose upon them; they are
intrenched within a mass of wealth and power and greatness, and so think
none can call them to an account. - Thomas Manton.

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

"Those that are at ease." The word always means such as are recklessly
at their ease, the careless ones, such as those whom Isaiah bids, "rise
up, tremble, be troubled;" for "many days and years shall ye be
troubled" ([Isa 32:9-11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009).md). It is that
luxury and ease which sensualize the soul, and make it dull, stupid,
hard-hearted. - Edward Bouverie Pusey (1800 - ), in "The Minor
Prophets."

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

"Those that are at ease," who are regardless of the troubles of others,
and expect none of their own. - James G. Murphy.

[Psalms 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 123:1</span></span>

1 Unto thee will I lift up mine eyes, O thou that dwellest in the
heavens.

2 Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the hand of their masters,
and as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her mistress; so our eyes
wait upon the Lord our God, until that he have mercy upon us.

3 Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us: for we are exceedingly
filled with contempt.

4 Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at
ease, and with the contempt of the proud.

[Psa 123:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#001.md)

"Unto thee lift I up mine eyes." It is good to have some one to look up
to. The Psalmist looked so high that he could look no higher. Not to the
hills, but to the God of the hills he looked. He believed in a personal
God, and knew nothing of that modern pantheism which is nothing more
than atheism wearing a figleaf. The uplifted eyes naturally and
instinctively represent the state of heart which fixes desire, hope,
confidence, and expectation upon the Lord. God is everywhere, and yet it
is most natural to think of him as being above us, in that glory-land
which lies beyond the skies. "O thou that dwellest in the heavens," just
sets forth the unsophisticated idea of a child of God in distress; God
is, God is in heaven, God resides in one place, and God is evermore the
same, therefore will I look to him. When we cannot look to any helper on
a level with us it is greatly wise to look above us; in fact, if we have
a thousand helpers, our eyes should still be toward the Lord. The higher
the Lord is the better for our faith, since that height represents
power, glory, and excellence, and these will be all engaged on our
behalf. We ought to be very thankful for spiritual eyes; the blind men
of this world, however much of human learning they may possess, cannot
behold our God, for in heavenly matters they are devoid of sight. Yet we
must use our eyes with resolution, for they will not go upward to the
Lord of themselves, but they incline to look downward, or inward, or
anywhere but to the Lord: let it be our firm resolve that the heavenward
glance shall not be lacking. If we cannot see God, at least we will look
towards him. God is in heaven as a king in his palace; he is there
revealed, adored, and glorified: thence he looks down on the world and
sends succours to his saints as their needs demand; hence we look up,
even when our sorrow is so great that we can do no more. It is a blessed
condescension on God's part that he permits us to lift up our eyes to
his glorious high throne; yea, more, that he invites and even commands
us so to do. When we are looking to the Lord in hope, it is well to tell
him so in prayer: the Psalmist uses his voice as well as his eye. We
need not speak in prayer: a glance of the eye will do it all; for -

"Prayer is the burden of a sigh,

The falling of a tear,

The upward glancing of an eye

When none but God is near."

Still, it is helpful to the heart to use the tongue, and we do well to
address ourselves in words and sentences to the God who heareth his
people. It is no small joy that our God is always at home, he is not on
a journey, like Baal, but he dwells in the heavens. Let us think no hour
of the day inopportune for waiting upon the Lord; no watch of the night
too dark for us to look to him.

[Psa 123:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#002.md)

"Behold" - for it is worthy of regard among men, and O that the Majesty
of heaven would also note it, and speedily send the mercy which our
waiting spirits seek. See, O Lord, how we look to thee, and in thy mercy
look on us. This Behold has, however, a call to us to observe and
consider. Whenever saints of God have waited upon the Lord their example
has been worthy of earnest consideration. Sanctification is a miracle of
grace; therefore let us behold it. For God to have wrought in men the
spirit of service is a great marvel, and as such let all men turn aside
and see this great sight. "As the eyes of servants (or slaves) look unto
the hand of their masters." They stand at the end of the room with their
hands folded watching their lord's movements. Orientals speak less than
we do, and prefer to direct their slaves by movements of their hands;
hence, the domestic must fix his eyes on his master, or he might miss a
sign, and so fail to obey it, even so, the sanctified man lifts his eyes
unto God, and endeavours to learn the divine will from every one of the
signs which the Lord is pleased to use. Creation, providence, grace;
these are all motions of Jehovah's hand, and from each of them a portion
of our duty is to be learned; therefore should we carefully study them,
to discover the divine will. "And as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand
of her mistress;" this second comparison may be used because Eastern
women are even more thorough than the men in the training of their
servants. It is usually thought that women issue more commands, and are
more sensitive of disobedience, than the sterner sex. Among the Roman
matrons female slaves had a sorry time of it, and no doubt it was the
same among the generality of Eastern ladies. "Even so our eyes wait upon
the Lord our God." Believers desire to be attentive to each and all of
the directions of the Lord; even those which concern apparently little
things are not little to us, for we know that even for idle words we
shall be called to account, and we are anxious to give in that account
with joy, and not with grief. True saints, like obedient servants, look
to the Lord their God reverentially, they have a holy awe and inward
fear of the great and glorious One. They watch, obediently, doing his
commandments, guided by his eye. Their constant gaze is fixed
attentively on all that comes from the Most High; they give earnest
heed, and fear lest they should let anything slip through inadvertence
or drowsiness. They look continuously, for there never is a time when
they are off duty; at all times they delight to serve in all things.
Upon the Lord they fix their eyes expectantly, looking for supply,
succour, and safety from his hands, waiting that he may have mercy upon
them. To him they look singly, they have no other confidence, and they
learn to look submissively, waiting patiently for the Lord, seeking both
in activity and suffering to glorify his name. When they are smitten
with the rod they turn their eyes imploring to the hand which chastens,
hoping that mercy will soon abate the rigour of the affliction. There is
much more in the figure than we can display in this brief comment;
perhaps it will be most profitable to suggest the questions - are we
thus trained to service? Though we are sons, have we learned the full
obedience of servants? Have we surrendered self, and bowed our will
before the heavenly Majesty? Do we desire in all things to beat the
Lord's disposal? If so, happy are we. Though we are made joint-heirs
with Christ, yet for the present we differ little from servants, and may
be well content to take them for our model.

Observe the covenant name, "Jehovah our God": it is sweet to wait upon a
covenant God. Because of that covenant he will show mercy to us; but we
may have to wait for it. "Until that he have mercy upon us'" God hath
his time and season, and we must wait until it cometh. For the trial of
our faith our blessed Lord may for awhile delay, but in the end the
vision will be fulfilled. Mercy is that which we need, that which we
look for, that which our Lord will manifest to us. Even those who look
to the Lord, with that holy look which is here described, still need
mercy, and as they cannot claim it by right they wait for it till
sovereign grace chooses to vouchsafe it. Blessed are those servants whom
their Master shall find so doing. Waiting upon the Lord is a posture
suitable both for earth and heaven, it is, indeed, in every place the
right and fitting condition for a servant of the Lord. Nor may we leave
the posture so long as we are by grace dwellers in the realm of mercy.
It is a great mercy to be enabled to wait for mercy.

[Psa 123:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#003.md)

"Have mercy upon us, O Lord, have mercy upon us." He hangs upon the word
"mercy," and embodies it in a vehement prayer, the very word seems to
hold him, and he harps upon it. It is well for us to pray about
everything, and turn everything into prayer; and especially when we are
reminded of a great necessity we should catch at it as a keynote, and
pitch our tune to it. The reduplication of the prayer before us is meant
to express the eagerness of the Psalmist's spirit and his urgent need,
what he needed speedily he begs for importunately. Note that he has left
the first person singular for the plural. All the saints need mercy;
they all seek it; they shall all have it, therefore we pray - "have
mercy upon us." A slave when corrected looks to his master's hand that
the punishment may cease, and even so we look to the Lord for mercy, and
entreat for it with all our hearts. Our contemptuous opponents will have
no mercy upon us,; let us not ask it at their hands, but turn to the God
of mercy, and seek his aid alone.

"For we are exceedingly filled with contempt," and this is an acid which
cats into the soul. Observe the emphatic words. Contempt is bitterness,
wormwood mingled with gall; he that feels it may well cry for mercy to
his God. Filled with contempt, as if the bitter wine had been poured in
till it was up to the brim. This had become the chief thought of their
minds, the peculiar sorrow of their hearts. Excluding all other
feelings, a sense of scorn monopolized the soul and made it unutterably
wretched. Another word is added adverbially - exceedingly filled. Filled
even to running over, as if pressed down and then heaped up. A little
contempt they could bear, but now they were satiated with it, and weary
of it. Do we wonder at the threefold mention of mercy when this master
evil was in the ascendant? Nothing is more wounding, embittering,
festering than disdain. When our companions make little of us we are far
too apt to make little of ourselves and of the consolations prepared for
us. Oh to be filled with communion, and then contempt will run off from
us, and never be able to fill us with its biting vinegar.

[Psa 123:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa123.htm#004.md)

"Our soul is exceedingly filled with the scorning of those that are at
ease." Knowing no troubles of their own, the easy ones grow cruel and
deride the people of the Lord. Having the godly already in secret
contempt, they show it by openly scorning them. Note those who do this'
they are not the poor, the humble, the troubled, but those who have a
merry life of it and are self-content. They are in easy circumstances;
they are easy in heart through a deadened conscience and so they easily
come to mock at holiness; they are easy from needing nothing, and from
having no severe toil exacted from them; they are easy as to any anxiety
to improve, for their conceit of themselves is boundless. Such men take
things easily, and therefore they scorn the holy carefulness of those
who watch the hand of the Lord. They say, Who is the Lord that we should
obey his voice? and then they turn round with a contemptuous look and
sneer at those who fear the Lord. Woe unto them that are at ease in
Zion; their contempt of the godly shall hasten and increase their
misery. The injurious effect of freedom from affliction is singularly
evident here. Place a man perfectly at ease and he derides the suffering
godly, and becomes himself proud in heart and conduct. "And with the
contempt of the proud." The proud think so much of themselves that they
must needs think all the less of those who are better than themselves.
Pride is both contemptible and contemptuous. The contempt of the great
ones of the earth is often peculiarly acrid, some of them, like a
well-known statesman, are "masters of gibes and flouts and sneers," and
never do they seem so much at home in their acrimony as when a servant
of the Lord is the victim of their venom. It is easy enough to write
upon this subject, but to be selected as the target of contempt is quite
another matter. Great hearts have been broken and brave spirits have
been withered beneath the accursed power of falsehood, and the horrible
blight of contempt. For our comfort we may remember that our divine Lord
was despised and rejected of men, yet he ceased not from his perfect
service till he was exalted to dwell in the heavens. Let us bear our
share of this evil which still rages under the sun, and let us firmly
believe that the contempt of the ungodly shall turn to our honour in the
world to come: even now it serves as a certificate that we are not of
the world, for if we were of the world the world would love us as its
own.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 124](psa124.md)

</div>
