<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa119)  [Next](psa121.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 120](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 120:0</span></span>

Suddenly we have left the continent of the vast Hundred and Nineteenth
Psalm for the islands and islets of the Songs of Degrees. It may be well
to engage in protracted devotion upon a special occasion, but this must
cast no slur upon the sacred brevities which sanctify the godly life day
by day. He who inspired the longest Psalm was equally the author of the
short compositions which follow it.

Title. - A Song of Degrees. - We have already devoted a sufficient space
to the consideration of this title in its application to this Psalm and
the fourteen compositions which succeed it. These appear to us to be
Pilgrim Psalms, but we are not sure that they were always sung in
company; for many of them are in the first person singular. No doubt
there were solitary pilgrims as well as troops who went to the house of
God in company, and for these lonely ones hymns were prepared.

Subject. - A certain author supposes that this hymn was sung by an
Israelite upon leaving his house to go up to Jerusalem. He thinks that
the good man had suffered from the slander of his neighbours, and was
glad to get away from their gossip, and spend his time in the happier
engagements of the holy feasts. It may be so, but we hope that pious
people were not so foolish as to sing about their bad neighbours when
they were leaving them for a Jew days. If they wished to leave their
houses in safety, and to come home to kind surroundings, it would have
been the height of Jolly to provoke those whom they were leaving behind
by singing aloud a Psalm of complaint against them. We do not know why
this ode is placed first among the Psalms of Degrees, and we had rather
hazard no conjecture of our own. We prefer the old summary of the
translators - "David prayeth against Doeg" - to any Jar-fetched
supposition, and if this be the scope of the Psalm, we see at once why
it suggested itself to David at the station where the ark abode, and
from which he had come to remove it. He came to fetch away the ark, and
at the place where he found it he thought of Doeg, and poured out his
plaint concerning him. The author had been grievously calumniated, and
had been tortured into bitterness by the false charges of his
persecutors, and here is his appeal to the great Arbiter of right and
wrong, before whose judgment-seat no man shall suffer from slanderous
tongues.

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md). - A reminiscence.

I. It is threefold; distress, prayer, deliverance.

II\. It has a threefold bearing: it excites my hope, stimulates my
petitions, and arouses my gratitude.

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md). -

I. Special trouble: "In my distress."

II\. Special prayer: "I cried unto the Lord."

IV\. Special favour: "He heard me." - G. R.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md). - The unjustly slandered
have, besides the avenging majesty of their God to protect them, many
other consolations, as -

I. The consciousness of innocence to sustain them.

II\. The promise of divine favour to support them, "I will hide thee
from the scourge of the tongue."

IV\. There is the consideration to soothe: "Blessed are ye when men
shall revile you and persecute you," etc.

V. That a lie has not usually a long life.

VI\. There is, lastly, for comfort, the repairing influence of time. -
R. Nisbet.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md). - A prayer against
slander. We are liable to it; it would do us great injury and cause us
great pain; yet none but the Lord can protect us from it, or deliver us
out of it.

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md). - The rewards of calumny.
What can they be? What ought they to be? What have they been?

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md). -

I. What the reviler does for others.

II\. What he does to himself. III. What God will do with him.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md). - The nature of slander
and the punishment of slander.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md). -

I. The tongue is sharper than an arrow.

1\. It is shot in private.

2\. It is tipped with poison.

3\. It is polished with seeming kindness.

4\. It is aimed at the tenderest part.

II\. The tongue is more destructive than fire. Its scandals spread with
greater rapidity. They consume that which other fires cannot touch, and
they are less easily quenched. "The tongue," says an Apostle, "is a fire
... and setteth on fire the course of nature; and it is set on fire of
hell." A fiery dart of the wicked one. - G. R.

[Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md). - Bad lodgings. Only the
wicked can be at home with the wicked. Our dwelling with them is trying,
and yet it may be useful (1) to them, (2) to us: it tries our graces,
reveals our character, abates our pride, drives us to prayer, and makes
us long to be home.

[Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md). -

I. None but the wicked enjoy the company of the wicked.

II\. None but the worldly enjoy the company of worldlings.

III\. None but the righteous enjoy the company of the righteous. - G. R.

[Psa 120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006.md). -

I. Trying company.

II\. Admirable behaviour.

III\. Undesirable consequences: "When I speak they are for war."

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md). - The character of the man
of God. He is at peace. He is for peace. He is peace. He shall have
peace.

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md). -

I. Piety and peace are united.

II\. So are wickedness and war. - G. R.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Title

"A Song of Degrees." A most excellent song, Tremellius rendereth it; and
so indeed this and the fourteen following are, both for the matter, and
for the form or manner of expression, which is wondrous short and sweet,
as the very epigrams of the Holy Ghost himself, wherein each verse may
well stand for an oracle. And in this sense, adam hammahalah, or, a man
of degrees, is put for an eminent or excellent man, [Ch1
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1017.htm#017.md). Others understand it otherwise;
wherein they have good leave to abound in their own sense; an error here
is not dangerous. - John Trapp.

Whole Psalm

In the interpretation of these Psalms, which sees in them the "degrees"
of Christian virtues, this Psalm aptly describes the first of such steps
- the renunciation of the evil and vanity of the world. It thus divides
itself into two parts.

I. The Psalmist, in the person of one beginning the grades of virtue,
finds many opponents in the shape of slanderers and ill advisers.

II\. He laments the admixture of evil - "Woe is me." - H. T. Armfield.

Whole Psalm

It is a painful but useful lesson which is taught by this first of the
Pilgrim Psalms, that all who manifest a resolution to obey the commands
and seek the favour of God, may expect to encounter opposition and
reproach in such a course.... This these worshippers of old found when
preparing to seek the Lord in his Temple. They were watched in their
preparation by malignant eyes; they were followed to the house of prayer
by the contempt and insinuations of bitter tongues. But their refuge is
in him they worship; and, firmly convinced that he never can forsake his
servants, they look up through the cloud of obloquy to his throne, and
implore the succour which they know that his children shall ever find
there. "O Lord, in this my trouble deliver my soul." - Robert Nisbet.

Whole Psalm

The pilgrims were leaving home; and lying lips commonly attack the
absent. They were about to join the pilgrim caravan; and in the
excitements of social intercourse their own lips might easily deviate
from truth. The Psalm, moreover, breathes an intense longing for peace;
and in this world of strife and confusion, when is that longing
inappropriate? Is it any marvel that a Hebrew, with a deep spiritual
longing for peace, should cry as he started for the Temple, "Let me get
out of all that, at least for a time. Let me be quit of this fever and
strain, free from the vain turbulence and conflicting noises of the
world. Let me rest and recreate myself a while in the sacred asylum and
sanctuary of the God of peace. God of peace, grant me thy peace as I
worship in thy presence; and let me find a bettered world when I come
back to it, or at least bring a bettered and more patient heart to its
duties and strifes." - Samuel Cox.

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

"In my distress I cried unto the Lord," etc. See the wondrous advantage
of trouble, - that it makes us call upon God; and again see the wondrous
readiness of mercy, that when we call he heareth us! Very blessed are
they that mourn while they are travelling the long upward journey from
the Galilee of the Gentiles of this lower world to the heavenly
Jerusalem, the high and holy city of the saints of God. - J. W. Burgon,
in "A Plain Commentary."

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

"In my distress." God's help is seasonable; it comes when we need it.
Christ is a seasonable good.... For the soul to be dark, and for Christ
to enlighten it; for the soul to be dead, and Christ to enliven it; for
the soul to be doubting, and for Christ to resolve it; and for the soul
to be distressed, and for Christ to relieve it; is not this in season'?
For a soul to be hard, and for Christ to soften it; for a soul to be
haughty, and for Christ to humble it; for a soul to be tempted, and for
Christ to succour it; and for a soul to be wounded, and for Christ to
heal it? Is not this in season? - R. Mayhew, 1679.

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

"Cried." "Heard." The verbs are in the past tense, but do not refer
merely to a past occasion. Past experience and present are here
combined. From the past he draws encouragement for the present. - J. J.
Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

"And he heard me." The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
availeth much: [Jam 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016.md); [Zac
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#009.md). He that prayeth ardently,
speedeth assuredly ([Psa 91:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa091.htm#015).md); and
the unmiscarrying return of prayer should be carefully observed and
thankfully improved: [Psa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#020.md). -
John Trapp.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md)

"Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips," etc. An unbridled tongue is
vehiculum Diaboli, the chariot of the Devil, wherein he rides in
triumph. Mr. Greenham doth describe the tongue prettily by contraries,
or diversities, "It is a little piece of flesh, small in quantity, but
mighty in quality; it is soft, but slippery; it goeth lightly, but
falleth heavily; it striketh soft, but woundeth sore; it goeth out
quickly, but burneth vehemently; it pierceth deep, and therefore not
healed speedily; it hath liberty granted easily to go forth, but it will
find no means easily to return home; and being once inflamed with
Satan's bellows, it is like the fire of hell." The course of an unruly
tongue is to proceed from evil to worse, to begin with foolishness, and
go on with bitterness, and to end in mischief and madness. See [Ecc
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#013.md). The Jew's conference with our
Saviour began with arguments: "We be Abraham's seed," said they, etc.;
but proceeded to blasphemies: "Say we not well that thou art a
Samaritan, and hast a devil?" and ended in cruelty, "Then took they up
stones to cast at him." [Joh 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033.md),
[Joh 8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048.md), [Joh
8:59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059.md). This also is the base
disposition of a bad tongue to hate those whom it afflicts: [Pro
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#028.md).

The mischief of the tongue may further appear by the mercy of being
delivered from it, for,

I. So God hath promised it ([Job 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#015.md),
[Job 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#021).md). "God saveth the poor from
the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the mighty," and "thou
shalt be hid from the scourge of the tongue," or from being betongued,
as some render it, that is, from being, as it were, caned or cudgelled
with the tongues of others. "Thou shalt hide them in the secret of thy
presence from the pride of man: thou shalt keep them secretly in a
pavilion from the strife of tongues" ([Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020).md); that is, from all calumnies,
reproaches, evil speakings of all kinds. God will preserve the good
names of his people from the blots and bespatterings of malicious men,
as kings protect their favourites against slanders and clamours.

II\. So the saints have prayed for it, as David: "Deliver my soul, O
Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue." - Edward Reyner.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md)

"Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips," etc. In the drop of venom
which distils from the sting of the smallest insect, or the spike of the
nettle-leaf there is concentrated the quintessence of a poison so subtle
that the microscope cannot distinguish it, and yet so virulent that it
can inflame the blood, irritate the whole constitution, and convert day
and night into restless misery; so it is sometimes with the words of the
slanderer. - Frederick William Robertson.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md)

"Lying lips" bore false witness against him, or with a "deceitful
tongue" tried to ensnare him, and to draw something from him, on which
they might ground an accusation. - George Horne.

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md)

"What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue?" What dost thou expect, "thou false tongue," in pleading a
bad cause? What fee or reward hast thou for being an accuser instead of
an advocate? What shall it profit thee (as we put it in the margin);
what shalt thou gain by thy deceitful tongue? or (as our margin hath it
again), "What shall the deceitful tongue give unto thee," that thou
goest about slandering thy brother, and tearing his good name? Hath thy
deceitful tongue houses or lands to give thee? hath it any treasures of
gold and silver to bestow upon thee? Surely, as itself is, so it gives
only "Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper," as [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md) intimates.... The tongue indeed
will speak often in these cases gratis, or without a fee; but it never
doth without danger and damage to the speaker. As such speakers shoot
arrows, like the arrows of the mighty, and as they scatter coals, like
the coals of juniper, so they usually get an arrow in their own sides,
and not only burn their fingers, but heap coals of fire upon their own
heads. Ungodly men will do mischief to other men purely for mischief's
sake: yet when once mischief is done it proves most mischievous to the
doers of it; and while they hold their brethren's heaviness a profit,
though they are never the better, they shall feel and find themselves in
a short time much the worse. - Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md), [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"What shall be given?" Intimating that his enemy expected some great
reward for his malice against David; but, saith the Psalmist, he shall
have "sharp arrows of the Almighty, with coals of juniper"; as if he had
said, "Whatever reward he have from men, this shall be his reward from
God." - John Jackson, in "The Morning Exercises," 1661.

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md), [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

The victim of slander, in these heavy complaints he has just uttered,
may be indulging in excess, which pious friends are represented as
coming forward to reprove by reminding him how little a true servant of
God can be really injured by slander. Hence, as in the margin of our
Bibles, the Psalm assumes the dramatic form, and represents his
fellow-worshippers as asking the complainer: What evil, O servant of
God, can the false tongue give to thee! Nursling of Omnipotence, what
can it do to thee!.... The answer of suffering nature and bleeding peace
still returns: "It is like the sharp arrows of the mighty, like coals of
juniper." An arrow from the bow of a mighty warrior, that flies unseen
and unsuspected to its mark, and whose presence is only known when it
quivers in the victim's heart, not unaptly represents the silent and
deadly flight of slander; while the fire which the desert pilgrim
kindles on the sand, from the dry roots of the juniper, a wood which, of
all that are known to him, throws out the fiercest and most continued
heat, is not less powerfully descriptive of the intense pain and the
lasting injury of a false and malicious tongue. - Robert Nisbet.

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md), [Psa
120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Coals of juniper," these "shall be given unto thee." As if he had said,
thou shalt have the hottest coals, such coals as will maintain heat
longest, implying that the hottest and most lasting wrath of God should
be their portion. Some naturalists say that coals of juniper raked up in
the ashes will keep fire a whole year; but I stay not upon this. -
Joseph Caryl.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper." The world's sin is
the world's punishment. A correspondence is frequently observed between
the transgression and the retribution This law of correspondence seems
to be here indicated. Similar figures are employed to express the
offence and the punishment of the wicked. "They bend their tongue like a
bow for lies." "Who whet their tongue like a sword, and bend their bows
to shoot in secret at the perfect." But let the slanderer be upon his
guard. There is another bow besides that in his possession. The arrows
are sharp and burning; and when they are sent from the bow by the arm of
Omnipotence, nothing can resist their force, and in mortal agony his
enemies bite the dust. "He hath bent his bow, and made it ready. He hath
also prepared for him the instruments of death: he ordaineth his arrows
against the persecutors." "God shall shoot at them with an arrow;
suddenly shall they be wounded; so shall they make their own tongue fall
upon themselves." This train of thought is also pursued in the
illustration of fire. James compares the tongue of slander to fire. "And
the tongue is a fire, a world of iniquity: so is the tongue among the
members, that it defileth the whole body, and setteth on fire the course
of nature; and it is set on fire of hell." Such is the tongue, and here
is the punishment, "Coals of juniper," remarkable for their long
retention of heat. And yet what a feeble illustration of the wrath of
God, which burns down to the lowest hell I "His lips are full of
indignation, and his tongue as a devouring fire." Liars are excluded
from heaven by a special enactment of the Sovereign; and all of them
"shall have their part in the lake which burneth with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death." "Who among us shall dwell with
the devouring fire? Who among us shall dwell with everlasting burnings?"
With what solemn awe should we not cry out to the Lord, "Gather not my
soul with sinners, nor my life with bloody men!" - N. McMichael, in "The
Pilgrim Psalms," 1860.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Sharp arrows of the mighty." He compareth wicked doctrine to an arrow
which is not blunt, but sharp; and moreover which is cast, not of him
that is weak and feeble, but that is strong and mighty; so that there is
danger on both sides, as well of the arrow which is sharp and able to
pierce, as also of him which with great violence hurleth the same. -
Martin Luther.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Arrows." "Coals of juniper." When the tongue is compared to "arrows,"
there is a reference (according to the Midrash), to the irrevocableness
of the tongue's work. Even the lifted sword may be stayed, but the shot
arrow may not. The special point to be drawn out in the mention of
"coals of juniper," is the unextinguishableness of such fuel. There is a
marvellous story in the Midrash which illustrates this very well. Two
men in the desert sat down under a juniper tree, and gathered sticks of
it wherewith they cooked their food. After a year they passed over the
same spot where was the dust of what they had burned; and remarking that
it was now twelve months since they had the fire, they walked fearlessly
upon the dust, and their feet were burned by the "coals" beneath it,
which were still unextinguished. - H. T. Armfield.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Coals of juniper." The fire of the rothem burns for a very long time
covered with its ashes; like malignant slander. But the secret malignity
becomes its own terrible punishment. - William Kay.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Coals of juniper." We here \[at Wdi Kinnah\] found several Bedouins
occupied in collecting brushwood, which they burn into charcoal for the
Cairo market; they prefer for this purpose the thick roots of the shrub
Retham, Genista raetam of Forskal, which grows here in abundance. -
Johann Ludwig Burckhardt, 1784-1817.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Coals of juniper." At this time we spoke four "ships of the desert,"
bound for Cairo, and loaded with "coals of juniper," or, in other words,
with charcoal made from the roots or branches of the ratam, or white
broom of the desert, the identical bush referred to by the sacred
writer. - John Wilson, in "The Lands of the Bible visited and
described," 1847.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

By "coals of juniper," we understand arrows made of this wood, which
when heated possesses the property of retaining the heat for a long
time: and consequently, arrows of this kind, after having been placed in
the fire, would in the hands of the warrior do terrible execution.

Some persons think that this verse is not to be understood as a
figurative description of calumny, but rather of the punishment which
God will inflict upon the calumniator. They therefore regard this as an
answer to the question in [Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md) :
"What shall he give?" etc. - George Phillips.

[Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md)

"Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar!" Mesech was a son of Japheth; and the name here signifies his
descendants, the Mosques, who occupied that wild mountain region which
lies between the Caspian Sea and the Black Sea. Kedar, again, was a son
of Ishmael; and the name here signifies his descendants, the wandering
tribes, whose "hand is against every man, and every man's hand against
them." There is no geographical connection between those two nations:
the former being upon the north of Palestine, and the latter upon the
south. The connection is a moral one. They are mentioned together,
because they were fierce and warlike barbarians. David had never lived
on the shores of the Caspian Sea, or in the Arabian wilderness; and he
means no more than this, that the persons with whom he now dwelt were as
savage and quarrelsome as Mesech and Kedar. After a similar fashion, we
call rude and troublesome persons Turks, Tartars, and Hottentots. David
exclaims, I am just as miserable among these haters of peace, as if I
had taken up my abode with those savage and treacherous tribes. - N.
McMichael.

[Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md)

"Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech," etc. David exclaims, Alas for me!
because, dwelling amongst false brethren and a bastard race of Abraham,
he was wrongfully molested and tormented by them, although he had
behaved himself towards them in good conscience. Since then, at the
present day, in the church of Rome, religion is dishonoured by all
manner of disgraceful imputations, faith torn in pieces, light turned
into darkness, and the majesty of God exposed to the grossest mockeries,
it will certainly be impossible for those who have any feeling of true
piety within them to lie in the midst of such pollutions without great
anguish of spirit. - John Calvin.

[Psa 120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006.md)

The Arabs are naturally thievish and treacherous; and it sometimes
happens, that those very persons are overtaken and pillaged in the
morning who were entertained the night before with all the instances of
friendship and hospitality. Neither are they to be accused for
plundering strangers only, and attacking almost every person whom they
find unarmed and defenceless, but for those many implacable and
hereditary animosities which continually subsist among them; literally
fulfilling the prophecy of Hagar, that "Ishmael should be a wild man;
his hand should be against every man, and every man's hand against him."
- Thomas Shaw, 1692-1751.

[Psa 120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006.md)

Our Lord was with the wild beasts in the wilderness. There are not a few
who would rather face even these than the angry spirits which, alas, are
still to be found even in Christian Churches. - Wesleyan Methodist
Magazine, 1879.

[Psa 120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006.md), [Psa
120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)

What holy and gentle delight is associated with the very name of peace!
Peace resting upon our bosom, and soothing all its cares: peace resting
upon our households, and folding all the members in one loving embrace:
peace resting upon our country, and pouring abundance from her golden
horn: peace resting upon all nations, and binding them together with the
threefold cord of a common humanity, a common interest, and a common
religion! The man who hates peace is a dishonour to the race, an enemy
to his brother, and a traitor to his God. He hates Christ, who is the
Prince of peace. He hates Christians, who are men of peace. - N.
McMichael.

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)

"I am for peace," etc. Jesus was a man of peace; he came into our world,
and was worshipped at his nativity as the Prince of peace: there was
universal peace throughout the world at the time of his birth; he lived
to make peace "by the blood of his cross:" he died to complete it. When
he was going out of the world, he said to his disciples, "Peace I leave
with you, my peace I give unto you: not as the world giveth, give I unto
you. Let not your heart be troubled, neither let it be afraid": [Joh
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027.md). When he was risen from the
dead, and made his first appearance to his disciples, he said unto them,
"Peace be unto you": he is the peace-maker: the Holy Ghost is the
peace-maker: his gospel is the gospel of peace; it contains the peace of
God which passeth all understanding. "I am for peace: but when I speak,
they are for war." The bulk of the Jewish nation abhorred Christ, they
were for putting him to death; to avenge which, the Lord brought the
Roman army against them, and many of them were utterly destroyed. So
David literally was for peace with Saul; yet, when opportunities made
way for any negotiations, it was soon discovered Saul was for war,
instead of peace, with him.

May we see how this, which is the introductory Psalm to those fourteen
which follow, styled Songs of Degrees, hath a concern with our Lord
Jesus Christ; and that David the son of Jesse was in many cases a type
of him, and several of his enemies, sorrows, and griefs, forerunning
figures of what would befall Messiah, and come upon him. Amen. - Samuel
Eyles Pierce.

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)

"I am for peace." Good men love peace, pray for it, seek it, pursue it,
will give anything but a good conscience for it. Compare [Mat
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009.md); [Heb
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#014.md) : W. S. Plumer. "It is a mark of
a pious man, as far as in him is, to seek peace": Amesius. "I would not
give one hour of brotherly love for a whole eternity of contention." -
Dr. Ruffnet.

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)

"When I speak, they are for war." He spoke with all respect and kindness
that could be; proposed methods of accommodation; spoke reason, spoke
love; but they would not so much as hear him patiently; but cried out,
To arms! To arms! so fierce and implacable were they, and so bent on
mischief. Such were Christ's enemies: for his love they were his
adversaries; and for his good words and good works they stoned him; and
if we meet with such enemies we must not think it strange, nor love
peace the less for our seeking it in vain. "Be not overcome of evil,"
no, not of such evil as this; "but," even when thus tried, still try to
"overcome evil with good." - Matthew Henry.

[Psalms 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 120:1</span></span>

1 In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he heard me.

2 Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips, and from a deceitful tongue.

3 What shall be given unto thee? or what shall be done unto thee, thou
false tongue?

4 Sharp arrows of the mighty, with coals of juniper.

5 Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar!

6 My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace.

7 I am for peace, but when I speak, they are for war.

[Psa 120:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001.md)

"In my distress." Slander occasions distress of the most grievous kind.
Those who have felt the edge of a cruel tongue know assuredly that it is
sharper than the sword. Calumny rouses our indignation by a sense of
injustice, and yet we find ourselves helpless to fight with the evil, or
to act in our own defence. We could ward off the strokes of a cutlass,
but we have no shield against a liar's tongue. We do not know who was
the father of the falsehood, nor where it was born, nor where it has
gone, nor how to follow it, nor how to stay its withering influence. We
are perplexed, and know not which way to turn. Like the plague of flies
in Egypt, it baffles opposition, and few can stand before it. Detraction
touches us in the tenderest point, cuts to the quick, and leaves a venom
behind which it is difficult to extract. In all ways it is a sore
distress to come under the power of "slander, the foulest whelp of sin."
Even in such distress we need not hesitate to cry unto the Lord. Silence
to man and prayer to God are the best cures for the evil of slander.

"I cried unto the Lord" (or Jehovah). The wisest course that he could
follow. It is of little use to appeal to our fellows on the matter of
slander, for the more we stir in it the more it spreads; it is of no
avail to appeal to the honour of the slanderers, for they have none, and
the most piteous demands for justice will only increase their malignity
and encourage them to fresh insult. As well plead with panthers and
wolves as with black-hearted traducers. However, when cries to man would
be our weakness, cries to God will be our strength. To whom should
children cry but to their father? Does not some good come even out of
that vile thing, falsehood, when it drives us to our knees and to our
God? "And he heard me." Yes, Jehovah hears. He is the living God, and
hence prayer to him is reasonable and profitable. The Psalmist
remembered and recorded this instance of prayer-hearing, for it had
evidently much affected him; and now he rehearses it for the glory of
God and the good of his brethren. "The righteous cry and the Lord
heareth them." The ear of our God is not deaf, nor even heavy. He
listens attentively, he catches the first accent of supplication; he
makes each of his children confess, - "he heard me." When we are
slandered it is a joy that the Lord knows us, and cannot be made to
doubt our uprightness he will not hear the lie against us, but he will
hear our prayer against the lie.

If these Psalms were sung at the ascent of the ark to Mount Zion, and
then afterwards by the pilgrims to Jerusalem at the annual festivals and
at the return from Babylon, we shall find in the life of David a reason
for this being made the first of them. Did not this servant of God meet
with Doeg the Edomite when he enquired of the oracle by Abiathar, and
did not that wretched creature belie him and betray him to Saul? This
made a very painful and permanent impression upon David's memory, and
therefore in commencing the ark-journey he poured out his lament before
the Lord, concerning the great and monstrous wrong of "that dog of a
Doeg," as Trapp wittily calls him. The poet, like the preacher, may find
it to his advantage to "begin low," for then he has the more room to
rise the next Psalm is a full octave above the present mournful hymn.
Whenever we are abused it may console us to see that we are not alone in
our misery: we are traversing a road upon which David left his
footprints.

[Psa 120:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#002.md)

"Deliver my soul, O Lord, from lying lips." It will need divine power to
save a man from these deadly instruments. Lips are soft; but when they
are lying lips they suck away the life of character and are as murderous
as razors. Lips should never be red with the blood of honest men's
reputes, nor salved with malicious falsehoods. David says, "Deliver my
soul": the soul, the life of the man, is endangered by lying lips;
cobras are not more venomous, nor devils themselves more pitiless. Some
seem to lie for lying sake, it is their sport and spirit, their lips
deserve to be kissed with a hot iron; but it is not for the friends of
Jesus to render to men according to their deserts. Oh for a dumb
generation rather than a lying one! The faculty of speech becomes a
curse when it is degraded into a mean weapon for smiting men behind
their backs. We need to be delivered from slander by the Lord's
restraint upon wicked tongues, or else to be delivered out of it by
having our good name cleared from the liar's calumny. "And from a
deceitful tongue." This is rather worse than downright falsehood. Those
who fawn and flatter, and all the while have enmity in their hearts, are
horrible beings; they are the seed of the devil, and Ire worketh in them
after his own deceptive nature. Better to meet wild beasts and serpents
than deceivers these are a kind of monster whose birth is from beneath,
and whose end lies far below. It should be a warning to liars and
deceivers when they see that all good men pray against them, and that
even bad men are afraid of them. Here is to the believer good cause for
prayer. "Deliver us from evil," may be used with emphasis concerning
this business. From gossips, talebearers, writers of anonymous letters,
forgers of newspaper paragraphs, and all sorts of liemongers, good Lord
deliver us!

[Psa 120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md)

"What shall be given unto thee?" What is the expected guerdon of
slander? It ought to be something great to make it worth while to work
in so foul an atmosphere and to ruin one's soul. Could a thousand worlds
be bribe enough for such villainous deeds? The liar shall have no
welcome recompense: he shall meet with his deserts; but what shall they
be? What punishment can equal his crime? The Psalmist seems lost to
suggest a fitting punishment. It is the worst of offences - this
detraction, calumny, and slander. Judgment sharp and crushing would be
measured out to it if men were visited for their transgressions. But
what punishment could be heavy enough? What form shall the chastisement
take? O liar, "what shall be given unto thee?"

"Or what shall be done unto thee, thou false tongue?" How shalt thou be
visited? The law of retaliation can hardly meet the case, since none can
slander the slanderer, he is too black to be blackened; neither would
any of us blacken him if we could. Wretched being! He fights with
weapons which true men cannot touch. Like the cuttlefish, he surrounds
himself with an inky blackness into which honest men cannot penetrate.
Like the foul skunk, he emits an odour of falsehood which cannot be
endured by the true; and therefore he often escapes, unchastised by
those whom he has most injured. His crime, in a certain sense, becomes
his shield; men do not care to encounter so base a foe. But what will
God do with lying tongues? He has uttered his most terrible threats
against them, and he will terribly execute them in due time.

[Psa 120:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#004.md)

"Sharp arrows of the mighty." Swift, sure, and sharp shall be the
judgment Their words were as arrows, and so shall their punishment be.
God will see to it that their punishment shall be comparable to an arrow
keen in itself, and driven home with all the force with which a mighty
man shoots it from his bow of steel, - "sharp arrows of the mighty." Nor
shall one form of judgment suffice to avenge this complicated sin. The
slanderer shall feel woes comparable to coals of juniper, which are
quick in flaming, fierce in blazing, and long in burning. He shall feel
sharp arrows and sharper fires. Awful doom! All liars shall have their
portion in the lake which burneth with fire and brimstone. Their worm
dieth not, and their fire is not quenched. Juniper-coals long retain
their heat, but hell burneth ever, and the deceitful tongue may not
deceive itself with the hope of escape from the fire which it has
kindled. What a crime is this to which the All-merciful allots a doom so
dreadful! Let us hate it with perfect hatred. It is better to be the
victim of slander than to be the author of it. The shafts of calumny
will miss the mark, but not so the arrows of God: the coals of malice
will cool, but not the fire of justice. Shun slander as you would avoid
hell.

[Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005.md)

"Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of
Kedar!" Gracious men are vexed with the conversation of the wicked. Our
poet felt himself to be as ill-at-ease among lying neighbours as if he
had lived among savages and cannibals. The traitors around him were as
bad as the unspeakable Turk. He cries "Woe is met" Their sin appalled
him, their enmity galled him. He had some hope from the fact that he was
only a sojourner in Mesech; but as years rolled on the time dragged
heavily, and he feared that he might call himself a dweller in Kedar.
The wandering tribes to whom he refers were constantly at war with one
another; it was their habit to travel armed to the teeth; they were a
kind of plundering gipsies, with their hand against every man and every
man's hand against them; and to these he compared the false-hearted ones
who had assailed his character. Those who defame the righteous are worse
than cannibals; for savages only eat men after they are dead, but these
wretches eat them up alive.

"Woe's me that I in Mesech am

A sojourner so long.;

That I in tabernacles dwell

To Kedar that belong.

My soul with him that hateth peace

Hath long a dweller been;

I am for peace; but when I speak,

For battle they are keen.

My soul distracted mourns and pines

To reach that peaceful shore,

Where all the weary are at rest,

And troublers vex no more."

[Psa 120:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#006.md)

"My soul hath long dwelt with him that hateth peace." Long, long enough,
too long had he been an exile among such barbarians. A peace-maker is a
blessing, but a peace-hater is a curse. To lodge with such for a night
is dangerous, but to dwell with them is horrible. The verse may apply to
any one of the Psalmist's detractors: he had seen enough of him and
pined to quit such company. Perhaps the sweet singer did not at first
detect the nature of the man, for he was a deceiver; and when he did
discover him he found himself unable to shake him off, and so was
compelled to abide with him. Thoughts of Doeg, Saul, Ahithophel, and the
sons of Zeruiah come to our mind, - these last, not as enemies, but as
hot-blooded soldiers who were often too strong for David. What a change
for the man of God from the quietude of the sheepfold to the turmoil of
court and the tumult of combat! How he must have longed to lay aside his
sceptre, and to resume his crook. He felt the time of his dwelling with
quarrelsome spirits to be long, too long; and he only endured it
because, as the Prayer-book version has it, he was constrained so to
abide.

[Psa 120:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#007.md)

"I am for peace." Properly, "I am peace"; desirous of peace, peaceful,
forbearing, - in fact, peace itself. "But when I speak, they are for
war." My kindest words appear to provoke them, and they are at daggers
drawn at once. Nothing pleases them; if I am silent they count me
morose, and if I open my mouth they cavil and controvert. Let those who
dwell with such pugilistic company console themselves with the
remembrance that both David and David's Lord endured the same trial. It
is the lot of the saints to find foes even in their own households.
Others besides David dwelt in the place of dragons. Others besides
Daniel have been cast into a den of lions. Meanwhile, let those who are
in quiet resting-places and peaceful habitations be greatly grateful for
such ease. Deus nobis haec otia fecit: God has given us this
tranquillity. Be it ours never to inflict upon others that from which we
have been screened ourselves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 121](psa121.md)

</div>
