<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa100)  [Next](psa102) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 101](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 101:0</span></span>

Title. - A Psalm of David. This is just such a Psalm as the man after
God's own heart would compose when he was about to become king in
Israel. It is David all over, straightforward, resolute, devout; there
is no trace of policy or vacillation, - the Lord has appointed him to be
king, and he knows it, therefore he purposes in all things to behave as
becomes a monarch whom the Lord himself has chosen. If we call this the
Psalm of Pious Resolutions, we shall perhaps remember it all the more
readily. After songs of praise a Psalm of practice not only makes
variety, but comes in most fittingly. We never praise the Lord better
than when we do those things which are pleasing in his sight.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. - This is a Psalm of wills and shalls. There are nine wills
and five shalls. Resolutions should be made,

I. With deliberation; not, therefore, upon trifling matters.

II\. With reservation. "If the Lord will," etc.

III\. With dependence upon divine strength for their fulfilment. - G. R.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). -

I. The sweet work that is resolved upon is to "sing."

II\. The sweet singer that thus resolves, namely, David, "I will sing."

III\. The sweet subject of the song, "mercy and judgment."

IV\. The sweet object of this praise, and the manner in which he would
sing it - "Unto thee, O Lord, will I sing." - Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). - What there is in mercy
that affords ground of singing.

I. The freeness and undeservedness of mercy.

II\. The unexpectedness of mercy. When I was expecting a frown I got a
smile; when I was expecting nothing but wrath, I got a glance of love;
instead of a stroke of vengeance, I got a view of glory.

III\. The seasonableness of mercy is a ground of singing - grace to help
in time of need.

IV\. The greatness and riches of mercy make the recipients thereof sing.

V. The sweetness of mercy makes them sing.

VI\. The sureness and firmness of mercy make them sing - "The sure
mercies of David." - From Ralph Erskine's Sermon, entitled "The
Militant's Song."

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001). -

I. The different conditions of the righteous man in this life. Not all
mercy, nor all judgment, but mercy and judgment.

II\. His one duty and privilege in reference to them: "I will sing,"
etc.

1\. Because they are both from God.

2\. Because they are both from love.

3\. Because they are both for present good.

4\. Because they are both preparative for the heavenly rest. - G. R.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001), [Psa
101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). - The blending of song with
holy living. The bell of praise and the pomegranate of holy fruitfulness
should both adorn the Lord's priests.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). -

I. The end desired, "To behave wisely," etc.; consistency of conduct.

II\. The means employed, "When wilt thou come," etc.; only when God is
with us we walk in a perfect way.

III\. The test proposed, "Within my house," where I am most myself and
am best known. - G. R.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). - The wisdom of holiness.

I. In selecting our sphere of duty.

II\. In timing, arranging, and balancing duties.

III\. In managing others according to their tempers.

IV\. In avoiding disputes with adversaries.

V. In administering rebuke, giving alms, rendering advice, etc.; the
blending of the serpent with the dove.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002). - "O when wilt thou come
unto me?" A devout ejaculation.

I. Revealing the Psalmist's need of the divine presence in order to
holiness.

II\. His intense longing.

III\. His full expectation.

IV\. His thorough appreciation of the condescending visit.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002) (last clause). - Home
piety. Its duty, excellence, influence, sphere, and reward. Note also
the change of heart and firmness of purpose necessary to it.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003). -

I. The sight of wickedness is to be avoided, "I will set no wicked
thing," etc.

II\. When seen it is to be loathed, "I hate," etc.

III\. When felt it is to be repudiated. It may touch me, but "it shall
not cleave to me."

[Psa 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004). - The need of extreme care
in the choice of our intimates.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005). - The detestable nature of
slander, hurting three persons at once - the speaker, hearer, and person
slandered.

[Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006). - The duty of believers
who are wealthy to encourage and employ persons of pious character.

[Psa 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008). - The work of the great
King when he comes in judgment.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

The contents of this Psalm show that it was written at some remarkable
period of David's life. Three different times have been fixed upon as
respectively giving occasion for the solemn resolutions which are
announced in it. The first is supposed to be when David, immediately
after the death of Saul, succeeded to the government of a part of the
kingdom; the second, when the whole kingdom was united under the
dominion of David; and the third, when he removed the ark from the house
of Obededom to Zion, and placed it in the vicinity of his own abode. It
is certainly of little importance which of these periods we select, but
[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002) has some appearance of
relating to the last mentioned. The Psalmist here says, "When wilt thou
come to me?" which seems to intimate that when he was to have the
symbols of God's presence so near to him, he experienced a solemn
sentiment respecting the holiness that was now more than ever incumbent
upon him - a sentiment which induced him to form the sacred purposes and
resolutions which he has specified. These purposes relate to the
character of the persons whom he would select for his household, and
those whom he would employ in carrying on his government, which appeared
to be more firmly established by the divine condescension that was
manifested to him, in having the earthly residence of God placed so near
to himself. It was quite in agreement with David's character to form
purposes of more fervent and steadfast obedience, in proportion to the
advantages and favours which the divine goodness bestowed upon him. -
William Walford.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm has been appropriately called "The Householder's Psalm;" and
assuredly if every master of a family would regulate his household by
these rules of the conscientious Psalmist, there would be a far greater
amount, not merely of domestic happiness and comfort, but of fulfilment
of the serious and responsible duties which devolve on the respective
members of a household. David in some measure may be supposed to speak
of the regulation of a royal court and household; and of course with
such we in our humbler sphere can have but little in common; yet though
there may not be the same duties and the same requirements, yet the same
principles should actuate all alike, and the same virtues that adorn the
lowlier station may shed a radiance even on the highest. - Barton
Bouchier.

Whole Psalm

This is the Psalm which the old expositors used to designate "The Mirror
for Magistrates;" and an excellent mirror it is. It would mightily
accelerate the coming of the time when every nation shall be Christ's
possession, and every capital a "City of the Lord," if all magistrates
could be persuaded to dress themselves by it every time they go forth to
perform the functions of their godlike office. When Sir George Villiers
became the favourite and prime minister of King James, Lord Bacon, in a
beautiful Letter of Advice, counselled him to take this Psalm for his
rule in the promotion of courtiers. "In those the choice had need be of
honest and faithful servants, as well as of comely outsides who can bow
the knee and kiss the hand. King David ([Psa
101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006), [Psa
101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007)) propounded a rule to himself
for the choice of his courtiers lie was a wise and a good king; and a
wise and a good king shall do well to follow such a good example; and if
he find any to be faulty, which perhaps cannot suddenly be discovered,
let him take on him this resolution as King David did, 'There shall no
deceitful person dwell in my house.'" It would have been well both for
the Philosopher and the Favourite if they had been careful to walk by
this rule. - William Binnie.

Whole Psalm

Eyring, in his "Life of Ernest the Pious" (Duke of Saxe-Gotha), relates
that he sent an unfaithful minister a copy of the 101st Psalm, and that
it became a proverb in the country when an official had done anything
wrong, He will certainly soon receive the prince's Psalm to read. - F.
Delitzsch.

Whole Psalm

The 101st Psalm was one beloved by the noblest of Russian princes,
Vladimir Monomachos; and by the gentlest of English reformers, Nicholas
Ridley. But it was its first leap into life that has carried it so far
into the future. It is full of a stern exclusiveness, of a noble
intolerance, not against theological error, not against uncourtly
manners, not against political insubordination, but against the proud
heart, the high look, the secret slanderer, the deceitful worker, the
teller of lies. These are the outlaws from king David's court; these are
the rebels and heretics whom he would not suffer to dwell in his house
or tarry in his sight. - Arthur Penrhyn Stanley, in "Lectures on the
History of the Jewish Church," 1870.

Whole Psalm

Such a hymn of praise as the grand doxology of [Psa
99:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001) could not die away without an
echo. Accordingly [Psa 100:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#001) may be
regarded as forming the chorus of the church, and this as taking up and
applying that part of the doxology which celebrated the present
manifestation of the "King in his beauty." - Alfred Edersheim.

Whole Psalm

Mr. Fox reports that Bishop Ridley often read and expounded this Psalm
to his household, hiring them with money to get it by heart. - Thomas
Lye, in "The Morning Exercises."

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"I will sing." If thou bestowest mercies upon me; or if thou bringest
any judgment upon me; before thee, O Lord, will I sing my hymn for all.
- Chaldee Paraphrase.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"I will sing." The manner of expression imports a cordial resolution;
heart and will are engaged in it; there is twice I will in the text, the
manner of expression imports a humble resolution; I cannot sing of
merit; but I will sing of mercy, and through mercy I will sing of mercy.
To sing of mercy must be a humble song, for mercy towards a miserable
sinner is a melting word; and to sing of judgment must be a humble song,
for judgment in every sense is an awful word. The manner of the
expression imports a skilful harper, a dexterous musician, even in a
spiritual sense; he knew what should be the subject of the song, and he
says, "I will sing of mercy and judgment;" and he knew what should be
the object of the song, or to whom it should be sung, and therefore
says, "To thee, O Lord, I will sing"; he knew who should be the singer,
and therefore says, "I will" do it; he knew what should be the manner;
and therefore says, "I will sing of mercy and judgment; to thee, O Lord,
will I sing." It is before the Lord he resolves to sing, as he did
before the ark, which was a type of Christ; and so is it a song to the
praise of God in Christ. The manner of the expression imports a firm,
fixed, and constant resolution; so the redoubling of it seems to import;
"I will sing, I will sing." He had a mind this exercise of singing
should not go down, but be his continual trade, "I will sing, I will
sing;" I will sing on earth and I will sing in heaven; I will sing in
time and I will sing in eternity. And, indeed, all on whom the spirit of
praise and gratitude is poured out resolve never to give over singing
David had heard once, yea, twice, that mercy as well as power belongs to
the Lord; and therefore not only once, but twice in a breath he resolves
to sing unto the Lord. The word hath a great deal of elegancy and
emphasis in it; I will sing of mercy, I will sing of judgment; O, I will
sing, O Lord, I will sing; and I will sing unto thee. - Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

This song of the sweet singer of Israel is peculiar to earth; they do
not sing of "judgment" in heaven, for there is no sin there; they do not
sing of "mercy" in hell, for there is no propitiation for sin there.
Time was when the song was not heard even on earth; for in Paradise man
walked in innocence, and walking in innocence he walked in the light of
his Father's face. - Hugh Stowell, 1856.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"I will sing of mercy and judgment." It comes all to this, as if the
Psalmist should say, "I will sing of merciful judgments;" for judgment
is mercy, as it is the matter of the song: or, to take them separately,
"I will sing of mercy in mercies, and, I will sing of mercy in
judgment'" and so I will sing of my blinks and of my showers; I will
sing both of my cloudy and my clear day; both of my ups and downs. -
Ralph Erskine.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"Mercy and judgment." As the badge of the ship S. Paul sailed in was
Castor and Pollux, twin brothers, so the badge of this Psalm is Mercy
and Judgment, inseparable companions; of whom it may be said, as our
prophet sometimes spake of Saul and Jonathan, "They were lovely and
pleasant in their lives, and in their deaths they were not divided."
These are the two brightest stars in the firmament of majesty; the two
fairest flowers, and choicest jewels in the imperial crown; like the
carnation and the lily, the ruby and the sapphire, or the carbuncle and
the diamond, yielding a mutual and interchangeable lustre each to other.
They resemble not unfitly the two supporters of the king's arms, or the
two seraphim stretching out their golden wings over the propitiatory, or
the white and red rose in the same escutcheon.

We read that Solomon set up two goodly pillars in the porch of the
temple, the one called Jachin, the other Boaz, which signify stability
and strength: such pillars of the state are mercy and judgment. The
throne of the King is borne up by them, as Solomon's was with lions of
ivory on each side. Therefore, as in one place it is said that "the
throne is established by justice" ([Pro
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#012)); so in another that it is
"upheld by mercy" ([Pro 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#028));
justice being as the bones and sinews in the body politic, and mercy as
the veins and arteries. They are the two hands of action, the two eyes
of virtue, and the two wings of honour. And as the eyes, if they be
rightly set, do both look one way; so do mercy and judgment, however in
the apprehension of the vulgar they seem to look contrary ways. And as
the treble and the bass accord best in music; so do they in managing the
commonwealth. Wherefore David promiseth to make them both sound tunable
in his song without jar or discord: "I will sing of mercy and
judgment."....

As mercy is here set in the first place; so shall the sentence of mercy
and absolution be first pronounced at the last day. And it is a laudable
custom of princes, at their first entrance to their kingdoms, to shew
mercy, by hearing the mourning of the prisoner, and delivering the
children of death, by loosing the bands of wickedness, by taking off the
heavy burdens, by letting the oppressed go free, and by breaking every
yoke of former extortions. Thus, our prophet himself, as soon as the
crown was settled on his head, made inquiry if there remained yet alive
any of the house of Saul, on whom he might shew mercy ([Sa2
9:1-13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#001)). O how fair a thing is this
mercy in the time of anguish and trouble! It is like a cloud of rain
that cometh in the time of drought. But this mercy, here spoken of in
the first part of our prophet's song, stretcheth further; unfolding
itself in clemency, in courtesy, and in compassion. In clemency, by
pardoning malefactors; in compassion, by relieving the afflicted; in
courtesy, towards all. - George Hakewill, or Hakewell, 1579-1649.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"Mercy and judgment." What is the history of every poor sinner, plucked
as a brand from the fire, and brought to heaven in peace at last, but a
history of "mercy and judgment?" Judgment first awakes to terror and to
fear; mercy meets the poor, trembling, returning prodigal, and falls on
his neck, and kisses, and forgives. Then, through all his chequered
course, God hems up his way with judgment, that he may not wander, and
yet brightens his path with mercy, that he may not faint. Is there a
child of God that can look into the varied record of his heart or of his
Outward history, and not see goodness and severity, severity and
goodness, tracking him all his journey through? Has he ever had a cup so
bitter that he could say, "There is no mercy here"? Has he ever had a
lot so bright that he could say, "There is no chastisement or correction
here"? Has he ever had any bad tidings, and there have been no good
tidings set over against them to relieve them? Has he ever had a sky so
dark that he could see in it no star, or a cloud so unchequered that he
could trace no rainbow of promise there? ...

What a beautifully woven web of judgment and mercy does every man's
secret history, in his way through the wilderness of life to the land of
promise, present I and how good, and how wholesome, and how kindly, and
how gracious is this blessed intermingling of both! How do we need the
judgment, to keep us humble and watchful and pure! and how do we need
the mercy, to keep us hopeful, and to nerve our efforts, and to stir our
hearts, and to sustain us in patience, amid life's battle and struggle,
and disappointment and vexation! Oh, how good it is for us, that we
should thus, therefore, have the rod and staff together - the rod to
chasten, and the staff to solace and sustain! How good it is for us,
that we should have to "sing of mercy and judgment"! And yet, what is
judgment itself, but mercy with a sterner aspect? And what are the
chidings of judgment, but the sterner tones of the voice of a Father's
love? For even judgment is one of the "all things" that "work together
for good to them that love God, to them that are the called according to
his purpose." - Hugh Stowell.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"Mercy and judgment." God intermixeth mercy with affliction he steeps
his sword of justice in the oil of mercy; there was no night so dark,
but Israel had a pillar of fire in it; there is no condition so dismal,
but we may see a pillar of fire to give light. If the body be in pain,
conscience is in peace, - there is mercy; affliction is for the
prevention of sin, - there is mercy. In the ark there was a rod and a
pot of manna, the emblem of a Christian's condition, mercy interlined
with judgment. - Thomas Watson.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"I will behave myself wisely." The first thing he vows touching himself,
is wise behaviour; prudence, not sapience; not wise contemplation, but
wise action. It is not wise thoughts, or wise speaking, or wise writing,
or wise gesture and countenance, will serve the turn, but wise
behaviour; the former are graceful, but the other needful. For as the
apostle saith of godliness, "Having a show of godliness, but denying the
power thereof;" so certainly there are those who in point of wisdom and
sufficiency that do little or nothing thoroughly, but magno conatu
nugas, they make much ado about small matters; using all the
perspectives of shifting they can devise to make an empty superficies
seem a body that hath depth and bulk. - George Hakewill.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"I will walk." Walking is a word often used in Holy Scripture, and
especially by Our prophet in this book of the Psalms; yet more often
figuratively than properly. It shall not be amiss, then, out of the
property and nature of it, to consider the duties included and implied
in it. The natural acts of it, then, are three; motion, progress, and
moderation. As it includes motion, so is it opposed to lying, or
standing, or sitting; as it includes progress in motion, so is it
opposed to jumping or capering up and down in the same place; as it
includes moderation in a progressive motion, so is it opposed to violent
running. - George Hakewill.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"I will walk within my house." Much, though not all of the power of
godliness, lies within doors. It is in vain to talk of holiness if we
can bring no letters testimonial from our holy walking with our
relations. Oh, it is sad when they that have reason to know us best, by
their daily converse with us, do speak least for our godliness! Few so
impudent as to come naked into the streets; if men have anything to
cover their naughtiness they will put it on when they come abroad. But
what art thou within doors? What care and conscience to discharge thy
duty to thy near relations? He is a bad husband that hath money to spend
among company abroad, but none to lay in provisions to keep his family
at home. And can he be a good Christian that spends all his religion
abroad, and leaves none for his nearest relations at home? that is, a
great zealot among strangers and little or nothing of God comes from him
in his family? Yea, it were well if some that gain the reputation of
Christians abroad, did not fall short of others that pretend not to
profession in those moral duties which they should perform to their
relations. There are some who are great strangers to profession, who yet
are loving and kind in their way to their wives. What kind of professors
then are they who are dogged and currish to the wife of their bosom? who
by their tyrannical lording it over them embitter their spirit, and make
them cover the Lord's altar with tears and weeping? There are wives to
be found that are not clamorous, peevish and froward to their husbands,
who yet are far from a true work of grace in their hearts; do they then
walk as becomes holiness who trouble the whole house with their violent
passions? There are servants who from the authority of a natural
conscience, are kept from railing and reviling language, when reproved
by their masters, and shall not grace keep pace with nature? Holy David
knew very well how near this part of a saint's duty lies to the very
heart of godliness; and therefore, when he makes his solemn vow to walk
holily before God, he instanceth this, as one stage wherein he might
eminently discover the graciousness of his spirit; "I will walk within
my house with a perfect heart." - William Gurnall.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"Within my house." It is easier for most men to walk with a perfect
heart in the church, or even in the world, than in their own families.
How many are as meek as lambs among others, when at home they are wasps
or tigers. - Adam Clarke.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"Within my house with a perfect heart." Even in our best directed
establishments, as well as in private families, cultivation is still in
a great measure confined to intellect alone; and the direct exercise and
training of the moral and religious sentiments and affections are rarely
thought of as essential to their full and vigorous development. Moral
precepts are, no doubt, offered in abundance; but these address
themselves chiefly to the intellect. We must not be satisfied with
merely exclaiming, "Be kind, just, and affectionate," when perhaps at
the very moment we are counteracting the effect of the advice by our own
opposite conduct. "She told me not to lie," said Guy Rivers in speaking
of his mother, "and she set me the example herself by frequently
deceiving my father, and teaching me to disobey and deceive him."
Conduct like this is more common in real life than is supposed, although
generally less flagrant in degree. Parents and teachers indeed too often
forget that the sentiments feel and do not reason, and that,
consequently, even a stupid child may, by the instinctive operation of
its moral nature at once detect and revolt at the immorality of
practices, the true character of which its reason is unable to penetrate
or expose. It is one of the most effectual methods of cultivating and
exciting the moral sentiments in children, to set before them the
manifestations of these in our habitual conduct....

What kind of moral duties does the parent encourage, who, recommending
kindness, openness, and justice, tricks the child into the confession of
a fault, and then basely punishes it, having previously promised
forgiveness? And how is openness best encouraged - by practising it in
conduct, or by neglecting it in practice, and prescribing it in words?
Is it to be cultivated by thrusting suspicions in the face of honest
intentions? And how is justice to be cultivated by a guardian who speaks
about it, recommends it, and in practice charges each of four pupils the
whole fare of a hackney-coach? Or what kind of moral education is that
which says, "Do as I bid you, and I will give you sweetmeats or money,
or I will tell your mama how good you were," holding out the lowest and
most selfish propensities as the motives to moral conduct? Did space
permit, I might indeed pursue the whole round of moral and religious
duties, and ask similar questions at each. But it is needless. These
examples will suffice; and I give them, not as applicable generally
either to parents or teachers, but simply as individual instances from
among both, which have come within the sphere of my own knowledge, and
which bear directly upon the principle under discussion. - Andrew Combe,
in "The Principles of Physiology," 1836.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

"Wicked thing." The original hath it, if we will render it word for
word, "I will set no word of Belial before mine eyes." But word is
figuratively there put for thing; as likewise [Psa
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#008); and so is it rendered both by
Montanus in the margin, and in the text by Junius; howbeit, in his
comment upon this Psalm, he precisely follows the original, applying it
against sycophants and flatterers, the mice and moths of court. - George
Hakewill.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

"I hate the work of them that turn aside." Mr. Schultens hath shown in
his commentary on [Pro 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#025) that שׁטח
hath a much stronger and more significant meaning than that of mere
turning aside; and that it is used of an unruly horse, that champs upon
the bit through his fiery impatience; and when applied to a bad man,
denotes one impatient of all restraint, of unbridled passions, and that
is headstrong and ungovernable in the gratification of them, trampling
on all the obligations of religion and virtue. Such as these are the
deserved objects of the hatred of all good men, whose criminal
deviations and presumptuous crimes they detest; none of which "shall
cleave to them;" they will not harbour the love of, or inclination to
them, nor habitually commit them, nor encourage the practice of them.
Persons of this character are too frequently about the courts of
princes, but it is their honour and interest, as far as ever they can,
to discountenance them. - Samuel Chandler.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

"It shall not cleave to me." A bird may light upon a man's house, but he
may choose whether she shall nestle or breed there, or no: and the devil
or his instruments may represent a wicked object to a man's sight; but
he may choose whether he will entertain or embrace it or no. For a man
to set wicked things before his eyes is nothing else but to sin of set
purpose, to set himself to sin, or to sell himself to sin, as Ahab did,
1 Kings 21. - George Hakewill.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

"It shall not cleave to me." A wicked plan or purpose is thus
represented as having a tendency to fasten itself on a man, or to "stick
to him" - as pitch or wax, or a burr does. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)

"A froward heart." The original sense of עקשׁ is torsit, contorsit, to
twist together, and denotes, when applied to men, persons of a perverse,
subtle disposition, that can twist and twine themselves into all manner
of shapes, and who have no truth and honour to be depended on. - Samuel
Chandler.

[Psa 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)

"A froward heart." By which I understand "from-wardness" - giving way to
sudden impulses of anger, or quick conception, and casting it forth in
words or deeds of impetuous violence. - Thomas Chalmers.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

"Privily slandereth" - literally, he that tongueth his neighbour
secretly. "Will I not suffer," is properly, "him I cannot," i.e., cannot
live with, cannot bear about me, as the same verb is used in [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013). - Henry Cowles.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

"Him that hath an high look." Pride will sit and show itself in the eyes
as soon as anywhere. A man is seen what he is in oculis, in poculis, in
loculis (in his eyes, his cups, and his resorts) say the Rabbins. See
[Pro 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017). - John Trapp.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

"Proud heart." From רחב, latus or dilatatus est, is the noun רחב here,
broad, or wide, or large; and being applied to the heart or soul, it
notes largeness of desires. - Henry Hammond.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

Detraction, ambition, and avarice are three weeds which spring and
flourish in the rich soil of a court. The Psalmist declareth his
resolution to undertake the difficult task of eradicating them for the
benefit of his people, that Israelites might not be harassed by
informers, or repressed by insolent and rapacious ministers. Shall we
imagine these vices less odious in the eyes of that King whose character
was composed of humility and charity; or will Christ admit those tempers
into the court of heaven, which David determined to exclude from his
court upon earth? - George Horne.

[Psa 101:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

Perfect, as prophetic of Christ, is the delineation of his associates
and disciples. The perverse; the evil-doers; the slanderers, and the
proud found no fellowship with him. There were no common principles; no
bond of union between them. There was "a gulph" interposed, as in the
parable, which they could not pass; and what they saw of Christ, they
beheld only from a distance. Nor even now, as then, can "the deceitful"
dwell in Christ's "house" - his holy temple; nor the man of "lies be
established" by his love and favour. They must renounce their vices
before they can be admitted to his covenant; or, however they may claim
communion with him, he in return can have no sympathy with them. -
William Hill Tucker.

[Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

"Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful." There is an eye of search, and
an eye of favour: the one is for the seeking and finding them out, that
they may serve; the other for countenancing of their persons, and
rewarding of their service. - George Hakewill.

[Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

"Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land," etc. Christ's eyes
are upon faithful persons, or faithful ministers of the word, who preach
the Gospel faithfully, administer the ordinances truly, are faithful to
the souls of men in watching over them, reproving and exhorting them;
his eyes are upon them to keep and preserve them, and to honour and
reward them with a crown of life that fadeth not away. His eyes are also
on faithful members of churches, such who truly believe in him, who hold
fast the faithful word, and keep close to his worship and ordinances;
his eyes are upon them, to show favour to them, to bestow blessings upon
them, and to protect and defend them, and to preserve them from
perishing: "That they may dwell with me;" or, sit with me; at his table,
or at the council-board or in judgment, and assist him in the affairs of
government; so such as are faithful shall dwell with Christ both here
and hereafter; they dwell in him and with him by faith, and have
communion with him; they dwell in his house below, and shall dwell with
him above for evermore. - John Gill.

[Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

"He that waketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me." Art thou a godly
master? When thou tallest a servant into thy house, choose for God as
well as thyself. Remember there is a work for God to be done by thy
servant as well as by thyself, and shall he be fit for thy turn that is
not for God's? Thou desirest the work should prosper thy servant takes
in hand, dost thou not? And what ground hast thou, from the promise, to
hope that the work should prosper in his hand that sins all the while he
is doing of it? "The ploughing of the wicked is sin," [Pro
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#004). A godly servant is a greater
blessing than we think on. He can work, and set God on work also, for
his master's good: [Gen 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#012), "O Lord
God of my master Abraham, I pray thee, send me good speed this day, and
shew kindness unto my master." And sure he did his master as much
service by his prayer as by his prudence in that journey. If you were
but to plant an orchard, you would get the best fruit trees, and not
cumber your ground with crabs. There is more loss in a graceless servant
in the house than a fruitless tree in the orchard. Holy David observed,
while he was at Saul's court, the mischief of having wicked and ungodly
servants, for with such was that unhappy king compassed, that David
compares his court to the profane and barbarous heathens; among whom
there was scarce more wickedness to be found, [Psa
120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005). "Woe is me, that I sojourn in
Mesech, that I dwell in the tents of Kedar;" that is, among those who
were as prodigiously wicked as any there. And no doubt but this made
this gracious man in his banishment, before he came to the crown, having
seen the evil of a disordered house, to resolve what he would do when
God should make him the head of such a royal family. "He that worketh
deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that telleth lies shall not
tarry in my sight." He instanceth those sins, not as if he would spend
all his zeal against these, but because he had observed them principally
to abound in Saul's court, by which he had suffered so much, as you may
perceive by [Psa 120:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#001). - William
Gurnall.

[Psa 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

"That I may cut off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord." As the
kingdom of David was only a faint image of the kingdom of Christ, we
ought to set Christ before our view; who, although he may bear with many
hypocrites, yet as he will be the judge of the world, will at length
call them all to an account, and separate the sheep from the goats. And
if it seems to us that he tarries too long, we should think of that
morning which will suddenly dawn, that all filthiness being purged away,
true purity may shine forth. - John Calvin.

[Psa 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

"Early." From some incidental notices of Scripture ([Sa2
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#002); [Psa
101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008); [Jer
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012)), it has been inferred that
judges ordinarily held their sessions in the morning. In a climate like
that of Palestine, such a custom would be natural and convenient. It is
doubtful, however, whether this passage expresses anything more than the
promptness and zeal which a righteous judge exercises in the discharge
of his duty. - E. P. Barrows, in "Biblical Geography and Antiquities."

[Psa 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

The holy vow "to destroy all the wicked of the land," and to "cut off
all wicked doers from the city of the Lord," must begin at our own
hearts as his sanctuary, the temple of the Holy Ghost. - Alfred
Edersheim.

[Psalms 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 101:1</span></span>

1 I will sing of mercy and judgment; unto thee, O Lord, will I sing.

2 I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way. O when wilt thou come
unto me? I will walk within my house with a perfect heart.

3 I will set no wicked thing before mine-eyes: I hate the work of them
that turn aside; it shall not cleave to me.

4 A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked person.

5 Whose privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off: him that
hath an high look and a proud heart will not I suffer.

6 Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me; he that walketh in a perfect way, he shall serve me.

7 He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house: he that
telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight.

8 I will early destroy all the wicked of the land; that I may cut off
all wicked doers from the city of the Lord.

[Psa 101:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#001)

"I will sing of mercy and judgment." He would extol both the love and
the severity, the sweets and the bitters, which the Lord had mingled in
his experience; he would admire the justice and the goodness of the
Lord. Such a song would fitly lead up to godly resolutions as to his own
conduct, for that which we admire in our superiors we naturally
endeavour to imitate. Mercy and judgment would temper the administration
of David, because he had adoringly perceived them in the dispensations
of his God. Everything in God's dealings with us may fittingly become
the theme of song, and we have not viewed it aright until we feel we can
sing about it. We ought as much to bless the Lord for the judgment with
which he chastens our sin, as for the mercy with which he forgives it;
there is as much love in the blows of his hand as in the kisses of his
mouth. Upon a retrospect of their lives instructed saints scarcely know
which to be most grateful for - the comforts which have cheered them, or
the afflictions which have purged them. "Unto thee, O Lord, will I
sing." Jehovah shall have all our praise. The secondary agents of either
the mercy or the judgment must hold a very subordinate place in our
memory, and the Lord alone must be hymned by our heart. Our soul's sole
worship must be the lauding of the Lord. The Psalmist forsakes the minor
key, which was soon to rule him in the one hundred and second Psalm, and
resolves that, come what may, he will sing, and sing to the Lord too,
whatever others might do.

[Psa 101:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#002)

"I will behave myself wisely in a perfect way." To be holy is to be
wise; a perfect way is a wise way. David's resolve was excellent, but
his practice did not fully tally with it. Alas! he was not always wise
or perfect, but it was well that it was in his heart. A king had need be
both sage and pure, and, if he be not so in intent, when he comes to the
throne, his after conduct will be a sad example to his people. He who
does not even resolve to do well is likely to do very ill. Householders,
employers, and especially ministers, should pray for both wisdom and
holiness, for they will need them both. "O when wilt thou come unto me?"
- an ejaculation, but not an interruption. He feels the need not merely
of divine help, but also of the divine presence, that so he may be
instructed, and sanctified, and made fit for the discharge of his high
vocation. David longed for a more special and effectual visitation from
the Lord before he began his reign. If God be with us we shall neither
err in judgment nor transgress in character; his presence brings us both
wisdom and holiness: away from God we are away from safety. Good men are
so sensible of infirmity that they cry for help from God, so full of
prayer that they cry at all seasons, so intense in their desires that
they cry with sighs and groanings which cannot be uttered, saying, "O
when wilt thou come unto me?" "I will walk within my house with a
perfect heart." Piety must begin at home. Our first duties are those
within our own abode. We must have a perfect heart at home, or we cannot
keep a perfect way abroad. Notice that these words are a part of a song,
and that there is no music like the harmony of a gracious life, no Psalm
so sweet as the daily practice of holiness. Reader, how fares it with
your family? Do you sing in the choir and sin in the chamber? Are you a
saint abroad and a devil at home? For shame! What we are at home, that
we are indeed. He cannot be a good king whose palace is the haunt of
vice, nor he a true saint whose habitation is a scene of strife, nor he
a faithful minister whose household dreads his appearance at the
fireside.

[Psa 101:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#003)

"I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes." I will neither delight in
it, aim at it, nor endure it. If I have wickedness brought before me by
others I will turn away from it, I will not gaze upon it with pleasure.
The Psalmist is very sweeping in his resolve, he declines the least, the
most reputable, the most customary form of evil - no wicked thing: not
only shall it not dwell in his heart, but not even before his eyes, for
what fascinates the eye is very apt to gain admission into the heart,
even as Eve's apple first pleased her sight, and then prevailed over her
mind and hand. "I hate the work of them that turn aside." He was warmly
against it; he did not view it with indifference, but with utter scorn
and abhorrence. Hatred of sin is a good sentinel for the door of virtue.
There are persons in courts who walk in a very crooked way, leaving the
high road of integrity; and these, by short cuts, and twists, and turns,
are often supposed to accomplish work for their masters which simple
honest hearts are not competent to undertake; but David would not employ
such, he would pay no secret service money, he loathed the practices of
men who deviate from righteousness. He was of the same mind as the dying
statesman who said, "Corruption wins not more than honesty." It is
greatly to be deplored that in after years he did not keep himself clear
in this matter in every case, though, in the main he did; but what would
he have been if he had not commenced with this resolve, but had followed
the usual crooked policy of Oriental princes? How much do we all need
divine keeping! We are no more perfect than David, nay, we fall far
short of him in many things; and, like him, we shall find need to write
a Psalm of penitence very soon after our Psalm of good resolution. "It
shall not cleave to me." I will disown their ways, I will not imitate
their policy: like dirt it may fall upon me, but I will wash it off, and
never rest till I am rid of it. Sin, like pitch, is very apt to stick.
In the course of our family history crooked things will turn up, for we
are all imperfect, and some of those around us are far from being what
they should be; it must, therefore, be one great object of our care to
disentangle ourselves, to keep clear of transgression, and of all that
comes of it: this cannot be done unless the Lord both comes to us, and
abides with us evermore.

[Psa 101:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#004)

"A froward heart shall depart from me." He refers both to himself and to
those round about him; he would neither be crooked in heart himself, nor
employ persons of evil character in his house; if he found such in his
court he would chase them away. He who begins with his own heart begins
at the fountain head, and is not likely to tolerate evil companions. We
cannot turn out of our family all whose hearts are evil, but we can keep
them out of our confidence, and let them see that we do not approve of
their ways. "I will not know a wicked person." He shall not be my
intimate, my bosom friend. I must know him as a man, or I could not
discern his character; but if I know him to be wicked, I will not know
him any further, and with his evil I will have no communion. "To know"
in Scripture means more than mere perception, it includes fellowship,
and in that sense it is here used. Princes must disown those who disown
righteousness; if they know the wicked they will soon be known as wicked
themselves.

[Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005)

"Whoso privily slandereth his neighbour, him will I cut off." He had
known so bitterly the miseries caused by slanderers that he intended to
deal severely with such vipers when he came into power, not to revenge
his own ills, but to prevent others from suffering as he had done. To
give one's neighbour a stab in the dark is one of the most atrocious of
crimes, and cannot be too heartily reprobated, yet such as are guilty of
it often find patronage in high places, and are considered to be men of
penetration, trusty ones who have a keen eye, and take care to keep
their lords well posted up. King David would lop the goodly tree of his
state of all such superfluous boughs, "Him that hath an high look and a
proud heart wilt not I suffer." Proud, domineering, supercilious
gentlemen, who look down upon the poor as though they were so many worms
crawling in the earth beneath their feet, the Psalmist could not bear.
The sight of them made him suffer, and therefore he would not suffer
them. Great men often affect aristocratic airs and haughty manners,
David therefore resolved that none should be great in his palace but
those who had more grace and more sense than to indulge in such
abominable vanity. Proud men are generally hard, and therefore very
unfit for office; persons of high looks provoke enmity and discontent,
and the fewer of such people about a court the better for the stability
of a throne. If all slanderers were now cut off, and all the proud
banished, it is to be feared that the next census would declare a very
sensible diminution of the population.

[Psa 101:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#006)

"Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful of the land, that they may dwell
with me." He would seek them out, engage their services, take care of
them, and promote them to honour: this is a noble occupation for a king,
and one which will repay him infinitely better than listening to the
soft nothings of flatterers. It would be greatly for the profit of us
all if we chose our servants rather by their piety than by their
cleverness; he who gets a faithful servant gets a treasure, and he ought
to do anything sooner than part with him. Those who are not faithful to
God will not be likely to be faithful to men; if we are faithful
ourselves, we shall not care to have those about us who cannot speak the
truth or fulfil their promises; we shall not be satisfied until all the
members of our family are upright in character. "He that walketh in a
perfect way, he shall serve me." What I wish myself to be, that I desire
my servant to be. Employers are to a great degree responsible for their
servants, and it is customary to blame a master if he retains in his
service persons of notorious character; therefore, lest we become
partakers of other men's sins, we shall do well to decline the services
of bad characters. A good master does well to choose a good servant; he
may take a prodigal into his house for the sinner's good, but if he
consults his own he will look in another quarter. Wicked nurses have
great influence for evil over the minds of little children, and ungodly
servants often injure the morals of the older members of the family, and
therefore great care should be exercised that godly servants should be
employed as far as possible. Even religious men have the sense to
perceive the value of Christian servants, and surely their own Christian
brethren ought not to have a lower appreciation of them.

[Psa 101:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#007)

"He that worketh deceit shall not dwell within my house." He had power
to choose his courtiers, and he meant to exercise it. Deceit among most
Orientals is reckoned to be a virtue, and is only censured when it is
not sufficiently cunning, and therefore comes to be found out; it was
therefore all the more remarkable that David should have so determinedly
set his face against it. He could not tell what a deceitful man might be
doing, what plots he might be contriving, what mischief he might be
brewing, and therefore he resolved that he would at any rate keep him
out of his house, that his palace might not become a den of villainy.
Cheats in the market are bad enough, but deceivers at our own table we
cannot bear. "He that telleth lies shall not tarry in my sight." He
would not have a liar within sight or hearing; he loathed the mention of
him. Grace makes men truthful, and creates in them an utter horror of
everything approaching to falsehood. If David could not have a liar in
his sight, much less will the Lord; neither he that loves nor he who
makes a lie shall be admitted into heaven. Liars are obnoxious enough on
earth; the saints shall not be worried with them in another world.

[Psa 101:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#008)

"I will early destroy all the wicked of the land." At the very outset of
his government he would promptly deal out justice to the worthless, he
would leave them no rest, but make them leave their wickedness or feel
the lash of the law. The righteous magistrate "beareth not the sword in
vain." To favour sin is to discourage virtue; undue leniency to the bad
is unkindness to the good. When our Lord comes in judgment, this verse
will be fulfilled on a large scale; till then he sinks the judge in the
Saviour, and bids men leave their sins and find pardon. Under the gospel
we also are bidden to suffer long, and to be kind, even to the
unthankful and the evil; but the office of the magistrate is of another
kind, and he must have a sterner eye to justice than would be proper in
private persons. Is he not to be a terror to evil doers? "That I may cut
off all wicked doers from the city of the Lord." Jerusalem was to be a
holy city, and the Psalmist meant to be doubly careful in purging it
from ungodly men. Judgment must begin at the house of God. Jesus
reserves his scourge of small cords for sinners inside the temple. How
pure ought the church to be, and how diligently should all those who
hold office therein labour to keep out and chase out men of unclean
lives. Honourable offices involve serious responsibilities; to trifle
with them will bring our own souls into guilt, and injure beyond
calculation the souls of others. Lord, come to us, that we, in our
several positions in life, may walk before thee with perfect hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 102](psa102)

</div>
