<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa147)  [Next](psa149) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 148](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 148:0</span></span>

The song is one and indivisible. It seems almost impossible to expound
it in detail, for a living poem is not to be dissected verse by verse.
It is a song of nature and of grace. As a flash of lightning flames
through space, and enwraps both heaven and earth in one vestment of
glory, so doth the adoration of the Lord in this Psalm light up all the
universe and cause it to glow with a radiance of praise. The song begins
in the heavens, sweeps downward to dragons and all deeps, and then
ascends again, till the people near unto Jehovah take up the strain. For
its exposition the chief requisite is a heart on fire with reverent love
to the Lord over all, who is to be blessed for ever.

Hints to Preachers

Whole Psalm. -

I. What is implied in the invitation to the natural creation to praise
God.

1\. That praise is due to God on its account.

2\. That it is due from those for whose benefit it was created.

3\. That it is a reproof to those who do not praise God who are actually
capable of it. "If these should hold their peace, the stones would
immediately cry out."

II\. What is implied in the invitation to innocent beings to praise God.
"Praise ye the Lord from the heavens. Praise ye him all his angels,
praise ye him all his hosts:" [Psa 148:1, 19
148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001). -

1\. That they owe their creation in innocence to God.

2\. That they owe their preservation in innocence to him.

3\. That they owe the reward of their innocence to him.

III\. What is implied in the invitation to fallen beings to praise God:
"Kings of the earth and all people," etc.: [Psa
148:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011). -

1\. That God is merciful and ready to forgive. "Not willing that any
should perish," etc. They would not be called upon to praise God if they
were irrecoverably lost. Our Lord would not when on earth accept praise
from an evil spirit.

2\. That means of restoration from the fall are provided by God for men.
Without this they would have no hope, and could offer no praise.

IV\. What is implied in the invitation to the redeemed to praise God:
[Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014). -

1\. That God is their God.

2\. That all his perfections are engaged for their present and eternal
welfare. - G. R.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001). - "Praise ye the Lord."

I. The Voice - of Scripture of nature, of grace, of duty.

II\. The Ear on which it rightly falls - of saints and sinners, old and
young, healthy and sick. It falls on our ear.

III\. The Time when it is heard. Now, ever, yet also at special times.

IV\. The Response which we will give. Let us now praise with heart,
life, lip.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001) (second and third clauses).
-

I. The character of the praises of heaven.

II\. How far they influence us who are here below.

III\. The hope which we have of uniting in them.

[Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002). -

I. The angels as praiseful servants.

II\. The other hosts of God, and how they praise him.

III\. The rule without exception: "all - all." Imagine one heavenly
being living without praising the Lord!

[Psa 148:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#003). -

I. God's praise continual both day and night.

II\. Light the leading fountain of this praise.

III\. Life behind all, calling for the praise.

[Psa 148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005), [Psa
148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006). - Creation and conversation,
two chief reasons for praise.

[Psa 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007). - God's praise from dark,
deep, and mysterious things.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008). - Canon Liddon preached in
St. Paul's on Sunday afternoon, December 23, 1883, and took for his text
[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008), "Wind and storm fulfilling
his word." He spoke of the divine use of destructive forces.

I. In the physical world we see wind and storm fulfilling God's word.

1\. The Bible occasionally lifts the veil, and shows us how destructive
forces of Nature have been the servants of God.

2\. Modern history illustrates this vividly.

II\. In the human, spiritual, and moral world, we find new and rich
application of the words of the text.

1\. In the State we see the storm of invasion and the storm of
revolution fulfilling God's word.

2\. In the Church we see the storm of persecution and the storm of
controversy fulfilling God's word.

3\. In the experience of individual life we see outward troubles, and
inward storms of religious doubts fulfilling God's word. - The
Contemporary Pulpit, 1884.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009). - "Trees." The glory of
God as seen in trees.

[Psa 148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010). - The wildest, the
quietest, the most depressed, and the most aspiring should each have its
song.

[Psa 148:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011). -

I. The universal King. Alone in excelling. Supreme in glory.

II\. The universal summons. Of all nations, ranks, classes and ages.
Foreshadowing the Judgment.

III\. The universal duty: praise, - constant, emphatic, growing. - W. B.
H.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012). - God to be served by
strength and beauty, experience and expectation.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012). - "And children." A
Children's Address.

I. Where the children are found ([Psa
148:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011) and [Psa
148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012)). In royal and distinguished
society: yet not lost or overlooked.

II\. What they are called to. "Praise the Lord." Even they have abundant
reason.

III\. What are the lessons of the subject?

1\. Children should come up with their parents on the Sabbath.

2\. Children should unite in heart and voice in God's praises.

3\. Children should seek fitness for this praise by believing in Christ.
- W. B. H.

[Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014). - The Favoured People and
their God.

I. What he does for them.

II\. What he makes them: "Saints."

III\. Who they are: "Children of Israel."

IV\. Where they are: "Near unto him."

V. What they do for him: "Praise ye the Lord."

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Psalms 148-150

The last three Psalms are a triad of wondrous praise, ascending from
praise to higher praise, until it becomes "joy unspeakable and full of
glory" - exultation which knows no bounds. The joy overflows the soul,
and spreads throughout the universe; every creature is magnetized by it,
and drawn into the chorus. Heaven is full of praise, the earth is full
of praise, praises rise from under the earth, "every thing that hath
breath" joins in the rapture. God is encompassed by a loving, praising
creation. Man, the last in creation, but the first in song, knows not
how to contain himself. He dances, he sings, he commands all the
heavens, with all their angels, to help him, "beasts and all cattle,
creeping things and flying fowl" must do likewise, even "dragons" must
not be silent, and "all deeps" must yield contributions. He presses even
dead things into his service, timbrels, trumpets, harps, organs,
cymbals, high-sounding cymbals, if by any means, and by all means, he
may give utterance to his love and joy. - John Pulsford.

Whole Psalm

In this splendid anthem the Psalmist calls upon the whole creation, in
its two great divisions (according to the Hebrew conception) of heaven
and earth, to praise Jehovah: things with and things without life,
beings rational and irrational, are summoned to join the mighty chorus.
This Psalm is the expression of the loftiest devotion, and it embraces
at the same time the most comprehensive view of the relation of the
creature to the Creator. Whether it is exclusively the utterance of a
heart filled to the full with the thought of the infinite majesty of
God, or whether it is also an anticipation, a prophetic forecast, of the
final glory of creation, when at the manifestation of the sons of God,
the creation itself also shall be redeemed from the bondage of
corruption ([Rom 8:18-23](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)), and the
homage of praise shall indeed be rendered by all things that are in
heaven and earth and under the earth, is a question into which we need
not enter. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

Whole Psalm

Milton, in his Paradise Lost (Book V., line 153, etc.), has elegantly
imitated this Psalm, and put it into the mouth of Adam and Eve as their
morning hymn in a state of innocency. - James Anderson.

Whole Psalm

Is this universal praise never to be realized? is it only the longing,
intense desire of the Psalmist's heart, which will never be heard on
earth, and can only be perfected in heaven? Is there to be no jubilee in
which the mountains and the hills shall break forth into singing, and
all the trees of the field shah clap their hands? If there is to be no
such day, then is the word of God of none effect; if no such universal
anthem is to swell the chorus of heaven, and to be re-echoed by all that
is on earth, then is God's promise void. It is true, in this Psalm our
translation presents it to us as a call or summons for everything that
hath or hath not breath to praise the Lord - or as a petition that they
may praise; but it is in reality a prediction that they shall praise
This Psalm is neither more nor less than a glorious prophecy of that
coming day, when not only shall the knowledge of the Lord be spread over
the whole earth, as the waters cover the sea, but from every created
object in heaven and in earth, animate and inanimate, from the highest
archangel through every grade and phase of being, down to the tiniest
atom - young men and maidens, old men and children, and all kings and
princes, and judges of the earth, shall unite in this millennial anthem
to the Redeemer's praise. - Barton Bouchier.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

"Praise ye the Lord," etc. All things praise, and yet he says, "Praise
ye." Wherefore doth he say, "Praise ye," when they are praising? Because
he delighteth in their praising, and therefore it pleaseth him to add,
as it were, his own encouragement. Just as, when you come to men who are
doing any good work with pleasure in their vineyard or in their
harvest-field, or in some other matter of husbandry, you are pleased at
what they are doing, and say, "Work on, Go on"; not that they may begin
to work, when you say this, but, because you are pleased at finding them
working, you add your approbation and encouragement. For by saying,
"Work on," and encouraging those who are working, you, so to speak, work
with them in wish. In this sort of encouragement, then, the Psalmist,
filled with the Holy Ghost, saith this. - Augustine.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

The thrice-repeated exhortation, "Praise ... Praise ... Praise," in this
first verse is not merely imperative, nor only hortative, but it is an
exultant hallelujah. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

"From the heavens' praise him in the heights." Or, high places. As God
in framing the world begun above, and wrought downward, so doth the
Psalmist proceed in this his exhortation to all creatures to praise the
Lord. - John Trapp.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

"Praise him in the heights." The principle applied in this verse is
this, that those who have been exalted to the highest honours of the
created universe, should proportionately excel in their tribute of
honour to him who has exalted them. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

Bernard, in his sermon on the death of his brother Gerard, relates that
in the middle of his last night on earth his brother, to the
astonishment of all present, with a voice and countenance of exultation,
broke forth in the words of the Psalmist - "Praise the Lord of heaven,
praise him in the heights!"

[Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002)

"Praise ye him, all his angels." Angels are first invoked, because they
can praise God with humility, reverence, and purity. The highest are the
humblest, the leaders of all created hosts are the most ready themselves
to obey. - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002)

"Praise ye him, all his angels." The angels of God were his first
creatures; it has even been thought that they existed prior to the
inanimate universe. They were already praising their Maker before the
light of day, and they have never ceased their holy song. Angels praise
God best in their holy service, They praised Christ as God when they
sang their Gloria in Excelsis at the Incarnation, and they praised him
as man when they ministered to him after his temptation and before his
crucifixion. So also now angels praise the Lord by their alacrity in
ministering to his saints. - John Lorinus.

[Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002)

"Praise ye him, all his hosts." That is, his creatures (those above
especially which are as his cavalry) called his "hosts," for,

I. Their number;

II\. their order;

III\. their obedience. - John Trapp.

[Psa 148:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#003)

"Praise ye him, sun and moon," etc. How does the sun specially praise
Jehovah?

I. By its beauty. Jesus son of Sirach calls it the "globe of beauty."

II\. By its fulness. Dion calls it "the image of the Divine capacity."

III\. By its exaltation. Pliny calls it caeli rector, "the ruler of
heaven."

IV\. By its perfect brightness. Pliny adds that it is "the mind and soul
of the whole universe."

V. By its velocity and constancy of motion. Martian calls it "the Guide
of Nature."

God the Supreme was depicted by the ancients holding in his hand a
wreath of stars, to show the double conception, that they both obey and
adorn him. - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#003), [Psa
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)

Let the sun, the fount of light, and warmth, and gladness, the greater
light which rules the day, the visible emblem of the Uncreated Wisdom,
the Light which lighteth every man, the centre round whom all our hopes
and fears, our wants and prayers, our faith and love, are ever moving, -
let the moon, the lesser light which rules the night, the type of the
Church, which giveth to the world the light she gains from the Sun of
Righteousness, - let the stars, so vast in their number, so lovely in
their arrangement and their brightness, which God hath appointed in the
heavens, even as he hath appointed his elect to shine for ever and ever,
- let all the heavens with all their wonders and their worlds, the
depths of space above, and the waters which are above the firmament, the
images of God's Holy Scripture and of the glories and the mysteries
contained therein, - let these ever praise him who made and blessed them
in the beginning of the creation. - J. W. Burgon.

[Psa 148:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#003), [Psa
148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)

Praise him, thou golden-tressd sun;

Praise him, thou fair and silver moon,

And ye bright orbs of streaming light;

Ye floods that float above the skies.

Ye heav'ns, that vault o'er vault arise,

Praise him, who sits above all height.

Richard Mant.

[Psa 148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)

"Praise him, ye heavens of heavens," etc. From the heavenly inhabitants
the poetic strain passes in transition to the heavens themselves. There
are orders of heavens, ranks and heights supreme, and stages and degrees
of lower altitude. This verse sublimely traverses the immensities which
are the home of the most exalted dignities who wait on Deity, and then
it descends to the firmament where the meteors flash forth, and where
the heavens stoop to lift the clouds that aspire from earth. And the
idea sustained is that all these vast realms, higher and lower, are one
temple of unceasing praise. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)

The ancients thought there was an ethereal and lofty ocean in which the
worlds floated like ships in a sea. - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005), [Psa
148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006)

This is the account of creation in a word - He spake; it was done. When
Jesus came, he went everywhere showing his Divinity by this evidence,
that his word was omnipotent. These verses declare two miracles of God's
Will and Word, viz., the creation and consolidation of the earth.
Jehovah first produced matter, then he ordered and established it. -
John Lorinus.

[Psa 148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006)

"He hath also stabllshed them for ever and ever," etc. Here two things
are set before us, the permanence and the cosmic order of creation. Each
created thing is not only formed to endure, in the type or the
development, if not in the individual, but has its place in the universe
fixed by Gods decree, that it may fulfil its appointed share of working
out his will. They raise a question as to the words for ever and ever,
how they can be reconciled with the prophecy, [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017) : "Behold, I create new heavens
and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind"; a prophecy confirmed by the Lord himself, saying, "Heaven and
earth shall pass away," and seen fulfilled in vision by the beloved
disciple. [Mat 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018); [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001). And they answer that just as man
dies and rises again to incorruption, having the same personality in a
glorified body, so will it be with heaven and earth. Their qualities
will be changed, not their identity, in that new birth of all things. -
Neale and Littledale.

[Psa 148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006)

"For ever and ever."

My heart is awed within me, when I think

Of the great miracle which still goes on,

In silence, round me - the perpetual work

Of thy creation, finished, yet renewed,

For ever.

William Cullen Bryant, 1794-1878.

[Psa 148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006)

"He hath made a decree," etc. Rather, He hath made an ordinance, and
will not transgress it. This is more obvious and natural than to supply
a new subject to the second verb, "and none of them transgress it." This
anticipates, but only in form, the modern scientific doctrine of the
inviolability of natural order. It is the imperishable faithfulness of
God that renders the law invariable. - A. S. Aglen.

[Psa 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

"Dragons." The word tanninim, rendered "dragons," is a word which may
denote whales, sharks, serpents, or sea-monsters of any kind ([Job
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#001); [Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003)). - John Morison.

[Psa 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

"Sea-monsters," in Revised Version. Fishes constrain our admiration, as
a created wonder, by the perfection of their form, their magnitude,
their adaptation to the element they inhabit, and their multitude. Thus
their very nature praises the Creator. - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007), [Psa
148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

He calls to the deeps, fire, hail, snow, mountains, and hills, to bear a
part in this work of praise. Not that they are able to do it actively,
but to show that man is to call in the whole creation to assist him
passively, and should have so much charity to all creatures as to
receive what they offer, and so much affection to God as to present to
him what he receives from him. Snow and hail cannot bless and praise
God, but man ought to bless God for those things, wherein there is a
mixture of trouble and inconvenience, something to molest our sense, as
well as something that improves the earth for fruit. - Stephen Charnock.

[Psa 148:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

Here be many things easy to be understood, they are clear to every eye;
as when David doth exhort "kings" and "princes," "old men" and "babes"
to praise God; that is easy to be done, and we know the meaning as soon
as we look on it; but here are some things again that are hard to be
understood, dark and obscure, and they are two: -

First, in that David doth exhort dumb, unreasonable, and senseless
creatures to praise God, such as cannot hear, at least cannot
understand. Doth the Holy Ghost in the gospel bid us avoid impertinent
speeches, and vain repetitions, and shall we think he will use them
himself? No, no. But,

Secondly, not only doth he call upon these creatures, but also he calls
upon the "deeps" and the "seas" to praise God; these two things are hard
to be conceived. But to give you some reasons.

The first reason may be this, why David calls upon the unreasonable
creatures to perform this duty, - He doth his duty like a faithful
preacher, whether they will hear or no that he preaches to, yet he will
discharge his soul: a true preacher, he speaks forth the truth, and
calls upon them to hear, though his auditors sleep, are careless, and
regard it not. So likewise doth David, in this sense, with these
creatures; he doth his duty, and calls upon them to do it, though they
understand not, though they comprehend it not. And likewise he doth it
to show his vehement desire for all creatures to praise God.

The second reason may be this: he doth it craftily, by way of policy, to
incite others to perform this duty, that if such creatures as they ought
to do this, then those that are above them in degree have more cause,
and may be ashamed to neglect it; as an ill-governed master, though he
stay himself at home, yet he will send his servants to church: so David,
being conscious of his own neglect, yet he calls upon others not to be
slack and negligent: though he came infinitely short of that he should
do, yet he shows his own desire for all creatures to perform this duty.

But if these reasons will not satisfy you, though they have done many
others, a third reason may be this: to set forth the sweet harmony that
is among all God's creatures; to show how that all the creatures being
God's family, do with one consent speak and preach aloud God's praise;
and therefore he calls upon some above him, some below him, on both
sides, everywhere, to speak God's praise; for every one in their place,
degree, and calling, show forth, though it be in a dumb sense and way,
their Creator's praise.

Or, fourthly, and lastly, which I think to be a good reason: zeal makes
men speak and utter things impossible; the fire of zeal will so
transport him that it will make him speak things unreasonable,
impossible, as Moses in his zeal desired God, for the safety of Israel,
"to blot his name out of his book"; and Paul wished himself "anathema,"
accursed or separate from Christ, for his brethren's salvation, which
was a thing impossible, it could not be. - John Everard, in "Some Gospel
Treasures," 1653.

[Psa 148:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

The ox and the ass acknowledge their master. The winds and the sea obey
him. It should seem that as there is a religion above man, the religion
of angels, so there may be a religion beneath man, the religion of dumb
creatures. For wheresoever there is a service of God, in effect it is a
religion. Thus according to the several degrees and difference of states
- the state of nature, grace, and glory - religion may likewise admit of
degrees. - G. G., in a sermon entitled "The Creatures Praysing God,"
1662.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

This verse arrays in striking order three elements that are ever full of
movement and power - ignea, aquea, area; fire (or caloric), water (or
vapour), and air (or wind). The first includes meteors, lightnings and
thunders; the second, snow, hoar-frost, dew, mist and rain; the third
breezes, tempests and hurricanes. - Hermann Venema.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

"Fire and hail." These are contrasted with one another. "Snow and mist."
The mist is the vapour raised by the heat of the sun, and therefore
suitably contrasted with the snow, which is the effect of cold. "Stormy
wind" ([Psa 107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025)), which accompanies
the changes of temperature in the air. - James G. Murphy.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

"Snow." As sure as every falling flake of winter's snow has a part in
the great economy of nature, so surely has every Word of God which falls
within the sanctuary its end to accomplish in the moral sphere. I have
stood on a winter's day, and seen the tiny flakes in little clouds lose
themselves one by one in the rushing river. They seemed to die to no
purpose - to be swallowed up by an enemy which ignored both their power
and their existence. And so have I seen the Word of God fall upon human
hearts. Sent of God, from day to day and from year to year, I have seen
it dropping apparently all resultless into the fierce current of
unbelief - into the fiercer gulf-stream of worldliness which was
sweeping through the minds and the lives of the hearers. But as I stood
upon the river's bank and looked upon what seemed to be the death of the
little fluttering crystal, a second thought assured me that it was but
death into life, and that every tiny flake which wept its life away in
the rushing waters, became incorporate with the river's being. So when I
have seen the Word of God fall apparently fruitless upon the restless,
seething, rushing current of human life, a recovered faith in the
immutable declaration of God has assured me that what I looked upon was
not a chance or idle death, but rather the falling of the soldier, after
that he had wrought his life-force into the destiny of a nation and into
the history of a world. And so it must ever be. The Word of God ever
reaches unto its end. - S. S. Mitchell, in a Sermon entitled "The Coming
of the Snow and the Coming of the Word," 1884.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

The "stormy wind" is the swift messenger of God, [Psa
147:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015). The hurricane fulfils the
divine command. See [Mat 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#027). "Even
the winds and the sea obey him." The "wind" is the minister of judgment.
See [Eze 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#013). The words of this
verse have special use; for men are exceedingly apt to ascribe the
violence of tempests to blind chance. - Martin Geier.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

The half-learned man is apt to laugh at the simple faith of the clown or
savage, who tells us that rain comes from God. The former, it seems, has
discovered that it is the product of certain laws of air, water, and
electricity. But truly the peasant is the more enlightened of the two,
for he has discovered the main cause, and the real Actor, while the
other has found only the second cause, and the mere instrument. It is as
if a friend were to send us a gift of ingenious and beautiful
workmanship, and just as our gratitude was beginning to rise to the
donor, some bystanders were to endeavour to damp it all, by telling us
that the gift is the product of certain machinery he had seen. - James
MacGosh, 1811.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Mountains and all hills," etc. - The diversifying of the face of the
earth with higher and lower parts, with mountains, hills, and valleys,
and the adorning of the face thereof with trees of varied sorts,
contributeth much to the praise of God. - David Dickson.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Mountains and all hills." What voices have the hills! How solemn the
sounds of the mountains from their sublime solitudes! The mountains
thunder, and the hills re-echo; but they speak peace and send down
plenty to the vales in running rivulets. - Thomas Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Fruitful trees and all cedars." The praise of God is in the rustling
voices of the trees. They fulfil his purpose in giving fruit to refresh,
and shelter and shadow for a covert, and their murmur is the soft
cadence that chants mercy and grace. In India, the ancients reported
that the trees were worshipped as divine, and death was a penalty
awarded to those who cut them down. In classic mythology the groves were
the homes of gods. Jehovah decreed that an ark of safety for man, and
also a temple for himself, should be constructed of wood. Thus more than
any other created things, the trees of the wood have redounded to his
glory. - Le Blanc.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Fruitful trees." Rather fruit trees; the fruit-bearing tree being
representative of one division of the vegetable world, planted and
reared by man; the "cedars" of the other, which are ([Psa
104:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#016)) of God's own plantation. So in
[Psa 148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010) we have wild animals and
domesticated animals. - A. S. Aglen.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Trees."

All creatures of the eternal God but man,

In several sorts do glorify his name;

Each tree doth seem ten thousand tongues to have,

With them to laud the Lord omnipotent;

Each leaf that with wind's gentle breath doth wave,

Seems as a tongue to speak to that intent,

In language admirably excellent.

The sundry sorts of fragrant flowers do seem

Sundry discourses God to glorify,

And sweetest volumes may we them esteem;

for all these creatures in their several sort

Praise God, and man unto the same exhort.

Peter Pett, 1599.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"All cedars." Beautiful indeed is the pine forest in all seasons' in the
freshness of spring, when the gnarled boughs are penetrated and
mollified by the soft wind and the warm sun, and, thrilled with new
life, burst out into fringes and tassels of the richest green, and cones
of the tenderest purple; beautiful in the sultry summer, when among its
cool, dim shadows the heated hours all day sing vespers, while the open
landscape is palpitating in the scorching heat; beautiful in the sadness
of autumn, when its unfading verdure stands out in striking relief amid
changing scenes, that have no sympathy with anything earthly save sorrow
and decay, and directs the thoughts to the imperishableness of the
heavenly Paradise; beautiful exceedingly in the depth of winter, when
the tiers of branches are covered with pure, unsullied wreaths of snow,
sculptured by the wind into curves of exquisite grace. It is beautiful
in calm, when the tree-tops scarce whisper to each other, and the
twitter of the golden wren sounds loud in the expectant hush; it is more
than beautiful in storm, when the wild fingers of the wind play the most
mournful music on its great harp-strings, and its full diapason is
sublime as the roar of the ocean on a rock-bound shore. I do not wonder
that the northern imagination in heathen times should have invested it
with awe and fear as the favourite haunt of Odin and Thor; or that, in
after times, its long rows of trunks, vanishing in the dim perspective,
should have furnished designs for the aisles of Christian temples, and
the sunset, burning among its fretted branches, should have suggested
the gorgeous painted window of the cathedral. It looks like a place made
for worship, all its sentiments and associations seem of a sacred and
solemn character. Nature, with folded hands, as Longfellow says, seems
kneeling there in prayer. It certainly reminds us in various ways of the
power, wisdom, and goodness of him who thus spake by the mouth of his
prophet: "I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the fir tree, and
the pine, and the box tree together: that they may see, and know, and
consider, and understand together, that the hand of the Lord hath done
this, and the Holy One of Israel hath created it." - Hugh Macmillan, in
"Bible Teachings in Nature," 1867.

[Psa 148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010)

"Creeping things." In public worship all should join. The little strings
go to make up a concert, as well as the great. - Thomas Goodwin.

[Psa 148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010)

"Flying fowl." Thus the air is vocal. It has a hallelujah of its own.
The "flying fowl" praise him; whether it be "the stork that knoweth her
appointed time" ([Jer 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007)), or "the
sparrow alone upon the housetop" ([Psa
102:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#007)), or "the raven of the valley"
([Pro 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017)), or the eagle "stirring
up her nest, and fluttering over her young" ([Deu
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011)), or the turtle making its voice
to be heard in the land ([Sol 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012)),
or the dove winging its way to the wilderness ([Psa
55:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#006)). This is creation's harp (truer
and sweeter than Memnon's), which each sunrise awakens, "turning all the
air to music." - Horatius Bonar, in "Earth's Morning; or, Thoughts on
Genesis," 1875.

[Psa 148:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011)

"Kings of the earth, and all people; princes." As kings and princes are
blinded by the dazzling influence of their station, so as to think the
world was made for them, and to despise God in the pride of their
hearts, he particularly calls them to this duty; and, by mentioning them
first, he reproves their ingratitude in withholding their tribute of
praise when they are under greater obligations than others. As all men
originally stand upon a level as to condition, the higher persons have
risen, and the nearer they have been brought to God, the more sacredly
are they bound to proclaim his goodness. The more intolerable is the
wickedness of kings and princes who claim exemption from the common
rule, when they ought rather to inculcate it upon others, and lead the
way. He could have addressed his exhortation at once summarily to all
men, as indeed he mentions people in general terms; but by thrice
specifying princes he suggests that they are slow to discharge the duty,
and need to be urged to it. - John Calvin.

[Psa 148:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011)

"Kings of the earth"; "judges of the earth"; these are not proud but
humiliating titles; for earthly kings and earthly judges will not be
kings and judges long.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012)

"Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children." The parties are
mentioned by couples, being tied two and two together. "Young men and
maidens; old men and children." And here is a double caveat; first,
against presumption; and secondly, against despair. First, that the
younger sort might desire to praise God, they are exhorted to address
themselves to the service of God, to remember their Creator in the days
of their youth. Secondly, for aged men, that they might not doubt of the
acceptation of their service, our Prophet exhorts them also. For the
first, you know, David calls upon the sun and the moon to praise God.
Should the sun reply, I will not do it in the morning, or at noon time,
but when I am about to set? or the moon reply, I will not in the full,
but in the Wane? or the tree, not in the spring time, or in the summer,
but at the fall of the leaf? So likewise, thou young man, defer not the
time of praising God: take the swing of thy youth, and do not defer to
apply thyself to the service of God till thy old age; but remember that
for all these things thou shalt come to judgment. He that styles himself
by the title I AM, cares not for I will be, or I have been, but he that
is at this present: take heed, therefore, thou strong and lusty young
man, the Devil that holds thee now will every day tie a new cord about
thee. Consider this, you that are yet young, whom the morning sun of
light adorns with his glorious rays: everyone doth not live to be old.
Let us not procrastinate in God's service; for the longer we defer to
serve God, the farther God's grace is distant from us, and the dominion
of Satan is more strengthened in our hearts; the more we delay, the more
is our debt, the greater our sin, and the less our grace. I will commend
this lesson unto all. He that doth not repent to-day hath a day more to
repent of, and a day less to repent in. I shall conclude with a hearty
exhortation for us all, of what sex, age, and degree soever; I could
wish that all our lives might end like this book of Psalms, in blessing
and praising Almighty God. - Thomas Cheshire, in "A Sermon preached in
Saint Paule's Church," 1641.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012)

"Old men." Think not, ye who are now near the end of life, that your
tongues may without blame be silent in the praises of the Lord, because
you are come to those years in which men say, they "have no pleasure in
them." Were you not frequently praising God when you were children and
young men? Have you less, or have you not greater, reason now to praise
God than in those early days of life?

Old men ought to be better qualified than young persons to show forth
the glory both of the perfections and works of God, because they have
enjoyed more time, and more abundant opportunities than their juniors,
for attaining the knowledge of God, and of those glorious perfections
and works which furnish us with endless materials for praise. "Days
should speak, and the multitude of years should teach wisdom."

The heavens are constantly declaring "the glory of God, and the
firmament showeth forth his handy work. Day unto day uttereth speech,
and night unto night showeth knowledge." Have you, then, lived twenty
thousand days and twenty thousand nights? What deep impressions ought to
be made upon your spirits, of those wonders which have been preached in
your ears or eyes, ever since you could use your bodily senses as
ministers to your intellectual powers! All the works of God praise him,
by showing forth how wonderful in power, and goodness, and wisdom, the
Creator is. Your tongues are indeed inexcusable, if they are silent in
the praises of him whose glory is proclaimed by every object above or
around them, and even by every member of their own bodies, and every
faculty of their souls. But old men are doubly inexcusable, if they are
inattentive to those precious instructions which are given them by all
the works of God which they have seen, or of which they have been
informed, every day since the powers of their rational natures began to
operate.

But old men in this highly favoured land have been blessed with more
excellent instructions than those which are given them by the mountains
and fruitful valleys, by the dragons of the desert or the deep, or by
the fowls of heaven and the beasts of the earth, or by the sun and stars
of heaven. For many more years than young men or maidens you have been
learners, or you are very blamable if you have not been at the school of
Christ. You were, early taught to read the Word of God. In the course of
fifty or sixty years, you have probably heard six thousand religious
discourses from the ministers of Christ, not to mention other excellent
means you have enjoyed for increasing in the knowledge of God. "For the
time," says Paul to the Hebrew Christians, "ye might have been
teachers." May I not say the same to all aged Christians, who have had
the Bible in their possession, and have enjoyed opportunities of
frequenting the holy assemblies from their earliest days? May it not be
expected that your hearts and your mouths will be filled with the
praises of God, not only as your Maker, but as your Redeemer?

But there are many things more especially relating to themselves, which
should induce the aged to abound in this duty of praise to God.

Consider how long you have lived. Is not every day of life, and even
every hour, and every moment, an undeserved mercy? You might have been
cut off from the breast and the womb, for you were conceived in iniquity
and born in sin. How many of your race have been cut off before they
could distinguish between their right hand and their left, before they
could do good or evil! Since you were moral agents, not a day has passed
in which you were not chargeable with many sins. What riches of
long-suffering is manifested in a life of sixty or seventy years! If you
have lived in a state of sin all that time, have you not reason to be
astonished, that you are not already in a condition which would for ever
render it impossible for you to utter the voice of praise? Give glory,
therefore, to that God who has still preserved you alive.

Consider with what mercies your days have been filled up. God's mercies
have been new to you every morning, although every day you have sinned
against him.

Reflections on your own conduct through life will suggest to you many
reasons for praise and thanksgiving. But on this part of the subject it
is proper to put you in mind of the two great classes into which men are
divided: saints and sinners. If you belong to the former class, who is
it that has made you to differ from others? Give thanks to him who
delivered you from the power of darkness, and translated you into the
kingdom of his dear Son. Have you been enabled to do some good works in
the course of your lives? For every one of them bless God, who wrought
"in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure." Have any of your
endeavours been successful to bring about the reformation of any of your
fellow-men, or to promote their spiritual welfare? What sufficient
thanks can you render to God for making you the humble ministers of his
grace?

But there are too many of the old who have no reason to think that they
have yet passed from death to life. These, certainly, are very unfit to
praise God, and will not be able to praise him with their hearts, unless
that change pass upon them, without which no man shall ever enter into
the kingdom of heaven. Yet, surely, they have great reason to praise the
Lord; and they may see good reason for it, although they cannot carry
their knowledge into practice. You have, indeed, greater reason to
praise God that you are in the land of the living than those who are in
a better state; because, if you were deprived of your present life,
nothing is left for you but the terrors of eternal death. Bless God, ye
who have lived fifty or sixty years in sin, and have been all along
spared in a world so full of mercy. You are still called by the gospel
to receive that salvation which you have long treated with contempt. -
Condensed from a Sermon by George Lawson (1749-1820), entitled. "The
Duly of the Old to praise God."

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012)

"Old men and children." It is interesting always to see a friendship
between the old and the young. It is striking to see the aged one
retaining so much of freshness and simplicity as not to repel the
sympathies of boyhood. It is surprising to see the younger one so
advanced and thoughtful, as not to find dull the society of one who has
outlived excitability and passion. - Frederick William Robertson.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012), [Psa
148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)

The Psalms are church songs, and all who belong to the church are to
sing them. "Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children; let them
praise the name of the Lord." The ripe believer who can triumph in the
steadfast hope of God's glory, is to lend his voice to swell the song of
the church when she cries to God out of the depths; and the penitent,
who is still sitting in darkness, is not to refrain his voice when the
church pours out in song her sense of God's love. The whole church has
fellowship in the Psalms. - William Binnie, in "The Psalms, their
History, Teachings, and Use," 1870.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012), [Psa
148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)

"Old men ... Let them praise the name of the Lord." It is a favourite
speculation of mine that if spared to sixty we then enter on the seventh
decade of human life, and that this, if possible, should be turned into
the Sabbath of our earthly pilgrimage and spent sabbatically, as if on
the shores of an eternal world, or in the outer courts, as it were, of
the temple that is above, the tabernacle in heaven. - Thomas Chalmers.

[Psa 148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)

"Let them praise." Exactly as at the close of the first great division
of the anthem ([Psa 148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005)), and, in
the same way as there, the reason for the exhortation follows in the
next clause. But it is a different reason. It is no longer because he
has given them a decree, bound them as passive, unconscious creatures by
a law which they cannot transgress. (It is the fearful mystery of the
reasonable will that it can transgress the law.) It is because his name
is exalted, so that the eyes of men can see, and the hearts and tongues
of men confess it; it is because he has graciously revealed himself to,
and mightily succoured, the people whom he loves, the nation who are
near to him. If it be said that what was designed to be a Universal
Anthem is thus narrowed at its close, it must be remembered that,
however largely the glory of God was written on the visible creation, it
was only to the Jew that any direct revelation of his character had been
made. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)

"The name of Jehovah." Jehovah is a name of great power and efficacy, a
name that hath in it five vowels, without which no language can be
expressed; a name that hath in it also three syllables, to signify the
Trinity of Persons, the eternity of God, One in Three, and Three in One;
a name of such dread and reverence amongst the Jews, that they tremble
to name it, and therefore they use the name Adonai (Lord) in all their
devotions. And thus ought every one to stand in awe, and sin not by
taking the name of God in vain; but to sing praises, to honour, to
remember, to declare, to exalt, and bless it; for holy and reverend,
only worthy and excellent is his name. - Rayment, 1630.

[Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014)

"His people, the praise of all his saints." But among all, one class in
particular is called on to praise him, for they have an additional
motive for so doing, namely, "his people," and "his saints." As man
above all the creatures, so among men his elect or chosen, who are the
objects of his special grace, and, above all, of his redeeming love. "He
also exalteth the horn of his people" - exalts them, one and all, from
the death of sin to the life of righteousness, and consequent on this,
from the dust of earth to the glory of heaven. "The praise of all his
saints"; and, yet again, among them, of one people in particular - "even
of the children of Israel, a people near unto him." "Near to him" of
old, and yet again to be - yea, nearest of all the peoples of the earth
- when he recalls them from their dispersion, and again places his name
and his throne among them. Hallelujah - Praise ye the Lord. - William De
Burgh.

[Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014)

"A people near unto him." Jesus took our nature, and became one with us;
thus he is "near" unto us; he gives us his Holy Spirit, brings us into
union with himself, and thus we are near to him. This is our highest
honour, an unfailing source of happiness and peace. We are near to him
in point of relation, being his children; near to him in point of
affection, being loved with an everlasting love; we are near to him in
point of union, being members of his body, of his flesh, and of his
bones; we are near to him in point of fellowship, walking with him as a
man walketh with his friend; we are near to him in point of attention,
being the objects of his daily, hourly, tender care; we shall soon be
near to him in point of locality, when our mansion is prepared, for we
shall depart to be with Christ, which is far better. We are near to him
when poor, and when deeply tried; and if ever nearer at one time than
another, we shall be nearest to him in death. If we are near unto him,
he will sympathize with us in all our sorrows, assist us in all our
trials, protect us in all our dangers, hold intercourse with us in all
our lonely hours, provide for us in all seasons of necessity, and
honourably introduce us to glory. Let us realize this fact daily - we
are near and dear to our God. - James Smith.

[Psalms 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 148:1</span></span>

1 Praise ye the Lord. Praise ye the Lord from the heavens: praise a him
in the heights.

2 Praise ye him, all his angels' praise ye him, all his hosts.

3 Praise ye him, sun and moon - praise him, all ye stars of light.

4 Praise him, ye heavens of heavens, and ye waters that be above the
heavens.

5 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for he commanded, and they were
created.

6 He hath also stablished them for ever and ever: he hath made a decree
which shall not pass.

7 Praise the Lord from the earth, ye dragons, and all deeps

8 Fire, and haft; snow, and vapours; stormy wind fulfilling his word;

9 Mountains, and all hills; fruitful trees, and all cedars;

10 Beasts, and all cattle; creeping things, and flying fowl:

11 Kings of the earth, and all people; princes, and all judges of the
earth,

12 Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children;

13 Let them praise the name of the Lord, for his name alone is
excellent; his glory is above the earth and heaven.

14 He also exalteth the horn of his people, the praise of all his
saints; even of the children of Israel, a people near unto him. Praise
ye the Lord.

[Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001)

"Praise ye the Lord." - Whoever ye may be that hear this word, ye are
invited, entreated, commanded, to magnify Jehovah. Assuredly he has made
you, and, if for nothing else, ye are bound, upon the ground of
creatureship, to adore your Maker. This exhortation can never be out of
place, speak it where we may; and never out of time, speak it when we
may. "Praise ye the Lord from the heavens." Since ye are nearest to the
High and lofty One, be ye sure to lead the song. Ye angels, ye cherubim
and seraphim, and all others who dwell in the precincts of his courts,
praise ye Jehovah. Do this as from a starting-point from which the
praise is to pass on to other realms. Keep not your worship to
yourselves, but let it fall like a golden shower from the heavens on men
beneath. "Praise him in the heights." This is no vain repetition; but
after the manner of attractive poesy the truth is emphasized by
reiteration in other words. Moreover, God is not only to be praised from
the heights, but in them: the adoration is to be perfected in the
heavens from which it takes its rise. No place is too high for the
praises of the most High. On the summit of creation the glory of the
Lord is to be revealed, even as the tops of the highest Alps are tipped
with the golden light of the same sun which glads the valleys. Heavens
and heights become the higher and the more heavenly as they are made to
resound with the praises of Jehovah. See how the Psalmist trumpets out
the word "Praise." It sounds forth some nine times in [Psa
148:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001) of this song. Like
minute-guns, exultant exhortations are sounded forth in tremendous force
- Praise! Praise! Praise! The drum of the great King beats round the
world with this one note - Praise! Praise! Praise! "Again they said,
Hallelujah." All this praise is distinctly and personally for Jehovah.
Praise not his servants nor his works; but praise him. Is he not worthy
of all possible praise? Pour it forth before him in full volume; pour it
only there!

[Psa 148:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#002)

"Praise ye him all his angels." Living intelligences, perfect in
character and in bliss, lift up your loudest music to your Lord, each
one of you. Not one bright spirit is exempted from this consecrated
service. However many ye be, O angels, ye are all his angels, and
therefore ye are bound, all of you, to render service to your Lord. Ye
have all seen enough of him to be able to praise him, and ye have all
abundant reasons for so doing. Whether ye be named Gabriel, or Michael,
or by whatever other titles ye are known, praise ye the Lord. Whether ye
bow before him, or fly on his errands, or desire to look into his
covenant, or behold his Son, cease not, ye messengers of Jehovah, to
sound forth his praise while ye move at his bidding. "Praise ye him, all
his hosts." This includes angelic armies, but groups with them all the
heavenly bodies. Though they be inanimate, the stars, the clouds, the
lightnings, have their ways of praising Jehovah. Let each one of the
countless legions of the Lord of hosts show forth his glory; for the
countless armies are all his, his by creation, and preservation, and
consequent obligation. Both these sentences claim unanimity of praise
from those in the upper regions who are called upon to commence the
strain - "all his angels, all his hosts." That same hearty oneness must
pervade the whole orchestra of praising ones; hence, further on, we read
of all stars of light, all deeps, all hills, all cedars, and all people.
How well the concert begins when all angels, and all the heavenly host,
strike the first joyful notes! In that concert our souls would at once
take their part.

[Psa 148:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#003)

"Praise ye him, sun and moon: praise him, all ye stars of light." The
Psalmist enters into detail as to the heavenly hosts. As all, so each,
must praise the God of each and all. The sun and moon, as joint rulers
of day and night, are paired in praise: the one is the complement of the
other, and so they are closely associated in the summons to worship. The
sun has his peculiar mode of glorifying the Great Father of lights, and
the moon has her own special method of reflecting his brightness. There
is a perpetual adoration of the Lord in the skies' it varies with night
and day, but it ever continues while sun and moon endure. There is ever
a lamp burning before the high altar of the Lord. Nor are the greater
luminaries allowed to drown with their floods of light the glory of the
lesser brilliants, for all the stars are bidden to the banquet of
praise. Stars are many, so many that no one can count the host included
under the words, "all ye stars"; yet no one of them refuses to praise
its Maker. From their extreme brilliance they are fitly named "stars of
light"; and this light is praise in a visible form twinkling to true
music. Light is song glittering before the eye instead of resounding in
the ear. Stars without light would render no praise, and Christians
without light rob the Lord of his glory. However small our beam, we must
not hide it: if we cannot be sun or moon we must aim to be one of the
"stars of light," and our every twinkling must be to the honour of our
Lord.

[Psa 148:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#004)

"Praise him, ye heavens of heavens." By these are meant those regions
which are heavens to those who dwell in our heavens; or those most
heavenly of abodes where the most choice of spirits dwell. As the
highest of the highest, so the best of the best are to praise the Lord.
If we could climb as much above the heavens as the heavens are above the
earth, we could still cry out to all around us, "Praise ye the Lord."
There can be none so great and high as to be above praising Jehovah.
"And ye waters that be above the heavens." Let the clouds roll up
volumes of adoration. Let the sea above roar, and the fulness thereof,
at the presence of Jehovah, the God of Israel. There is something of
mystery about these supposed reservoirs of water; but let them be what
they may, and as they may, they shall give glory to the Lord our God.
Let the most unknown and perplexing phenomena take up their parts in the
universal praise.

[Psa 148:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#005)

"Let them praise the name of the Lord; for he commanded, and they were
created." Here is good argument. The Maker should have honour from his
works, they should tell forth his praise; and thus they should praise
his name - by which his character is intended. The name of JEHOVAH is
written legibly upon his works, so that his power, wisdom, goodness, and
other attributes are there made manifest to thoughtful men, and thus his
name is praised. The highest praise of God is to declare what he is. We
can invent nothing which would magnify the Lord: we can never extol him
better than by repeating his name, or describing his character. The Lord
is to be extolled as creating all things that exist, and as doing so by
the simple agency of his word. He created by a command; what a power is
this! Well may he expect those to praise him who owe their being to him.
Evolution may be atheistic; but the doctrine of creation logically
demands worship; and hence, as the tree is known by its fruit, it proves
itself to be true. Those who were created by command are under command
to adore their Creator. The voice which said "Let them be," now saith
"Let them praise."

[Psa 148:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#006)

"He hath also stablished them for ever and ever." The continued
existence of celestial beings is due to the supporting might of Jehovah,
and to that alone. They do not fail because the Lord does not fail them.
Without his will these things cannot alter; he has impressed upon them
laws which only he himself can change. Eternally his ordinances are
binding upon them. Therefore ought the Lord to be praised because he is
Preserver as well as Creator, Ruler as well as Maker. "He hath made a
decree which shall not pass." The heavenly bodies are ruled by Jehovah's
decree: they cannot pass his limit, or trespass against his law. His
rule and ordination can never be changed except by himself, and in this
sense his decree "shall not pass": moreover, the highest and most
wonderful of creatures are perfectly obedient to the statutes of the
Great King, and thus his decree is not passed over. This submission to
law is praise. Obedience is homage; order is harmony. In this respect
the praise rendered to Jehovah from the "bodies celestial" is absolutely
perfect. His almighty power upholds all things in their spheres,
securing the march of stars and the flight of seraphs; and thus the
music of the upper regions is never marred by discord, nor interrupted
by destruction. The eternal hymn is for ever chanted; even the solemn
silence of the spheres is a perpetual psalm.

[Psa 148:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#007)

"Praise the Lord from the earth." The song descends to our abode, and so
comes nearer home to us. We who are "bodies terrestial," are to pour out
our portion of praise from the golden globe of this favoured planet.
Jehovah is to be praised not only in the earth but from the earth, as if
the adoration ran over from this planet into the general accumulation of
worship. In [Psa 148:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#001) the song was
"from the heavens"; here it is going "from the earth"; songs coming down
from heaven are to blend with those going up from earth. The "earth"
here meant is our entire globe of land and water, it is to be made vocal
everywhere with praise. "Ye dragons, and all deeps." It would be idle to
enquire what special sea-monsters are here meant; but we believe all of
them are intended, and the places where they abide are indicated by "all
deeps," Terrible beasts or fishes, Whether they roam the earth or swim
the seas, are bidden to the feast of praise. Whether they float amid the
teeming waves of the tropics, or wend their way among the floes and
bergs of polar waters, they are commanded by our sacred poet to yield
their tribute to the creating Jehovah. They pay no service to man; let
them the more heartily confess their allegiance to the Lord. About
"dragons" and "deeps" there is somewhat of dread, but this may the more
fitly become the bass of the music of the Psalm. If there be aught grim
in mythology, or fantastic in heraldry, let it praise the
incomprehensible Lord.

[Psa 148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008)

"Fire and hail." Lightning and hailstones go together. In the plagues ox
Egypt they co-operated in making Jehovah known in all the terrors of his
power. Fire and ice-morsels are a contrast in nature, but they are
combined in magnifying the Lord. "Snow and vapours." Offsprings of cold,
or creations of heat, be ye equally consecrated to his praise. Congealed
or expanded vapours, falling flakes or rising clouds, should, rising or
falling, still reveal the praises of the Lord. "Stormy winds fulfilling
his word." Though rushing with incalculable fury, the storm-wind is
still under law, and moves in order due, to carry out the designs of
God. It is a grand orchestra which contains such wind-nstruments as
these! He is a great leader who can keep all these musicians in concert,
and direct both time and tune.

[Psa 148:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#009)

"Mountains and all hills." Towering steeps and swelling knolls alike
declare their Creator. "All hills" are to be consecrated; we have no
longer Ebal and Gerizim, the hill of the curse and the hill of the
blessing, but all our Ebals are turned to Gerizims. Tabor and Hermon,
Lebanon and Carmel, rejoice in the name of the Lord. The greater and the
lesser mounts are one in their adoration. Not only the Alps and the
mountains of the Jura thunder out his praise; but our own Cotswolds and
Gramplans are vocal with songs in his honour. "Fruitful trees and all
cedars." Fruit trees and forest trees, trees deciduous or evergreen, are
equally full of benevolent design, and alike subserve some purpose of
love; therefore for all and by all let the great Designer be praised.
There are many species of cedar, but they all reveal the wisdom of their
Maker. When kings fell them, that they may make beams for their palaces,
they do but confess their obligation to the King of trees, and to the
King of kings, whose trees they are. Varieties in the landscape are
produced by the rising and falling of the soil, and by the many kinds of
trees which adorn the land, let all, and all alike, glorify their one
Lord. When the trees clap their hands in the wind, or their leaves
rustle in the gentle breath of Zephyr, they do to their best ability
sing out unto the Lord.

[Psa 148:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#010)

"Beasts, and all cattle." Animals fierce or tame; wild beasts and
domestic cattle; let all these show forth the praises of Jehovah. Those
are worse than beasts who do not praise our God. More than brutish are
those who are wilfully dumb concerning their Maker. "Creeping things,
and flying fowl." The multitudes that throng the earth and the air;
insects of every form and birds of every wing are called upon to join
the universal worship. No one can become familiar with insect and bird
life without feeling that they constitute a wonderful chapter in the
history of divine wisdom. The minute insect marvellously proclaims the
Lord's handiwork: when placed under the microscope it tells a wondrous
tale. So, too, the bird which soars aloft displays in its adaptation for
an aerial life an amount of skill which our balloonists have in vain
attempted to emulate. True devotion not only hears the praises of God in
the sweet song of feathered ministrels, but even discovers it in the
croaking from the marsh or in the buzz of "the bluefly which singeth in
the window-pane." More base than reptiles, more insignificant than
insects, are songless men.

[Psa 148:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011)

"Kings of the earth, and all people: princes, and all judges of the
earth." Now the poet has reached our own race, and very justly he would
have rulers and subjects, chieftains and magistrates, unite in
worshipping the sovereign Lord of all. Monarchs must not disdain to
sing, nor must their people refrain from uniting with them. Those who
lead in battle and those who decide in courts must neither of them allow
their vocations to keep them from reverently adoring the Chief and Judge
of all. All people, and all judges, must praise the Lord of all. What a
happy day it win be when it is universally acknowledged that through our
Lord Jesus, the incarnate Wisdom, "kings reign and princes decree
justice"! Alas, it is not so as yet! kings have been patrons of vice,
and princes ringleaders in folly. Let us pray that the song of the
Psalmist may be realized in fact.

[Psa 148:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#012)

"Both young men, and maidens; old men, and children." Both sexes and all
ages are summoned to the blessed service of song. Those who usually make
merry together are to be devoutly joyful together, those who make up the
ends of families, that is to say, the elders and the Juveniles, should
make the Lord their one and only end. Old men should by their experience
teach children to praise; and children by their cheerfulness should
excite old men to song. There is room for every voice at this concert:
fruitful trees and maidens, cedars and young men, angels and children,
old men and judges - all may unite in this oratorio. None, indeed, can
be dispensed with: for perfect Psalmody we must have the whole universe
aroused to worship, and all parts of creation must take their parts in
devotion.

[Psa 148:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#013)

"Let them praise the name of the Lord." All that is contained in the
name or character of Jehovah is worthy of praise, and all the objects of
his creating care will be too few to set it forth in its completeness.
"For his name alone is excellent." It alone deserves to be exalted in
praise, for alone it is exalted in worth. There is none like unto the
Lord, none that for a moment can be compared unto him. His unique name
should have a monopoly of praise. "His glory is above the earth and
heaven:" it is therefore alone because it surpasses all others. His
royal splendour exceeds all that earth and heaven can express. He is
himself the crown of all things, the excellency of the creation. There
is more glory in him personally than in all his works united. It is not
possible for us to exceed and become extravagant in the Lord's praise:
his own natural glory is infinitely greater than any glory which we can
render to him.

[Psa 148:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#014)

"He also exalteth the horn of his people." He hath made them strong,
famous, and victorious. His goodness to all his creatures does not
prevent his having a special favour to his chosen nation: he is good to
all, but he is God to his people. He lifts up the down-trodden, but he
in a peculiar manner lifts up his people. When they are brought low he
raises up a horn for them by sending them a deliverer; when they are in
conflict he gives them courage and strength, so that they lift up their
horn amid the fray; and when all is peaceful around them, he fills their
horn with plenty, and they lift it up with delight. "The praise of all
his saints." He is their glory: to him they render praise; and he by his
mercy to them evermore gives them further reasons for praise, and higher
motives for adoration. He lifts up their horn, and they lift up his
praise. He exalts them, and they exalt him. The Holy One is praised by
holy ones. He is their God, and they are his saints; he makes them
blessed, and they bless him in return. "Even of the children of Israel."
The Lord knoweth them that are his. He knows the name of him with whom
he made a covenant, and how he came by that name, and who his children
are, and where they are. All nations are bidden in [Psa
148:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#011) to praise the Lord; but here
the call is specially addressed to his elect people, who know him beyond
all others. Those who are children of privilege should be children of
praise. "A people near unto him," near by kin, and near by care; near as
to manifestation and near as to affection. This is a highly honourable
description of the beloved race; and it is true even more emphatically
of the spiritual Israel, the believing seed. This nearness should prompt
us to perpetual adoration. The Lord's elect are the children of his
love, the courtiers of his palace, the priests of his temple, and
therefore they are bound beyond all others to be filled with reverence
for him, and delight in him. "Praise ye the Lord," or, Hallelujah. This
should be the Alpha and Omega of a good man's life. Let us praise God to
the end, world without end. The field of praise which lies before us in
this Psalm is bounded at beginning and end by landmarks in the form of
Hallelujahs, and all that lieth between them is every word of it to the
Lord's honour. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 149](psa149)

</div>
