<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa109)  [Next](psa111) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Treasury of David*, by Charles Haddon Spurgeon, \[1869-85\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 110](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 110:0</span></span>

Title - A Psalm of David. Of the correctness of this title there can be
no doubt, since our Lord in Matthew 22 says, "How then doth David in
spirit call him Lord." Yet some critics are so fond of finding new
authors for the Psalms that they dare to fly in the face of the Lord
Jesus himself. To escape from finding Jesus here, they read the title,
"Psalm of (or concerning) David," as though it was not so much written
by him as of him; but he that reads with understanding will see little
enough of David here except as the writer. He is not the subject of it
even in the smallest degree, but Christ is all. How much was revealed to
the patriarch David! How blind are some modern wise men, even amid the
present blaze of light, as compared with this poet-prophet of the darker
dispensation. May the Spirit who spoke by the man after God's own heart
give us eyes to see the hidden mysteries of this marvellous Psalm, in
which every word has an infinity of meaning.

Subject and Division. - The subject is the Priest-King. None of the
kings of Israel united these two offices, though some endeavoured to do
so. Although David performed some acts which appeared to verge upon the
priestly, yet he was no priest, but of the tribe of Judah, "of which
tribe Moses spake nothing concerning the priesthood"; and he was far too
devout a man to thrust himself into that office uncalled. The
Priest-King here spoken of is David's Lord, a mysterious personage
typified by Melchizedek, and looked for by the Jews as the Messiah. He
is none other than the apostle and high-priest of our profession, Jesus
of Nazareth, and King of the Jews. The Psalm describes the appointment
of the kingly priest, his followers, his battles, and his victory. Its
centre is [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004), and so it may be
divided, as Alexander suggests, into the introduction, [Psa
110:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001); the central thought, [Psa
110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004); and the supplementary verses,
[Psa 110:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005).

Hints to Preachers

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). - Here the Holy Ghost
begins with the kingdom of Christ, which he describeth and magnifieth, -

I. By his unction and ordination thereunto, by the word or decree of his
Father: "The Lord said."

II\. By the greatness of his person in himself, while yet he is nearly
allied in blood and nature unto us; "My Lord."

III\. By the glory, power, and heavenliness of his kingdom, for in the
administration thereof he sitteth at the right hand of his Father, "Sit
thou at my right hand."

IV\. By the continuance and victories thereof: "Until I make thy foes
thy footstool." - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). - "My Lord."

I. Christ's condescending nearness to us does not destroy our reverence;
he was David's son, and yet he calls him Lord; he is our brother,
bridegroom, and so on, and yet our Lord.

II\. Christ's glory does not diminish his nearness to us, or familiarity
with us. Sitting on the throne as Lord, he is yet "my Lord."

III\. It is under the double aspect as Lord, and yet ours, that Jehovah
regards him, and speaks with him, and ordains him to the priesthood.
Ever in these two lights let us regard him.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001). - "Sit," etc.

I. Our Lord's quiet amid passing events.

II\. The abundance of his present power.

III\. The working of all history towards the ultimate end, which will be
-

IV\. His easy victory, putting his foot on his foes as readily as we
tread on a footstool.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002). -

I. What is that rod? The gospel (Illustrated by Moses' rod).

II\. Who sends it? "The Lord."

III\. Whence it comes? Out of the church of God.

IV\. What is the result? Jesus reigns.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). - A willing people and an
immutable Leader.

I. The promise made to Christ concerning his people, "Thy people shall
be willing," etc.

1\. A promise of time, "In the day," etc.

2\. Of persons, "Thy people."

3\. Of disposition "Shall be willing."

4\. Of character: "In the beauties of holiness."

5\. The majestic figure employed, "From the womb of the morning, thou
hast the dew of thy youth."

II\. The promise made to Christ concerning himself, "Thou hast the dew
of thy youth." Jesus Christ has the dew of his youth personally,
doctrinally, and mystically, being surrounded by new converts, who are
as the early dew. - Spurgeon's Sermons, No. 74.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). - This is a prophecy of
the subjects of Christ's kingdom.

I. Who they are; "Thy people."

1\. A people. This denotes distinction, separation, similarity,
organization. They are not a confused rabble, but a united community.

2\. His people. By gift, by purchase, by effectual calling.

II\. What they are.

1\. A loyal people, "willing."

2\. A conquered people, "in the day of thy power."

3\. A holy people, "in the beauties of holiness."

4\. A numerous people, "from the womb of the morning," etc. The number
of converts at the first proclamation of Christ's gospel was but the dew
of his youth. - G. R.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). - First, the internal
evidence of Christ's kingdom is in his people's willingness: "Thy people
shall be willingness - thy people shall be a people all willing" - all
volunteers, not pressed men. Secondly, the external evidence of it lies
in his people's holiness; "the beauties of holiness;" or as it may be
rendered - "in the magnificence of his sanctuary," for the ornaments of
the sanctuary and the dress of the priests were very splendid. When you
once give yourselves to God, you become temples of God; and sanctity
must adorn that heart which is a living temple of the Holy Ghost. - J.
Bennett, in a Sermon, 1829.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). - All true followers of
Jesus are

I. priests - beauties of holiness are their sacerdotal robes;

II\. soldiers - "in the day of thine armies;"

III\. volunteers;

IV\. benefactors - as the dew. - Suggested by a paper in The Baptist
Magazine.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003). - Here we have a cluster
of subjects: - the willingness of the Lord's people, the beauty of
holiness, young converts the glory of the church, the mystery of
conversion, and so on.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004). - The eternal priesthood
of Christ. On what its perpetuity is founded and the blessed results
flowing therefrom.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004). - These words offer three
points of special observation.

I. The ceremony used at the consecration of our Lord: "The Lord sware."

II\. The office conferred upon him by this rite or ceremony: "Thou art a
priest."

III\. The prerogatives of his office; which office is here declared to
be,

1\. Perpetual "for ever."

2\. Regular, "after the order."

3\. Royal, "of Melchizedek." - Daniel Featley.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004). - Melchizedek: a fruitful
subject. See notes.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005). - The certain overthrow of
every power which opposes the gospel.

[Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006). - The fearful calamities
which have happened to nations through their sinful rejection of the
Lord Jesus.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007). - Christ's alacrity,
self-denial, and simplicity, the causes of his success. Example to be
imitated.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007). - Christ's humiliation and
exaltation.

Explanatory Notes and Quaint Sayings

Whole Psalm

The preceding Psalm is a Passion-Psalm, and it is now followed by a
Psalm of Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, and Session in glory. We have
seen the same connection in Ps. 22-24, and in Ps. 45-47. The present
Psalm grows up from the former Psalm, as the Hill of Olivet, the Hill of
Ascension, rises up from the Vale of Gethsemane below it. - Christopher
Wordsworth.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm has been well designated the crown of all the Psalms, of
which Luther saith that it is worthy to be overlaid with precious
jewels. More especially does the Reformer call [Psa
110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005) a well-spring, - nay, a treasury
of all Christian doctrines, understanding, wisdom, and comfort, richer
and fuller than any other passage of Holy Writ. In his own peculiar
manner, he styles Christ the Sheblimini ('Sit on my right hand'). 'Full
sure, the devil must let alone my Sheblimini, and cannot bring him down
either by his scorn or by his wrath.' Christ still liveth and reigneth,
and his title is Sheblimini. On his stirrup is engraven, "I will make
thine enemies thy footstool," and upon his diadem, "Thou art a priest
for ever." - Alfred Edersheim, 1873.

Whole Psalm

The ancients (by Cassiodorus' collection) term this Psalm the sun of our
faith, the treasure of holy writ verbis brevis, sensu infinitus (saith
Augustine), short in words, but in sense infinite. Theodoret notes how
it is connected with the Psalm going before, "there (saith he) we have
his cross and sufferings, here his conquest and trophies." For he cometh
forth as the heir apparent of the Almighty, the brightness of his glory,
and the express image of his person, graced with,

1\. Title, "My Lord."

2\. Place, "Sit thou on my right hand."

3\. Power, "Until I make thine enemies thy footstool." - John Prideaux,
in a Sermon entitled, "The Draught of the Brooke," 1636.

Whole Psalm

This Psalm is one of the fullest and most compendious prophecies of the
person and offices of Christ in the whole Old Testament, and so full of
fundamental truth, that I shall not shun to call it Symbolum Davidicum,
the prophet David's creed. And indeed there are very few, if any, of the
articles of that creed which we all generally profess, which are not
either plainly expressed, or by most evident implication couched in this
little model. First, the Doctrine of the Trinity is in the first words;
"The Lord said unto my Lord." There is Jehovah the Father, and my Lord,
the Son, and the consecrating of him to be David's Lord, which was by
the Holy Ghost, by whose fulness he was anointed unto the offices of
king and priest; for so our Saviour himself expounds this word "said,"
by the sealing and sanctification of him to his office, [Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034), [Joh
10:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#035), [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036). Then we have the Incarnation of
Christ, in the words, "my Lord," together with his dignity and honour
above David (as our Saviour himself expounds it, [Mat
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042), [Mat
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045)). Mine, that is, my Son by
descent and genealogy after the flesh, and yet my Lord too, in regard of
his higher sonship. We have also the Sufferings of Christ, in that he
was consecrated a priest ([Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004))
to offer up himself once for all, and so to drink of the brook in the
way. We have his Completed Work and conquest over all his enemies and
sufferings; his Resurrection, "he shall lift up his head"; his Ascension
and Intercession, "Sit thou on my right hand." We have here also a Holy
Catholic Church gathered together by the sceptre of his kingdom, and
holding in the parts thereof a blessed and beautiful Communion of
Saints; "The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion: rule
thou in the midst of thine enemies. Thy people shall be willing in the
daft of thy power, in the beauties of holiness from the womb of the
morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth." We have the Last Judgment, for
all his enemies must be put under his heel (which is the Apostle's
argument to prove the end of all things, [Co1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025)); and there is the day of his
wrath, wherein he shall accomplish that judgment over the heathen, and
that victory over the kings of the earth (who take counsel and band
themselves together against him), which he doth here in his word begin.
We have the Remission of sins, comprised in his priesthood, for he was
to offer sacrifices for the remission of sins, and "to put away sin by
the sacrifice of himself," [Eph 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#007);
[Heb 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#026). We have the Resurrection of
the body, because he must "subdue all enemies under his feet, and the
last enemy to be destroyed is death," as the Apostle argues out of this
Psalm, [Co1 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#025), [Co1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#026). And lastly, we have life
everlasting, in the everlasting merit and virtue of his priesthood,
"Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchizedek," and in his
sitting at the right hand of God, whither he is gone as our forerunner,
and to prepare a place for us, [Heb
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#020); [Joh
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002); and therefore the apostle from
his sitting there, and living ever, inferreth the perfection and
certainty of our salvation, [Rom 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#008),
[Rom 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#011); [Rom
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#017); [Eph
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#016); [Col
3:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001); [Co1
15:49](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#049); [Phi
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#020), [Phi
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#021); [Th1
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#014); [Heb
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#025); [Jo1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#002). - Edward Reynolds, 1599-1676.

Whole Psalm

Although the Jews of later times have gone about to wrest it to another
meaning, yet this Psalm is so approved and undoubted a prophecy of
Christ, that the Pharisees durst not deny it, when being questioned by
our Saviour ([Mat 22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042), [Mat
22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043)) how it should be, seeing Christ
is the son of David, that David notwithstanding should call him Lord,
saying, "The Lord said unto my Lord," they could not answer him a word,
whereas the answer had been very easy and ready if they could have
denied this Psalm to be meant of Christ. But they knew it could not be
otherwise understood, and it was commonly taken amongst them to be a
prophecy of their Messias, according to the very evidence of the text
itself, which cannot be fitted to any other, but only to Christ our
Saviour, the Son of God. For whereas some of them since then have
construed all these things as spoken in the name of the people of Judah
concerning David their king, the text itself refuseth that construction,
when in those words, "Sit thou at my right hand," it mentioneth an
honour done to him of whom it speaketh, greater than can be fitted to
the angels, and therefore much less to be applied unto David. Again,
that which is spoken in [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004) of
the priesthood, cannot be understood of David, who was indeed a king,
but never had anything spoken as touching the priesthood to appertain
unto him, and of whom it cannot be conceived how it should be said,
"Thou art a priest for ever," etc. Yea, there is nothing here spoken
whereof we may see in David any more but some little shadow in
comparison of that which hath come to pass in Jesus Christ. - Robert
Abbot (1560-1617) in "The Exaltation of the Kingdom and Priesthood of
Christ."

Whole Psalm

The sixty-eighth Psalm hails the ascent of the Messiah, prefigured by
the translation of the ark, and gives a rapid and obscure view of the
glories and the blessings consequent upon that event. The twenty-fourth
exhibits to us the Messiah ascending to his redemption throne upborne by
the wings of angels and archangels, and hosannahed by the whole
intelligent creation; it marks in the most glowing colours the
triumphant entry of Messiah into the heavenly regions, and the tone of
authority and power with which he commands that entrance - it sends him
attended by the angelic host to his Father's throne, there to claim that
pre-eminence which was his by inheritance and by conquest. At this point
the Psalm before us "takes up the wondrous tale": it exhibits to us the
awful solemnities of his reception, it represents the Father bestowing
on his well-beloved Son the kingdom which he had earned, exalting him to
the throne, and putting all things under his feet; receiving him in his
office of prophet, and promising universality and permanence to "the rod
of his strength"; receiving him in the office of priesthood, his own
peculiar priesthood, and confirming its efficacy and duration by an
oath; thus perfecting the redemption scheme, and completing the conquest
over sin and death, and him who had the power of death. Man united with
God was raised to the throne of being; man united with God perfected the
sacrifice which was demanded, and the angelic host is represented by the
Psalmist as taking up the strain, and hymning the future triumphs of the
King of Glory - triumphs over his foes, whom he will visit in the day of
his wrath, and triumphs with his willing people, whom he will assist
with his Spirit, refine by his grace, and exalt into his glory. Such do
I conceive to be the occasion, the object, and the tendency of this
sacred song; to me it appears to be eminently an epinicion, or song of
victory: it celebrates the triumph of the conqueror, it presents him
with the rewards of victory, and it predicts future conquests as
crowning his glory; while elsewhere we see the Captain of our salvation
militant, here we see him triumphant; while elsewhere we see his offices
inchoate, here they are perfected by the approval of the Godhead, and
the promise of eternity: here we have instruction consolidating empire,
and the atonement completed by the everlasting priesthood. - J. H.
Singer, in "The Irish Pulpit," 1839.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

In this one verse we have a description of Christ's person, his wars and
his victory; so that we may say of it (and so indeed of the whole Psalm,
which is an epitome of the Gospel), as Tully did of Brutus in his
laconical epistle, Quam multa, quam paucis! How much in a little. - John
Trapp.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"The Lord said unto my Lord, sit thou at my right hand." An oft-quoted
passage - because it contains a memorable truth. We find it quoted by
Messiah himself to lead Israel to own him as greater than David, [Mat
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044). It is quoted in [Heb
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#013), to prove him higher far than
angels. It is brought forward by Peter, [Act
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#034), to show him Lord as well as
Christ. It is referred to in [Heb
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#012), [Heb
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#013), as declaring that Jesus has
satisfactorily finished what he undertook to accomplish on earth, "the
one sacrifice for ever," and is henceforth on that seat of divine honour
"expecting till his enemies be made his footstool" in the day of his
Second Coming. - Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"The Lord said." Albeit the understanding of Christ's person and office
be necessary unto the church, yet none know the Son save the Father, and
they to whom he will reveal him: for David knew Christ only by the
Father's teaching, "The Lord said," said he. - David Dickson.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"My Lord." From hence we learn that though Christ was man, yet he was
more than a bare man, since he is Lord to his father David. For jure
naturae no son is lord to his father; domination doth never ascend.
There must be something above nature in him to make him his father's
sovereign, as our Saviour himself argueth from these words, [Mat
22:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#042), [Mat
22:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#045). - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"My Lord." It was a higher honour to have Christ for his son, than to be
a king; yet David does not say that Christ is his son, but rejoices that
Christ is his Lord, and he Christ's servant. But this joy has also been
procured for it: see [Luk 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#043); [Joh
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#028); [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003), [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008). They who regard the Messiah only
as the son of David, regard the lesser part of the conception of him. A
dominion to which David himself is subject, shows the heavenly majesty
of the King, and the heavenly character of his kingdom. - John Albert
Bengel.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"Until I make thine enemies thy footstool." Every word is full of
weight. For though ordinarily subdivisions of holy Scripture and
crumbling of the bread of life be rather a loosing than an expounding of
it; yet in such parts of it as were of purpose intended for models and
summaries of fundamental doctrines (of which sort this Psalm is one of
the fullest and briefest in the whole Scriptures), as in little maps of
large countries, there is no word whereupon some point of weighty
consequence may not depend. Here then is to be considered the term of
duration or measure of Christ's kingdom, "until." The author of subduing
Christ's enemies under him, "I, the Lord." The manner thereof; ponam,
and ponam scabellum, put thy foes as a stool under thy feet. Victory is
a relative word, and presupposeth enemies, and they are expressed in the
text Enmity shows itself against Christ in all the offices of his
mediation. There is enmity against him as a prophet. Enmity against his
truth, - in opinion by adulterating it with human mixtures and
superinducements, teaching for doctrines the traditions of men; in
affection, by wishing many divine truths were razed out of the
Scriptures, as being manifestly contrary to those pleasures which they
love rather than God; in conversation, by keeping down the truth in
unrighteousness, and in those things which they know, as brute beasts,
corrupting themselves. Enmity against his teaching, by quenching the
motions, and resisting the evidence of his Spirit in the Word, refusing
to hear his voice, and rejecting the counsel of God against themselves.
There is enmity against him as a priest, by undervaluing his person,
sufferings, righteousness, or merits. And as a king; enmity to his
worship, by profaneness neglecting it, by idolatry misappropriating it,
by superstition corrupting it. Enmity to his ways and service, by
ungrounded prejudices, misjudging them as grievous, unprofitable, or
unequal ways; and by wilful disobedience forsaking them to walk in the
ways of our own heart. - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"Make thine enemies thy footstool." This expression, that the conquest
of Christ's enemies shall be but as the removing of a stool into its
place, noteth unto us two things: first, the easiness of God's victory
over the enemies of Christ. They are before him as nothing, less than
nothing, the drop of a bucket, the dust of the balance, a very little
thing Secondly, as this putting of Christ's enemies like a stool under
the feet noteth easiness, so also it noteth order or beauty too. When
Christ's enemies shall be under his foot, then there shall be a right
order in things; then it shall indeed appear that God is a God of order,
and therefore the day wherein that shall be done, is called "the times
of the restitution of all things," [Act
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#021). The putting of Christ's enemies
under his feet is an act of justice; and of all others, justice is the
most orderly virtue, that which keepeth beauty upon the face of a
people, as consisting itself in symmetry and proportion.

This putting of Christ's enemies as a stool under his feet, also denotes
unto us two things in reference to Christ; first, his rest, and
secondly, his triumph. To stand, in the Scripture phrase, denoteth
ministry, and to sit, rest; and there is no posture so easy as to sit
with a stool under one's feet. Till Christ's enemies then be all under
his feet, he is not fully in his rest.

Furthermore, this "footstool" under Christ's feet, in reference to his
enemies, denoteth unto us four things. First, the extreme shame and
confusion which they shall everlastingly suffer, the utter abasing and
bringing down of all that exalteth itself against Christ. Secondly,
hereby is noted the burden which wicked men must bear; the footstool
beareth the weight of the body, so must the enemies of Christ bear the
weight of his heavy and everlasting wrath upon their souls. Thirdly,
herein is noted the relation which the just recompense of God bears unto
the sins of ungodly men. Thus will Christ deal with his enemies at the
last day. Here they trample upon Christ in his word, in his ways, in his
members; they make the saints bow down for them to go over, and make
them as the pavements on the ground; they tread under foot the blood of
the covenant, and the sanctuary of the Lord, and put Christ to shame;
but there their own measure shall be returned into their bosoms, they
shall be constrained to confess as Adonibezek, "As I have done, so God
hath requited me." Lastly, herein we may note the great power and wisdom
of Christ in turning the malice and mischief of his enemies unto his own
use and advantage, and so ordering wicked men that though they intend
nothing but extirpation and ruin to his kingdom, yet they shall be
useful unto him, and, against their own wills, serviceable to those
glorious ends, in the accomplishing whereof he shall be admired by all
those that believe. As in a great house there is necessary use of
vessels of dishonour, destined unto sordid and mean, but yet daily,
services so in the great house of God, wicked men are his utensils and
household instruments, as footstools and staves, and vessels wherein
there is no pleasure, though of them there may be good use. - Condensed
from Reynolds.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"Thy footstool." As this our king has a glorious throne, so has he also
a wonderful footstool; and as his royal throne imparts to us comfort in
the highest degree, so his footstool also imparts to us joy. How joyful
shall his poor subjects be when they hear that their prince and king has
slain their enemies and delivered them out of their hands! How did their
poor subjects go forward to meet Saul and Jonathan when those kings had
slain the Philistines!... Moreover, because our King has his enemies
under his feet, thus shall he also bring all our enemies under our feet,
for his victory is ours, God be thanked, who has given us the victory
through Christ our Lord. - Joshua Arnd, 1626-1685.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

"The rod of thy strength," or rather, "The sceptre of thy might," i.e.,
of "Thy kingly majesty," as in [Jer
48:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#017); [Eze
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#014). Chrysostom plays upon the word
ῥάβδος (lxx) as a rod of strength and consolation, as in [Psa
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004); a rod of chastisement, as in
[Psa 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#009), [Co1
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#021); a symbol of kingly rule, as in
[Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001), [Psa
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006). It was by this rod, he says,
that the disciples wrought when they subdued the world, in obedience to
the command, "Go and make disciples of all nations"; a rod far more
powerful than that of Moses, "for that divided rivers, this brake in
pieces the ungodliness of the world." And then with profound truth he
adds, "Nor would one err who should call the Cross the rod of power; for
this rod converted sea and land, and filled them with a vast power.
Armed with this rod, the Apostles went forth throughout the world, and
accomplished all that they did, beginning at Jerusalem." The Cross,
which to men seemed the very emblem of shame and weakness, was, in
truth, the power of God. - J. J. Stewart Perowne.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

"The rod of thy strength." The power of this sceptre and word of Christ
appeareth greatly in the saving of his elect.... So mightily hath it
prevailed and overruled the minds of men against nature, and reason, and
learning, and wisdom, and custom, and whatsoever else is strong to hold
men in the liking of those things which they have once received and
followed, as that they have been content to renounce the devotions which
their forefathers had so long embraced; to cast away the gods which
themselves had devoutly served; to stop their ears against the contrary
motives and persuasions of father and mother; to harden their hearts
against the kneelings and weepings and embracings of wife and children;
to forego their honours, and inheritances, yea, and their lives also,
rather than lose that peace and joy of heart which the same word of
Christ had ministered unto them. Yea, how strange is it, and how greatly
doth it commend the power of this word, to see weakness hereby
prevailing against strength, simplicity against policy; to see the lamb
standing without fear before the lion, the gentle turtle before the
devouring kite; women and children and weaklings before the great
monarchs and potentates of the world, not fearing their threatening
words, nor dreading their tormenting hands, but boldly uttering the word
of their testimony ([Rev 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#011)), in
despite of all their fury, and never yielding to shrink from it, by
anything that could be devised against them. The word of God in their
hearts gave them courage and resolution and strength to go through fire
and water, to bear all adventures of wind and weather, and howsoever
they seemed to be beaten against the rocks, yet they escaped shipwreck,
and arrived safe at the haven of their desire. - Robert Abbot.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

"Out of Zion." We need not say much about how the omniscience of God is
displayed in the wonderful fact, that in the very land of the covenant -
in the very midst of that people who rejected and crucified the Saviour,
the first church of Christ on earth was established. What would
cartilers and blasphemers have said, had it been otherwise? had the
Christian community been formed in any of the heathen countries? Would
it not have been considered as a fiction of the idolatrous priests?
Israel scattered among the nations, and the Church of Christ haying
begun in Zion at Jerusalem, are the most wonderful and enduring
monuments, and incontestable witnesses of the truth of Christianity. -
Benjamin Weiss.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

From his ruling in the midst of enemies we learn that the kingdom of
Christ in this life is the kingdom of the Cross, of persecutions, and of
dangers. Enemies are never wanting, not only external adversaries, but
also spiritual and eternal; and therefore great sorrow is always
awaiting the godly. In this most terrible conflict, however, their minds
are lifted up by this consolation, viz., that the rod of the kingdom is
strong, and cannot be overcome by any force or power; yea, more, albeit
assailed with contendings and all kinds of storms, it will continue
stable, firm, and perpetual: and there will always be a Church among
men, which will fear and worship this King; because the experience of
all the ages teaches, that this kingdom has the more grown and increased
the more it has been opposed, according to that saying of Basil, ἐν ταῖς
θλιψεσι μαλλον θάλλει ἡ ἐκκλησία, the Church flourishes more by
tribulation. - Rivetus.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

"Rule thou in the midst of thine enemies." Set up thy power over them
and reign in them. This is a commission to set up a kingdom in the very
midst of those who were his enemies; in the hearts of those who had been
and were rebellions. His kingdom is set up not by destroying them, but
by subduing them, so that they become his willing servants. They yield
to him, and he rules over them. It is not here a commission to cut them
off, but one much more difficult of execution, - to make them his
friends, and to dispose them to submit to his authority. Mere power may
crush men; it requires more than that to make rebels willingly
submissive, and to dispose them voluntarily to obey. - Albert Barnes.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people." That is, those whom thou dost receive from thy Father,
and, by setting up the standard and ensign of the Gospel, gather to
thyself "Shall be willing." The word is willingnesses, that is, a people
of great willingness and devotion, or (as the original word is elsewhere
used, [Psa 119:108](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#108)), shall be freewill
offerings unto thee. The abstract being put for the concrete, and the
plural for the singular, notes how exceeding forward and free they
should be; as the Lord, to signify that his people were most rebellious,
saith, that they were rebellion itself, [Eze
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#008). So then the meaning is, thy
people shall, with most ready aria forward cheerfulness, devote,
consecrate, and render up themselves to thy government as a reasonable
sacrifice, shall be of a most liberal, free, noble, aria unconstrained
spirit in thy service, and shall be voluntaries in the wars of thy
kingdom. - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people," O Jesus Christ, which were given thee by the Father,
purchased and redeemed by thee, who acknowledge thee for their Lord, and
are bound to thee by a military oath, are extremely willing, being
devoted to thy service with the greatest readiness of soul, alacrity,
inclination, and voluntary obedience. Nor are they willing only, but
willingness itself in the abstract; nay, willingnesses in the plural
number, the highest and most excellent willingnesses, all which add an
emphasis. This is seen to be so בּיום חילף "in the day of thy \[valour\]
power," in which thy generous spirit laying hold of them, animates them
to grand and bold enterprises. Then they go forth in the beauties of
holiness, by which they are a terror to the devil, a delight to God and
angels, and a mutual edification to one another. - Hermann Witsius,
1636-1708.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing." Willing to do what? They shall be willing
while others are unwilling. The simple term "willing," is very
expressive. It denotes the beautiful condition of creatures who suffer
themselves to be wrought upon, and moved, according to the will of God.
They suffer God to work in them to will and to do. They are willing to
die unto all sin, they are willing to crucify the old man, or self, in
order that the new man, or Christ, may be formed in them. They are
willing to be weaned from their own thoughts and purposes, that the
thoughts and purposes of God may be fulfilled in them. They are willing
to be transferred from nature's steps of human descent to God's steps of
human ascent. Or, to abide by the simplicity of our text, God is Will,
and they are "willing." God will beautify them with salvation, because
there is nothing in them to hinder his working. They will be wise, they
will be good, they Will be lovely, they will be like God, for they are
"willing"; and there proceeds from God a mighty spirit, the whole
tendency of which is to make his creatures like himself. - John
Pulsford, in "Quiet Hours," 1857.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing." They are willing in believing, loving,
obeying, adhering, living piously and justly in this world; so that they
do not need the constraints of laws or threats, because they are led by
the Spirit of God, and where the Spirit of the Lord is there, also is
liberty. - Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing." Am I one of the "willing people" - not
only my obedience and allegiance secured from a conviction of the truth,
but my heart inclined, and my will renewed? To do the will of God, to
bear the will of God, to coincide with the will of God - and that with
calm if not cheerful consent of the heart, as seeing him who is
invisible, and holding fast my living apprehension of his person and
character? All unwillingness, whether practical or lurking in the heart,
springs from unbelief - from a failure to realise him or his purposes.
Were Jesus, as God become incarnate, and as giving himself for me, and
his counsel of grace towards me, ever or even in any measure before my
heart, how could I hesitate to yield myself, absolutely and implicitly,
to him and his guidance? Again, this "willingness" is the essence of
holiness; it constitutes "the beauties of holiness" - the beauty of
Christ cast over the soul. The cure, therefore, for all my misery and
sin is more faith, more of Christ, and nearer to him. This let me seek
and ask with ever increasing earnestness. - Alfred Edersheim.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing in the day of, thy power," etc. The prophet
here notes three things respecting the subjects of the kingdom of the
Messiah:

1\. Their prompt obedience.

2\. Their attire or vesture.

3\. Their abundance, or multitude.

This representation admirably agrees with what precedes. He had said
that the Messiah should reign in the midst of his enemies, but lest any
one should rein only over enemies, unwilling and opposing, as the devils
are made subject to Christ, now he lets us know that he will have a
loyal people, and obedient subjects, for else there would be wanting
that same glory of which Solomon speaks in [Pro
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#028), "In the multitude of people is
the king's honour." He affirms also, that he would have his own people,
who would recognise, receive, and serve him as King, with true
obedience, nor would it be a small company, but like the dew, which
waters the face of the whole earth. - Rivetus.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power." It is power acted
and executed with all sweetness, mildness, and gentleness. Here is
"leading, but no force; conduct, but no compulsion," vehemens
inclinatio, non coactio: the will is determined, but not the least
violence is done to it, to the infringing of its liberty. How
spontaneously does the person led follow him that leads him! So it is
here. This and all other workings of the Spirit are admirably suited to
the nature of reasonable and free agents. Efficacious grace does not at
all destroy natural liberty. Where the Spirit does not find sinners
willing, by his sweet method he makes them willing: "Thy people shall be
willing in the daft of thy power." A "day of power," yet "willing." Even
the Spirit's drawing is managed with all consistency to the freedom of
the will. Ελκυει ὁ Θεος, αλλα βουλομενον ἑλκυει "He draws; but it is one
that he makes willing to follow." "Behold, I will allure her" ([Hos
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014)): ay, there is the Spirit's
leading I this being the constant and avowed doctrine of the
Protestants, and particularly their explication of the Spirit's leading
in the text \[[Rom 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#014)\]; how
injurious and invidious are the Popish writers in their traducing and
calumniating of them, as if they asserted the Spirit, in this or any
other act, to work with compulsion, or in a way destructive to man's
essential liberty! It is a vile scandal! - Thomas Jacomb, in "The
Morning Exercises."

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"In the day of thy power." In the day of thy strength, saith the
Vulgate: of thy force and valour, say Tremellius and Junius: of the
assemblies, say they of Geneva: of the armies, saith Munster; "at such
times as thou shalt bring thy bands and join battle," so Vatablus,
Castalio, and the Chaldee Paraphrase have it. All which the original
בּיום חילך may bear without straining. - John Prideaux, 1578-1650.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

The subjects of the Priest-King are willing soldiers. In accordance with
the warlike tone of the whole Psalm, our text describes the subjects as
an army. That military metaphor comes out more closely when we attach
the true meaning of the words, "in the day of thy power." The word
rendered, and rightly rendered, "power," has the same ambiguity which
that word has in the English of the date of our translation, and for a
century later, as you may find in Shakespeare and Milton, who both used
it in the sense of "army." Singularly enough we do not employ "powers"
in that meaning, but we do another word which means the same thing - and
talk of "forces," meaning thereby "troops." "The day of thy power" is
not a mere synonym for "the time of thy might," but means specifically
"the day of thine army," that is "the day when thou dost muster thy
forces and set them in array for the war." The King is going forth to
conquest. But he goes not alone. Behind him come his faithful followers,
all pressing on with willing hearts and high courage. - Alexander
McLaren, 1871.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"In the day of thy power." This refers in a general way to the gospel
dispensation, and in particular to the period of conversion. To the
perishing sinner the gospel comes, "not in word only, but also in power,
and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance." It is an arresting power;
it meets the sinner, and stays his mad career, as in the case of Saul of
Tarsus. It is a convincing power, it teaches the sinner that he is
ruined in every respect, and leads him to cry out, "What shall I do to
be saved?"... It is a life-giving power; it quickens dead souls, and
will eventually bring the dead bodies from their graves; "all that are
in the graves shall hear the voice of the Son of God and shall live."
This is the style of Jehovah, "I will, they shall"; none other dare
speak thus. It is also liberating power; "if the Son shall make you
free, ye shall be free indeed." - Theophilus Jones, in a Sermon preached
at Surrey Chapel, 1823.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people," etc. In homage, they shall be like a company of priests in
sacred vestments, for they shall appear "in the beauties of holiness."
In number, they shall be like the countless dewdrops "from the womb of
the morning," sparkling in the rays of the rising sun, and reflecting
his radiance. In glory they shall bear the likeness of Christ's
resurrection in all its vernal freshness: "Thou hast the dew of thy
youth." - Benjamin Wildon Carr.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"In the beauties of holiness." In holy vestments as priests. They are at
once warriors and priests; meet for the service of him who was King and
Priest. Neander (Mem. of Chr. Life, ch. iv.) remarks on the connection
between these two sides of the Christian character. God's soldiers can
only maintain their war by priestly self-consecration. Conversely: God's
priests can only preserve their purity by unintermitted conflict. -
William Kay.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"In the beauties of holiness." This expression is usually read as if it
belonged either to the words immediately preceding, or to those
immediately following. But in either case the connection is somewhat
difficult and obscure. It seems better regarded as a distinct and
separate clause, adding a fresh trait to the description of the army.
And what that is we need not find any difficulty in ascertaining. "The
beauties of holiness" is a frequent phrase for the sacerdotal garments,
the holy festal attire of the priests of the Lord. So considered, how
beautifully it comes in here. The conquering King whom the Psalm hymns
is a Priest for ever; and he is followed by an army of priests: The
soldiers are gathered in the day of the muster, with high courage and
willing devotion, ready to fling away their lives; but they are clad not
in mail, but in priestly robes; like those who wait before the altar
rather than like those who plunge into the fight, like those who
compassed Jericho With the ark for their standard and the trumpets for
all their weapons. We can scarcely fail to remember the words which echo
these and interpret them. "The armies which were in heaven followed him
on white horses, clothed in fine linen, white and clean" - a strange
armour against sword-cut and spear-thrust. - Alexander McLaren.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"The beauties of holiness." Godliness is our spiritual beauty. Godliness
is to the soul as the light to the world, to illustrate and adorn it. It
is not greatness that sets us off in God's eye, but goodness: what is
the beauty of the angels but their sanctity? Godliness is the curious
embroidery and workmanship of the Holy Ghost: a soul furnished with
godliness is damasked with beauty, and enamelled with purity: this is
the "clothing of wrought gold" which makes the King of heaven fall in
love with us. Were there not an excellency in holiness, the hypocrite
would never go about to paint it. Godliness sheds a glory and lustre
upon the saints: what are the graces but the golden feathers in which
Christ's dove shines? [Psa 68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013). -
Thomas Watson.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thou hast the dew of thy youth." These words are often misunderstood,
and taken to be a description of the fresh, youthful energy attributed
by the Psalm to the Priest-King of this nation of soldier-priests. The
misunderstanding, I suppose, has led to the common phrase, "the dew of
one's youth." But the reference of the expression is to the army, not to
its leader. "Youth" here is a collective noun, equivalent to "young
men." The host of his soldier-subjects is described as a band of young
warriors, whom he leads, in their fresh strength and countless numbers
and gleaming beauty like the dew of the morning.... It is as a symbol of
the refreshing which a weary world will receive from the conquests and
presence of the King and his host, that they are likened to the
glittering morning dew. Another prophetic Scripture gives us the same
emblem when it speaks of Israel being "in the midst of many people as a
dew from the Lord." Such ought to be the effect of our presence. We are
meant to gladden, to adorn, to refresh this parched, prosaic world, with
a freshness brought from the chambers of the sunrise.

The dew, formed in the silence of the darkness while men sleep, falling
as willingly on a bit of dead wood as anywhere, hanging its pearls on
every poor spike of grass, and dressing everything on which it lies with
strange beauty, each separate globule tiny and evanescent, but each
flashing back the light, and each a perfect sphere: feeble one by one,
but united mighty to make the pastures of the wilderness rejoice - so,
created in silence by an unseen influence, feeble when taken in detail,
but strong in their myriads, glad to occupy the lowliest place, and each
"bright with something of celestial light," Christian men and women are
to be in the midst of many people as a dew from the Lord. - Alexander
McLaren.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"The dew of thy youth." There does not, indeed, appear to me any reason
to doubt that, in this place, David extols the divine favour displayed
in increasing the number of Christ's people; and hence, in consequence
of their extraordinary increase, he compares the youth or race which
would be born to him to the dew. As men are struck with astonishment at
seeing the earth moistened and refreshed with dew, though its descent be
imperceptible, even so, David declares that an innumerable offspring
shall be born to Christ, who shall be spread over the whole earth. The
youth, therefore, which, like the dew-drops, are innumerable, are here
designated the dew of childhood, or of youth. - John Calvin.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"From the womb of the morning" is, with the utmost pertinency, applied
to the conception and production of dews; agreeably to a delicate line
in that great master of just description and lively painting, Mr.
Thomson:

"The meek ey'd morn appears, mother of dews."

We meet with a fine expression in the book of Job, which may serve to
confirm this remark; and may illustrate the propriety of the phrase used
in this connection, "Hath the rain a father, or who hath begotten the
drops of dew?" It seems, the oriental writers delighted to represent the
dew as a kind of birth, as the offspring of the morning. And if so,
surely there could be no image in the whole compass of the universe
better adapted to the Psalmist's purpose, or more strongly significant
of those multitudes of proselytes, which were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God; by the
powerful energy of his word and Spirit. Upon this supposition, the whole
verse describes the willing subjection, the gracious accomplishments,
and the vast number of Christ's converts. - James Hervey (1713-14-1758),
in "Meditations and Contemplations."

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"The dew of thy youth." The most apparent reference is to multitude.
Compare [Psa 72:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016), and the proverbial
use of the dew together with the sand of the sea shore to express a vast
number. The people of the Messiah are a great number that no man can
number: [Rev 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009). But this is only the
common enwrapping veil of a further sense We must further note, First,
the origen of the dew. From what comes it? From earthly matter, vapour
and mist, as the new born soldier of Christ comes from the confused,
dark substance of the old nature. By what is it produced? Through the
influence of the heavenly warmth of the beams of the morning sun: so the
people of God owe themselves to the light from above. In the vivifying
light of heaven, the dewdrops are begotten, and from it they come more
properly than from the earth-water. How are they produced? Invisibly,
wonderfully, by the secret, incomprehensible influence of the divine
power. We have by no means exhausted the figure, for we notice,
Secondly, the design of the dew. It is for the fertilizing and
refreshing of the earth. The spiritual Israel are a fructifying,
quickening dew among men. It is also for the ornament of the earth,
which the dew bestrews as with precious stones; and this beauty is
caused because each little drop of dew reflects the morning sun and is
an earthly reflection of the heavenly light. - Condensed from Rudolph
Slier.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003) (last clause)

With singular beauty and propriety does the Psalmist compare the first
preachers of the gospel to dew. In the first place, they may be compared
to the drops of dew on account of their multitude. But, in order to
judge of the correctness of the comparison in this respect, we must
consider, that, in the Holy Land, the dews are remarkably abundant. A
French traveller has observed of Judea, that in the morning the ground
is as much moistened by dew, as if it had rained. We are informed in the
sacred history, that, when the Dayspring from on high visited the earth,
many were the followers of Christ; and that very soon after his
ascension into heaven, "multitudes both of men and women were added to
the Lord." Justly then may those who hastened to the blessed Jesus, when
the glorious light of his gospel first dawned upon the world, or
immediately on the commencement of his mediatorial kingdom, be compared
in number to the drops of dew, which at the dawn of day fall to the
earth.

It is mentioned also in this verse, that the first subjects of the
Messiah were to present themselves adorned "with the beauties of
holiness"; בהדרי קד in the splendours of holiness. In brightness, then,
as well as in multitude, did they resemble the glittering drops of the
morning dew. Our great poet has combined these two ideas in his
beautiful comparison of an host innumerable to the

"Stars of morning, dew-drops which the sun impearls."

The formation of the dew is represented in Scripture as the work of God,
and not of man; and its descending to refresh and fertilize the earth is
mentioned as his peculiar gift, and in opposition to human means of
rendering the earth more fruitful. "Who," saith Job, "hath begotten the
drops of dew?" ([Job 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#028)). And the
prophet Micah declares, that "the remnant of Jacob shall be in the midst
of many people as a dew from the Lord, as the showers upon the grass,
that tarrieth not for man, nor waiteth for the sons of men" ([Mic
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#007)). Well, then, might the term be
applied by the Psalmist to those whom "God of his own will begat with
the word of truth"; and who were his appointed instruments, by their
preaching, to cause "the desert to rejoice and to blossom abundantly";
and "the wilderness to become a fruitful field."

Let it also be remembered, that those whom the Psalmist compares to dew
are described under the image of young soldiers, going forth to fight
the battles of a victorious prince. Now this comparison is used in [Sa2
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#011), [Sa2
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#012), "I counsel," said Hushai to
Ahitophel, "that all Israel be generally gathered unto thee, from Dan
even to Beer-sheba, as the sand that is by the sea for multitude; and
that thou go to battle in thine own person. So shall we come upon him in
some place where he shall be found, and we will light upon him as the
dew falleth upon the ground." It is perhaps not undeserving of notice,
that amongst the Romans those troops who first attacked the enemy, and
who were composed of young men, were, from a supposed resemblance to
dew, called Rorarii. It is not incumbent upon me to investigate the
reason of their receiving that name; it is sufficient to point out its
similarity with the expression of the Psalmist, which is applied to
those who were first to engage in the conflict with the enemies of the
Gospel of Christ. - Richard Dixon, 1811.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

Thee, in thy power's triumphant day,

The willing nations shall obey;

And, when thy rising beams they view,

Shall all (redeem'd from error's night)

Appear as numberless and bright

As crystal drops of morning dew.

N. Brady and N. Tate.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

Lord, let thy day of power be known,

Thy people be confessed;

Eager and valiant - priests each one,

In holy garments dressed.

Countless they shine, as dews from heaven

When eastern skies grow bright -

More glorious than those dews are given,

Sparkling in morning light.

George Rawson, in "Hymns, Verses, and Chants," 1876.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent," etc. It should be diligently
considered, that God has consecrated Christ priest by an oath, and that
this was done for our sakes: First, That we might know how exceedingly
momentous was this transaction, and the more reverently and with the
stronger faith believe it. Secondly, That we might acknowledge the
goodness of God, who, being most truthful in himself, and concerning
whose faithfulness it is the greatest crime to doubt, nevertheless has
been pleased to speak to us not only with a bare word, but also, after
the manner of men, to confirm his decree by an oath. - Rivetus.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"Sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever." God might have
made the levitical priest by oath, and yet he might have been changed;
but if he had made him by oath to be a priest for ever, then he could
not have repented, that is, changed; but he must of necessity have been
a priest for ever. Therefore you must take special notice, that God did
not only swear that Christ should be a priest, or that he should be a
priest for a long time, but a priest "for ever;" so that there should
never be any priest joined with him, or come after him. So that if we
consider the oath, and the thing confirmed by this oath, two things will
be manifest:

1\. That Christ's priesthood is personal, and settled in one single
person for ever; so that he can have no fellow nor co-partner, nor any
successor in his priesthood.

2\. That, by this oath, God did limit his own supreme and absolute power
in this particular; and took away the use and exercise of it, and that
for ever. For now he hath no power to make Christ no priest, or take
away his priesthood at will and pleasure: and in this God discovered his
unspeakable love unto Christ, in that he did so much honour him, and so
highly reward him. By this he also displayed his abundant mercy to man;
for by this oath known unto man, he signifies that man shall never be
destitute of a powerful and effectual priest, able for ever to save; and
this doth minister unto sinful man most sweet and heavenly comfort. -
George Lawson, 1662.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

The form and manner of our Saviour's investiture or consecration was
most honourable and glorious, God the Father performing the rites; which
were not imposition of hands, and breathing on him the Holy Ghost, but a
solemn testimony, with a protestation, "Thou art a priest": ceremonies
never used by any but God, nor in the investiture of any but Christ, nor
in his investiture into any office but the priesthood. At his coronation
we hear nothing, but the Lord said, "Sit thou on my right hand": the
rule of the whole world is imposed upon our Saviour by command; and even
in this did Christ show his obedience to his Father, that he took upon
him the government of his church. But at the consecration of Christ we
have a great deal more of ceremony and solemnity, God his Father taketh
an oath, and particularly expresseth the nature and condition of his
office, a priesthood for ever after the order of Melchizedek: and he
confirmeth it unto him for ever, saying, "Thou art a priest for ever." -
Daniel Featley, in "Clavis Mystica." 1636.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

What doctrine doth the Scripture afford more comfortable to a drooping
soul than this, that God hath sworn his Son a priest for ever, to
sanctify our persons, and purge our sins, and tender all our petitions
to his Father? What sin is so heinous, for which such a priest cannot
satisfy by the oblation of himself? what cause so desperate, in which
such an advocate, if he will plead, may not prevail? We may be sure God
will not be hard to be intreated of us, who himself hath appointed us
such an intercessor, to whom he can deny nothing; and to that end hath
appointed him to sit at his right hand to make intercession for us. -
Abraham Wright.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"And will not repent." The meaning of this phrase is, that the
priesthood of Christ is not like that of Aaron, which was after a time
to expire, and is now actually with all the ceremonial law abolished,
but a priesthood never to be altered or changed. - Daniel Featley.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"Thou art a priest." The reasons which moved our Lord to take upon him
the office of priest are conceived to be these.

1\. Because the salvation and redemption of mankind, wrought by the
sacrifice of his priesthood, being a most noble work, and not inferior
to the creation, it was not fit that any should have the honour of it,
but the Son of God.

2\. Neither was it agreeable that any should offer him, who was the only
sacrifice that could expiate the sins of the whole world, but himself,
therefore by offering himself he added infinite worth to the sacrifice,
and great honour to the priesthood of the Gospel. For, as the gold
sanctifieth not the altar, but the altar the gold; so it may be truly
said without impeachment to the dignity of that calling, that Christ was
rather an honour to the priesthood, than the priesthood an addition to
him. For what got he by the priesthood which cost him his life? What
preferment could it be to him, to take upon him an office, whereby he
was to abase himself below himself, and be put to an ignominious and
accursed death? What were we vile miscreants, conceived and born in
original sin, and soiled with the filth of numberless actual
transgressions, that to purge and cleanse our polluted souls and defiled
consciences, the second person in the Trinity should be made a Priest?
It was wonderful humility in him to wash his disciples' feet; but in his
divine person to wash our unclean souls, is as far above human conceit,
as it seemeth below divine majesty. There is nothing so impure as a foul
conscience; no matter so filthy, no corruption so rotten and unsavoury
as is found in the sores of an exulcerated mind; yet the Son of God
vouchsafed to wash and bathe them in his own blood. O bottomless depth
of humility and mercy! Other priests were appointed by men for the
service of God, but he was appointed by God for the service and
salvation of men, other priests spilt the blood of beasts to save men,
but he shed his own blood to save us, more like beasts than men, other
priests offered sacrifice for themselves, he offered himself for a
sacrifice: other priests were fed by the sacrifices which the people
brought, but he feeds us with the sacrifice of his own body and blood:
lastly, others were appointed priests but for a time, he was ordained a
priest "for ever." - Daniel Featley.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"Thou art a priest." This word, "Thou art," is verbum constitutivum, a
"constituting word," whereon the priesthood of Christ was founded. And
it may be considered, -

1\. As declarative of God's eternal decree, with the covenant between
the Father and the Son, whereby he was designed unto this office.

2\. As demonstrative of his mission, or his actual sending to the
discharge of his office. These words are the symbol and solemn sign of
God's conferring that honour upon him, which gave him his instalment.

3\. As predictive, for there is included in them a supposition that God
would prepare a body for him, wherein he might exercise his priesthood,
and which he might offer up unto him. - John Owen.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"Melchizedek." Some heretics of old affirmed that he was the Holy Ghost.
Others, that he was an angel. Others that he was Shem, the son of Noah.
Others that he was a Canaanite, extraordinarily raised up by God to be a
priest of the Gentiles. Others that he was Christ himself, manifested by
a special dispensation and privilege unto Abraham in the flesh, who is
said to have seen his day, and rejoiced, [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056). Difference there is also about
Salem, the place of which he was king. Some take it for Jerusalem, as
Josephus and most of the ancients. Others for a city in the half tribe
of Manasseh, within the river Jordan, where Hierom reports that some
ruins of the palace of Melchizedek were in his days conceived to remain.
Tedious I might be in insisting on this point who Melchizedek was. But
when I find the Holy Ghost purposely concealing his name, genealogy,
beginning, ending, and descent, and that to special purpose, I cannot
but wonder that men should toil themselves in the dark to find out that
of which they have not the least ground of solid conjecture, and the
inevidence whereof is expressly recorded, to make Melchizedek thereby
the fitter type of Christ's everlasting priesthood. - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

"Melchizedek." These things concerning are certain, First, That he was a
mere man, and no more; for,

1\. "Every high priest" was to be "taken from among men," [Heb
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001); - so that the Son of God himself
could not have been a priest had he not assumed our nature.

2\. That if he were more than a man, there would be no mystery in his
being introduced in Scripture as, "without father, without mother,
without pedigree," for none but men have such.

3\. Without this conception of him there is no force in the apostle's
argument against the Jews.

Secondly, That he came not to his office by the right of primogeniture
(which includes a genealogy) or by any way of succession, but was raised
up and immediately called of God thereunto; for in that respect Christ
is said to be a priest after his order. Thirdly, That he had no
successor on the earth, nor could have; for there was no law to
constitute an order of succession, and he was a priest only after an
extraordinary call. These things belong unto faith in this matter, and
no more The first personal instituted type of Christ was a priest; this
was Melchizedec. There were before real instituted types of his work, as
sacrifices; and there were moral types of his person, as Adam, Abel, and
Noah, which represented him in sundry things; but the first person who
was solemnly designed to teach and represent him, by what he was and
did, was a priest. And that which God taught herein was, that the
foundation of all that the Lord Christ had to do in and for the church
was laid in his priestly office, whereby he made atonement and
reconciliation for sin. Everything else that he doth is built on the
supposition of his priesthood. And we must begin in the application
where God begins in the exhibition. An interest in the effects of the
priestly office of Christ is that which in the first place we ought to
look after. This being attained, we shall be willing to be taught and
ruled by him. It may not be amiss to observe the likeness between
Melchizedec and Christ. As for our Lord;

1\. He was said to be, and he really was, and he only, first the king of
righteousness, and then the king of peace; seeing he alone brought in
everlasting righteousness and made peace with God for sinners. In his
kingdom alone are these things to be found.

2\. He was really and truly the priest of the most high God; and
properly he was so alone. He offered that sacrifice, and made that
atonement, which was signified by all the sacrifices offered by holy men
from the foundation of the world.

3\. He blesseth all the faithful, as Abraham, the father of the
faithful, was blessed by Melchizedec. In him were they to be blessed, by
him are they blessed, - through him delivered from the curse, and all
the fruits of it; nor are they partakers of any blessing but from him.

4\. He receiveth all the homage of his people, all their grateful
acknowledgments of the love and favour of God, in the conquest of their
spiritual adversaries, and deliverance from them, as Melchizedec
received the tenth of the spoils from Abraham.

5\. He was really without progenitors or predecessors in his office; nor
would I exclude that mystical sense from the intention of the place,
that he was without father as to his human nature, and without mother as
to his divine.

6\. He was a priest without genealogy, or derivation of his pedigree
from the loins of Aaron, or any other that ever was a priest in the
world, and moreover, mysteriously, was of a generation which none can
declare.

7\. He had, in his divine person, as the high priest of the church,
neither beginning of days nor end of life, as no such thing is reported
of Melchizedec; for the death which he underwent, in the discharge of
his office, being not the death of his whole person, but of his human
nature only, no interruption of his endless office did ensue thereon.
For although the person of the Son of God died, whence God is said to
"redeem his church with his own blood," [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028); yet he died not in his whole
person; but in his divine nature was still alive. Absolutely, therefore,
and in respect of his office, he had neither beginning of days nor end
of life.

8\. He was really the Son of God, as Melchizedec in many circumstances
was made like to the Son of God.

9\. He alone abideth a priest for ever; whereof we must particularly
treat afterwards. - Condensed from John Owen.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

"The Lord shall strike through kings," etc. He really threatens such
great heads in an awful manner, that if they will not hear, and cannot
obey, they shall be terrified to death. And assuredly he would
willingly, by these means, allure them to repentance, and persuade them
to turn, and to cease from raging against the Lord. But if they will
not, they shall know against whom it is that they go on.... This is our
consolation which upholds us, and makes our heart joyful and glad
against the persecution and rage of the world, that we have such a Lord,
who not only delivers us from sin and eternal death, but also protects
us, and delivers us in sufferings and temptations, so that we do not
sink under them. And though men rage in a most savage manner against
Christians, yet neither the gospel nor Christianity shall perish; but
their heads shall be destroyed against it. If their persecutions were to
go on unceasingly Christianity could not remain, wherefore he gives them
a time, and says he will connive at them for a while, but not longer
than till the hour comes which he here calls the "day of his wrath." And
if they will not now cease in the name of God, they must then cease in
the name of the devil. - Martin Luther.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

"Shall strike through kings." To strike through notes a complete victory
and full confusion of the enemy, an incurable wound, that they may
stagger, and fall, and rise up no more, and that affliction may not
arise a second time, [Nah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#009); [Sa1
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#008). The only difficulty is what is
meant by "kings." For which we must note that the kingdom of Christ is
spiritual, and his war spiritual, and therefore his enemies for the most
part spiritual. - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

"In the day of his wrath." Note that it is not simply said, he will
strike through kings in his wrath, but in the day of his wrath.
Therefore as there is a time of grace and patience, so there is also an
appointed time of wrath and vengeance of God. Frequent mention is made
of this in the sacred Scriptures, that we may be admonished that the
wicked will not be left always unpunished, because they contemn the
patience of God, aye, provoke his anger; but that there will be a time
when they will experience the wrath of God. Thus, armed with patience,
we should persevere in the practice of piety, nor be turned aside from
it, either by the example of the wicked, or from fear of them. -
Wolfgang Musculus.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005), [Psa
110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006), [Psa
110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

The sentenc'd heathen he shall slay,

And fill with carcases his way,

Till he hath struck earth's tyrants dead;

But in the high-way brooks shall first,

Like a poor pilgrim, slake his thirst,

And then in triumph raise his head.

N. Brady and N. Tate.

[Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)

"He shall fill the places with the dead bodies." This notes the
greatness of the victory, that none should be left to bury the dead.
There shall be an universal destruction of wicked men together in the
day of God's wrath, they shall be bound up in bundles, and heaped for
damnation, [Mat 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030); [Psa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#038); [Isa
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#028); [Isa
66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017). And it notes the shame and
dishonour of the enemy, they shall be like dung upon the face of the
earth, and shall be beholden to their victors for a base and
dishonourable burial, as we see in the great battle with Gog and Magog,
[Eze 39:11-16](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#011). - Edward Reynolds.

[Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)

"Dead bodies." Either the corpses of the vanquished enemy; or (possibly)
the living bodies of men in a state of servitude, as in [Gen
47:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#018); [Neh
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#037). (The construction as in [Exo
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009).) In the latter case, the meaning
may be: that the bodies of those who had been enslaved by the Usurper,
Death, were now claimed back by their rightful Lord. The full number is
claimed back. The "last enemy" being destroyed, "all things" are brought
beneath Christ's sway. - William Kay.

[Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)

"The heads." Rather, the head; doubtless, the head of the Old Serpent
(according to the prophecy in [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)), who acts in all who resist
Christ. The verb machats, which is used here, is employed to describe
the prophetical and typical act of Jael, smiting the head of God's
enemy, Sisera ([Jdg 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#026) and [Jdg
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#022)); and it is used in [Psa
68:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#021), which describes Christ's
victory, "God shall wound the head of his enemies"; and also by [Hab
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#013), "Thou woundest the head out of
the house of the wicked." - Christopher Wordsworth.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

"He shall drink of the brook," etc. He describeth the passion of Christ
and his glory. "In the way," saith he, that is, in his life while he is
in this misery, "he shall drink out of the brook," that is, he shall
suffer and be overcome. For to drink out of the cup is to suffer: but to
drink out of the brook, is to be altogether full of trouble, to be vexed
and tormented and utterly to be overwhelmed with a strong stream of
troubles. Thus was it in David's mind to declare the passion of Christ.
Afterward he saith, "therefore shall he lift up the head." After the
passion followeth the glory, with the resurrection and ascension. Paul
([Phi 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#001)) speaketh of both, and
saith: "Christ humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the
death of the cross. Wherefore God hath exalted him, and given him a name
which is above every name," etc. - Myles Coverdale, 1487-1568.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

I conceive that the "brook" here spoken of was not intended to give us
the idea of a clear brook of refreshing water, which was to afford the
Redeemer strength to endure the amazing conflict; as the drinking of the
water enabled Gideon's chosen band of men to go forth to battle against
the Midianites. No; in our Lord's case it was a polluted and turbid
stream. Like the water of Marah, which the Israelites could not drink,
it was bitter; for sin had made it so. It bore along with it, as it
flowed, the curse of the broken law, and the vengeance of offended
justice, and the wrath of the eternal God. It was pain, sorrow,
suffering, death. This was the "brook" of which he drank. The "cup"
which his Father gave him to drink was filled with the bitter water of
this "brook"; and he may be said to have first put his lips to it, when
he declared to his disciples, in his way to Gethsemane, "My soul is
exceedingly sorrowful, even unto death."

But it is stated in the text that this "brook" was "in the Way." It is
described here as running by the path in which the Redeemer was going in
order to the accomplishment of his great work of man's salvation; that
work which he had engaged in the everlasting covenant to perform; and by
the performance of which, man could alone be accepted of God. The sin of
man was the source from whence this water issued; and it flowed along in
the Saviour's "way," through the wilderness of this world to his kingdom
of glory in the next; as the brook Kidron, red with the blood of the
typical sacrifices, flowed in his way to Calvary. - Fountain Elwin,
1842.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

In the expositions of most of the ancients and moderns, we are told that
he drank of the brook,

1\. of mortality by his incarnation;

2\. of strictness and hardness in all his passage, by his voluntary
wants and poverty;

3\. of the strong potion of the law, by his exact obedience and
subjection;

4\. of the Jews' malice, by their continual indignities;

5\. of the floods of Belial, by apparent and unknown temptations;

6\. of the heaviest wrath of his Father, by his unspeakable agony and
bloody sweat in the garden.

7\. And last of all, of death itself on the cross, by his sad and
extreme passion. - John Prideaux.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

"He shall drink of the brook in the way." These words were understood by
Junius and Tremellius long ago as meaning, "He shall steadily press on
to victory, as generals of energy act, who in pursuing routed foes, stay
not to indulge themselves in meat or drink." Hengstenberg and others
substantially approve of this view. While a few hold that allusion may
be made to Samson at Ramath-Lehi (as if the words spoke of Christ having
a secret spring of refreshment when needful). Most seem inclined to take
Gideon as the type that best expresses the idea. Pressing on to victory,
Messiah, like Gideon, "faint yet pursuing" as he passed over Jordan,
shall not desist till all is won. "He shall not fail nor be discouraged
till he hath set judgment in the earth." Perhaps the full idea is this:
- His career was irresistibly successful like that of Gideon; for he
allowed nothing to detain him, nor did he shrink in the enterprise from
any fatigue nor did he stop to indulge the flesh. If we take it thus,
there is both the Humiliation and the Exaltation of the Son of Man
contained in the words; and [Phi 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#008),
[Phi 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#009) supplies a commentary. -
Andrew A. Bonar.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

"Schnurrer," says Rosenmuller, "seems to have perceived the meaning of
the verse, which he gives in the following words: - 'Though fatigued
with the slaughter of his enemies, yet he will not desist: but, having
refreshed himself with water from the nearest stream, will exert his
renovated strength in the pursuit of the routed foe.'" - Messianic
Psalms.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

Christ shall "lift up the head" by way of triumphing and rejoicing, when
he shall have taken full vengeance of his adversaries, and freed, not
himself only, but the whole body of his church from the assaults and
dangers of all enemies. We see now that oftentimes, though not in
himself, yet in his members, he is fain to hang down the head, and to
wear the badges of reproach and shame, whilst the ungodly vaunt
themselves ([Job 31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026)) and in their
hearts despise the righteous, accounting more vilely of them than of the
dust of their feet. - Robert Abbot.

[Psalms 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 110:1</span></span>

1 The Lord said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right hand, until I make
thine enemies thy footstool.

2 The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion; rule thou in
the midst of thine enemies.

3 Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties
of holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy
youth.

[Psa 110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)

"The Lord said unto my Lord" - Jehovah said unto my Adonai: David in
spirit heard the solemn voice of Jehovah speaking to the Messiah from of
old. What wonderful intercourse there has been between the Father and
the Son! From this secret and intimate communion spring the covenant of
grace and all its marvellous arrangements. All the great acts of grace
are brought into actual being by the word of God; had he not spoken,
there had been no manifestation of Deity to us; but in the beginning was
the Word, and from of old there was mysterious fellowship between the
Father and his Son Jesus Christ concerning his people and the great
contest on their behalf between himself and the powers of evil. How
condescending on Jehovah's part to permit a mortal ear to hear, and a
human pen to record his secret converse with his co-equal Son! How
greatly should we prize the revelation of his private and solemn
discourse with the Son, herein made public for the refreshing of his
people! "Lord, what is man that thou shouldst thus impart thy secrets
unto him."

Though David was a firm believer in the Unity of the Godhead, he yet
spiritually discerns the two persons, distinguishes between them, and
perceives that in the second he has a peculiar interest, for he calls
him "my Lord." This was an anticipation of the exclamation of Thomas,
"My Lord and my God," and it expresses the Psalmist's reverence, his
obedience, his believing appropriation, and his joy in Christ. It is
well to have clear views of the mutual relations of the persons of the
blessed Trinity; indeed, the knowledge of these truths is essential for
our comfort and growth in grace. There is a manifest distinction in the
divine persons, since one speaks to another; yet the Godhead is one.

"Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies they footstool."
Away from the shame and suffering of his earthly life, Jehovah calls the
Adonai, our Lord, to the repose and honours of his celestial seat. His
work is done, and he may sit; it is well done, and he may sit at his
right hand; it will have grand results, and he may therefore quietly
wait to see the complete victory which is certain to follow. The
glorious Jehovah thus addresses the Christ as our Saviour; for, says
David, he said "unto my Lord." Jesus is placed in the seat of power,
dominion, and dignity, and is to sit there by divine appointment while
Jehovah fights for him, and lays every rebel beneath his feet. He sits
there by the Father's ordinance and call, and will sit there despite all
the raging of his adversaries, till they are all brought to utter shame
by his putting his foot upon their necks. In this sitting he is our
representative. The mediatorial kingdom will last until the last enemy
shall be destroyed, and then, according to the inspired word, "cometh
the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God even the
Father." The work of subduing the nations is now in the hand of the
great God, who by his Providence will accomplish it to the glory of his
Son; his word is pledged to it, and the session of his Son at his right
hand is the guarantee thereof; therefore let us never fear as to the
future. While we see our Lord and representative sitting in quiet
expectancy, we, too, may sit in the attitude of peaceful assurance, and
with confidence await the grand outcome of all events. As surely as
Jehovah liveth Jesus must reign, yea, even now he is reigning, though
all his enemies are not yet subdued. During the present interval,
through which we wait for his glorious appearing and visible millennial
kingdom, he is in the place of power, and his dominion is in no
jeopardy, or otherwise he would not remain quiescent. He sits because
all is safe, and he sits at Jehovah's right hand because omnipotence
waits to accomplish his will. Therefore there is no cause for alarm
whatever may happen in this lower world; the sight of Jesus enthroned in
divine glory is the sure guarantee that all things are moving onward
towards ultimate victory. Those rebels who now stand high in power shall
soon be in the place of contempt, they shall be his footstool. He shall
with ease rule them, he shall sit and put his foot on them; not rising
to tread them down as when a man puts forth force to subdue powerful
foes, but retaining the attitude of rest, and still ruling them as
abject vassals who have no longer spirit to rebel, but have become
thoroughly tamed and subdued.

[Psa 110:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#002)

"The Lord shall send the rod of thy strength out of Zion." It is in and
through the church that for the present the power of the Messiah is
known. Jehovah has given to Jesus all authority in the midst of his
people, whom he rules with his royal sceptre, and this power goes forth
with divine energy from the church for the ingathering of the elect, and
the subduing of all evil. We have need to pray for the sending out of
the rod of divine strength. It was by his rod that Moses smote the
Egyptians, and wrought wonders for Israel, and even so whenever the Lord
Jesus sends forth the rod of his strength, our spiritual enemies are
overcome. There may be an allusion here to Aaron's rod which budded and
so proved his power; this was laid up in the ark, but our Lord's rod is
sent forth to subdue his foes. This promise began to be fulfilled at
Pentecost, and it continues even to this day, and shall yet have a
grander fulfilment. O God of eternal might, let the strength of our Lord
Jesus be more clearly seen, and let the nations see it as coming forth
out of the midst of thy feeble people, even from Zion, the place of
thine abode. "Rule thou in the midst off thine enemies;" as he does
whenever his mighty sceptre of grace is stretched forth to renew and
save them. Moses' rod brought water out of the flinty rock, and the
gospel of Jesus soon causes repentance to flow in rivers from the once
hardened heart of man. Or the text may mean that though the church is
situated in the midst of a hostile world, yet it exerts a great
influence, it continues to manifest an inward majesty, and is after all
the ruling power among the nations because the shout of a king is in her
midst. Jesus, however hated by men, is still the King of kings. His rule
is over even the most unwilling, so as to overrule their fiercest
opposition to the advancement of his cause. Jesus, it appears from this
text, is not inactive during his session at Jehovah's right hand, but in
his own way proves the abiding nature of his kingdom both in Zion and
from Zion, both among his friends and his foes. We look for the clearer
manifestation of his almighty power in the latter days; but even in
these waiting times we rejoice that to the Lord all power is given in
heaven and in earth.

[Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)

"Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, in the beauties of
holiness from the womb of the morning: thou hast the dew of thy youth."
In consequence of the sending forth of the rod of strength, namely, the
power of the gospel, out of Zion, converts will come forward in great
numbers to enlist under the banner of the Priest-King. Given to him of
old, they are his people, and when his power is revealed, these hasten
with cheerfulness to own his sway, appearing at the gospel call as It
were spontaneously, even as the dew comes forth in the morning. This
metaphor is further enlarged upon, for as the dew has a sparkling
beauty, so these willing armies of converts have a holy excellence and
charm about them; and as the dew is the lively emblem of freshness, so
are these converts full of vivacity and youthful vigour, and the church
is refreshed by them and made to flourish exceedingly. Let but the
gospel be preached with divine unction, and the chosen of the Lord
respond to it like troops in the day of the mustering of armies; they
come arrayed by grace in shining uniforms of holiness, and for number,
freshness, beauty, and purity, they are as the dewdrops which come
mysteriously from the morning's womb. Some refer this passage to the
resurrection, but even if it be so, the work of grace in regeneration is
equally well described by it, for it is a spiritual resurrection. Even
as the holy dead rise gladly into the lovely image of their Lord, so do
quickened souls put on the glorious righteousness of Christ, and stand
forth to behold their Lord and serve him. How truly beautiful is
holiness! God himself admires it. How wonderful also is the eternal
youth of the mystical body of Christi As the dew is new every morning,
so is there a constant succession of converts to give to the church
perpetual juvenility. Her young men have a dew from the Lord upon them,
and arouse in her armies an undying enthusiasm for him whose "locks are
bushy and black as a raven" with unfailing youth. Since Jesus ever
lives, so shall his church ever flourish. As his strength never faileth,
so shall the vigour of his true people be renewed day by day. As he is a
Priest-King, so are his people all priests and kings, and the beauties
of holiness are their priestly dress, their garments for glory and for
beauty: of these priests unto God there shall be an unbroken succession.
The realisation of this day of power during the time of the Lord's
tarrying is that which we should constantly pray for; and we may
legitimately expect it since he ever sits in the seat of honour and
power, and puts forth his strength, according to his own word, "My
Father worketh hitherto, and I work."

[Psalms 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 110:4</span></span>

4 The Lord hath sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a priest for ever
after the order of Melchizedek.

We have now reached the heart of the Psalm, which is also the very
centre and soul of our faith. Our Lord Jesus is a Priest-King by the
ancient oath of Jehovah: "he glorified not himself to be made a high
priest," but was ordained thereunto from of old, and was called of God a
high priest after the order of Melchizedek. It must be a solemn and a
sure matter which leads the Eternal to swear, and with him an oath fixes
and settles the decree for ever; but in this case, as if to make
assurance a thousand times sure, it is added, "and will not repent." It
is done, and done for ever and ever; Jesus is sworn in to be the priest
of his people, and he must abide so even to the end, because his
commission is sealed by the unchanging oath of the immutable Jehovah. If
his priesthood could be revoked, and his authority removed, it would be
the end of all hope and life for the people whom he loves; but this sure
rock is the basis of our security - the oath of God establishes our
glorious Lord both in his priesthood and in his throne. It is the Lord
who has constituted him a priest for ever, he has done it by oath, that
oath is without repentance, is taking effect now, and will stand
throughout all ages: hence our security in him is placed beyond all
question.

The declaration runs in the present tense as being the only time with
the Lord, and comprehending all other times. "Thou art," i.e., thou wast
and art, and art to come, in all ages a priestly King. The order of
Melchizedek's priesthood was the most ancient and primitive, the most
free from ritual and ceremony, the most natural and simple, and at the
same time the most honourable. That ancient patriarch was the father of
his people, and at the same time ruled and taught them; he swayed both
the sceptre and the censer, reigned in righteousness, and offered
sacrifice before the Lord. There has never arisen another like to him
since his days, for whenever the kings of Judah attempted to seize the
sacerdotal office they were driven back to their confusion; God would
have no king-priest save his son. Melchizedek's office was exceptional;
none preceded or succeeded him; he comes upon the page of history
mysteriously; no pedigree is given, no date of birth, or mention of
death; he blesses Abraham, receives tithe, and vanishes from the scene
amid honours which show that he was greater than the founder of the
chosen nation. He is seen but once, and that once suffices. Aaron and
his seed came and went; their imperfect sacrifice continued for many
generations, because it had no finality in it, and could never make the
comers thereunto perfect. Our Lord Jesus, like Melchizedek, stands forth
before us as a priest of divine ordaining; not made a priest by fleshly
birth, as the sons of Aaron; he mentions neither father, mother, nor
descent, as his right to the sacred office; he stands upon his personal
merits, by himself alone; as no man came before him in his work, so none
can follow after; his order begins and ends in his own person, and in
himself it is eternal, "having neither beginning of days nor end of
years." The King-priest has been here and left his blessing upon the
believing seed, and now he sits in glory in his complete character,
atoning for us by the merit of his blood, and exercising all power on
our behalf.

"O may we ever hear thy voice

In mercy to us speak,

And in our Priest we will rejoice,

Thou great Melchizedek."

[Psalms 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 110:5</span></span>

5 The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of
his wrath.

6 He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the
dead bodies: he shall wound the heads over many countries.

7 He shall drink of the brook in the way; therefore shall he lift up the
head.

The last verses of this Psalm we understand to refer to the future
victories of the Priest-King. He shall not for ever sit in waiting
posture, but shall come Into the fight to end the weary war by his own
victorious presence. He will lead the final charge in person; his own
right hand and his holy arm shall get unto him the victory.

[Psa 110:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#005)

"The Lord at thy right hand shall strike through kings in the day of his
wrath." Now that he has come into the field of action, the infinite
Jehovah comes with him as the strength of his right hand. Eternal power
attends the coming of the Lord, and earthly power dies before it as
though smitten through with a sword. In the last days all the kingdoms
of the earth shall be overcome by the kingdom of heaven, and those who
dare oppose shall meet with swift and overwhelming ruin. What are kings
when they dare oppose the Son of God? A single stroke shall suffice for
their destruction. When the angel of the Lord smote Herod there was no
need of a second blow; he was eaten of worms and gave up the ghost.
Concerning the last days, we read of the Faithful and True, who shall
ride upon a white horse, and in righteousness judge and make war, "Out
of his mouth goeth a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
nations: and he shall rule them with a rod of iron, and he treadeth the
winepress of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God."

[Psa 110:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#006)

"He shall judge among the heathen," or, among the nations. All nations
shall feel his power, and either yield to it joyfully or be crushed
before it. "He shall fill the places with the dead bodies." In the
terrible battles of his gospel all opponents shall fall till the field
of fight is heaped high with the slain. This need not be understood
literally, but as a poetical description of the overthrow of all
rebellious powers and the defeat of all unholy principles. Yet should
kings oppose the Lord with weapons of war, the result would be their
overwhelming defeat and the entire destruction of their forces. Read in
connection with this prophecy the passage which begins at [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017) and runs on to the end of the
chapter. Terrible things in righteousness will be seen ere the history
of this world comes to an end. "He shall wound the heads over many
countries." He will strike at the greatest powers which resist him, and
wound not merely common men, but those who rule and reign. If the
nations will not have Christ for their Head, they shall find their
political heads to be powerless to protect them. Or the passage may be
read, "he has smitten the head over the wide earth." The monarch of the
greatest nation shall not be able to escape the sword of the Lord; nor
shall that dread spiritual prince who rules over the children of
disobedience be able to escape without a deadly wound. Pope and priest
must fall, with Mahomet and other deceivers who are now heads of the
people. Jesus must reign and they must perish.

[Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007)

"He shall drink of the brook in the way." So swiftly shall he march to
conquest that he shall not stay for refreshment, but drink as he hastens
on. Like Gideon's men that lapped, he shall throw his heart into the
fray and cut it short in righteousness, because a short work will the
Lord make in the earth. "Therefore shall he lift up the head." His own
head shall be lifted high in victory, and his people, in him, shall be
upraised also. When he passed this way before, he was burdened and had
stern work laid upon him; but in his second advent he will win an easy
victory; afore-time he was the man of sorrows, but when he comes a
second time his head will be lifted in triumph. Let his saints rejoice
with him. "Lift up your heads, for your redemption draweth nigh." In the
latter days we look for terrible conflicts and for a final victory. Long
has Jesus borne with our rebellious race, but at length he will rise to
end the warfare of long-suffering, by the blows of justice. God has
fought with men's sins for their good, but he will not always by his
Spirit strive with men; he will cease from that struggle of
long-suffering love, and begin another which shall soon end in the final
destruction of his adversaries. O King-priest, we who are, in a minor
degree, king-priests too, are full of gladness because thou reignest
even now, and wilt come ere long to vindicate thy cause and establish
thine empire for ever. Even so, come quickly. Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 111](psa111)

</div>
