<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to04)  [Next](to06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

# CHAPTER II

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">A new view of the Kantian problem. The books of Hinton. The "space-sense" and its evolution. A system for the development of a sense of the fourth dimension by exercises with colored cubes. The geometrical conception of space. Three perpendiculars—why three? Can everything existing be measured by three perpendiculars? The indices of existence. Reality of ideas. Insufficient evidence of the existence of matter and motion. Matter and motion are only logical concepts, like "good" and "evil."</span> |

</div>

 

AS already stated, Kant propounded the problem, but gave no solution of
it, nor did he point the way to a solution. And not one of the known
commentators, interpreters, followers or adversaries of Kant has found a
solution, or the way to it.

I find the first flashes of a right understanding of the Kantian
problem, and the first suggestions in regard to a possible way toward
its solution, in the attempts at a new treatment of the problem of space
and time, involving the concept of the "fourth dimension" and higher
dimensions in general. An interesting synopsis of many things developed
in this direction is that of C. H. Hinton, author of the books, *A New
Era of Thought*, and *The Fourth Dimension*.

Hinton notes, among other things, that in commenting upon Kantian ideas,
only their negative side is usually insisted upon, namely, the fact that
we can cognize things in a sensuous way, in terms of space and time
only, is regarded *as an obstacle*, hindering us from seeing what things
in themselves really are, preventing the possibility of cognizing them
as they are, imposing upon them that which is not inherent in them,
shutting them off from us.

<span class="small">But \[says Hinton\] if we take Kant's statement
simply as it is—not seeing in the spatial conception a *hindrance* to
right receptivity—that we *apprehend things by means of space*—then it
is equally allowable to consider our space sense not as a negative
condition, *hindering* our perception of the world, but as a positive
means *by which* the mind grasps its experiences, i.e., by which we
cognize the world.</span>

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

There is, in so many books in which the subject is treated, a certain
air of despondency—as if this space apprehension were a kind of veil
which shut us off from nature. But there is no need to adopt this
feeling. The first postulate of this book is a full recognition of the
fact that it is by means of space that we apprehend what is.

Space is the instrument of the mind.

Very often a statement which seems to be most deep and abstruse and hard
to grasp, is simply the form into which deep thinkers have thrown a very
simple and practical observation. And for the present let us look on
Kant's great doctrine of space from a practical point of view, and it
comes to this—it is important to develop the space sense, for it is the
means by which we think about real things.

Now according to Kant \[Hinton goes on to say\] the space sense, or the
intuition of space, is the most fundamental power of the mind. But I do
not find anywhere a systematic and thorough-going education of the space
sense. It is left to be organized by accident. Yet the special
development of the space sense makes us acquainted with a whole series
of new conceptions.

Fichte, Schelling, Hegel, have developed certain tendencies and have
written remarkable books, but the true successors of Kant are Gauss and
Lobachevsky.

For if our intuition of space is the means whereby we apprehend, then it
follows that there may be different kinds of intuitions of space. Who
can tell what the absolute space intuition is? This intuition of space
must be colored, so to speak, by the conditions (of psychical activity)
of the being which uses it.

By a remarkable analysis the great geometers above mentioned have shown
that space is not limited as ordinary experience would seem to inform
us, but that we are quite capable of conceiving different kinds of
space.

(*A New Era of Thought*.)           

Hinton invented a complicated system for the education and development
of the space sense by means of exercises with groups the cubes of
different colors. The books above mentioned are devoted to the
exposition of this system. In my opinion Hinton's exercises are
interesting from a theoretical standpoint, but they are practically
valuable only for such as have the same turn of mind as Hinton's own.

Exercises of the mind according to his system must first of all lead to
the development of the ability to *imagine objects*, not as the eye sees
them, i.e., in perspective, but as they are geometrically—to learn to
imagine the cube, for example, simultaneously from all sides. Moreover
such a development of the imagination

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

as overcomes the illusions of perspective results in the expansion of
the limits of consciousness, thus creating *new conceptions* and
augmenting *the faculty for perceiving analogies*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Kant established the fact that the development of knowledge under the
existing conditions of receptivity will not bring us any closer to
things in themselves. But there are theories asserting that it is
possible, if desired, to change the very conditions of receptivity, and
thus to approach the true substance of things. In the books above
referred to, Hinton tries to unite the scientific foundations of such
theories.

Our space as we ordinarily think of it is conceived as limited—not in
extent, but in a certain way which can only be realized when we think of
our ways of measuring space objects. It is found that there are only
three independent directions in which a body can be measured—it must
have height, length and breadth, but it has no more than these
dimensions, if any other measurement be taken in it, this new
measurement will be found to be compounded of the old measurements.

It is impossible to find a point in the body which could not be arrived
at by travelling in combinations of the three directions already taken.

But why should space be limited to three independent directions?

Geometers have found that there is no reason why bodies which we can
measure should thus be limited. As a matter of fact all the bodies which
we can measure are thus limited. So we come to this conclusion, that the
space which we use for conceiving ordinary objects in the world is
limited to three dimensions. *But it might be possible for there to be
beings living in a world such that they would conceive a space of four
dimensions*. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

It is possible to say a great deal about space of higher dimensions than
our own, and to work out analytically many problems which suggest
themselves. But can we conceive four-dimensional space in the same way
in which we can conceive our own space? Can we think of a body in four
dimensions as a unit having properties in the same way as we think of a
body having a definite shape in the space with which we are familiar?

There is really no more difficulty in conceiving four-dimensional
shapes, when we go about it in the right way, than in conceiving the
idea of solid shapes, nor is there any mystery at all about it.

When the faculty to apprehend in four dimensions is acquired—or rather
when it is brought into consciousness—for it exists in every

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

one in imperfect form—a new horizon opens. The mind acquires a
development of power, and in this use of ampler space as a mode of
thought, a path is opened by using that very truth which, when first
stated by Kant, seemed to close the mind within such fast limits. Our
perception is subject to the condition of being in space. But space is
not limited as we at first think.

The next step after having formed this power of conception in ampler
space, is to investigate nature and see what phenomena are to be
explained by four-dimensional relations.

The thought of past ages has used the conception of a three-dimensional
space, and by that means has classified many phenomena and has obtained
rules for dealing with matters of great practical utility. The path
which opens immediately before us in the future is that of applying the
conception of four-dimensional space to the phenomena of nature, and of
investigating what can be found out by this new means of apprehension. .
. .

For development of knowledge it is necessary to separate the
*self-elements*, i.e., the personal elements which we put in everything
cognized by us, from *that which is cognized*, in order that our
attention may not be distracted (upon ourselves) from the properties
which we, in substance, [perceive](errata.htm#6).

Only by getting rid of the *self-elements* in our receptivity do we put
ourselves in a position in which we can propound sensible questions.
Only by getting rid of the notion of a circular motion of the sun around
the earth (i.e., around *us*—*self-element*) do we prepare our way to
study the sun as it really is.

But the worst about a self-element is that its presence is never dreamed
of till it is got rid of.

In order to understand what the *self-element* in our receptivity means,
imagine ourselves to be translated suddenly to another part of the
universe, and to find there intelligent beings and to hold conversation
with them. If we told them that we came from this world, and were to
describe the sun to them, saying that it was a bright, hot body which
moved around us, they would reply: "*You have told us something about
the sun, but you have also told us something about yourselves*.". . .

Therefore, desiring to tell something about the sun, we shall first of
all get rid of the *self-element* which is introduced into our knowledge
of the sun by the movement of the earth, upon which we are, round it. .
. .

One of our serious pieces of work will be to get rid of the
self-elements *in the knowledge of the arrangement of objects*.

The relations of our universe or our space with regard to the wider
universe of four-dimensional space are altogether undetermined. The real
relationship will require a great deal of study to apprehend, and when
apprehended *will seem as natural to us as the position of the earth
among the other planets seems to us now*. . . .

I would divide studies of arrangement into two classes: those which

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

create the faculty of arrangement, and those which use it and exercise
it. Mathematics exercises it, but I do not think it creates it; and
unfortunately, in mathematics as it is now often taught, the pupil is
launched into a vast system of symbols: the whole use and meaning of
symbols (namely, as means to acquire a clear grasp of facts) is lost to
him. . . .

Of the possible units which will serve for the study of arrangement, I
take the cube; and I have found that whenever I took any other unit I
got wrong, puzzled, and lost my way. With the cube one does not get
along very fast, but everything is perfectly obvious and simple, and
builds up into a whole of which every part is evident. . . .

Our work then will be this: a study, by means of cubes, of the facts of
arrangement; and the process of learning will be an active one of
actually putting up the cubes. Thus we will bring our minds into contact
with nature.

(*A New Era of Thought*.)

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Taking all these things into consideration, we should try to define
clearly our understanding of those sides of our receptivity dealt with
by Kant.

What is space?

Taken as object, that is, perceived by our consciousness, space is for
us *the form of the universe* or the form of the matter in the universe.

Space possesses an infinite extension in all directions. But it can be
measured in only three directions independent of one another—in length,
breadth, and height; these directions we call the dimensions of space,
and we say that our space has three dimensions: it is three-dimensional.

By *independent direction* we mean in this case a line at right angles
to another line.

Our geometry (or the science of measurement of *the earth*, or matter in
space) knows *only three* such lines, which are mutually at right angles
to one another and not parallel among themselves.

But why three only, and not ten or fifteen?

This we do not know.

And here is another very significant fact: either because of some
mysterious property of the universe, or because of some mental

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

limitation, we cannot even imagine to ourselves more than three
independent directions.

But we speak of the universe as infinite, and because the first
condition of infinity is infinity *in all directions* and in all
possible relations, so we must presuppose in space an infinite number of
dimensions: that is, we must presuppose an infinite number of lines
perpendicular and not parallel to each other; and yet out of these lines
we know, *for some reason*, only three.

It is usually in some such guise that the question of higher
dimensionality appears to normal human consciousness.

Since we cannot construct more than three mutually independent
perpendiculars, and if the three-dimensionality of our space is
conditional upon this, we are forced to admit the indubitable fact of
the limitedness of our space in relation to geometrical possibilities:
though of course if the properties of space are created by some
limitation of consciousness, then the limitedness lies in ourselves.

No matter what this limitedness depends on, it is a fact that it exists.

A given point can be the vertex of only *eight* independent
tetrahedrons. Through a given point it is possible to draw only three
perpendicular and not parallel straight lines.

Upon this as a basis, we define the *dimensionality* of space by the
number of lines it is possible to draw in it which are mutually at right
angles one with another.

The line upon which there cannot be a perpendicular, that is, *another
line*, constitutes linear, or one-dimensional space.

Upon the surface two perpendiculars are possible. This is superficial,
or two-dimensional space.

In "space" three perpendiculars are possible. This is solid, or
three-dimensional space.

The idea of the *fourth dimension* arose from the assumption that in
addition to the three dimensions known to our geometry there exists
still a fourth, for some reason unknown and inaccessible to us, i.e.,
that in addition to the three known to us, a mysterious fourth
perpendicular is possible.

This assumption is practically founded on the consideration

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

that there are things and phenomena in the world undoubtedly *really
existing*, but quite incommensurable in terms of length, breadth and
thickness, and lying as it were outside of three-dimensional space.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

By *really existing* we understand that which produces definite action,
which possesses certain functions, which appears to be the cause of
something else.

That which *does not exist* cannot produce any action, has no function,
cannot be a cause.

But there are different modes of existence. There is *physical*
existence, recognized by certain sorts of actions and functions, and
there is *metaphysical* existence, recognized by its actions and its
functions.

*A house exists*, and the *idea of good and evil* exists. But they do
not exist in like manner. One and the same method of proof of existence
does not suffice for the proof of the existence of a house and for the
proof of the existence of an idea. A house is a *physical fact*, an idea
is a *metaphysical fact*. Physical and metaphysical facts *exist*, but
they exist differently.

In order to prove the idea of a division into good and evil, i.e., a
metaphysical fact, I have only to prove *its possibility*. This is
already sufficiently established. But if I should prove that a house,
i.e., a physical fact, *may* exist, it does not at all mean that it
exists really. If I prove that a man *may* own the house it is no proof
that he owns it.

Our relation to an idea and to a house are quite different, It is
possible by a certain effort to destroy a house—to burn, to wreck it.
The house will cease to exist. But suppose you attempt to destroy, by an
effort, an idea. The more you try to contest, argue, refute, ridicule,
the more the idea is likely to spread, grow, strengthen. And
contrariwise, silence, oblivion, *non-action*, "non-resistance" will
exterminate, or in any case will weaken the idea. Silence, oblivion,
will not wreck a house, will not hurt a stone.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It is clear that
the existence of a house and that of an idea are quite different
existences.

Of such *different existences* we know very many. A book exists, and
also *the contents of a book*. Notes exist, and so does *the music that
the notes combine to make*. A coin exists, and so does *the purchasing
value of a coin*. *A word* exists, and the *energy* which it contains.

We discern on the one hand, a whole series of *physical facts*, and on
the other hand, a series of *metaphysical facts*.

As facts of the first kind exist, so also do facts of the second kind
exist, but differently.

From the usual positivist point of view it will seem naive in the
highest degree to speak of *the purchasing value of a coin* separately
from the coin; of *the energy of a word* separately from the word; of
the *contents of a book* separately from the book, and so on. We all
know that these are only "what people say," that in reality *purchasing
value*, *energy of a word*, and *contents of a book* do not exist, that
by these conceptions we only denote a series of phenomena in some way
linked with coin, word, book, but in substance quite separate from them.

But is it so?

We decided to accept nothing as given, consequently we shall not
*negate* anything as given.

We see in things, in addition to what is external, something internal.
We know that this internal element in things constitutes a continuous
part of things, usually their *principal substance*. And quite naturally
we ask ourselves, *where* is this internal element, and what does it
represent in and by itself. We see that it is not embraced within our
space. We begin to conceive of the idea of a "higher space" possessing
more dimensions than ours. Our space then appears to be somehow a part
of higher space, i.e., we begin to believe that we know, feel, and
measure only part of space, that part which is measurable in terms of
length, width and height.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

As was said before, we usually regard space as a form of the universe,
or as a form of the matter of the universe. To make this

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

clear it is possible to say that a "cube" is the form of the matter in a
cube; a "sphere" is the form of the matter in a sphere; "space"—an
infinite sphere—is the form of the entire matter of the universe.

H. P. Blavatsky, in *The Secret Doctrine*, has this to say about space:

<span class="small">The superficial absurdity of assuming that Space
itself is measurable in any direction is of little consequence. The
familiar phrase (the fourth dimension of space) can only be an
abbreviation of the fuller form—the "*Fourth dimension of Matter in
Space*.". . . The progress of evolution may be destined to introduce us
to new characteristics of matter. . . ." <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)</span>

But the formula defining "space" as "the form of matter in the universe"
suffers from this deficiency, that there is introduced in it the concept
of "matter," i.e., *the unknown*.

I have already spoken of that "dead-end siding," x=y, y=x, to which all
attempts at the physical definition of matter inevitably lead.

Psychological definitions lead to the same thing.

In a well-known book, *The Psychology of the Soul*, A. I. Herzen says:

We call matter everything which directly or indirectly offers resistance
to motion, directly or indirectly produced by us, manifesting a
remarkable analogy with our *passive* states.

And we call force (motion) that which directly or indirectly
communicates movement to us or to other bodies, thus manifesting the
greatest similitude to our *active* states.

Consequently, "matter" and "motion" are something like projections of
our active and passive states. It is clear that it is possible to define
the passive state only in terms of the active, and the active in terms
of the passive—again two unknowns, defining one another.

E. Douglas Fawcett, in an article entitled *Idealism and the Problem of
Nature* in *The Quest* (April, 1910), discusses matter from this point
of view.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

Matter (like force) does not give us any trouble. We know all about it,
for the very good reason that *we invented it*. By "matter" we think of
sensuous objects. It is mental change of concrete but too complicated
facts, which are difficult to deal with.

Strictly speaking, matter exists only as a concept. Truth to tell, the
character of matter, even when treated only as a conception, is so
unobvious that the majority of persons are unable to tell us exactly
what they mean by it.

An important fact is here brought to light: *matter* and *force* are
just *logical concepts*, i.e., only *words* accepted for the designation
of a lengthy series of complicated facts. It is difficult for us,
educated almost exclusively along physical lines, to understand this
clearly, but in substance it may be stated as follows: Who has seen
*matter* and *force*, and when? We see things, see phenomena. *Matter*,
independently of the substance from which a given thing is made, or of
which it consists, we have never seen and never shall see; but *the
given substance* is not quite *matter*, this is *wood*, or *iron* or
*stone*. Similarly, we shall never see *force* separately from *motion*.
What does this mean? It means that "*matter*" and "*force*" are just
such abstract conceptions as "value" or "labor," as "the purchasing
value of a coin" or the "contents" of a book; it means that matter is
"such stuff as dreams are made of." And because we can never touch this
"stuff" and can see it only in dreams, so we can never touch physical
matter, nor see, nor hear, nor photograph it, *separately from the
object*. We cognize things and phenomena which are bad or good, but we
never cognize "*matter*" and "*force*" separately from *things* and
*phenomena*.

Matter is as much an abstract conception as are truth, good and evil.

It is as impossible to put matter or any part of matter into a chemical
retort or crucible as it is impossible to sell "*Egyptian darkness*" in
vials. However as it is said that "Egyptian darkness" is sold as a black
powder in Athos, or elsewhere, therefore perhaps somewhere, by some one,
even matter has been seen. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

In order to discuss questions of this order a certain preparation is
necessary, or a high degree of intuition; but unfortunately it is
customary to consider fundamental questions of cosmogony very lightly.

A man easily admits his incompetency in music, dancing, or higher
mathematics, but he always maintains the privilege of *having an
opinion* and being a judge of questions relating to "first principles."

It is difficult to discuss with such men.

For how will you answer a man who looks at you in perplexity, knocks on
the table with his fingers and says, "*This is matter*. I *know* it;
*feel!* How can *it* be an abstract conception?" To answer this is as
difficult as to answer the man who says: "I *see* that the sun rises and
sets!"

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Returning to the consideration of space, we shall under no circumstances
introduce unknown quantities in the definition of it. We shall define it
only in terms of those two *data* which we decided to accept at the very
beginning.

*The world and consciousness* are the facts which we decided to
recognize as existing.

By the world we mean the combination of all the causes of our sensations
in general.

By the material world we mean the combination of causes of *a definite
series of sensations*: those of sight, hearing, touch, smell, taste,
sensations of weight, and so on.

*Space* is either a property of the world or a property of our knowledge
of the world.

*Three-dimensional space* is either a property of the *material world*
or a property of our receptivity of the material world.

Our inquiry is confined to the problem: how shall we approach the study
of space?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[25:1](to05.htm#fr_1) Italics by P. D. Ouspensky.
*Transl*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[31:1](to05.htm#fr_2) "The Secret Doctrine," The
Theosophical Publishing Society. Third Edition, p. 271, vol. I.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[32:1](to05.htm#fr_3) This is irony which the
English speaking may easily fail to understand. Some unscrupulous monks
of the monastery of Athos, famous throughout Greece and Russia, made a
practice, it is said, of selling "Egyptian darkness" in little vials,
thus making capital out of the credulity and piety of the illiterate
Russian pilgrims who were wont to visit this [monastery](errata.htm#7)
in great numbers. *Transl*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](to06)

</div>
