<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to07)  [Next](to09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

# CHAPTER V

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Four-dimensional space. "Temporal body"—*Linga Sharîra*. The form of a human body from birth to death. Incommensurability of three-dimensional and four-dimensional bodies. Newton's fluents. The unreality of constant quantities in our world. The right and the left hands in three-dimensional and in four-dimensional space. Difference between three-dimensional and four-dimensional space. Not two different spaces but different methods of receptitivity of one and the same world.</span> |

</div>

FOUR-DIMENSIONAL space, if we try to imagine it to ourselves, will be
the infinite repetition of our space, of our infinite three-dimensional
sphere, as a line is the infinite repetition of a point.

Many things that have been said before will become much clearer to us
when we dwell on the fact that the fourth dimension must be sought for
*in time*.

It will become clear what is meant by the fact that it is possible to
regard a four-dimensional body as the tracing of the movement in space
of a three-dimensional body in a direction not confined within that
space. Now the direction not confined in three-dimensional space in
which any three-dimensional body moves—this is the direction of time.
Any three-dimensional body, *existing*, is at the same time moving in
time and leaves as a tracing of its movement the temporal, or
four-dimensional body. We never see or feel this body, because of the
limitations of our receptive apparatus, but we see the *section* of it
only, which section we call the three-dimensional body. Therefore we are
in error in thinking that the three-dimensional body is in itself
something real. It is the *projection* of the four-dimensional body—its
picture—the image of it *on our plane*.

The four-dimensional body is the infinite number of three-dimensional
bodies. That is, the four-dimensional body is the infinite number of
*moments of existence* of the three-dimensional one—its states and
positions. The three-dimensional body which we see

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

appears as a single figure—one of a series of pictures on a
cinematographic film as it were.

Four-dimensional space (time) is really the distance between the forms,
states, and positions of one and the same body (and different bodies,
i.e., those seeming different to us). It separates those states, forms,
and positions each from the other, and it binds them also into some to
us incomprehensible whole. This incomprehensible whole can be formed in
time out of one physical body—and out of *different* bodies.

It is easier for us to imagine *the temporal whole* as related to *one*
physical body.

If we consider the physical body of a man, we shall find in it besides
its "matter" *something*, it is true, changing, but undoubtedly *one and
the same* from birth until death.

This something is the *Linga-Sharîri* of Hindu philosophy, i.e., *the
form on which our physical body is moulded*. (H. P. Blavatsky: *The
Secret Doctrine*.) Eastern philosophy regards the physical body as
something *impermanent* which is in a condition of perpetual interchange
with its surroundings. The particles come and go. *After one second* the
body is already not absolutely the same as it was one second before.
Today it is in a considerable degree not that which it was yesterday.
After seven years it is *a quite different body*. But despite all this,
*something* always persists from birth to death, changing its aspect a
little, but remaining the same. This is the *Linga-Sharîra*.

The *Linga-Sharîra* is the form, *the image*: it changes, but remains
the same. That image of a man which we are able to represent to
ourselves is not the *Linga-Sharîra*. But if we try to represent to
ourselves mentally the image of a man from birth to death, with all the
particularities and traits of childhood, manhood and senility, as if
[extended](errata.htm#9) in time, when it will be the *Linga-Sharîra*.

Form pertains to all *things*. We say that everything consists of
*matter and form*. Under the category of "matter," as already stated,
the cause of a lengthy series of mixed sensations is predicated, but
matter without form is not comprehensible to us; we cannot even *think*
of matter without form. But we can think and imagine form without
matter.

The *thing*, i.e., the union of form and matter, is never *constant*;

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

it always changes in the course of time. This idea afforded Newton the
possibility of building his theory of *fluents* and *fluxions*.

Newton came to the conclusion that *constant quantities* do not exist in
nature. Variables do exist—*flowing*, *fluents* only. The velocities
with which different fluents change were called by Newton *fluxions*.

From the standpoint of this theory all things known to us—men, plants,
animals, planets—are fluents, and they differ by the magnitude of their
fluxions. But the *thing*, changing continuously in time, sometimes very
much, and quickly, as in the case of a living body for example, still
remains *one and the same*. The body of a man in youth, and the body of
a man in senility—these are one and the same, though we know that in the
old body there is not one atom left that was in the young one. The
matter changes, but *something* remains one under all changes, this
something is the *Linga-Sharîra*. Newton's theory is valid for the
three-dimensional world existing in time. In this world there is nothing
constant. All is variable because every consecutive moment the thing is
already not that which it was before. We never see the *Linga-Sharîra*,
we see always its parts, and they appear to us variable. But if we
observe more attentively we shall see that it is an illusion. Things of
three dimensions are unreal and variable. They cannot be real because
they do not exist in reality, just as the *imaginary sections* of a
solid do not exist. Four-dimensional bodies alone are real.

In one of the lectures contained in the book, *A Pluralistic Universe*,
Prof. James calls attention to Prof. Bergson's remark that science
studies always only the *t* of the *universe*, i.e., not the universe in
its entirety, but the *moment*, the "temporal section" of the universe.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The properties of four-dimensional space will become clearer to us if we
compare in detail three-dimensional space with the surface, and discover
the differences existing between them.

Hinton, in his book, *A New Era of Thought*, examines these differences
very attentively. He represents to himself, on a plane, two equal
rectangular triangles, cut out of paper, the right angles of which are
placed in opposite directions. These triangles will be

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

equal, but *for some reason* quite different. The right angle of one is
directed to the right, that of the other to the left. If anyone wants to
make them quite similar, it is possible to do so only with the help of
three-dimensional space. That is, it is necessary to take one triangle,
turn it over, and put it back on the plane. Then they will be two equal,
and *exactly similar* triangles. But in order to effect this, it was
necessary to take one triangle from the plane into three-dimensional
space, and turn it over in that space. If the triangle is left on the
plane, then it will never be possible to make it identical with the
other, keeping the same relation of angles of the one to those of the
other. If the triangle is merely rotated in the plane this similarity
will never be established. In our world there are figures quite
analogous to these two triangles.

We know certain shapes which are equal the one to the other, which are
exactly similar, and yet which we cannot make fit into the same portion
of space, either practically or by imagination.

If we look at our two hands we see this clearly, though the two hands
represent a complex case of a symmetrical similarity. Now there is one
way in which the right hand and the left hand may practically be brought
into likeness. If we take the right hand glove and the left hand glove,
they will not fit any more than the right hand will coincide with the
left hand; but if we turn one glove inside out, then it will fit. Now
suppose the same thing done with the solid hand as is done with the
glove when it is turned inside out, we must suppose it, so to speak,
pulled through itself. . . . If such an operation were possible, the
right hand would be turned into an exact model of the left hand. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

But such an operation would be possible in the higher dimensional space
only, just as the overturning of the triangle is possible only in a
space relatively higher than the plane. Even granting the existence of
four-dimensional space, it is possible that the turning of the hand
inside out and the pulling of it through itself is a practical
impossibility on account of causes independent of geometrical
conditions. But this does not diminish its value as an example. Things
like the turning of the hand inside out are possible theoretically in
four-dimensional space because in this space different, and even distant
points of our space *and time* touch, or have the possibility of
contact. All points of a sheet of paper lying on a table are separated

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

one from another, but by taking the sheet from the table it is possible
to fold it in such a way as to bring together any given points. If on
one corner is written *St. Petersburg*, and on another *Madras*, nothing
prevents the putting together of these corners. And if on the third
corner is written the year 1812, and on the fourth 1912, these corners
can touch each other too. If on one corner the year is written in red
ink, and the ink has not yet dried, then the figures may imprint
themselves on the other corner. And if afterwards the sheet is
straightened out and laid on the table, it will be perfectly
incomprehensible, to a man who has not followed the operation, how the
figure from one corner could transfer itself to another corner. For such
a man the. possibility of the contact of remote points of the sheet will
be incomprehensible, and it will remain incomprehensible so long as he
thinks of the sheet in two-dimensional space only. The moment he
imagines the sheet in three-dimensional space this possibility will
become real and obvious to him.

In considering the relation of the fourth dimension to the three known
to us, we must conclude that our geometry is obviously insufficient for
the investigation of higher space.

As before stated, a four-dimensional body is as incommensurable with a
three-dimensional one as *a year* is incommensurable with *St.
Petersburg*.

It is quite clear why this is so. The four-dimensional body consists of
on infinitely great number of three-dimensional bodies; accordingly,
there cannot be a common measure for them. The three-dimensional body,
in comparison with the four-dimensional one is *equivalent to the point*
in comparison with the line.

And just as the point is incommensurable with the line, so is the line
incommensurable with the surface; as the surface is incommensurable with
the solid body, so is the three-dimensional body incommensurable with
the four-dimensional one.

It is clear also why the geometry of three dimensions is insufficient
for the definition of *the position* of the region of the fourth
dimension in relation to three-dimensional space.

Just as in the geometry of one dimension, that is, upon the line, it is
impossible to define *the position* of the surface, the side of which
constitutes the given line; just as in the geometry of two dimensions,

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

i.e., upon the surface, it is impossible to define the position of the
solid, the side of which constitutes the given surface, so in the
geometry of three dimensions, in three-dimensional space, it is
impossible to define a four-dimensional space. Briefly speaking, as
planimetry is insufficient for the investigation of the problems of
stereometry, so is stereometry insufficient for four-dimensional space.

As a conclusion from all of the above we may repeat that every point of
our space is the section of a line in higher space, or as B. Riemann
expressed it: the material atom is the entrance of the fourth dimension
into three-dimensional space.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

For a nearer approach to the problem of higher dimensions and of higher
space it is necessary first of all to understand the constitution and
properties of the higher dimensional region in comparison with the
region of three dimensions. Then only will appear the possibility of a
more exact investigation of this region, and a classification of the
laws governing it.

What is it that it is necessary to understand?

It seems to me that first of all it is necessary to understand that we
are considering not *two* regions spatially different, and not two
regions of which one (again spatially, "geometrically") constitutes a
part of the other, but two methods of receptivity of one and the same
*unique* world of a space which is unique.

Furthermore it is necessary to understand that all objects known to us
exist not only in those categories in which they are perceived by us,
but in an infinite number of others in which we do not and cannot sense
them. And we must learn first *to think* things in other categories, and
then so far as we are able, to imagine them therein. Only after doing
this can we possibly develop the faculty to apprehend them in higher
space—and to sense "higher" space itself.

Or perhaps the first necessity is the direct perception of everything in
the outside world which does not fit into the frame of three dimensions,
which exists independently of the categories of time and
space—everything that for this reason we are accustomed to consider as
non-existent. If *variability* is an indication of the three-dimensional
world, then let us search for *the constant* and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

thereby approach to an understanding of the four-dimensional world.

We have become accustomed to count as really existing only that which is
measurable in terms of length, breadth and height; but as has been shown
it is necessary to expand the limits of the *really existing*.
Mensurability is too rough an indication of existence, because
mensurability itself is too conditioned a conception. We may say that
for any approach to the exact investigation of the higher dimensional
region the certainty obtained by the immediate sensation is probably
indispensable; that much that is *immeasurable* exists just as really
as, and even more really than, much that is measurable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[55:1](to08.htm#fr_5) C. H. Hinton, "A New Era of
Thought," p. 44.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](to09)

</div>
