<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to10)  [Next](to12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   |
|-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Our receptive apparatus. Sensation. Perception. Conception. Intuition. Art as the language of the future. To what extent does the three-dimensionality of the world depend upon the properties of our receptive apparatus? What might prove this interdependence? Where may we find the real affirmation of this interdependence? The animal psyche. In what does it differ from the human? Reflex action. The irritability of the cell. Instinct. Pleasure-pain. Emotional thinking. The absence of concepts. Language of animals. Logic of animals. Different degrees of psychic development in animals. The goose, the cat, the dog and the monkey.</span> |

</div>

IN order exactly to define the relation of our psyche to the external
world, and to determine what, in our receptivity of the world, belongs
to it, and what belongs to ourselves, let us turn to elementary
psychology and examine the mechanism of our receptive apparatus.

The fundamental unit of our receptivity is *a sensation*. This sensation
is an elementary change in the state of our psyche, produced, as it
seems to us, either by some change in the state of the external world in
relation to our consciousness, or by a change in the state of our psyche
in relation to the external world. Such is the teaching of physics and
psycho-physics. Into the consideration of the correctness or
incorrectness of the construction of these sciences I shall not enter.
Suffice it to define a sensation as an *elementary* change in the state
of the psyche—as the element, that is, as the fundamental unit of this
change. Feeling the sensation we assume that it appears, so to speak, as
the reflection of some change in the external world.

The sensations felt by us leave a certain trace in our memory. The
accumulating memories of sensations begin to blend in consciousness into
groups, and according to their similitude tend to associate, to sum up,
to be opposed; the sensations which are usually felt in close connection
with one another will arise in memory in the

same connection. Gradually, out of the memories of sensations,

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

*perceptions* are compounded. Perceptions—these are so to speak the
group memories of sensations. During the compounding of perceptions,
sensations are polarizing in two clearly defined directions. The first
direction of this grouping will be *according to the character of
sensations*. (The sensations of a yellow color will combine with the
sensations of a yellow color; sensations of a sour taste with those of a
sour taste.) The second direction will be *according to the time of the
reception of sensations*. When various sensations, constituting a single
group, and compounding *one* perception, enter simultaneously, then the
memory of this definite group of sensations is ascribed to a common
cause. This "common cause" is projected into the outside world as the
object, and it is assumed that the given perception itself reflects the
real properties of this object. Such group remembrance constitutes
*perception*, the perception, for example, of a tree—*that* tree. Into
this group enter the green color of the leaves, their smell, their
shadows, their rustle in the wind, etc. All these things taken together
form as it were a focus of rays coming out of the psyche, gradually
concentrated upon the outside object and coinciding with it either well
or ill.

In the further complication of the psychic life, the memories of
perception proceed as with the memories of sensations. Mingling
together, the memories of perceptions, or the "images of perceptions,"
combine in various ways: they sum up, they stand opposed, they form
groups, and in the end give rise to concepts.

Thus out of various sensations, experienced (in groups) at different
times, a child gets the perception of a tree (that tree), and
afterwards, out of the images of perceptions of different trees there
emerges *the concept of a tree*, i.e., not "that tree," but trees in
general.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The formation of perceptions leads to the formation of *words*, and the
appearance of *speech*.

The beginning of speech may appear on the lowest level of psychic life,
during the period of living by sensations, and it will become more
complex during the period of living by perceptions;

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

but unless there be concepts it will not be *speech* in the true meaning
of the word.

On the lower levels of psychic life certain sensations can be expressed
by certain sounds. Therefore it is possible to express common
impressions of horror, anger, pleasure. These sounds may serve as
signals of danger, as commands, demands, threats, etc., but it is
impossible to say much by means of them.

In the further development of speech, if words or sounds express
*perceptions*, as in the case of children, this means that the given
sound or the given word designates only that object to which it refers.
For each new *similar* object must exist another *new* sound, or a new
word. If the speaker designates *different* objects by one and the same
sound or word, it means that in his opinion the objects are the same, or
*that knowingly* he is calling different objects by the same name. In
either case it will be difficult to understand him, and such speech
cannot serve as an example of clear speech. For instance, if a child
call a tree by a certain sound or word, having in view *that tree* only,
and not knowing other trees at all, then any new tree which he may see
he will call by a new word, or else he will take it for the same tree.
The speech in which "words" correspond to perceptions is as it were made
up of proper nouns. There are no appellative nouns; and not only
substantives, but verbs, adjectives and adverbs have the character of
"proper nouns"—that is, they apply to a *given* action, to a *given*
quality, or to a given property.

The appearance of words of *a common meaning* in human speech signifies
the appearance of concepts in consciousness.

Speech consists of words, each word expressing a concept. Concept and
word are in substance one and the same thing; only the first (the
concept) represents, so to speak, the inner side, and the second (the
word) the outer side. Or, as says Dr. R. M. Bucke (the author of the
book *Cosmic Consciousness*, about which I shall have much to say later
on), "A word (i.e., concept) is the *algebraical* sign of a thing."

<span class="small">It has been noticed thousands of times that the
brain of a thinking man does not exceed in size the brain of a
non-thinking wild man in anything like the proportion in which the mind
of the thinker exceeds the mind of the savage. The reason is that the
brain of a Herbert Spencer has very little more work to do than has the
brain of a native Australian, for</span>

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="small">this reason, that Spencer does all his
characteristic mental work by signs or counters which stand for
concepts, while the savage does all or nearly all his by means of
cumbersome recepts. The savage is in a position comparable to that of
the astronomer who makes his calculations by arithmetic, while Spencer
is in the position of one who makes them by algebra. The first will fill
many great sheets of paper with figures and go through immense labor;
the other will make the same calculations on an envelope and with
comparatively little mental work. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)</span>

In our speech words express concepts or ideas. By ideas are meant
broader concepts, not representing the group sign of similar
perceptions, but embracing various groups of perceptions, or even
*groups of concepts*. Therefore an idea is a complex or an abstract
concept.

In addition to the simple sensations of these sense organs (color,
sound, touch, smell and taste), in addition to the simple emotions of
pleasure, pain, joy, anger, surprise, wonder, curiosity and many others,
there is passing through our consciousness a series of complex
sensations and higher (complex) emotions (moral, esthetic, religious).
The content of emotional feelings, even the simplest—to say nothing of
the complex—can never be wholly confined to concepts or ideas, and
therefore can never be correctly or exactly expressed in words. Words
can only allude to it, point to it. The interpretation of emotional
feelings and *emotional understanding* is the problem of *art*. In
combinations of words, in their meaning, their rhythm, their music—the
combination of meaning, rhythm and music; in sounds, colors, lines,
forms—men are creating a new world, and are attempting therein to
express and transmit that which they feel, but which they are unable to
express and transmit simply in words, i.e., in concepts. The emotional
tones of life, i.e., of "feelings," are best transmitted by music, but
it cannot express concepts, i.e., thought. Poetry endeavors to express
both music and thought together. The combination of feeling and thought
of high tension leads to a higher form of psychic life. Thus in art we
have already the first experiments in *a language of the future*. Art
anticipates a psychic evolution and divines its future forms.

At the present time an average man, taken as a norm, has attained to
three units of psychic life: *sensation*, *perception*, and
*conception*. Furthermore, observation reveals the fact that some people
at certain

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

times acquire a new, fourth unit of psychic life, which different
authors and different schools name differently, but in which an element
of knowledge or ideas is always united with an emotional element.

If Kant's ideas are correct, if space with its characteristics is a
property of our consciousness, and not of the external world, then the
three-dimensionality of the world must in this or some other manner
depend upon the constitution of our psychic apparatus.

It is possible to put the question concretely in the following manner:
What bearing upon the three-dimensional extension of the world has the
fact that in our psychical apparatus we discover the categories above
described—sensations, perceptions and concepts?

We possess *such* a psychical apparatus and the world is
*three-dimensional*. How is it possible to establish the fact that the
three-dimensionality of the world depends upon *such* a constitution of
our psychical apparatus?

This could be proven or disproven *undeniably* only with the aid of
experiments.

If we could *change our psychic apparatus* and should then discover that
*the world around us was changing*, this would constitute for us the
proof of the dependence of the properties of space upon the properties
of our consciousness.

For example if we could make the above-mentioned higher form of psychic
life (which appears now accidentally as it were and depends upon
insufficiently studied conditions) just as definite, exact, and *subject
to our will* as is the concept; and if the number of characteristics of
space increased, i.e., if space became four-dimensional instead of being
three-dimensional, this would affirm our presupposition, and would prove
Kant's contention that space with its properties is a *form of our
sensuous receptivity*.

Or if we could diminish the number of units of our psychic life, and
deprive ourselves or someone else of *conceptions*, leaving the psyche
to act by perceptions and sensations only; and if by so doing the number
of characteristics of the space surrounding us diminished; i.e., if for
the person subjected to the test the world became two-dimensional
instead of three-dimensional, and indeed

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

one-dimensional as a result of a still greater limitation of the psychic
apparatus, by depriving the person of perceptions—this would affirm our
presupposition, and Kant's idea could be considered proven.

That is to say, Kant's idea would be proven *experimentally* if we could
be convinced that for the being possessing sensations only, the world is
one-dimensional; for the being possessing sensations and perceptions the
world is two-dimensional; and for the being possessing, in addition to
concepts and ideas, the higher forms of knowledge the world is
four-dimensional.

Or, more exactly, Kant's thesis in regard to the subjectivity of
space-perception could be regarded as proven (a) if for the being
possessing sensations only, our entire world with all its variety of
forms should seem *a single line*; if the universe of this being should
possess but one dimension, i.e., should this being be one-dimensional in
the properties of its receptivity; and (b) if for the being possessing,
in addition to the [faculty](errata.htm#13) of feeling sensations, the
faculty of forming perceptions, the world should have a two-dimensional
extension; if all our world with its blue sky, clouds, green trees,
mountains and precipices, should seem to him one plane; if the universe
of this being should have only two dimensions, i.e., if this being were
two-dimensional in the properties of its receptivity.

More briefly, Kant's thesis would be proven could we be made to see that
for the conscious being the number of characteristics of the world
changes in accordance with the changes of its psychic apparatus.

To perform such an experiment, effecting the *diminution* of psychic
characteristics is not possible under ordinary conditions—we cannot
arbitrarily limit our own, or anyone else's psychic apparatus.

Experiments with *the augmentation* of psychic characteristics have been
made and are recorded, but in consequence of many diverse causes they
are insufficiently convincing. The chief reason for this is that the
augmentation of psychic faculties yields, first of all, so much of
*newness* in the psychic realm that this newness obscures *the changes*
proceeding simultaneously in the

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

previous perception of the world; one feels the new, but is not capable
of defining the difference *exactly*.

The entire body of teachings of religio-philosophic movements have as
their avowed or hidden purpose, *the expansion of consciousness*. This
also is the aim of *mysticism* of every age and of every faith, the aim
of occultism, and of the Oriental *yoga*. But the question of the
expansion of consciousness demands special study; the final chapters of
this book will be dedicated to it.

For the present, in proof of the above stated propositions with regard
to the change of the world in relation to psychic changes, it is
sufficient to consider the assumption concerning the possibility of a
smaller number of psychic characteristics.

If experiments in this direction are impossible, perhaps observation may
furnish what we seek.

Let us put the question: Are there not beings in the world *standing
toward us in the necessary relation*, whose psyche is of a lower grade
than ours?

Such psychically inferior beings undoubtedly exist. These are animals.

Of the difference between the psychical nature of an animal and of a man
we know very little: the usual "conversational" psychology deals with it
not at all. Usually we deny altogether that animals have minds, or else
we ascribe to them our own psychology, but "limited"—though *how* and
*in what* we do not know. Again, we say that animals do not possess
reason, but are governed by instinct. As to what exactly we mean by
*instinct* we do not ourselves know. I am speaking not alone of popular,
but so-called "scientific" psychology.

Let us try to discover what instinct is, and learn something about
animal psychology. First of all let us analyze the *actions* of animals,
and see wherein they differ from ours. If these actions are instinctive,
what inference is to be drawn from the fact?

What are those actions in general, and how do they differ?

In the actions of living beings within the limits of our usual
observation we discriminate between those which are reflex, instinctive,
rational and automatic.

Reflex actions are simply *responses by motion*, reactions upon external
irritations, taking place always in the same way, regardless

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of their utility or futility, expediency or inexpediency in any given
case. Their origin and laws are due to the simple *irritability* of a
cell.

What is the irritability of a cell, and what are these laws?

The irritability of a cell is defined as its faculty to respond to
external irritation by a motion. Experiments with the simplest
mono-cellular organisms, have shown that this *irritability* acts
according to definite laws. The cell responds by a motion to outside
irritation. The force of the responsive motion increases as the force of
the irritation is intensified, but in no definite proportionality. In
order to provoke the responsive movement the irritation must be of a
sufficient intensity. Each experienced irritation leaves a *certain
trace* in the cell, making it more receptive to the new irritations. In
this we see that the cell responds to the *repetitive* irritation of an
*equal force* by a more forceful motion than the first one. And if the
irritations be repeated further the cell will respond to them by more
and more forceful motions, up to a certain limit. Having reached this
limit the cell experiences *fatigue*, and responds to the same
irritation by more and more feeble reactions. It is as if the cell
becomes accustomed to the irritation. It becomes for the cell part of *a
constant environment*, and it ceases to react, because it is reacting
generally only to *changes* in conditions which are constant. If from
the very beginning the irritation is so weak that it fails to provoke
the responsive motion, it nevertheless leaves in the cell a certain
*invisible* trace. This can be inferred from the fact that by repeating
these weak irritations, the cell finally begins to react to them.

Thus *in the laws of irritability* we observe, as it were, the
beginnings of memory, fatigue, and habit. The cell produces the
illusion, if not of a conscious and reasoning being, at any rate of a
remembering being, habit-forming, and susceptible to fatigue. If we can
be thus deceived by a cell, how much more liable are we to be deceived
by the greater complexity of animal life.

But let us return to the analysis of *actions*. By the reflex actions of
an organism are meant actions in which either an entire organism or its
separate parts acts *as a cell*, i.e., within the limits of the law of
variability. We observe such actions both in men and in animals. A man
shudders all over from unexpected cold, or

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

from a touch. His eyelids wink at the swift approach or touch of some
object. The freely-hanging foot of a person in a sitting position moves
forward if the leg be struck on the tendon below the knee. These
movements proceed independently of consciousness, they may even proceed
counter to consciousness. Usually consciousness registers them as
accomplished facts. Moreover these movements are not at all governed by
expediency. The foot moves forward in answer to the blow on the tendon
even though a knife or a fire be in front of it.

By instinctive actions are meant actions governed by expediency, but
made without conscious *selection* or without conscious *aim*.

They appear with the appearance of a sensuous tincture to sensations,
i.e., from that moment when the sensation begins to be associated with a
sense of pleasure or pain.

As a matter of fact, before the dawn of human intellect, throughout the
entire animal kingdom "actions" were governed by the tendency to receive
or to retain pleasure, or to escape pain.

We may declare with entire assurance that instinct is a *pleasure-pain*
which, like the positive and negative poles of an electro-magnet, repels
and attracts the animal in this or that direction, compelling it to
perform whole series of complex actions, sometimes expedient to such a
degree that they appear to be sensible, and not only sensible, but
founded upon foresight of the future, almost upon some clairvoyance,
like the migration of birds, the building of nests for the young which
have not as yet appeared, the finding of the way south in the autumn,
and north in the spring, etc.

But all these actions are explained in reality by a single instinct,
i.e., by the subservience to *pleasure-pain*.

During periods in which [millenniums](errata.htm#14) may be regarded as
days, by selection among all animals the types have been perfected,
living along the lines of this subservience. This subservience is
expedient, that is, the results of it lead to the *desired* goal. Why
this is so is clear. Had the sense of pleasure arisen from that which is
detrimental, the given species could not live, and would quickly die
out. Instinct is the guide of its life, but only as long as instinct is
expedient solely; just as soon as it ceases to be expedient it becomes
the guide of death, and the species soon dies out. Normally
"pleasure-pain" is pleasant or unpleasant not *for* the usefulness

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

or the harm which may result, but because of it. Those influences which
proved to be beneficial for a given species during the vegetative life,
with the transition to the more active and complex animal life begin to
be sensed as *pleasant*, the detrimental influences as unpleasant. As
regards two different species, one and the same influence—say a certain
temperature—may be useful and pleasant for one, and for another
detrimental and unpleasant. It is clear, therefore, that the
subservience to "pleasure-pain" must be governed by expediency. The
pleasant is pleasant because it is *beneficial*, the unpleasant is
unpleasant because it is *harmful*.

Next after instinctive actions follow those actions which are rational
and automatic.

By rational action is meant such an action as is known to the acting
subject *before its execution*; such an action as the acting subject can
*name*, *define*, *explain*, can show its cause and purpose *before its
execution*.

Automatic actions are actions which have been rational for a given
subject, but because of frequent repetitions they have become habitual
and are performed unconsciously. The acquired automatic actions of
trained animals were previously rational not in the animal, but in the
trainer. Such actions often appear as rational but this is a complete
illusion. The animal remembers the sequence of actions, and therefore
its actions appear to be considered and expedient. They really were
considered, *but not by it*. Automatic actions are often confounded with
instinctive ones—in reality they resemble instinctive ones, but there is
an enormous difference between them. Automatic actions are developed by
the subject during its own life, and for a long time before they become
automatic it must be conscious of them. Instinctive actions, on the
other hand, are developed during the life-periods of the *species*, and
the aptitude for them is transmitted in a definite manner by heredity.
*It is possible* to call automatic actions instinctive actions worked
out for itself by a given subject. *It is impossible*, however, to call
instinctive actions automatic actions worked out by a given species,
because they never were rational in different individuals of a given
species, but were compounded out of a series of complex reflexes.

REFLEXES, INSTINCTIVE AND "RATIONAL" ACTIONS, ALL MAY BE REGARDED AS
REFLECTED, i.e., AS NOT SELF-ORIGINATED. BOTH THESE AND OTHERS, AND
STILL A THIRD CLASS, COME NOT FROM MAN

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> HIMSELF, BUT FROM
THE OUTSIDE WORLD. MAN IS THE TRANSMITTING OR TRANSFORMING STATION FOR
CERTAIN FORCES: ALL OF HIS ACTIONS IN THESE THREE CATEGORIES ARE CREATED
AND DETERMINED BY HIS IMPRESSIONS OF THE OUTSIDE WORLD. MAN IN THESE
THREE SPECIES OF ACTIONS IS, IN SUBSTANCE, AN AUTOMATON, UNCONSCIOUS OR
CONSCIOUS OF HIS ACTIONS. NOTHING COMES FROM HIM HIMSELF.

With the exception of sensations of the outer world, only the higher
category of actions, i.e., *conscious actions* <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) appears to depend on something else. But the
aptitude for such actions is seldom met with—only in some few persons
whom it is possible to describe as MEN OF A HIGHER TYPE.

Having established the differences between various kinds of actions, let
us return to the question propounded before: *In what manner does the
psyche of an animal differ from that of a human being?* Out of the four
categories of actions the two lower ones are accessible to animals. The
category of "conscious" actions is inaccessible to animals. This is
proven first of all by the fact that animals have not the power of
speech as we have it.

As has been shown before, the possession of speech is indissolubly bound
up with the possession of concepts. Therefore we may say that animals do
not possess concepts.

Is this true, and is it possible to possess the instinctive mind without
possessing concepts?

All that we know about the instinctive mind teaches us that it acts
possessing sensations and perceptions only, and that in the lower grades
it possesses sensation only. The being which does its thinking by means
of perceptions possesses the instinctive mind which gives it the
possibility of exercising that *choice* between the perceptions
presented to it which produces the impression of judging and reasoning.
In reality the animal does not reason its actions, but lives by its
emotions, subject to that emotion which happens to be strongest.
*Although indeed*, in the life of the animal, acute moments sometimes
occur when it is confronted with the necessity of *choosing* among a
certain series of perceptions. At such moments its actions may seem to
be quite reasoned out. For example, the animal, being put in a situation
of danger acts often very cautiously and wisely,

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

but in reality its actions are directed not by thoughts but principally
by emotional memory and motor perceptions. It has been previously shown
that emotions are expedient, and that the subjection to them in a normal
being must be expedient. Any perception of an animal, any recollected
image, is bound up with some emotional sensation or emotional
remembrance—there are no non-emotional, cold thoughts in the animal
soul, or even if there are, these are in-active, and incapable of
becoming the springs of action.

Thus all actions of animals, sometimes highly complex, expedient, and
apparently reasoned, we can explain without attributing to them
concepts, judgments, and the power of reasoning. Indeed, we must
recognize that animals have no *concepts*, and the proof of this is that
they have no speech.

If we take two *men* of different nationalities, different races, each
ignorant of the language of the other, and put them together, they will
find a way to communicate at once.

One perhaps draws a circle with his finger, the other draws another
circle beside it. By these means they have already established that they
can understand one another. If a thick wall were put between them it
would not hamper them in the least—one of them knocks three times, and
the other knocks three times in response.

The communication is established. The idea of communicating with the
inhabitants of other planets is founded upon the idea of light signals.
It is proposed to make on the earth an enormous lighted circle or a
square to attract the attention of the inhabitants of Mars and to be
answered by them by means of the same signal. We live side by side with
animals and yet cannot establish such communication. Evidently the
distance between us and them is greater, and the difference deeper, than
between *men* divided by the ignorance of language, stone walls, and
enormous distances.

Another proof of the absence of concepts in the animal is its inability
to use a lever, i.e., its incapacity to come independently to an
understanding of the principle of the action of the lever. The usual
objection that an animal cannot operate a lever because its organs (paws
et cetera)are not adapted to such actions does not hold for the reason
that almost any animal can be *taught* to operate a lever. This shows
that the difficulty is not in the organs.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The animal simply
cannot of itself come to a comprehension of the idea of a lever.

The invention of the lever immediately divided primitive man from the
animal, and it was inextricably bound up with the appearance of
concepts. The psychic side of the understanding of the action of a lever
consists in the construction of a correct syllogism. Without
constructing the syllogism correctly it is impossible to understand the
action of a lever. Having no concepts it is impossible to construct the
syllogism. The syllogism in the psychic sphere is literally the same
thing as the lever in the physical sphere.

His mastery of the lever differentiates man as strongly from the animal
as does speech. If some learned Martians were looking at the earth, and
should study it objectively from afar by means of a telescope, not
hearing speech, nor entering into the subjective world of the
inhabitants of the earth, nor coming in contact with them, they would
divide the beings living on the earth into two groups: those acquainted
with the action of the lever, and those unacquainted with such action.

The psychology of animals is in general very misty to us. The infinite
number of observations made concerning all animals, from elephants to
spiders, and the infinite number of anecdotes about the mind, spirit,
and moral qualities of animals change nothing of all that. We represent
animals to ourselves either as living automatons or as stupid men.

We too much confine ourselves within the circle of our own psychology.
We fail to imagine any other, and think involuntarily that the only
possible sort of soul is such as we ourselves possess. But it is this
illusion which prevents us from understanding life. If we could
participate in the psychic life of an animal, understand *how* it
perceives, thinks and acts, we would find much of unusual interest. For
example, could we represent to ourselves, and re-create mentally, *the
logic* of an animal, it would greatly help us to understand our own
logic and the laws of our own thinking. Before all else we would come to
understand the conditionality and relativity of our own logical
construction and with it the conditionality of our entire conception of
the world.

An animal would have a peculiar logic. It indeed would not be logic in
the true meaning of the word, because logic presupposes the existence of
*logos*, i.e., of a word or concept.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

Our usual logic, by which we live, without which "the shoemaker will not
sew the boot," is deduced from the simple scheme formulated by Aristotle
in those writings which were edited by his pupils under the common name
of *Organon*, i.e., the "Instrument" (of thought). This scheme consists
in the following:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*A is A*.  
*A is not Not-A*.  
*Everything is either A or Not-A*.

</div>

The logic embraced in this scheme—the logic of Aristotle—is quite
sufficient for *observation*. But for *experiment* it is insufficient,
because the experiment proceeds *in time*, and in the formulæ of
Aristotle time is not taken into consideration. This was observed at the
very dawn of the establishment of our experimental science—observed by
Roger Bacon, and formulated several centuries later by his famous
namesake, Francis Bacon, Lord Verulam, in the treatise *Novum
Organum*—the "New Instrument" (of thought). Briefly, the formulation of
Bacon may be reduced to the following:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*That which was A, will be A*.  
*That which was Not-A, will be Not-A*.  
*Everything was and will be, either A or Not-A*.

</div>

Upon these formula, acknowledged or unacknowledged, all our scientific
experience is built, and upon them, too, is shoe-making founded, because
if a shoemaker could not be sure that the leather bought yesterday would
be leather tomorrow, in all probability he would not venture to make a
pair of shoes, but would find some other more profitable employment.

The formulæ of logic, such as those both of Aristotle and of Bacon, are
themselves deduced from the observation of facts, and do not and cannot
include anything except the contents of these facts. They are not the
laws of *reasoning*, but the laws of the outer world as it is perceived
by us, or the laws of our relation to the outer world.

Could we represent to ourselves the "logic" of an animal we should
understand its relation to the outer world. Our cardinal error
concerning the psychology of animals consists in the fact that

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

we ascribe to them our own logic. We assume that *logic is one*, that
our logic is something absolute, existing outside and independent of us,
while as a matter of fact, logic but formulates the laws of the
relations of our psyche to the outside world, or the laws which our
psyche discovers in the outside world. Another psyche will discover
other laws.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The logic of animals will differ from ours, first of all, from the fact
that it will not be *general*. It will exist separately for each case,
for each perception. Common properties, class properties, and the
generic and specific signs of *categories* will not exist for animals.
Each object will exist in and by itself, and all its properties will be
the specific properties of it alone.

*This house* and *that house* are entirely different objects for an
animal, because one is *its* house and the other is a *strange* house.
Generally speaking, we recognize objects by the signs of their
similarity; the animal must recognize them by the signs of their
difference. It remembers each object by that sign which had for it the
greatest emotional meaning. In such a manner, i.e., by their emotional
tones, perceptions are stored in the memory of an animal. It is clear
that such perceptions are much more difficult to store up in the memory,
and therefore the memory of an animal is more burdened than ours,
although in the amount of knowledge and in the quantity of that which is
preserved in the memory, it stands far below us.

After seeing an object once, we refer it to a certain class, genus and
species, place it under this or that concept, and fix it in the mind by
means of some "word," i.e., algebraical symbol; then by another,
defining it, and so on.

The animal has no concepts: it has not that mental algebra by the help
of which we think. It must know always *a given object*, and must
remember it with all its signs and peculiarities. No forgotten sign will
return. For us, on the other hand, the principal signs are contained in
the concept with which we have correlated that object, and we can find
it in our memory by means of the sign for it.

From this it is clear that the memory of an animal is more burdened than
ours, and *this* is the principal hindering cause to the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

mental evolution of an animal. Its mind is *too busy*. It *has no time*
to develop. The mental development of a child may be arrested by making
it memorize a series of words or a series of figures. The animal is in
just such a position. Herein lies the explanation of the strange fact
that an animal is *wiser when it is young*.

In man the flower of intellectual force blooms at a mature age, often
even in senility; in the animal, quite the reverse is true. It is
*receptive* only while it is young. At maturity its development stops,
and in old age it undoubtedly degenerates.

The logic of animals, were we to attempt to express it by means of
formulæ similar to those employed by Aristotle and Bacon would be as
follows:

The formula *A is A*, the animal will understand. It will say (as it
were) *I am I*, etc.; but the formula, *A is not Not-A*, it will be
incapable of understanding. *Not Not-A* is indeed the concept.

The animal will reason thus:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*This is this.  
That is that.  
This is not that*.

</div>

or,

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*This man is this man.  
That man is that man.  
This man is not that man*.

</div>

I shall be obliged to return to the logic of animals later on; for the
present it is only necessary to establish the fact that the psychology
of animals is peculiar, and differs in a fundamental way from our own.
And not only is it peculiar, but it is decidedly *manifold*.

Among the animals known to us, even among domestic animals, the
psychological differences are so great as to differentiate them into
entirely separate planes. We ignore this, and place them all under a
single rubric—"*animals*."

A goose, having entangled its foot in a piece of watermelon rind, drags
it along by the web and thus cannot get it out, but it never thinks of
raising its foot. This indicates that its mind is so vague

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

that it does not know its own body, scarcely distinguishing between it
and other objects. This would happen neither with a dog nor with a cat.
They know their bodies very well. But in relation to outside objects the
dog and the cat differ widely. I have observed a dog, a "very
intelligent" setter. When the little rug on which he slept got folded
and was uncomfortable to sleep on, he understood that the nuisance was
*outside of him*, that it was in the rug, and in a certain definite
position of the rug. Therefore he caught the rug in his teeth, turned it
and pushed it here and there, the while growling, sighing, and moaning
until some one came to his aid, for he was never able to rectify the
difficulty.

With the cat such a question could not even appear. The cat knows her
body very well, but everything outside of herself she takes as her due,
as given. To *correct* the outside world, to accommodate it to her own
comfort, never comes into the cat's head. Perhaps this is because she
lives more in another world, in the world of dreams and fantasies, than
in this. Accordingly, if there were something wrong with her bed the cat
would turn herself about repeatedly until she could lie down
comfortably, or she would go and lie in another place.

The monkey would spread the rug very easily indeed.

Here we have *four* beings, all quite different; and this is only one
example: it would be possible to collect others by the hundred. And
meanwhile there is for us just one "animal." We mix together many things
that are entirely different; our "divisions" are often incorrect, and
this hinders us when it comes to the examination of ourselves. To
declare that manifest differences determine the "evolutionary grade,"
that animals of one type are "higher" or "lower" than those of another,
would be entirely false. The dog and the monkey by their *intellect*,
their aptness to imitate, and by reason of the dog's fidelity to man,
are as it were higher than the cat, but the cat is infinitely superior
to them in intuition, esthetic sense, independence, and force of will.
The dog and the monkey manifest themselves *in toto*: all that they have
is seen. The cat, on the other hand, is not without reason regarded as a
magical and occult animal. In her there is much hidden of which she
herself does not know. If one speaks in terms of evolution, it is more
correct to say that the cat and the dog are animals of different
evolutions, just as in all

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

probability, not one, but several evolutions are simultaneously going
forward in humanity.

The recognition of several independent and from one standpoint
equivalent evolutions, developing entirely different properties, would
lead us out of a labyrinth of endless contradictions in our
understanding of *man* and would show us the path to the only real and
important evolution for us—the evolution into superman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[83:1](to11.htm#fr_8) R. M. Bucke. "Cosmic
Consciousness," p. 12.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[90:1](to11.htm#fr_9) Generally speaking, we do
not observe these actions, because we confuse them with "rational"
actions; the principal cause of this confusion is that we call
"rational" actions conscious—which they are not.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](to12)

</div>
