<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to14)  [Next](to16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

# CHAPTER XII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Analysis of phenomena. What defines different orders of phenomena for us? Methods and forms of the transition of one order of phenomena into another. Phenomena of motion. Phenomena of life, Phenomena of consciousness. The central question of our knowledge of the world: what mode of phenomena is generic and produces the others? Can the origin of everything lie in motion? The laws of transformation of energy. Simple transformation and liberation of latent energy. Different liberating forces of different orders of phenomena. The force of mechanical energy, the force of a living cell, the force of an idea. Phenomena and noumena of our world.</span> |

</div>

THE order of phenomena is defined for us, first, by the method of
apprehending them, and second, by the form of the transition of one
order of phenomena into another. According to our method of apprehending
them and by the form of their transition into one another we discern
three orders of phenomena:

*Physical phenomena* (i.e., all phenomena studied by physics and
chemistry); *phenomena of life* (all phenomena studied by biology and
its subdivisions); *psychic phenomena* (thoughts, feelings, sensations,
etc.).

We know physical phenomena by means of our sense organs or by the aid of
apparatus. Many recognized physical phenomena are not observed directly;
they are merely projections of the assumed causes of our sensations, or
those of the causes of other phenomena. Physics recognizes the existence
of many phenomena which have never been observed by the sense organs or
by means of apparatus (the temperature of absolute zero etc., for
example).

The phenomena of life, as such, are not observed directly. We cannot
project them as the cause of definite sensations. But certain *groups of
sensations* force us to assume in certain groups of physical phenomena
the presence of the phenomena of life. It may be said that a certain
grouping of physical phenomena forces us to assume the presence of the
phenomena of life. We define the cause of the phenomena of life as a
something not capable of being

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

grasped by the senses or by apparatus, and incommensurable with the
causes of physical sensations. A sign of the presence of the phenomena
of life consists in the power of organisms to reproduce themselves,
i.e., the multiplication of them in the same forms, the indivisibility
of separate units and their especial adaptability, which is not observed
outside of life.

Psychic phenomena are the feelings and the thoughts that we know in
ourselves by direct sensation. We assume their existence in others (1)
*from analogy* with ourselves; (2) from their manifestation in actions
and (3) from that which we gather by the aid of speech. But, as has been
shown by certain philosophical theories, it is impossible to establish
strictly objectively, the presence of consciousness other than our own.
A man establishes this usually because of his inner assurance of its
truth.

Physical phenomena transform themselves into one another completely. It
is possible to *transform* heat into light, pressure into motion, etc.
It is possible to produce any physical phenomenon from other physical
phenomena; to produce any chemical combination by the synthetic method,
combining the composite parts in proper proportions and under proper
physical conditions. Modern physics assumes electro-magnetic phenomena
as the basis of all physical phenomena. *But physical phenomena do not
transform themselves into the phenomena of life*. By no combination of
physical conditions can science create life, just as by chemical
synthesis it cannot create living matter—protoplasm. We can tell what
amount of coal is necessary to generate the certain amount of heat
necessary to transform a given quantity of ice into water; but we cannot
tell what amount of coal is necessary to create the vital energy with
which one living cell forms another living cell. In similar manner
physical, chemical and mechanical phenomena cannot themselves produce
the phenomena of consciousness, i.e., of thought. Were it otherwise, *a
rotating wheel*, after the expenditure of a certain amount of energy, or
after the lapse of a certain time, could *generate an idea*. Yet we know
perfectly well that the wheel can go on rotating for millions of years,
and no single *idea* will be produced by it at all. Thus we see that the
phenomena of motion differ in a fundamental way from the phenomena of
life and of consciousness.

The phenomena of life change into other phenomena of life, multiply
infinitely, and *transform themselves into physical phenomena*,

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

generating whole series of mechanical and chemical combinations. The
phenomena of life manifest themselves to us in physical phenomena, and
in the existence of such phenomena.

Psychic phenomena are sensed directly, and having enormous potential
force, transform themselves into physical phenomena and into
manifestations of life. We know that at the basis of our procreative
force lies *desire*—that is, a psychical state, or a phenomenon of
consciousness. *Desire* is possessed of enormous potential force. Out of
the united desire of a man and of a woman, a whole nation may come into
being. At the root of the active, constructive, creative force of man,
that can change the course of rivers, unite oceans, cut through
mountains, lies desire, i.e., again a psychical state, or a phenomenon
of consciousness. Thus psychic phenomena possess even greater unifying
force with relation to physical phenomena than do the phenomena of life.

Positive philosophy affirms that all three orders of phenomena proceed
from one cause *lying within the sphere of the study of physics*. This
cause is called by different names at different times, but it is assumed
to be identical with physical energy in general.

Seriously analyzing such an affirmation, it is easily seen to be
absolutely arbitrary, and not founded upon anything. Physical phenomena
of themselves, inside the limits of our existence and observation, never
create the phenomena of life and the phenomena of consciousness.
Consequently we may with *greater* right assume that in the phenomena of
life and in the phenomena of consciousness there is something which does
not exist in physical phenomena.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

Moreover, we cannot *measure* physical, biological, and psychic
phenomena *by the same unit of measurement*. Or more correctly, we
cannot measure the phenomena of life and the phenomena of consciousness
at all. It is only the phenomena first mentioned, i.e., the physical,
that we fancy we can measure, though this is very doubtful, too.

In any case we undoubtedly know that we can express neither the
phenomena of life nor psychic phenomena in the formula of physical
phenomena; and generally speaking we have for them no formulæ at all.

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

In order to clarify the relation between phenomena of different kinds,
let us examine in detail the laws of their transformation one into
another.

First of all it is necessary to consider physical phenomena, and make a
detailed study of the conditions and properties of their transformation
one into another.

In an essay on Wundt (*The Northern Messenger*, 1888) A. L. Volinsky,
elucidating the principles of Wundt's physiological psychology, says:

The actions of sensation are provoked by the actions of irritation. But
both these actions need not be at all equal. It is possible to burn a
whole city by a spark from a cigarette. It is necessary to understand
why this is possible. Place a board upon the edge of some object
scalewise, so that it will balance. On both ends of the board put now an
equal amount of weight. The weights will not fall: although both of them
will tend to fall, they balance one another. If we lift the least weight
from one end of the board, then the other end will overbalance, and the
board will fall—i.e., the force of gravity which existed before as an
invisible tendency, will have become a visible motive force. If we put
the board and weights on the earth, the force of gravity will not
produce any action, but it will not be eliminated: it will only
transform itself into other forces.

Those forces which are only *striving* to produce motion are called
*constrained*, or *dead*, forces. The forces which are actually
manifesting themselves in certain definite actions are called free, or
live forces; but as regards free forces it is necessary to differentiate
those forces which are liberating, setting free, from the forces which
are liberated, or set free.

An enormous difference exists between the *liberation* of a force and
its *transformation* into another.

When one kind of motion transforms itself into another kind, the amount
of free force remains the same; and contrariwise, when one force
*liberates* another, the amount of free force changes. The free force of
an irritation liberates the tied-up forces of a nerve. And this
liberation of tied-up forces is proceeding at each point of the nerve.
The first motion increases like a fire, like a snow-slide carrying along
with it new and ever new drifts. It is for this reason that the action
(phenomenon) of sensation need not be exactly equal to the action of
irritation.

Let us look more broadly at the relation between liberated and
liberating forces in the different kinds of phenomena.

We shall discover that sometimes an almost negligible amount of physical
force may liberate an enormous, a colossal amount of physical energy.
But *all that we can ever assemble of physical* 

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

*force* is powerless *to liberate* a single iota of that vital energy
necessary for the independent existence of a single microscopic living
organism.

The force contained in *living organisms*, the vital force, is capable
of liberating infinitely greater amounts of vital and also of physical
energy than the force of motion.

The microscopic living cell is capable of infinite dissemination, to
evolve new species, to cover continents with vegetation, to fill the
oceans with seaweed, to build islands out of coral, to deposit powerful
layers of coal, etc., etc.

Concerning the latent energy contained in *the phenomena of
consciousness*, i.e., in thoughts, feelings, desires, we discover that
its potentiality is even more immeasurable, more boundless. From
personal experience, from observation, from history, we know that ideas,
feelings, desires, manifesting themselves, can liberate enormous
quantities of energy, and create infinite series of phenomena. An idea
can act for centuries and millenniums and only grow and deepen, evoking
ever new series of phenomena, liberating ever fresh energy. We know that
*thoughts* continue to live and act when even the very name of the man
who created them has been converted into a myth, like the names of the
founders of ancient religions, the creators of the immortal poetical
works of antiquity—heroes, leaders, prophets. Their words are repeated
by innumerable lips, their ideas are studied and commented upon. Their
preserved works are translated, printed, read, studied, staged,
illustrated. And this is done not only with the masterpieces of men of
genius, but some single little verse may live millenniums, making
hundreds of men work for it, serve it, in order to transmit it further.

Observe how much of potential energy there is in some little verse of
Pushkin or Lermontoff. This energy acts not only upon the feelings of
men, but by reason of its very existence it acts upon their will. See
how vital and immortal are the words, thoughts and feelings of
half-mythical Homer—how much of "motion" each word of his, during the
time of its existence, has evoked.

Undoubtedly each thought of a poet contains enormous potential force,
like the power confined in a piece of coal or in a living cell, but
infinitely more subtle, imponderable and potent.

This remarkable correlation of phenomena may be expressed in the
following terms: the farther a given phenomenon is from the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

visible and sensed—from the physical, the farther it is from matter—the
more there is in it of hidden force, the greater the quantity of
phenomena it can produce, can leave in its wake, the greater amount of
energy it can liberate, and so the less it is dependent upon time.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

If we would correlate all of the above with the principle of physics
that *the amount of energy is constant*, then we must state more exactly
that in the preceding discussion nothing has been said of the creation
of new energy, but of the *liberation* of latent force. And we have
found that the liberating force of life and thought is infinitely
greater than the liberating force of mechanical motion and of chemical
reactions. *The microscopic living cell is more powerful than a
volcano—the idea is more powerful than the geological cataclysm*.

Having established these differences between phenomena, let us endeavor
to discover what phenomena themselves represent, taken by themselves,
independently of our receptivity and sensation of them.

We at once discover that we know nothing about them.

We know a phenomenon just as much and just as far as it is *irritation*,
i.e., to the extent that it provokes sensation.

The positivistic philosophy sees mechanical motion or electromagnetic
energy as the basis of all phenomena. But the hypothesis of vibrating
atoms or of *units of energy*—electrons and cycles of motion,
combinations of which create different "phenomena"—is only an
hypothesis, built upon a perfectly arbitrary and artificial assumption
concerning the existence of the world in time and space. Just as soon as
we discover that the conditions of time and space are merely the
properties of our sensuous receptivity, we absolutely destroy the
validity of the hypothesis of "energy" as the foundation of everything;
because time and space are necessary for energy, i.e., it is necessary
for time and space to be properties of the world and not properties of
consciousness.

Thus in reality we know nothing about *the causes of phenomena*.

We do know that some combinations of causes, acting through the organism
upon our consciousness, produce the series of sensations which we
recognize as *a green tree*. But we do not know if

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

this perception of a tree corresponds to the real substance of the
causes which evoked this sensation.

The question concerning the relation of the phenomenon to the
*thing-in-itself*, i.e., to the indwelling reality, has been from far
back the chief and most difficult concern of philosophy. Can we,
studying phenomena, get at the very cause of them, at the very substance
of things? Kant has said definitely: No!—by studying phenomena we do not
even approach to the understanding of things in themselves. Recognizing
the correctness of Kant's view, if we desire to approach to an
understanding of things in themselves, we must seek an entirely
different method, an utterly different path from that which positive
science, which studies *phenomena*, is treading.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII](to16)

</div>
