<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to16)  [Next](to18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

# CHAPTER XIV

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">The voices of stones. The wall of a church and the wall of a prison. The mast of a ship and a gallows. The shadow of a hangman and of an ascetic. The soul of a hangman and of an ascetic. The different combinations of known phenomena in higher space. The relationship of phenomena which appear unrelated, and the difference between phenomena which appear similar. How shall we approach the noumenal world? The understanding of things outside the categories of space and time. The reality of many "figures of speech." The occult understanding of energy. The letter of a Hindu occultist. Art as the knowledge of the noumenal world. What we see and what we do not see. Plato's dialogue about the cavern.</span> |

</div>

IT seems to us that we see something and understand something. But in
reality all that proceeds around us we sense only very confusedly, just
as a snail senses confusedly the sunlight, the darkness, and the rain.

Sometimes in things we sense confusedly their difference in function,
i.e., their *real* difference.

On one occasion I was crossing the Neva with one of my friends, A, with
whom I happened to have had many conversations upon the themes touched
on in this book. We had been talking, but both fell silent as we
approached the fortress, gazing up at its walls and making probably the
same reflection. "Right there are also factory chimneys!" said A. Behind
the walls of the fortress indeed appeared some brick chimneys blackened
by smoke.

On his saying this, I too sensed *the difference* between the chimneys
and the prison walls *with unusual clearness* and like an electric
shock. I realized the *difference between the very bricks themselves*,
and it seemed to me that A realized this difference also.

Later in conversation with A, I recalled this episode, and he told me
that not only then, but *always*, he sensed these differences and was
deeply convinced of their reality. "Positivism assures itself that a
stone is a stone and nothing more," he said, "but any

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

simple woman or child knows perfectly that a stone from the wall of a
church and one from a prison wall are different things."

It seems to me also, that in considering a given phenomenon in
connection with all the chains of sequences of which it is a link, we
shall see that *the subjective sensation* of the difference between two
physically similar objects—which we are accustomed to think of only as
poetic expression, *metaphor*, and the reality of which we deny—*is
entirely real*; we shall see that these objects are *really different*,
just as different as the candle and the coin which appear as similar
circles (moving lines) in the two-dimensional world of the plane-man. We
shall see that things of the same material constitution but different in
their functions are *really different*, and that this difference goes so
deep as to *make different* the very material which is physically the
same. There are differences in stone, in wood, in iron, in paper, which
no chemistry will ever detect: but these differences exist, and there
are men who feel and understand them.

The mast of a ship, a gallows, a crucifix at a cross-roads on the
steppes—these may be made of the same kind of wood, but in reality they
are *different* objects made of *different material*. That which we see,
touch, investigate, is nothing more than "the circles on the plane" made
by the coin and the candle. They are only the *shadows* of real things,
*the substance of which is contained in their function*. The shadow of a
sailor, of a hangman, and of an ascetic may be quite similar—it is
impossible to distinguish them by their shadows, just as it is
impossible to find any difference between the wood of a mast, of a
gallows and of a cross by chemical analysis. But they are different men
and different objects—their *shadows only* are equal and similar.

And if we take men as we know them—the sailor, the hang-man, the
ascetic: men who seem to us similar and *equal*—and consider them from
the standpoint of their differences in function, we shall see that in
reality they are entirely different and that there is nothing in common
between them. They are quite different beings, belonging to different
categories, to different planes of the world between which there are no
bridges, no avenues at all. These men seem to us equal and similar
because in most cases we see only the shadows of real facts. The "souls"
of these men are actually quite different, different not only in their
quality, their

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

magnitude, their "age," as some people like now to put it, but as
different *in the very nature, origin and purpose of their existence* as
things belonging to entirely different categories can be.

When we shall begin to understand this, the general concept *man* will
take on a different meaning.

And this relation holds in the observation of all phenomena. The mast,
the gallows, the cross—these are things belonging to such different
categories, the atoms of such different objects (known only by their
functions), that there cannot be a question of any similarity at all.
Our misfortune consists in the fact that we regard the chemical
constitution of a thing as its *most real* attribute, while as a matter
of fact its true attributes must be sought for in its functions. Could
we broaden and deepen our vision of the chains of causation the links of
which are forged by our action and our conduct; could we learn to see
them not only in their narrow relation to the life of man—*to our
personal life*—but in their broad cosmical meaning; could we succeed in
finding and establishing a connection between the simple phenomena of
our life and the life of the cosmos; then without doubt in these
"simplest" phenomena would be unveiled for us an infinity of the new and
the unexpected.

For example, in this way we may come to know something entirely new
about those simple physical phenomena which we are accustomed to regard
as natural and obvious and about which we think we know something. Then,
unexpectedly, we may find that we know nothing, that everything
heretofore known about them is only an incorrect deduction from
incorrect premises. There may be revealed to us something infinitely
great and immeasurably important in such phenomena as the expansion and
contraction of solids, electrical phenomena, heat, light, sound, the
movements of the planets, the coming of day and of night, the change of
seasons, a thunderstorm, heat-lightning, etc., etc. Generally speaking,
we may find explained in the most unexpected manner the properties of
phenomena which we used to accept as given things, as not containing
anything within themselves that we could not see and understand.

The constancy, the time, the periodicity or unperiodicity of phenomena
may take on quite a new meaning and significance

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

for us. The new and the unexpected may reveal itself in the *transition*
of some phenomena into others. Birth, death, the life of a man, his
relations with other men; love, enmity, sympathies, antipathies,
desires, passions—these may unexpectedly receive illumination by an
entirely new light. It is impossible now to imagine the nature of this
*newness* which we shall sense in familiar things, and once felt it will
be difficult to understand.

But it is really only our inaptitude to feel and understand this
"newness" which divides us from it, because we are *living* in it and
amidst it. Our senses, however, are too primitive, our concepts are too
crude, for that fine differentiation of phenomena which must unfold
itself to us in higher space. Our minds, our powers of correlation and
association are insufficiently elastic for the grasping of new
relations. Therefore, the first emotion at the rising of the curtain on
"that world"—i.e., this our world, but free of those limitations under
which we usually regard it—must be of *wonderment*, and this wonderment
must grow greater and greater according to our better acquaintance with
it. And the better we know a certain thing or a certain relation of
things—the nearer, the more familiar they are to us—the greater will be
our wonder at the new and the unexpected therein revealed.

Desiring to understand the *noumenal world* we must search for *the
hidden meaning* in everything. At present we are too heavily enchained
by the habit of the positivistic method of searching always for the
*visible* cause and the *visible* effect. Under this weight of
positivistic habit it is extremely difficult for us to comprehend
certain ideas. Among other things we have difficulty in understanding
the *reality of the difference* in the noumenal world between objects of
our world which are *similar*, but different in function.

But if we desire to approach to an understanding of the noumenal world,
we must try with all our might to *notice* all those seeming,
"subjective" differences between objects which astonish us sometimes, of
which we are often *painfully aware*—those differences expressed in the
symbols and metaphors of art which are often revelations of the world of
reality. Such differences are the realities of the noumenal world, far
more real than all *maya* (illusion) of our phenomena.

We should endeavor to notice these realities and to develop

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

within ourselves the ability to feel them, because exactly in this
manner and only by such a method do we put ourselves in contact with the
noumenal world or the world of causes.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

I find an interesting example of the understanding of the *hidden*
meaning of phenomena contained in *The Occult World* in the letter of a
Hindu occultist to the author of the book, A. P. Sinnett.

We see a vast difference between the two qualities of two equal amounts
of energy expended by two men, of whom one, let us suppose, *is on his
way* to his daily quiet work, and another *on his way* to denounce a
fellow creature at the police station, while the men of science see
none; and we—not they—see a specific difference between the energy in
the motion of the wind and that of a revolving wheel.

Every thought of man upon being evolved passes into the inner world, and
becomes an active entity by associating itself, coalescing we might term
it, with an elemental—that is to say, with one of the semi-intelligent
forces of the kingdom.

If we ignore the last part of this quotation for the moment, and
consider only the first part, we shall easily see that the "man of
science" does not recognize the difference in the quality of the energy
spent by two men going, one to his work, and another to denounce
someone. For the man of science this difference is negligible: science
does not sense it and does not recognize it. But perhaps the difference
is much deeper and consists not in the difference between modes of
energy but in the difference between *men*, one of whom is able to
develop energy of one sort and another that of a different sort. Now we
have *a form of knowledge* which senses this difference perfectly, knows
and understands it. I am speaking of art. The musician, the painter, the
sculptor well understand that it is possible to walk differently—and
even impossible not to walk differently: a workman and a spy cannot walk
alike.

Better than all *the actor* understands this, or at least he should
understand it better.

The poet understands that the mast of a ship, the gallows, and the cross
are made of *different wood*. He understands the difference

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

between the stone from a church wall and the stone from a prison wall.
He hears "the voices of stones," understands the whisperings of ancient
walls, of tumuli, of mountains, rivers, woods and plains. He hears "*the
voice of the silence*," understands the psychological difference between
silences, knows that *one silence can differ from another*. And this
*poetical* understanding of the world should be developed, strengthened
and fortified, because only by its aid do we come in contact with the
true world of reality. In the real world, behind phenomena which appear
to us similar, often stand noumena so different that only by our
blindness is it possible to account for our idea of the similarity of
those phenomena.

Through such a false idea the current belief in the similarity and
equality of men must have arisen. In reality the difference between a
"hangman," a "sailor," and an "ascetic" is not an accidental difference
of position, state and heredity, as material-ism tries to assure us; nor
is it a difference between the stages of one and the same evolution, as
theosophy affirms; but it is a deep and IMPASSABLE difference—such as
exists between murder, work and prayer—involving entirely different
worlds. The representatives of these worlds may seem to us to be similar
MEN, only because we see, not them, but their shadows only.

It is necessary to accustom oneself to the thought that this difference
is not metaphysical but entirely real, more real than many *visible*
differences between things and between phenomena.

All art, in essence, consists of the understanding and representation of
these elusive differences. The phenomenal world is merely a means for
the artist—just as colors are for the painter, and sounds for the
musician—a means for the understanding of the noumenal world and for the
expression of that understanding. At the present stage of our
development we possess nothing so powerful, as an instrument of
knowledge of the world of causes, as art. The mystery of life dwells in
the fact that the *noumenon*, i.e., the hidden meaning and the hidden
function of a thing, is reflected in its *phenomenon*. A phenomenon is
merely the reflection of a noumenon in our sphere. THE PHENOMENON IS THE
IMAGE OF THE NOUMENON. It is *possible* to know the noumenon by the
phenomenon. But in this field the chemical reagents and spectroscopes
can accomplish nothing. Only that fine apparatus which is called *the
soul of an artist* can understand and feel the reflection of the

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

noumenon in the phenomenon. In art it is necessary to study
"occultism"—the hidden side of life. The artist must be a clairvoyant:
he must see that which others do not see; he must be a magician: must
possess the power to make others see that which they do not themselves
see, but which he does see.

Art sees more and farther than we do. As was said before, we usually see
nothing, we merely *feel our way*; therefore we do not notice those
differences between things which cannot be expressed in terms of
chemistry or physics. But art is *the beginning of vision*; it sees
vastly more than the most perfect apparatus can discover; and it senses
the infinite invisible facets of that crystal, one facet of which we
call man.

<span class="small">The truth is that this earth is the scene of a drama
of which we only perceive scattered portions, and in which the greater
number of the actors are invisible to us.</span>

Thus says the theosophical writer, Mabel Collins, the author of *Light
on the Path*, in a little book, *Illusions*. And this is very true: we
see only a little.

But art sees farther than merely human sight, and therefore concerning
certain sides of life art alone can speak, and has the right to speak.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

A remarkable attempt to portray our relation to the "noumenal world"—to
that "great life"—is found in Book VII of Plato's Republic. <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17)

<span class="small">Behold! human beings living in a sort of underground
den; they have been there from their childhood, and have their legs and
necks chained—the chains are arranged in such a manner as to prevent
them from turning round their heads. At a distance above and behind them
the light of a fire is blazing, and between the fire and the prisoners
there is a raised way; and you will see, if you look, a low wall built
along the way, like the screen which marionette players have before
them, over which they show the puppets. Imagine men passing along the
wall carrying vessels, which appear over the wall; also figures of men
and animals, made of wood</span>

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

and stone and various materials; and some of the passengers, as you
would expect, are talking, and some of them are silent!

That is a strange image, he said, and they are strange prisoners.

Like ourselves, I replied; and they see only their own shadows, or the
shadows of one another, which the fire throws on the opposite wall of
the cave?

True, he said; how could they see anything but the shadows if they were
never allowed to move their heads?

And of the objects which are being carried in like manner they would
only see the shadows?

Yes, he said.

And if they were able to talk with one another, would they not suppose
that they were naming what was actually before them?

Very true.

And suppose further that the prison had, an echo which came from the
other side, would they not be sure to fancy that the voice which they
heard was that of a passing shadow?

No question, he replied.

There can be no question, I said, that the truth would be to them just
nothing but the shadows of the images.

That is certain.

And now look again and see how they are released and cured of their
folly. At first, when any one of them is liberated and compelled
suddenly to go up and turn his neck around and walk and look at the
light, he will suffer sharp pains; the glare will distress him and he
will be unable to see the realities of which in his former state he had
seen the shadows; and then imagine someone saying to him, that what he
saw before was an illusion, but that now he is approaching real being
and has a truer sight and vision of more real things,—what will be his
reply? And you may further imagine that his instructor is pointing to
the objects as they pass and requiring him to name them,—will he not be
in a difficulty? Will he not fancy that the shadows which he formerly
saw are truer than the objects which are now shown to him?

Far truer.

And if he is compelled to look at the light, will he not have a pain in
his eyes which will make him turn away to take refuge in the object of
vision which he can see, and which he will conceive to be clearer than
the things which are now being shown to him?

True, he said.

And suppose once more, that he is reluctantly dragged up a steep and
rugged ascent, and held fast and forced into the presence of the sun
himself, do you not think that he will be pained and irritated, and when
he approaches the light he will have his eyes dazzled, and will not be
able to see any of the realities which are now affirmed to be the truth?

Not all in a moment, he said.

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

He will require to get accustomed to the sight of the upper world. And
first he will see the shadows best, next the reflections of men and
other objects in the water, and then the objects themselves; next he
will gaze upon the light of the moon and the stars; and he will see the
sky and the stars by night, better than the sun, or the light of the
sun, by day?

Certainly.

And at last he will be able to see the sun, and not mere reflections of
him in the water, but he will see him as he is in his own proper place,
and not in another, and he will contemplate his nature.

Certainly.

And after this he will reason that the sun is he who gives the seasons
and the years, and is the guardian of all that is in the visible world,
and in a certain way the cause of all things which he and his fellows
have been accustomed to behold?

Clearly, he said, he would come to the other first and to this
afterwards.

And when he remembered his old habitation, and the wisdom of the den and
his fellow-prisoners, do you not suppose that he would felicitate
himself on the change, and pity them?

Certainly, he would.

And if they were in the habit of conferring honors on those who were
quickest to observe and remember and foretell which of the shadows went
before, and which followed after, and which were together, do you think
that he would care for such honors and glories, or envy the possessors
of them?

Would he not say with Homer,—

"Better to be a poor man, and have a poor master," and endure anything,
than to think and live after their manner?

Yes, he said, I think that he would rather suffer anything than live
after their manner.

Imagine once more, I said, that such an one coming suddenly out of the
sun were to be replaced in his old situation, is he not certain to have
his eyes full of darkness?

Very true, he said.

And if there were a contest, and he had to compete in measuring the
shadows with the prisoners who have never moved out of the den, during
the time that his sight is weak, and before his eyes are steady (and the
time which would be needed to acquire this new habit of sight might be
very considerable), would he not be ridiculous? Men would say of him
that up he went and down he comes without his eyes; and that there was
no use in even thinking of ascending: and if anyone tried to loose
another and lead him up to the light, let them only catch the offender
in the act, and they would put him to death.

No question, he said.

This allegory, I said, you may now append to the previous argument; the
prison is the world of sight, the light of the fire is the sun, the
ascent

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

and vision of the things above you may truly regard as the upward
progress of the soul into the intellectual world.

And you will understand that those who attain to this beatific vision
are unwilling to descend to human affairs; but their souls are ever
hastening into the upper world in which they desire to dwell. And is
there anything surprising in one who passes from divine contemplations
to human things, misbehaving himself in a ridiculous manner.

There is nothing surprising in that, he replied.

Any one who has common sense will remember that the bewilderments of the
eyes are of two kinds, and arise from two causes, either from coming out
of the light or from going into the light, which is true of the mind's
eye, quite as much as of the bodily eye; and he who remembers this when
he sees the soul of any one whose vision is perplexed and weak, will not
be too ready to laugh; he will first ask whether that soul has come out
of the brighter life, and is unable to see because unaccustomed to the
dark, or having turned from darkness to the day is dazzled by excess of
light. And then he will count one happy in his condition and state of
being.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[162:1](to17.htm#fr_17) "The Dialogues of
Plato," Transl. by B. Jowett, Vol. II, pp. 341-345, Chas. Scribner's
Sons, N. Y. 1911.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](to18)

</div>
