<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](to24)  [Next](to26) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00272NIFS/internetsacredte)

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tertium Organum*, by P.D. Ouspensky, \[1922\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

# CHAPTER XXII

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| <span class="small">Theosophy of Max Müller. Ancient India. Philosophy of the Vedânta. *Tat twam asi*. Knowledge by means of the expansion of consciousness as a reality. Mysticism of different ages and peoples. Unity of experiences. *Tertium Organum* as a key to mysticism. Signs of the noumenal world. Treatise of Plotinus *On Intelligible Beauty* as a misunderstood system of higher logic. Illumination in Jacob Boehme. "A harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate instrument, while the whole is only one harp." Mysticism of *The Love of the Good*. St. Avva Dorotheus and others. Clement of Alexandria. Lao-Tzu and Chuang-Tzu. *Light on the Path*. *The Voice of the Silence*. Mohammedan mystics. Poetry of the Sufis. Mystical states under narcotics. *The Anæsthetic Revelation*. Experiments of Prof. James. Dostoyevsky on "time" (*The Idiot*). Influence of nature on the soul of man.</span> |

</div>

TO trace historically the process of the development of those ideas and
systems founded upon higher logic or proceeding from it, would indeed be
a matter of great interest and importance. But this would be difficult
and almost impossible of accomplishment because we lack definite
knowledge of the time and origin, the means of transmitting, and the
sequence of ideas in ancient philosophical systems and religious
teachings. There are innumerable guesses and speculations concerning the
manner of this succession. Many of these guesses and speculations are
accepted as unquestioned until new ones appear which controvert them.
The opinions of different investigators in regard to these questions are
very divergent, and the truth is often difficult to determine—it would
be more accurate to say "impossible" if conclusions had to be based upon
the material accessible to logical investigation.

I shall not dwell at all on the question of the *succession of ideas*,
either from the historical or any other point of view.

The proposed outline of systems which refer to the world of noumena is
not intended to be complete. This is not "the history of

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

thought," but merely examples of movements of thought which have led to
similar conclusions.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

In the book *Theosophy* (*or Psychological Religion*) the noted scholar
Max Müller gives an interesting analysis of mystical religions and
mystical philosophical systems. He dwells much on India and her
teachings.

That which we can study nowhere but in India is the all-absorbing
influence which religion and philosophy may exercise on the human mind.
So far as we can judge a large class of people in India, not only the
priestly class, but the nobility also, not men only but women, never
looked upon their life on earth as something real. What was real to them
was the invisible, the life to come. What formed the theme of their
conversations, whet formed the subject of their meditations, was the
real that alone lent some kind of reality to this unreal phenomenal
world. Whoever was supposed to have caught a new ray of truth was
visited by young and old, was honored by princes and by kings, was
looked upon indeed as holding a position far above that of kings and
princes. This is the side of life of ancient India which deserves our
study, because there has been nothing like it in the whole world, not
even in Greece or Palestine.

I know quite well, \[says Müller\] that there never can be a whole
nation of philosophers or metaphysical dreamers . . . and we must never
forget that all through history, it is the few, not the many, who
impress their character on a nation, and have a right to represent it as
a whole. What do we know of Greece at the time of the Ionian and Eleatic
philosophers, except the utterances of Seven Sages? What do we know of
the Jews at the time of Moses, except the traditions preserved in the
Laws and the Prophets? It is the prophets, the poets, the lawgivers and
teachers, however small their number, who speak in the name of the
people, and who alone stand out to represent the nondescript multitude
behind them, to speak their thoughts and to express their sentiments.

Real Indian philosophy, even in that embryonic form in which we find it
in the *Upanishads*, stands completely by itself. And if we ask what was
the highest purpose of the teachings of the *Upanishads* we can state it
in three words, as it has been stated by the greatest *Vedânta* <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) teachers themselves, namely *Tat twam
asi*. This means *Thou art That*. *That* stands for that which is known
to us under different names in different systems of ancient and modern
philosophy. It is *Zeus* or the *Eis Theos* or *To On* in Greece; it is
what Plato meant by the *Eternal Idea*, what Agnostics call the

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Unknowable*, what
I call the *Infinite in Nature*. This is what in India is called
*Brahman*, the being behind all beings, the power that emits the
universe, sustains it and draws it back again to itself. The *Thou* is
what I called the *Infinite in man*, the Soul, the Self, the being
behind every human Ego, free from all bodily fetters, free from
passions, free from all attachments (*Atman*). The expression: *Thou art
That*—means: thy soul is the Brahman; or in other words, the subject and
the object of all being and of all knowing are one and the same.

This is the gist of what I call *Psychological Religion* or *Theosophy*,
the highest summit of thought which the human mind has reached, which
has found different expressions in different religions and philosophies,
but nowhere such a clear and powerful realization as in the ancient
*Upanishads* of India.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

For as long as the individual soul does not free itself from Nescience,
or a belief in duality, it takes something else for itself. True
knowledge of the Self or true self-knowledge, expresses itself in the
words, "*Thou art That*" or "*I am Brahman*," the nature of Brahman
being unchangeable eternal cognition. Until that stage has been reached,
the individual soul is fettered by the body, by the organs of sense, nay
even by the mind and its various functions.

The Soul (The Self) says the Vedânta philosopher, cannot be different
from the *Brahman*, because *Brahman* comprehends *all* reality and
nothing that really is can therefore be different from *Brahman*.
Secondly, the individual self cannot be conceived as a modification of
*Brahman*, because *Brahman* by itself cannot be changed, whether by
itself, because it is one and perfect in itself, or by anything outside
of it (because there exists nothing outside of it). Here we see \[says
Müller\], the Vedântist moving on exactly the same stratum of thought in
which Eleatic philosophers moved in Greece. "If there is one Infinite,"
they said, "there cannot be another, for the other would limit the one,
and thus render it finite, so, as applied to God, the Eleatics argued:
"If God is to be the mightiest and the best, he must be one, for if
there were two or more, he would not be the mightiest and best." The
Eleatics continued their monistic argument by showing that this One
Infinite Being cannot be divided, so that anything could be called a
portion of it, because there is no power that could separate anything
from it. Nay, it cannot even have parts, for, as it has no beginning and
no end, it can have no parts, for a part has a beginning and an end.

These Eleatic ideas—namely that there is and there can be only One
Absolute Being, infinite., unchangeable, without a second, without parts
and passions—are the same ideas which underlie the *Upanishads* and have
been fully worked out in the *Vedânta-Sutras*.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

In most of the religions of the ancient world \[says Müller\] the
relation between the soul and God has been represented as a return of
the soul to God. A yearning for God, a kind of divine home-sickness,
finds expression in most religions, but the road that is to lead us
home, and the reception which the soul may expect in the Father's house
have been represented in very different ways in different religions.

According to some religious teachers, a return of the soul to God is
possible after death only. . . .

According to other religious teachers, the final beatitude of the soul
can be achieved in this life. . . . That beatitude requires knowledge
only, knowledge of the necessary unity of what is divine in man with
what is divine in God. The Brahmins call it self-knowledge, that is to
say, the knowledge that our true self, if it is anything, can only be
that Self which is All in All, and beside which there is nothing else.
Sometimes this conception of the intimate relation between the human and
the divine natures comes suddenly, as the result of an unexplained
intuition or self-recollection. Sometimes, however, it seems as if the
force of logic had driven the human mind to the same result. If God had
once been recognized as the Infinite in nature and the soul as the
Infinite in man, it seemed to follow that there could not be two
Infinites. The Eleatics had clearly passed through a similar phase of
thought in their own philosophy. If there is an Infinite, they said, it
is one, for if there were two they could not be In-finite, but would be
finite one toward the other. But that which exists is infinite, and
there cannot be more such. Therefore that which exists is one.

Nothing can be more definite than this Eleatic Monism, and with it the
admission of a soul, the Infinite in man, as different from God, the
Infinite in nature, would have been inconceivable.

In India it was so expressed that *Brahman* and *Atman* (the spirit)
were in their nature one.

The early Christians also, at least those who had been brought up in the
schools of Neo-platonist philosophy, had a clear perception that if the
soul is infinite and immortal in its nature, it cannot be anything
beside God, but that it must be of God and in God. St. Paul gave but his
own bold expression to the same faith or knowledge, when he uttered the
words which have startled so many theologians: *In Him we live and move
and have our being*. If anyone else had uttered these words they would
at once have been condemned as pantheism. No doubt they are pantheism,
and yet they express the very key-note of Christianity. The divine
sonship of man is only a metaphorical expression but it was meant
originally to embody the same idea. . . . And when the question was
asked how the consciousness of this divine sonship could ever have been
lost, the answer given by Christianity was, by sin, the answer given by
the *Upanishads* was, by *avidya*, nescience. This marks the similarity,
and at the same time the characteristic difference between these two
religions. The question how *nescience* laid hold on the human soul, and
made it imagine that it could live or move or have its true

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

being anywhere but in *Brahman*, remains as unanswerable in Hindu
philosophy as in Christianity the question how sin first came into the
world.

Both philosophies, that of the East and that of the West \[says Müller\]
start from a common point, namely from the conviction that our ordinary
knowledge is uncertain, if not altogether wrong. This revolt of the
human mind against itself is the first step in all philosophy.

In our own philosophical language we may put the question thus: how did
the real become phenomenal, and how can the phenomenal become real
again? Or, in other words, how was the infinite changed into the finite,
how was the eternal changed into the temporal, and how can the temporal
regain its eternal nature? Or, to put it into more familiar language,
how was this world created, and how can it be untreated again?

Nescience or *avidya* is regarded as the cause of the phenomenal
semblance.

In the *Upanishads* the meaning of *Brahman* changes. Sometimes it is
almost an objective God, existing separately from the world. But then we
see *Brahman* as the essence of all things . . . and the soul, knowing
that it is no longer separated from that essence, learns the highest
lesson of the whole *Vedânta* doctrine: *Tat twam asi*; "*Thou art
That*," that is to say, "Thou who for a time didst seem to be something
by thyself, art that, art really nothing apart from the divine essence."
To know *Brahman* is to be Brahman. . . .

Almost in the same words as the Eleatic philosophers and the German
mystics of the fourteenth century, the [Vedântists](errata.htm#45) argue
that it would be self-contradictory to admit that there could be
anything besides the Infinite or *Brahman*, which is All in All, and
that therefore the soul also cannot be anything different from it, can
never claim a separate and independent existence.

*Brahman* has to be conceived as perfect, and therefore unchangeable,
the soul cannot be conceived as a real modification or deterioration of
Brahman.

And as *Brahman* has neither beginning nor end, neither can it have any
parts; therefore the soul cannot be a part of *Brahman*, but the whole
of *Brahman* must be present in every individual soul. This is the same
as the teaching of Plotinus, who held with equal consistency, that the
True Being is totally present in every part of the Universe.

The Vedânta philosophy rests on the foundation thesis that the soul or
the Absolute Being or *Brahman*, are one in their essence. . . .

The fundamental principle of the Vedânta-philosophy is that in reality
there exists and there can exist nothing but *Brahman*, that *Brahman*
is everything. Idealistic philosophy has swept away this world-old
prejudice more thoroughly in India than anywhere else.

The nescience (which creates the separation between the individual soul
and Brahman) can be removed by science or knowledge only. And this
knowledge or *vidya* is imparted by the *Vedânta*, which shows that all
our

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

ordinary knowledge is simply the result of ignorance or nescience, is
uncertain, deceitful, and perishable, or as we should say, is
phenomenal, relative, and conditioned. The true knowledge or complete
insight cannot be gained by sensuous perception nor by inference.
According to the orthodox [Vedântist](errata.htm#46), *Sruti* alone, or
what is called revelation, can impart that knowledge and remove that
nescience which is innate in human nature.

Of the Higher *Brahman* nothing can be predicated but that it is, and
that through our nescience, it appears to be this or that.

When a great Indian sage was asked to describe *Brahman*, he was simply
silent—that was his answer.

When it is said that *Brahman* is, that means at the same time that
Brahman is not; that is to say, that *Brahman* is nothing of what is
supposed to exist in our sensuous perceptions.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Whatever we may think of this philosophy, we cannot deny its
metaphysical boldness and its logical consistency. If *Brahman* is all
in all, the One without a second, nothing can be said to exist that is
not *Brahman*. there is no room for anything outside the infinite and
the Universal, nor is there room for two infinites, for the infinite in
nature and the infinite in man. There is and there can be one infinite,
one *Brahman* only. This is the beginning and the end of the Vedânta.

As the shortest summary of the ideas of the *Vedânta* two verses of
*Sankara*, the commentator and interpreter of *Vedânta* are often
quoted:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Brahma is true, the world is false.  
The soul is Brahma and is nothing else*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This is really a
very perfect summary. What truly and really exists is Brahman, the One
Absolute Being; the world is false, or rather is not what it seems to
be; that is, everything which is present to us by means of sense is
phenomenal and relative, and can be nothing else. The soul again, or
rather every man's soul, though it may seem to be this or that, is in
reality nothing but Brahma.

In relation to the question of the origin of the world two famous
commentators of the [*Vedânta*](errata.htm#47), *Sankara* and *Râmânuga*
differ. *Râmânuga* holds to the theory of evolution, *Sankara*—to the
theory of illusion.

It is very important to observe that the Vedântist does not go so far as
certain Buddhist philosophers who look upon the phenomenal world as
simply *nothing*. No, their world is real, only it is not what it seems
to be. Sankara claims for the phenomenal world a reality sufficient for
all practical purposes, sufficient to determine our practical life, our
moral obligations.

There *is* a veil. But the Vedânta-philosophy teaches us that the
eternal light behind it can always be perceived more or less clearly
through philosophical

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

knowledge. It can be perceived, because in reality it is always there.

It may seem strange to find the results of the philosophy of Kant and
his followers thus anticipated under varying expressions in the
*Upanishads* and in the Vedânta-philosophy of ancient India.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

In the chapters about the *Logos* and about *Christian Theosophy* Max
Müller says that religion is the bridge between the *Visible* and the
*Invisible*, between *Finite* and *Infinite*.

<span class="small">It may be truly said that the founders of the
religions of the world have all been bridge-builders. As soon as the
existence of a Beyond, of a Heaven above the earth, of Powers above us
and beneath us has been recognized, a great gulf seemed to be
fixed.</span>

Among contemporary thinkers the noted psychologist, Prof. William James,
approached nearer than all others to the ideas of Max Müller's
theosophy.

In the last chapter of his book, *The Varieties of Religious
Experience*, Prof. James says:

The warring gods and formulas of the various religions do indeed cancel
each other, but there is a certain uniform deliverance in which
religions all appear to meet—this is *the liberation of the soul*. . . .
Man becomes conscious that if his higher part is conterminous and
continuous with a MORE of the same quality, which is operative in the
universe outside of him, and which he can keep in working touch with,
and in a fashion get on board of, he can save himself when all his lower
being has gone to pieces in the wreck.

What is the objective "Truth" of content of religious experiences? Is
such a "more" merely our own notion, or does it really exist? If so, in
what shape does it exist? And in what form should we conceive of that
"union" with it of which religious geniuses are so convinced?

It is in answering these questions that the various theologies perform
their theoretic work, and that their divergencies most come to light.
They all agree that the "more" really exists; though some of them hold
it to exist in the shape of a personal God or gods while others are
satisfied to conceive it as a stream of ideal tendency. . . . It is when
they treat of the experience of "union" with it that their speculative
differences appear most clearly. Over this point pantheism and theism,
nature and second birth, works and grace and Karma, immortality and
reincarnation, rationalism and mysticism, carry on inveterate disputes.

At the end of my lecture on Philosophy I held out the notion that an

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

impartial science of religions might sift out from the midst of their
discrepancies a common body of doctrine which she might also formulate
on terms to which physical science need not object. This, I said, she
might adopt as her own reconciling hypothesis, and recommend it for
general belief.

Let me then propose as an hypothesis that whatever it may be on its
*farther* side, the "more" with which in religious experience we feel
ourselves connected is on its *hither* side the subconscious
continuation of our conscious life.

The conscious person is continuous with a wider self. . . .

The further limits of our being plunge, it seems to me, into an
altogether other dimension of existence from the sensible and merely
"understandable" world.

 

Name it the mystical region, or the super-natural region. . . . We be,
long to it, in a more intimate sense than that in which we belong to
thy, visible world, for we belong in the most intimate sense wherever
our ideals belong. . . . The communion with this invisible world is a
real process with real results. . . .

. . . Personal religious experience has its roots and centre in mystical
states of consciousness.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

But what, after all, is mysticism?

Returning to the terminology established in the foregoing chapters, we
may say that "mystical states of consciousness" are closely bound up
with knowledge received under conditions of expanded receptivity.

Until quite recently psychology did not recognize the reality of the
mystical experience and regarded all mystical states as *pathological
ones*—unhealthy conditions of the normal consciousness. Even now, many
positivist-psychologists hold to this opinion, embracing in one common
classification real mystical states, pseudo-mystical perversions of the
usual state, purely psychopathic states and more or less conscious
deceit.

This of course can be of no assistance to a correct understanding of the
question. Before going further let us therefore establish certain
criteria for the identification of real mystical states:

Prof. James enumerates the following: ineffability, noetic quality,
transiency, passivity. But some of these characteristics belong also to
*simple emotional states*, and he fails to define exactly how mystical
states can be distinguished from emotional ones of analogous character.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

Considering mystical states as "knowledge by expanded conscious. ness,"
it is possible to give quite definite criteria for their discernment and
their differentiation from the generality of psychic experiences.

1\. Mystical states give *knowledge* WHICH NOTHING ELSE CAN GIVE.

2\. Mystical states give knowledge of the *real world* with all its
signs and characteristics.

3\. The mystical states of men of different ages and different peoples
exhibit an astonishing similarity, sometimes amounting to complete
identity.

4\. The results of the mystical experience are *entirely illogical* from
our ordinary point of view. They are *super-logical*, i.e., *Tertium
Organum*, WHICH IS THE KEY TO MYSTICAL EXPERIENCE, is applicable to them
in all its entirety.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The last-named criterion is especially important—the *illogicality* of
the data of mystical experience forced science to repudiate them. Now we
have established that illogicality (from our standpoint) is the
necessary condition of the knowledge of truth or of the real world. This
does not mean that everything that is illogical is true and real, but it
means absolutely, that everything true and real is *illogical* from our
standpoint.

We have established the fact that it is impossible to approach the truth
with our logic, and we have also established the possibility of
penetrating into these heretofore inaccessible regions by means of *the
new canon of thought*.

The consciousness of the necessity for such an instrument of thought
undoubtedly existed from far back. For what, in substance, does the
formula *Tat twam asi* represent if not THE FUNDAMENTAL AXIOM OF HIGHER
LOGIC?

Thou art That means: *thou art both thou and not thou*, and corresponds
to the super-logical formula, *A is both A and Not-A*.

If we examine ancient writings from this standpoint, then we shall
understand that their authors were searching for *a new logic*, and were
not satisfied with the logic of the things of the phenomenal world. The
seeming *illogicality* of ancient philosophical systems,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

which portrayed an *ideal* world, as it were, instead of an existing
one, will then become comprehensible, for in these portrayals of an
ideal world, systems of *higher logic* often lie concealed.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

One of such *misunderstood* attempts to construe a system of higher
logic, to give a precise instrument of thought, penetrating beyond the
limits of the visible world, is the treatise by Plotinus *On
Intelligible Beauty*.

Describing HEAVEN and THE GODS, Plotinus says:

<span class="small">All the gods are venerable and beautiful, and their
beauty is immense. What else however is it but intellect through which
they are such? And because intellect energizes in them in so great a
degree as to render them visible (by its light)? For it is not because
their bodies are beautiful. For these gods that have bodies do not
through this derive their subsistence as gods; but these also are gods
through intellect. For they are not at one time wise, and at another
destitute of wisdom; but they are always wise, in an impassive, stable
and pure intellect. They likewise know all things, not human concerns
(precedaneously) but their own, which are divine, and such as intellect
sees. . . . For all things there are heaven, and there the earth is
heaven, as also are the sea, animals, plants, and men. The gods likewise
that it contains do not think men undeserving of their regard, nor
anything else that is there (because everything there is divine). And
they occupy and pervade without ceasing the whole of that (blissful)
region. For the life which is there is unattended with labor, and truth
(as Plato says in the "Phædrus") is their generator, and nutriment,
their essence and nurse. They likewise see all things, not those with
which generation, but those with which essence is present. And they
perceive themselves in others. For all things there are diaphanous; and
nothing is dark and resisting, but everything is apparent to everyone
internally and throughout. For light everywhere meets with light; *since
everything contains all things in itself and again sees all things in
another. So that all things are [everywhere](errata.htm#48), and all is
all. Each thing likewise is everything*. And the splendor there is
infinite. For everything there is great, since even that which is small
is great. *The sun too which is there is all the stars; and again each
star is the sun and all the stars. . . In each however, a different
property predominates, but at the same time all things are visible in
each*. Motion likewise there is pure; for the motion is not confounded
by a mover different from it. Permanency also suffers no change of its
nature, because it is not mingled with the unstable. And the beautiful
there is beautiful, because it does not subsist in beauty (as in a
subject). Each thing too is there</span>

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

established, not as in a foreign land, but the seat of each thing is
that which each thing is. . . . Nor is the thing itself different from
the place in which it subsists. For the subject of it is intellect, and
it is itself intellect . . . *There each part always proceeds from the
whole, and is at the same time each part and the whole. For it appears
indeed as a part; but by him whose sight is acute, it will be seen as a
whole*. . . . There is likewise no weariness of the vision which is
there, nor any plenitude of perception which can bring intuition to an
end. For neither was there any vacuity, which when filled might cause
the visive energy to cease; nor is this one thing, but that another, so
as to occasion a part of one thing is not to be amicable with that of
another.

And the knowledge which is possible there is insatiable. . . . For by
seeing itself more abundantly it perceives both itself and the objects
of its perception to be infinite, it follows its own nature (in
unceasing contemplation). The life there is wisdom; a wisdom not
obtained by a reasoning process, because the whole of it always was, and
is not in any respect deficient, so as to be in want of investigation.
But it is the first wisdom, and is not derived from another. <span
id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

Closely akin to Plotinus is Jacob Boehme, who was a common shoemaker in
the German town of Goerlitz (end of the XVI and the beginning of the
XVII century), and has left a whole series of remarkable writings in
which he describes revelations vouchsafed him in moments of
illumination.

His first "illumination" occurred in 1600 A.D., when he was twenty-five
years old. <span id="fr_36"></span>[2](#fn_36)

<span class="small">Sitting one day in his room, *his eyes fell upon a
burnished pewter dish, which reflected the sunshine with such marvelous
splendor that he fell into an inward ecstasy*, and it seemed to him as
if he could now look into the principles and deepest foundations of
things. He believed that it was only a fancy, and in order to banish it
from his mind he went out upon the green. But here he remarked that he
gazed into the very heart of things, the very herbs and grass, and that
actual nature harmonized with what he had inwardly seen. He said nothing
of this to anyone, but praised and thanked God in silence.</span>

Of the first illumination Boehme's biographer says: "He learned to know
the innermost foundation of nature, and acquire the capacity

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

to see henceforth with the eyes of the soul into the heart of all
things, a faculty which remained with him even in his normal condition."

<span class="small">About the year 1600, in the twenty-fifth year of his
age, he was again surrounded by the divine light and replenished with
the heavenly knowledge; insomuch as going abroad in the fields to a
green before Neys Gate, at Goerlitz, he there sat down and, viewing the
herbs and grass of the field in his inward light, he saw into their
essences, use and properties, which were discovered to him by their
lineaments, figures and signatures. In like manner he beheld the whole
creation, and from that foundation he afterwards wrote his book, "*De
Signature Rerum*." In the unfolding of those mysteries before his
understanding he had a great measure of joy, yet returned home and took
care of his family and lived in great peace and silence, scarce
intimating to any these wonderful things that had befallen him, and in
the year 1610, being again taken into this light, lest the mysteries
revealed to him should pass through him as a stream, and rather for a
memorial than intending any publication, he wrote his first book, called
"Aurora, or the Morning Redness."</span>

The first illumination, in 1600, was not complete. Ten years later
(1610) he had another remarkable inward experience. What he had
previously seen only chaotically, fragmentarily, and in isolated
glimpses, he now beheld as a coherent whole and in more definite
outlines.

When his third illumination took place, that which in former visions had
appeared to him chaotic and multifarious was now recognized by him as a
unity, *like a harp of many strings, of which each string is a separate
instrument, while the whole is only one harp*. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[1](#fn_37)

He now recognized the divine order of nature, and how from the trunk of
the tree of life spring different branches, bearing manifold leaves and
flowers and fruits, and he became impressed with the necessity of
writing down what he saw and preserved the record.

He himself speaks of this final and complete illumination as follows:

<span class="small">The gate was opened to me that in one quarter of an
hour I saw and knew more than if I had been many years at a university,
at which I exceedingly admired and thereupon turned my praise to God for
it. For I saw and knew the being of all beings, the byss and abyss and
the eternal</span>

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

<span class="small">generation of the Holy Trinity, the descent and
original of the world and of all creatures through divine wisdom. I knew
and saw in myself all the three worlds, namely, (1) the divine
(angelical and paradisical) (2) and the dark (the original of the nature
to the fire) and (3) then the external and visible world (being a
procreation or external birth from both the internal and spiritual
worlds). And I saw and knew the whole working essence in the evil and
the good and the original and the existence of each of them; and
likewise how the fruitful—bearing—womb of eternity brought forth. So
that I did not only greatly wonder at it but did also exceedingly
rejoice.</span>

Describing "illuminations" Boehme writes, in one of his books:

<span class="small">Suddenly . . . my spirit did break through . . .
even into the inner-most birth of Geniture of the
[Deity](errata.htm#49), and there I was embraced with love, as a
bridegroom embraces his dearly beloved bride. But the greatness of the
triumphing that was in the spirit I cannot express either in speaking or
writing; neither can it be compared to anything, but that wherein the
life is generated in the midst of death, and it is like the resurrection
from the dead. In this light my spirit suddenly saw through all, and in
and by all creatures, even in herbs and grass, it knew God, who he is,
and how he is, and what his work is; and suddenly in that light my will
was set on, by a mighty impulse, to describe the being of God. But
because I could not presently apprehend the deepest births of God in
their being and comprehend them in my reason, there passed almost twelve
years before the exact understanding thereof was given me. And it was
with me as with a young tree which is planted on the ground, and at
first is young and tender, and flourishing to the eye, especially if it
comes on lustily in its growing. But it does not bear fruit presently;
and, though it blossoms, they fall off; also many a cold wind, frost and
snow, puff upon it, before it comes to any growth and bearing of
fruit.</span>

Boehme's books are full of wonderment before these mysteries with which
he was confronted.

I was as simple concerning the hidden mysteries as the meanest of all;
but *my vision of the wonders of God* taught me, so that I must write of
his wonders; though indeed my purpose is to write this for a memorandum
for myself. . . .

*Not I, the I that I am, know these things: but God knows them in me*.

If you will behold your own self and the outer world, and what is taking
place thereon, you will find that you, with regard to your external
being, are that external world.

The *Dialogues* between *Disciple* and *Master* are remarkable (Disciple

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

and Master should be understood to refer to the lower and the higher
consciousness of man).

*The Disciple* said to his Master:

How may I come to the supersensual life, that I may see God and hear him
speak?

His *Master* said:

When thou canst throw thyself but for a moment into that where no
creature dwelleth, then thou hearest what God speaketh.

*Disciple*—Is that near at hand or far off?

*Master*—It is in thee. And if thou canst for a while but cease from all
thy thinking and willing, then thou shalt hear the unspeakable words of
God.

*Disciple*—How can I hear him speak, when Ii stand still from thinking
and willing?

*Master*—When thou standest still from the thinking of self, and the
willing of self; "When both thy intellect and will are quiet, and
passive to the impressions of the Eternal Word and Spirit; And when thy
soul is winged up, and above that which is temporal, the outward senses,
and the imagination being locked up by holy abstraction," then the
Eternal hearing, seeing, and speaking, will be revealed in thee; and so
God "heareth and seeth through thee," being now the organ of his spirit;
and so God speaketh in thee, and whispereth to thy spirit, and thy
spirit heareth his voice. Blessed art thou therefore if that thou canst
stand still from self-thinking and self-willing, and canst stop the
wheel of imagination and senses; forasmuch as hereby thou mayest arrive
at length to see the great salvation of God, being made capable of all
manner of Divine sensations and heavenly communications. Since it is
naught indeed but thine own hearing and willing that do wonder thee, so
that thou dost not see and hear God.

*Disciple*—Loving Master, I can no more endure anything should divert
me, how shall I find the nearest way to him?

*Master*—Where the way is hardest there walk thou, and take up what the
world rejecteth; and what the world doth, that do not thou. Walk
contrary to the world in all things. And then thou comest the nearest
way to him.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

*Disciple*—. . . Oh how may I arrive at the unity of will, and how come
into the unity of vision?

*Master*—. . . Mark now what I, say: The Right Eye looketh in thee into
Eternity. The Left Eye looketh backward in thee into time. If now thou
sufferest thyself to be always looking into nature, and the things of
time, it will be impossible for thee ever to arrive at the unity, which
thou wishest for. Remember this; and be upon thy watch. Give not thy
mind

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

<span class="small">leave to enter in, nor to fill itself with, that
which is without thee; neither look thou backward upon thyself . . . Let
not thy Left Eye deceive thee, by making continually one representation
after another, and stirring up thereby an earnest longing in the
self-propriety; but let thy Right Eye command back this Left . . . And
only bringing the Eye of Time into the Eye of Eternity . . . and
descending through the Light of God into the Light of Nature . . . shalt
thou arrive at the Unity of Vision or Uniformity of Will.</span>

In another dialogue the Disciple and the Master converse about heaven
and hell.

The Disciple asked his Master:

Whither go the souls when they leave these mortal bodies?

His Master answered:

The soul needeth no going forth anywhere.

*Disciple*—Does it not enter into heaven or hell?

*Master*—No, there is no such kind of entering. . . . The soul hath
heaven and hell in itself . . . and whether of the two states—either
heaven or hell—shall be manifested in the soul, in that it standeth.

The quotations given here are sufficient to indicate the character of
the writings of an unlearned *shoemaker* from a little provincial town
in Germany of the XVI—XVII centuries. Boehme is remarkable for the
bright intellectuality of his comprehensions, although there is in them
a strong moral element also.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

In the book above mentioned (*The Varieties of Religious Experience*)
Prof. James dwells with great attention on Christian Mysticism, which
afforded him much material for establishing the fact of the cognitive
aspect of mysticism.

I borrow from him the following description of the mystical experiences
of certain Christian saints.

<span class="small">St. Ignatius confessed one day to Father Laynez that
a single hour of meditation at Manfesa had taught him more truths about
heavenly things than all the teachings of all the doctors put together
could have taught him. . . . One day in orison, on the steps of the
choir of the Dominican Church, he saw in a distinct manner the plan of
divine wisdom in the creation of the world. On another occasion, during
a procession, his spirit</span>

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

<span class="small">was ravished on God, and it was given him to
contemplate, in a form and images fitted to the weak understanding of a
dweller on earth, the deep mystery of the holy Trinity. This last vision
flooded his heart with such sweetness, that mere memory of it in after
times made him shed abundant tears.</span>

 

"One day, being in orison," Saint Teresa writes, "it was granted me to
perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. I
did not perceive them in their proper form, and nevertheless the view I
had of them was of a sovereign clearness and has remained vividly
impressed upon my soul. It is one of the most signal of all the graces
which the Lord has granted me. . . . The view was so subtle and delicate
that the understanding cannot grasp it."

She goes on to tell \[Prof. James writes\] how it was as if the Deity
was an enormous and sovereignly limpid diamond, in which all our actions
were contained in such a way that their full sinfulness appeared evident
as never before.

"Our Lord made me comprehend," she writes, "in what way it is that one
God can be in three Persons. He made me see it so clearly that I
remained as extremely surprised as I, was comforted . . . and now, when
I think of the holy Trinity, or hear it spoken of, I understand how the
three adorable Persons form only one God and I experienced an
unspeakable happiness."

Christian mysticism, as Prof. James shows, is very near to the *Vedânta*
and the *Upanishads*. That fountain-head of Christian mysticism,
Dionysius the Areopagite, tells about the absolute truth in *negative
formulæ only*.

<span class="small">"The cause of all things is neither soul nor
intellect; nor has it imagination, opinion, or reason, or intelligence;
nor is it reason or intelligence; nor is it spoken or thought. It is
neither number, nor order, nor magnitude, nor littleness, nor equality,
nor inequality, nor similarity, nor dissimilarity. It neither stands,
nor moves, nor rests. . . . It is neither essence, nor eternity, nor
time. Even [intellectual](errata.htm#50) contact does not belong to it.
Art is neither science nor truth. It is not even royalty or wisdom; not
one; not unity; not divinity or goodness nor even spirit as we know
it."</span>

\_\_\_\_\_\_

The writings of the mystics of the Greek Orthodox Church are collected
in the books *The Love of the Good*, comprising five large and
formidable volumes. I selected several examples of profound

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

and fine mysticism from the book, *Superconsciousness and the Paths to
its Attainment*, by M. V. Lodizhensky (In Russian), who studied these
books and found therein remarkable examples of philosophical thought.

<span class="small">Imagine a circle, says *Avva Dorotheus* (VII
century), and in the middle of it a centre; and from this centre
forthgoing radii-rays. The farther these radii go from the centre, the
more divergent and remote from one another they become; conversely, the
nearer they approach to the centre, the more they come together among
themselves. Now suppose that this circle is the world: the very middle
of it, God; and the straight lines (radii) going from the centre to the
circumference, or from the circumference to the centre, are the paths of
life of men. And in this case also, to the extent that the saints
approach the middle of the circle, desiring to approach God, do they, by
so doing, come nearer to God and to one another. . . . Reason similarly
with regard to their withdrawing from God . . . they withdraw also from
one another, and by so much as they withdraw from one another do they
withdraw from God. Such is the attribute of love: to the extent that we
are distant from God and do not love Him, each of us is far from his
neighbor also. If we love God, then to the extent that we approach to
Him through love of Him, do we unite in love with our neighbors; and the
closer our union with them, the closer is our union with God also. <span
id="fr_38"></span>[1](#fn_38)</span>

(*Superconsciousness*, p. 266)

<span class="small">Hear now, says St. Isaac of Syria (VI century), how
man becomes refined, acquires spirituality, and becomes like the
invisible forces. . . . When the vision soars above things earthly, and
above all troubles over earthly doings, and begins to experience
revelations concerning that which is within, hidden from sight, and when
it will turn its gaze upward, and experiences faith in the guidance of
future ages, and the ardent desire for promised things, when it will
search for hidden mysteries, then faith itself consumes this knowledge
and so transforms and regenerates it that it becomes entirely spiritual.
Then may the vision soar on pinions into regions incorporeal, may touch
the depths of an inaccessible sea, participating</span>

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

<span class="small">in the mind Divine, and the miraculous acts of
guidance in the hearts of thinking and feeling beings, discovering
spiritual mysteries which become then comprehensible by the refined and
simple mind. Then the inner senses are awakened to spirituality after
the manner that they will be in the life immortal and incorruptible, for
even here this redemption of the mind is a true symbol of the general
redemption.</span>

(*Superconsciousness*, p. 370)

<span class="small">When the grace of the Holy Spirit, says Maxim
Kapsokalivit, descends on anyone, there is shown to him nothing of the
sensuous world, but that which he never saw or never imagined. Then the
understanding of such a man receives from the Holy Spirit the highest
and hidden mysteries which according to the divine Paul, neither the
human eye can understand nor the human reason comprehend unaided. (Ii
Corinthians ii, 9). And that thou mayest understand how our reason sees
them, try to apprehend that which I shall say to thee. Wax, when it is
placed far from fire, is solid, and it is possible to take it and hold
it, but as soon as it is thrown in fire it immediately melts, takes
fire, burns, blazes and ends thus in the midst of flames. So also is
human reason when it is alone by itself, ununited with God; then it
comprehends in the usual way and according to its power all things
surrounding it; but as it approaches the fire of Divinity and of the
Holy Ghost, then is it entirely enveloped by that Divine fire, and
immersed in Divine meditation, and then in that fire of Divinity it is
impossible for it to think about its own affairs and about that which it
desires.</span>

(*Superconsciousness*, p. 370)

<span class="small">St. Basil the Great says about the revelation of
God: Absolutely unutterable and indescribable are the lightning-like
splendors of Divine beauty; neither can speech express nor hearing
apprehend. Shall we name the brilliance of the morning star, the
brightness of the moon, the radiance of the sun—the glory of all these
is unworthy of being compared with the true light, standing farther from
it than does the gloomiest night and the most terrible darkness from
midday brightness. This beauty, invisible to bodily eyes, comprehensible
to soul and mind only, if it illumines some of the saints leaves in them
an unbearable wound through their desire that this vision of Divine
beauty should extend over an eternity of life; disturbed by this earthly
life, they loathe it as thought it were a prison.</span>

(*Superconsciousness*, p. 372)

 

<span class="small">St. Theognis says: A strange word will I say to
thee. There is some hidden mystery which proceeds between God and the
soul. This is experienced by those who achieve the highest heights of
perfect purity of</span>

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="small">love and faith, when man, changing completely unites
with God, as His own, through ceaseless prayer and contemplation?</span>

([*Superconsciousness*](errata.htm#51), p. 381)

Certain parts of the writings of Clement of Alexandria (second century)
are remarkably interesting.

<span class="small">It appears to us that painting appears to take in
the whole field of view in the scenes represented. But it gives a false
description of the view, according to the rules of the art, employing
the signs that result from the incidents of the lines of vision. By this
means, the higher and the lower points in the view, and those between,
are preserved; and some objects seem to appear in the foreground, and
others in the background, and others to appear in some other way, on the
smooth and level surface. So also philosophers copy the truth, after the
manner of painting. <span id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39)</span>

Clement of Alexandria here reveals one very important aspect of *truth*,
namely, its *inexpressibility in words* and the entire conditionality of
all philosophical systems and formulations. Dialectically truth is
represented only in perspective—i.e., in an *inevitably* deformed
shape—such is his idea.

What time and labor would be saved, and from what enormous and
unnecessary suffering would humanity save itself, could it but
understand this one simple thing: that *truth cannot be expressed in our
language*. Then would men cease to think that they possessed truth,
would cease to force others to accept *their truth* at any cost, would
see that others may approach truth from *another direction*, exactly as
they themselves approach it, by a way of their own. How many arguments,
how many religious struggles, how much of violence toward the thoughts
of others would be rendered unnecessary and impossible if men would only
understand that *nobody* possesses truth, but all are seeking for it,
each in his own way.

The ideas of Clement of Alexandria about God are highly interesting, and
closely approximate to those of the Vedânta, and particularly to the
ideas of the Chinese philosophers.

<span class="small">The discourse respecting God is the most difficult
to handle. For since the first principle of everything is difficult to
find out, the absolutely first and the oldest principle, which is the
cause of all other things being and</span>

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

<span class="small">having been, is difficult to exhibit. For how can
that be expressed which is neither genus, nor difference, nor species,
nor individual, nor number; nay more, is neither an event, nor that to
which an event happens? No one can rightly express this wholly. For on
account of his greatness he is ranked as the All and is the Father of
the universe. Nor are any parts to be predicated of them. For the one is
indivisible, wherefore also it is infinite, not considered with
reference to its being without dimensions, and not having a limit. And
therefore it is without form and name. And if we name it, we do not do
so properly, terming it either the one, or the good, or mind, or
Absolute Being, or Father, or God, or Creator, or Lord. We speak not as
supplying His name; but for want, we use good names, in order that the
mind may have these as points of support, so as not to err in other
respects. <span id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)</span>

Among Chinese mystical philosophers our attention is arrested by Lao-Tzu
(VI cent. B. C.), and *Chuang-Tzu^* (IV cent. B. C.) by the cleanliness
of thought and the unusual simplicity with which they express the most
profound doctrines of idealism.

*The Sayings of Lao-Tzu^*

The Tao, which can be expressed in words is not the eternal Tao; the
name which can be uttered is not its eternal name. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41)

Tao eludes the sense of sight, and is therefore called colorless. It
eludes the sense of hearing, and is therefore called soundless. It
eludes the sense of touch, and is therefore called incorporeal. These
three qualities cannot be apprehended, and hence they may be blended
into unity.

Ceaseless in action, it cannot be named, but returns again to
nothingness. We may call it the form of the formless, the image of the
image-less, the fleeting and the indeterminable.

There is something chaotic, yet complete, which existed before heaven
and earth. Oh, how still it is, and formless, standing alone without
changing, reaching everywhere, without suffering harm!

Its name I know not. To designate it I call it Tao. Endeavoring to
describe it, I call it Great.

Being Great, it passes on; passing on, it becomes remote; having become
remote it returns.

The law of Tao is its own spontaneity.

Tao in its unchanging aspect has no name.

The mightiest manifestations of active force flow from Tao.

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

Tao as it exists in the world is like great rivers and seas which
receive the streams from the valleys.

All-pervading is the Great Tao. It can be at once on the right hand and
on the left.

Tao is a great square with no angles, a great sound which cannot be
heard, a great image with no form.

Tao produced Unity; Unity produced Duality; Duality produced Trinity;
and Trinity produced all existing objects.

He who acts in accordance with Tao, becomes one with Tao.

All the world says that my Tao is great, but unlike other teachings. It
is just because it is great that it appears unlike other teachings. If
it had this likeness, long ago would its smallness have been known.

The sage attends to the inner and not to the outer; he puts away the
objective and holds to the subjective.

The sage occupies himself with inaction, and conveys instructions
without words.

Who is there that can make muddy water clear? But if allowed to remain
still it will gradually become clear of itself. Who is there that can
secure a state of absolute repose? But let time go on, and the state of
repose will gradually arise.

Tao is eternally inactive, and yet it leaves nothing undone.

The pursuit of book-learning brings about daily increase (i.e., the
increase of knowledge). The practice of Tao brings about daily loss
(i.e., the loss of ignorance). Repeat the loss again and again, and you
arrive at inaction. Practice inaction, and there is nothing which cannot
be done.

Practice inaction, occupy yourself with doing nothing.

Leave all things to take their natural course, and do not interfere.

All things in Nature work silently.

Among mankind, the recognition of beauty as such implies the idea of
ugliness, and the recognition of good implies the idea of evil.

Cast off your holiness, rid yourself of sagacity, and the people will
benefit a hundredfold.

Those who know do not speak; those who speak do not know.

He who acts, destroys; he who grasps, loses. Therefore the sage does not
act, and so he does not destroy; he does not grasp, and so he does not
lose.

The soft overcomes the hard; the weak overcomes the strong. There is no
one in the world but knows this truth, and no one who can put it into
practice.

*A Meditation of Chuang-Tzu^*

<span class="small">You cannot speak of ocean to a well-frog—the
creature of a narrower sphere. You cannot speak of ice to a summer
insect—the creature of a season. You cannot speak of Tao to a pedagogue,
his scope is too restricted.</span>

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

But now that you have emerged from your narrow sphere and have seen the
great ocean, you know your own significance, and I can speak to you of
great principles. . . .

Dimensions are limitless; time is endless. Conditions are not
invariable; terms are not final.

There is nothing which is not objective; there is nothing which is not
subjective. But it is impossible to start from the objective. Only from
subjective knowledge is it possible to proceed to objective knowledge.

When subjective and objective are both without their correlates, that is
the very axis of Tao.

Tao has its laws and its evidences. It is devoid both of action and of
form.

It may be obtained but cannot be seen.

Spiritual beings draw their spirituality from Tao.

To Tao no point in time is long ago.

Tao cannot be existent. If it were existent, it could not be
non-existent. The very name of Tao is only adapted for convenience'
sake. Predestination and chance are limited to material existences. How
can they bear upon the infinite?

Tao is something beyond material existences. It cannot be conveyed
either by words or by silence. In that state which is neither speech nor
silence, its transcendental nature may be apprehended. <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42)

\_\_\_\_\_\_

In contemporary Theosophical literature, two little books stand out:
*The Voice of the Silence* by H. P. Blavatsky, and *Light on the Path*
by Mabel Collins. In both of them there is much of real mystical
sentiment.

*The Voice of the Silence*

He who would hear the voice of the silence, the soundless sound, and
comprehend it, he has to learn the nature of the perfect inward
concentration of the mind, accompanied by complete abstraction from
everything pertaining to the external Universe, or the world of senses.

Having become indifferent to objects of perception, the pupil must seek
out the Rajah of the senses, the Thought-Producer, him who awakes
illusions. The mind is the great slayer of the real.

Let the Disciple slay the Slayer.

For—

When to himself his form appears unreal, as do on waking all the forms
he sees in dreams;

When he ceases to hear the many, he may discern the ONE—the inner sound
which kills the outer.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

Then only, not till then, shall he forsake the region of ASAT, the
false, to come into the realm of SAT, the true.

Before the soul can see, the harmony within must be attained, and
fleshly eyes be rendered blind to illusion.

Before the soul can hear, the image (man) has to become as deaf to
warnings as to whispers, to cries of bellowing elephants as to the
silvery buzzing of the golden firefly.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

And then to the inner ear will speak—

THE VOICE OF THE SILENCE

And say:

—If thy Soul smiles while bathing in the sunlight of thy life; if thy
soul sings within her chrysalis of flesh and matter; if thy soul weeps
inside her castle of illusion; if thy soul struggles to break the silver
thread that binds her to the MASTER, know, O Disciple, thy soul is of
the earth.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

Give up thy life, if thou wouldst live.

Learn to discern the real from the false, the ever-fleeting from the
ever-lasting. Learn above all to separate head-learning from
soul-wisdom, the "Eye" from the "Heart" doctrine.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

*Light on the Path*, like *The Voice of the Silence* is full of symbols,
hints and hidden meanings. This is a little book which makes demands
upon the reader. Its meaning is elusive, and it requires to be read in a
fitting state of spirit. *Light on the Path* prepares the "disciple" to
meet the "Master," i.e., the ordinary consciousness for communion with
the higher consciousness. According to the author of Light on the Path,
the term "THE MASTERS" is a symbolical expression for the "Divine
Life." <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)

*Light on the Path*

<span class="small">Before the eyes can see they must be incapable of
tears. Before the ear can hear it must have lost its sensitiveness.
Before the voice can speak in the presence of the Masters it must have
lost the power to wound. Before the soul can stand in the presence of
the Masters its feet must be washed in the blood of the heart.</span>

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

<span class="small">Kill out all sense of separateness.  
Desire only that which is within you.  
Desire only that which is beyond you.  
Desire only that which is unattainable.</span>

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

For within you is the light of the world. . . . If you are unable to
perceive it within you, it is useless to look for it elsewhere. . . . it
is unattainable, because it forever recedes. You will enter the light,
but you will never touch the Flame. . . .

Seek out the way.

Look for the flower to bloom in the silence that follows the storm: not
till then. . . .

And on the deep silence the mysterious event will occur which will prove
that the way has been found. Call it by what name you will, it speaks in
a voice that speaks where there is none to speak—it is a messenger that
comes, a messenger without form or substance; or it is the flower of the
soul that has opened. It cannot be described by any metaphor.

.     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .     .

To hear the voice of the silence is to understand that from within comes
the only true guidance. . . . For when the disciple is ready, the Master
is ready also.

Hold fast to that which is neither substance nor existence.

Listen only to the voice which is soundless.

Look only on that which is invisible. . . .

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Prof. James calls attention in his book to the unusually vivid
emotionality of mystic experiences, and to the quite unusual sensations
felt by mystics.

The deliciousness of some of these states seems to be beyond anything
known in ordinary consciousness. It evidently involves organic
sensibilities, for it is spoken of as something too extreme to be borne,
and as verging on bodily pain. But it is too subtle and piercing a
delight for ordinary words to denote. God's touches, the wounds of his
spear, references to ebriety and to mystical union have to figure in the
phraseology by which it is shadowed forth.

The joy of communion with God, described by *St Simeon the New
Theologian* <span id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) (X century) may serve as
an example of such an experience.

<span class="small">I am wounded by the arrow of His love (writes St.
Simeon). He is Himself inside of me, in my heart; he embraces me, kisses
me, fills me with light. . . . A new flower grows in me, new because it
is joyous. . . . This flower is of an unutterable form, is seen when it
grows merely, then suddenly disappears . . . it is of indescribable
appearance; attracts my mind to itself, causes forgetfulness of
everything to do with fear, and then</span>

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

<span class="small">flies suddenly away. Then does the tree of fear
remain again lacking fruit; I moan in sorrow and pray to thee, my
Christ; again I see the flower amid the branches, Ii chain my attention
to it alone, and see not the tree alone, but the brilliant flower
attracting me to itself irresistibly; this flower grows in the end into
the fruit of love. . . . Incomprehensible is it how from fear grows
love.</span>

Mysticism penetrates into all religions.

In India, \[Prof. James says\] training in mystical insight has been
known from time immemorial under the name of yoga. Yoga means the
experimental union of the individual with the divine. It is based on
per-severing exercise; and the diet, posture, breathing, intellectual
concentration, and moral discipline vary slightly in the different
systems which teach it. The yogi, or disciple, who has by these means
overcome the obscurations of his lower nature sufficiently, enters into
the condition termed *samadhi*, "and he comes face to face with facts
which no instinct or reason can ever know."

. . . When a man comes out of *samadhi* Vedântists assure us that he
remains "enlightened, a sage, a prophet, a saint, his whole character
changed, his life changed, illumined."

The Buddhists use the word *samadhi* as well as the Hindus; but *dhyana*
is their special word for the higher states of contemplation.

Higher stages still of contemplation are mentioned—a region where there
exists nothing, and where the meditator says: "There exists absolutely
nothing," and stops. Then he reaches another region, he says: "There are
neither ideas nor absence of ideas," and stops again. Then another
region where, "having reached the end of both idea and perception, he
stops finally." This would seem to be, not yet *Nirvana*, but as close
an approach to it as this life affords. <span
id="fr_45"></span>[1](#fn_45)

\_\_\_\_\_

In Mohammedanism there is much of mysticism also. The most
characteristic expression of Moslem mysticism is Persian *Sufism*. This
is at the same time a religious sect and a philosophical school of high
idealistic character, which struggled against materialism and against
the narrow fanaticism and the literal understanding of the Koran. The
Sufis interpreted the Koran mystically. Sufism—this is the philosophical
free-thinking of Mohammedanism, united

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

with an entirely original symbolical and brightly sensuous poetry which
has always a hidden mystical character. The blossoming of Sufism
occurred in the early centuries of the second millennium of the
Christian era.

Sufism remained for a long time incomprehensible to European thought.
From the point of view of Christian theology and Christian morality the
mixing up of sensuousness and religious ecstacy is incomprehensible, but
in the Orient the two coexisted with perfect harmony. In the Christian
world "the flesh" has always been regarded as inimical to "the spirit."
In the Moslem world the fleshly and sensuous was accepted as a symbol of
spiritual things. The expression of philosophical and religious truths
"in the language of love" was a widely disseminated custom throughout
the Orient. These things are "Oriental flowers of eloquence." All
allegories, all metaphors were taken from "love." "Mohammed fell in love
with God," the Arabs say, desiring to convey the brightness of the
religious ardor of Mohammed. "*Select for thyself a new wife every
spring of the new year, because last year's calendar is no good*"—says
the Persian poet and philosopher *Sa’di*. And in such curious form
*Sa’di* expresses the thought that Ibsen puts in the mouth of Dr.
Stockman: "*Truths are not as many believe like long-living Methuselahs.
Under normal conditions a truth may exist about seventeen or eighteen
years, rarely longer*."

The poetry of the Sufis will become clearer to us if we always keep in
mind this general sensuous character of the literary language of the
Orient, the heritage of profound antiquity. A classic example of this
ancient literature is the *Song of Songs*.

Many parts of the Bible and all ancient myths and stories are
distinguished by a sensuousness of form strange to us.

"The Persian mystical poetical Sufis wrote about the love of God in
expressions applicable to their beautiful women," says the translator of
*Jami* and other poets, Davis—"because, as they explained this, nobody
can write in heavenly language and be understood." (*Persian Mystics*.)

"The idea of Sufism," Max Müller says, "*is a loving union of the soul
with God*." "The Sufi holds that there is nothing in human language that
can express the love between the soul and God so well as the love
between man and woman and that if he is to speak of the union between
the two at all, he can only do so in the

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

symbolic language of earthly love." When we read some of the Sufi
enraptured poetry, we must remember that the Sufi poets use a number of
expressions which have a recognized meaning in their language. Their
*sleep* means meditation; *perfume*—hope of divine favor; *kisses* and
*embraces*—the raptures of piety; wine means spiritual knowledge, etc.

<span class="small">The flowers which a lover of God had gathered in his
rose-garden, and which he wished to give to his friends, so overpowered
his mind by their fragrance that they fell out of his lap and withered,
*Sa’di* says. A poet desires to express by this, that the glory of
ecstatic visions pales and fades away when it has to be put into human
language.—(Max Müller *Theosophy*.)</span>

Generally speaking, never and nowhere has poetry been so blended with
mysticism as in Sufism. The Sufi poets frequently lived the strange
lives of hermits, anchorites and wanderers, at the same time singing of
love, the beauty of women, the aroma of roses and wine.

*Jêlal eddîn* describes as follows the communion of the soul with God:

<span class="small">A loved one said to her lover to try him early one
morning: "O such a one, son of such a one, I marvel whether you hold me
more dear, or yourself; tell me truly, O ardent lover!" He answered: "I
am so entirely absorbed in you, that I am full of you from head to foot.
Of my own existence nothing but the man remains, in my being is nothing
beside you, O object of my desire. Therefore I am thus lost in you. As a
stone which has been changed into a pure ruby, is filled with the bright
light of the sun."—(Max Müller.)</span>

In two well-known poems of *Jami* (XV century), *Salaman and Abasl* and
*Yusuf and Zulaikha*, the "ascending of the soul," its purification and
its union with God, is represented in the most passionate forms.

\_\_\_\_\_\_

Prof. James pays great attention in his book to *mystical states under
narcosis*.

"This is a realm that public opinion and ethical philosophy have

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

long since branded as pathological, though private practice and certain
lyric strains of poetry seem still to bear witness of its ideality.

"Nitrous oxide and ether, especially nitrous oxide, when sufficiently
diluted with air, stimulates the mystical consciousness in an
extraordinary degree. Depth beyond depth of truth seems revealed to the
inhaler. This truth fades out, however, or escapes, at the moment of
coming to; and if any words remain over in which it seemed to clothe
itself, they prove to be the veriest nonsense. Nevertheless, the sense
of a profound meaning having been there persists; and I know more than
one person who is persuaded that in the nitrous oxide trance we have a
genuine metaphysical revelation.

"Some years ago I myself made some observations on this aspect of
nitrous oxide intoxication, and reported them in print. One conclusion
was forced upon my mind at that time, and my impression of its truth has
ever since remained unshaken. It is that our normal waking
consciousness, rational consciousness as we call it, is but one special
type of [consciousness](errata.htm#52), whilst all about it, parted from
it by the filmiest of screens, there are potential forms of
consciousness entirely different. We may go through life without
suspecting their existence, but apply the requisite stimulus and at a
touch they are there in all their completeness, definite types of
mentality which probably somewhere have their field of application and
adaptation. No account of the universe in its totality can be final
which leaves these other forms of consciousness quite disregarded. At
any rate, they forbid a premature closing of our accounts with reality.

"The whole drift of my education goes to persuade me that the world of
our present consciousness is only one out of many worlds of
consciousness that exist, and that those other worlds must contain
experiences which have a meaning for our life also.

"Looking back on my experiences, they all converge toward a kind of
insight to which I cannot help ascribing some metaphysical significance.
The keynote of it is invariably a reconciliation. It is as if the
opposites of the world, whose contradictions and conflict make all our
difficulties and troubles, were melted into unity. Not only do they, as
contrasted species, belong to one and the same genus, but *one of the
species*—the nobler

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

and the better one—*is itself the genus, so soaks up and absorbs its
opposite into itself*. This is a dark saying, I know, when thus
expressed in terms of common logic, but I cannot wholly escape from its
authority. I feel as if it must mean something, something like what the
Hegelian philosophy means, if one could only lay hold of it more
clearly. Those who have ears to hear let them hear; to me the loving
sense of its reality only comes in the artificial mystic state of mind.

"What reader of Hegel can doubt that sense of a perfected being with all
its otherness soaked up in itself, which dominates his whole philosophy,
must have come from the prominence in his consciousness of mystical
moods like this, in most persons kept subliminal? The notion is
thoroughly characteristic of the mystical level, and the *Aufgabe* (the
problem) of making it articulate was surely set to Hegel's intellect by
mystical feeling.

"I have friends who believe in the anæsthetic revelation. For them too
it is a monistic insight, in which the *other* in its various forms
appears absorbed into the One. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46)

"Into this pervading genus," writes one of them, "we pass, forgetting
and forgotten, and thenceforth each is all, in God. There is no higher,
no deeper, no other, than the life in which we are founded. The one
remains, the many change and pass; and each and every one of us is the
One that remains. . . . This is the ultimatum. . . . As sure as
being—whence is all our care—so sure is content, beyond duplexity,
antithesis, or trouble, where I have triumphed in a solitude that God is
not above."—(B. P. Blood: *The Anæsthetic Revelation and the Gist of
Philosophy*, Amsterdam, N. Y., 1874.)

Xenos Clark, a philosopher who died young (at Amherst in the '80's) was
also impressed by the revelation.

"In the first place," he once wrote to me, "Mr. Blood and I agree that
the revelation is, if anything, non-emotional. It is, as Mr. Blood says,
the one sole and sufficient insight why or not why, but how, the present
is pushed on by the past, and sucked forward by the vacuity of the
future. . . . It is an *initiation of the past*. The real secret would
be the formulæ by which the 'now' keeps exfoliating out of itself, yet
never escapes. We simply fill the hole with the dirt we dug out.
Ordinary philosophy is like a hound hunting its own tail. The more he
hunts the farther he has to go, and his nose never catches up with his
heels, because it is forever ahead of them. So the present is already a
foregone conclusion,

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

and I am ever too late to understand it. *But at the moment of recovery
from anæsthesis, then, before starting on life, I catch, so to speak, a
glimpse of my heels, a glimpse of the eternal process just in the act of
starting*. The truth is that we travel on a journey that was
accomplished before we set out; and the real end of philosophy is
accomplished, not when we arrive at, but when we remain in, our
destination (being already there)—which may occur vicariously in this
life when we cease our intellectual questioning. That is why there is a
smile upon the face of revelation, as we view it. It tells us that we
are forever half a second too late—that's all.

"You could kiss your own lips, and have all the fun to yourself," it
says, "if you only knew the trick. It would be perfectly easy if they
would just stay there till you got around to them. Why don't you manage
it somehow?"

In his latest phamphlet Mr. Blood describes the value of the anæsthetic
revelation for life as follows:

"The Anæsthetic Revelation is the initiation of man into the mystery of
the open secret of Being, revealed as the inevitable vortex of
continuity. Inevitable is the word. Its motive is inherent—it is what
has to be. It is not for any love or hate, nor for joy or sorrow, nor
good nor ill. End, beginning, or purpose, it knows not of.

"It affords no particular of the multiplicity and variety of things; but
it fills the appreciation of the historical and the sacred with a
secular and intimately personal illumination of the nature and motive of
existence. . . .

"Although it is at first startling in its solemnity, it becomes directly
such a matter of course—so old-fashioned, and so akin to proverbs, that
it inspires exultation rather than fear, and the sense of safety, as
identified with the aboriginal and the universal. But no words may
express the surpassing certainty of the patient that he is realizing the
primordial Adamic surprise of life.

"Repetition of the experience finds it ever the same, and as if it could
not possibly be otherwise. The subject resumes his normal consciousness
only to partially and fitfully remember its occurrence, and to try to
formulate its baffling import—with this consolatory after-thought: that
he has known the oldest truth, and that he has done with human theories
as to the origin, meaning, or destiny of the race. He is beyond
instruction in 'spiritual things.'

"The lesson is one of central safety; the kingdom is within. All days
are judgment days: but there can be no climacteric purpose of eternity,
nor any scheme of the whole. The astronomer abridges the row of
bewildering figures by increasing his unit of measurement: so may we
reduce the distracting multiplicity of things to the unity for which
each of us stands.

"This has been my moral sustenance since I have known of it. In my first
printed mention of it I declared: The world is no more the alien

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

<span class="small">terror that was taught me. Spurning the cloud-grimed
and still sultry battlements whence so lately Jehovan thunders boomed,
my gray gull lifts her wings against the nightfall, and takes the dim
leagues with a fearless eye. And now, after twenty-seven years of this
experience, the wing is grayer, but the eye is fearless still, while I
renew and doubly emphasize that declaration. I know—as having known—the
meaning of existence: the sane center of the universe—at once the wonder
and the assurance of the soul—for which the speech of reason has as yet
no name but the Anæsthetic Revelations."</span>

I subjoin, Prof. James says, another interesting anæsthetic revelation.
This is what the subject, a gifted woman, writes about her experience,
when she was taking ether for a surgical operation.

"I wondered if I was in a prison being tortured, and why I remembered,
having heard it said that people 'learn through suffering,' and in view
of what I was seeing, the inadequacy of this saying struck me so much
that I said, aloud, 'to suffer is to learn.' With that I became
unconscious again, and my last dream immediately preceded my real coming
to. It only lasted a few seconds and was most vivid and real to me,
though it may not be clear in words.

"A great Being or Power was traveling through the sky, his foot was on a
kind of lightning as a wheel is on a rail, it was his pathway. The
lightning was made of innumerable spirits close to one another, and I
was one of them. He moved in a straight line, and each part of the
streak or flash came into its short conscious existence only that he
might travel. I seemed to be directly under the foot of God, and I
thought he was grinding his own life up out of my pain. Then I saw that
what he had been trying with all his might to do was to *change his
course, to bend* the line of lightning to which he was tied, in the
direction in which he wanted to go. I felt my flexibility and
helplessness, and I knew that he would succeed. He bended me, turning
his corner by means of my hurt, hurting me more than I had ever been
hurt in my life, and at the acutest point of this, as he passed, I, SAW.

"I understood for a moment things that I have now forgotten, things that
no one could remember while retaining sanity. The angle was an obtuse
angle, and I remember thinking as I woke that had he made it a right or
acute angle, I should have both suffered and 'seen' still more, and
should probably have died.

"He went on and I came to. In that moment the whole of my life passed
before me, including each little meaningless piece of distress, and I
understood them. This is what it had all meant, *this* was the piece of
work it had all been contributing to do.

"I did not see God's purpose. I only saw his intentness and his entire
relentlessness toward his means. He thought no more of me than a man

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

thinks of hurting a cartridge when he is firing. And yet, on waking, my
first feeling was, and it came with tears, 'Domine non sum digna,' for I
had been lifted into a position for which I was too small. I, realized
that in that half hour under ether I had served God more distinctly and
purely than I had ever done in my life before, or than I, am capable of
desiring to do. I was the means of his achieving and revealing
something, I know not what or to whom, and that to the exact extent of
my capacity for suffering.

"While regaining consciousness L wondered why, since I had gone so deep,
I had seen nothing of what saints call the *love* of God, nothing but
his relentlessness. And then I heard an answer, which I could only just
catch, saying, 'Knowledge and Love are One, and the measure is
suffering'—I give the words as they came to me. With that I came finally
to into what seemed a dream world compared with the reality of what I,
was leaving. . . ."

I. S. Symonds, whom Prof. James mentions, tells of an interesting
mystical experience with chloroform:

<span class="small">"After the choking and stifling had passed away, I
seemed at first in a state of utter blankness, then came flashes of
intense light, alternating with blackness, and with a keen vision of
what was going on in the room around me, but no sensation of touch. I
thought that I was near death; when suddenly, my soul became aware of
God, who was manifestly dealing with me, handling me, so to speak, in an
intense personal present reality. I felt him streaming in like light
upon me. I cannot describe the ecstacy I felt. Then as I gradually awoke
from the influence of the anæsthetic, the old sense of my relation to
the world began to return, and the new sense of my relation to God began
to fade. I suddenly leapt to my feet on the chair where I was sitting,
and shrieked out, 'It is too horrible, it is too horrible, it is too
horrible,' meaning that I could not bear this disillusionment. At last I
awoke . . . calling to the two surgeons (who were frightened) 'why did
you not kill me? Why would you not let me die?"</span>

Anæsthetic states are very similar to those strange moments experienced
by epileptics during their fits of illness. An artistic description of
epileptic states we find in Dostoyevsky's, *The Idiot*.

<span class="small">He remembered among other things that he always had
one minute just before the epileptic fit (if it came on while he was
awake) when suddenly in the midst of sadness, spiritual darkness and
oppression, there seemed at moments a flash of light on his brain and
with extraordinary impetus all his vital forces suddenly began working
at their highest tension. The sense of life, the consciousness of self,
were multiplied ten times at these</span>

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

moments which passed like a flash of lightning. His mind and his heart
were flooded with extraordinary light; all his uneasiness, all his
doubts, all his anxieties were relieved at once; they were all merged in
a lofty calm, full of serene, harmonious joy and hope.

Thinking of that moment later, when he was all right again, he often
said to himself that all these gleams and flashes of the highest
sensation of life and self-consciousness, and therefore also of the
highest form of existence, were nothing but disease, the interruption of
the normal condition. . . . And yet he came at last to an extremely
paradoxical conclusion. What if it is disease? he decided, if the
result, if the minute of sensation, remembered and analyzed afterwards
in health, turns out to be the acme of harmony and beauty, and gives a
feeling, unknown and undivined till then, of completeness, of
proportion, of reconciliation, and of ecstatic devotional merging in the
highest synthesis of life?

These vague expressions seemed to him very comprehensible, though too
weak. That it was "beauty and worship," that it really was the "highest
synthesis of life" he could not doubt, and could not admit the
possibility of doubt. . . . He was quite capable of judging of that when
the attack was over. These moments were only an extraordinary quickening
of self-consciousness—if the condition was to be expressed in one
word—and at the same time of the direct sensation of existence in the
most intense degree. Since at that second, that is at the very last
conscious moment before the fit, he had time to say to himself clearly
and consciously, "Yet for this moment one might give ones whole life!"
then without doubt that moment was really worth the whole of life. . . .
For the very thing had happened; he actually had said to himself at that
second, that, for the infinite happiness he had felt in it, that second
really might well be worth the whole of life.

At that moment," as he told Rogozhin one day in Moscow . . . "at that
moment I seemed somehow to understand the extraordinary saying that
*there shall be time no longer*. Probably," he added, smiling, "this is
the very second which was not long enough for the water to be spilt out
of Mohammed's pitcher, though the epileptic prophet had time to gaze at
all the habitations of Allah. <span id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)

Narcosis or epilepsy are not at all necessary conditions to induce
mystical states in ordinary men.

"Certain aspects of nature appear to have the peculiar power of
awakening such mystical moods," says James.

It would be more correct to say that *in all conditions* of encompassing
nature this power lies concealed. The change of the seasons—the first
snow, the awakening of spring, the summer days,

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

rainy and warm, the aroma of autumn—awakes in us strange "moods" which
we ourselves do not understand. Sometimes these moods intensify, and
become the sensation of a complete oneness with nature. In the life of
every man there are moments which act upon him more powerfully than
others. Upon one *a thunderstorm* acts mystically, upon another,
sunrise, a third *the sea, the forest, rocks, fire*. The voice of sex
embraces much of that same mystical sense of *nature*.

In the sex impulse man puts himself in the most personal relation with
nature. The comparison of the sensation of woman experienced by man, or
*vice versa*, with the feeling for nature is met with very often. And
*it is really the same sensation* as is given by forest, prairie, sea,
mountains, only in this case it is even more intense, awakens more inner
voices, forces the sounding of more inner strings.

Animals often give the mystical sensation of nature to men. Almost
everyone has his favorite animal, with which he has some inner affinity.
In these animals, or through them, men sense nature intimately and
personally.

In Hindu occultism there is the belief that every man has his
corresponding animal, through which it is possible to act upon him
magically, through which he himself can act upon others, and into which
he can transform himself or be by others transformed.

Each Hindu deity has his own particular animal.

*Brahma* has a goose; *Vishnu* an eagle; *Shiva* a bull; *Indra* an
elephant; *Kali* (*Durga*) a tiger; *Rama* a buffalo; *Ganesha* a rat;
*Agni* a ram; *Kartikkeya* (or *Subrananyia*) a peacock, and *Kama* (the
god of love) a parrot.

The same thing is true of Greece: all the deities of Olympus had their
animals.

In the religion of Egypt sacred animals played an enormous part, and in
Egypt *the cat*, the most magical of all animals, was held as sacred.

The sense of nature sometimes unfolds something infinitely new and
profound in things which seemed to have been known a long time and in
themselves contained nothing mystical.

<span class="small">The consciousness of God's nearness came to me
sometimes \[quotes Prof. James\] . . . *a presence*, I might say . . .
something in myself made</span>

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

<span class="small">me feel a part of something bigger than I, that was
controlling. I felt myself one with the grass, the trees, birds,
insects, everything in Nature. I exulted in the mere fact of existence,
of being a part of it all—the drizzling rain, the shadow of the clouds,
the tree-trunks, and so on.</span>

In my own note book of 1908 I found a description of the same
experienced state of consciousness.

It was in the sea of Marmora, on a rainy day of winter, the far-off high
and rocky shores were of a pronounced violet color of every shade,
including the most tender, fading into gray and blending with the gray
sky. The sea was the color of lead mixed with silver. I remember all
these colors. The steamer was going north. I, remained at the rail,
looking at the waves. The white crests of waves were running toward us.
A wave would run at the ship, raised as if desiring to hurl its crest
upon it, rushing up with a howl. The steamer heeled, shuddered, and
slowly straightened back; then from afar a new wave came running. I
watched this play of the waves with the ship, and felt them draw me to
themselves. It was not at all that desire to jump down which one feels
in mountains but something infinitely more subtle. The waves were
drawing my soul to themselves. And suddenly I felt that it went to them.
It lasted an instant, perhaps less than an instant, but I entered into
the waves and with them rushed with a howl at the ship. And in that
instant *I became all*. The waves—they were myself: the far violet
mountains, the wind, the clouds hurrying from the north, the great
steamship, heeling and rushing irresistibly forward—all were myself. I
sensed the enormous heavy body—*my body*—all its motions, shudderings,
waverings and vibrations, fire, pressure of steam and weight of engines
were *inside of me*, the unmerciful and unyielding propelling screw
which pushed and pushed me forward, never for a moment releasing *me*,
the rudder which determined all my motion—all this was myself: also two
sailors. . . . and the black snake of smoke coming in clouds out of the
funnel . . . all.

It was an instant of unusual freedom, joy and expansion. A second—and
the spell of charm disappeared. It passed like a dream when one tries to
remember it. But the sensation was so powerful, so bright, and so
unusual that I was afraid to move and waited for it to recur. But it did
not return, and a moment later I could not say that it had been—could
not say whether it was a reality or merely the *thought* that, looking
at the waves, it might be so.

Two years afterwards the yellowish waves of the Finnish gulf and a green
sky gave me a taste of the same sensation, but this time it was
dissipated almost before it appeared.

The examples given in this chapter do not by any means exhaust the
mystical experience of humanity.

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

But what do we infer from them?

First of all, *unity of experience*. In mystical sensations all men feel
definitely something in common, having a similar meaning and connection
one with another. The mystics of many ages and many peoples speak the
same language and use the same words. This is the first and most
important thing that speaks for the reality of the mystical experience.
Next is the complete harmony of data regarding such experience with the
theoretically deduced *conditions of the world causes*; the sensation of
the *unity of all*, so characteristic of mysticism; a new sensation of
time, the sense of infinity; joy or horror; knowledge of the whole in
the part; infinite life and infinite consciousness. All these are real
*sensed* facts in the mystical experience. And these facts are
*theoretically correct*. They are such as they should be according to
the conclusions of THE MATHEMATICS OF THE INFINITE AND OF THE HIGHER
LOGIC. This is all that is possible to say about them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_34"></span>[271:1](to25.htm#fr_34) *Vedânta is the end of
the Vedas*, the abridgment and commentaries on the Vedas. *P.
Ouspensky*.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[280:1](to25.htm#fr_35) Abridged quotation from
"Select Works of Plotinus," transl. by Thomas Taylor. Bohn's Library,
pp. lxxiii and lxxiiv.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[280:2](to25.htm#fr_36) All the ensuing
quotations are from the books of Prof. William James, and of Dr. R. M.
Bucke.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[281:1](to25.htm#fr_37) See quotation from Van
Manen's book, Chap. xi. p. 125.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[286:1](to25.htm#fr_38) The author of
"Superconsciousness," M. V. Lodizhensky, told me that in the summer of
1910 he was in "Yasnaya Poliana," the residence of L. Tolstoy, and he
conversed with him about the mystics and "The Love of the Good." Tolstoy
was at first very skeptical about them, but when Mr. Lodizhensky read to
him the quotation, given here, about the circle, Tolstoy became very
enthusiastic, and ran into another room and got a letter in which a
triangle was drawn. It appeared that he had independently almost grasped
the thought of Avva Dorotheus, and had written to some one that God was
the apex of a triangle: men the points within the angles; approaching to
one another they approach to God, approaching God, they do the same
toward one another. Several days afterward Tolstoy rode over to Mr.
Lodizhensky's, near Tula, and read different parts of "The Love <span
id="page_287">p. 287</span> of the Good," much regretting that he had
not known the books before.—*P. D. Ouspensky*.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[288:1](to25.htm#fr_39) "The Ante-Nicene
Fathers." Buffalo, The Christian Literature Pub. Co., 1885. Vol. II, pp.
463, 464.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[289:1](to25.htm#fr_40) Ibid. p. 493.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[289:2](to25.htm#fr_41) Abridged quotation from
"The saying of Lao Tzu^." Wisdom of the East Series.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[291:1](to25.htm#fr_42) Musings of a Chinese
Mystic." Wisdom of the East Series.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[292:1](to25.htm#fr_43) "Light on the Path," p.
92. London, Theosophical Pub. Co.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[293:1](to25.htm#fr_44) Paul Anikieff.
"Mysticism of St. Simeon the New Theologian." St. Petersburg, 1906.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[294:1](to25.htm#fr_45) Prof. W. James. "The
Varieties of Religious Experience," pp. 400, 401.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[298:1](to25.htm#fr_46) Prof. William James,
"The Varieties of [Religious](errata.htm#53) Experience." Lectures XVI
and XVII. Mysticism.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[302:1](to25.htm#fr_47) "The Idiot," by Fyodor
Dostoyevsky, transl. of Constance Garnett. New York, the Macmillan Co.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXIII](to26)

</div>
