[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth029)  [Next](toth031.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 27. HOW THE YELLOW CORN-EAR MAIDEN BECAME A BULL SNAKE AND REVENGED HERSELF. <span id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_72.md)

A long time ago two maidens lived in Oraíbi. They were close friends and
often used to grind corn together, one time at the house of one, at
another time at the house of the other. But after a little while they
both fell in love with a certain young man of the village, which led to
disagreement and quarrels between them. The Yellow Corn-Ear maiden was
possessed of supernatural powers and concluded to destroy her friend and
rival. One time early in the morning they were both going to get some
water from Spider Spring, which is located somewhat north-east of the
village. They took their so-called maiden's jugs (mónwikurus) with them.
When they were returning to the village they came to a sand hill, and
the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden suggested that they rest there for a little
while.

After some time she said to her friend: ''Let us play here for a little
while. You go down this hill and I shall throw something at you. You
catch it and throw it back to me," whereupon she drew forth from her
bosom a very pretty little wheel that showed all the colors of the
rainbow. When her friend had reached the foot of the hill she threw this
wheel at her, and when her friend caught it it was

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

so heavy that it threw her down. When she rose she had been turned into
a coyote. Her friend at the top of the hill laughed at her and said,
"You have been quarreling with me about that young man, now that is what
you get for it. Now, you go about that way." Whereupon she picked up her
jug and went to the village.

The other maiden, now a coyote, felt very sad and ascended the hill to
her water jug, which she tried to carry but could not do so in her
present form. She waited there until evening and was crying most of the
time. After dark she tried to enter the village, but the dogs of the
village immediately drove her away. She made a large circuit around the
village and tried to enter it from another side, but was again driven
away by the dogs. So she went westward, and having become very hungry by
this time, she was thinking where she might find something to eat. It
was in the fall of the year, and the people were watching their crops in
the fields, so she thought she might perhaps find something in some of
the sheds or temporary shelters in which the people were living, and
approaching one of them she found on top of a shelter two roasted ears
of corn that had been left there. These she ate. She then made another
effort to enter the village but as soon as the dogs of the village
smelled her presence she was again driven away. She then concluded that
she could not get into the village and again went westward. She knew
that somewhere west of Apóhnivi there was a place called Yungáchaiví,
where some herders had also built temporary shelters and were staying
while they were herding their sheep at that place. She thought that
perhaps there she might find some shelter and food.

By and by she arrived at a hut which belonged to two Qö'oqöqlöm Katcinas
who were hunting in that region. In this but she found a great deal of
rabbit meat, a good many rabbit skins and some entrails of rabbit. The
latter and the meat were slightly baked. She was very hungry and ate a
little of the entrails, which she did not like very much, however. It
was about the time of the morning meal and the two hunters had had their
early meat and had already left for the hunt. She was very tired, having
spent all the night trying to get into the village and find shelter, and
so concluded to remain and rest here all day. In the evening the two
Qö'oqöqlöm hunters returned. When coming near their hut one of them
said, "There is a coyote in our hut and has eaten some of our meat. Let
us kill him." Whereupon he got ready his bow and arrows and was aiming
at the intruder, when the other one said: "No, let us try to capture him
alive and take him home to our grandmother, Spider Woman." Upon entering
the hut they heard the coyote sob and saw tears trickling

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

down his eyes. "Oh!" one of the hunters said, "This coyote is sad and
has been crying. Let us feed him." So he took a large piece of meat,
broke it in two and gave a portion of it to the visitor, who ate it with
relish. Hereupon they concluded that they would go home that evening.
They tied up the meat and the skins, and also tied the feet of the
coyote, and loading everything upon their backs they returned to their
home, which was at Katcina Gap (Katcínvala), a short distance northwest
of Oraíbi.

Arriving there they called to Spider Woman saying, "We have brought you
an animal. Come and help us lift it off of our backs." She did so and
expressed her satisfaction at the present that she had received. They
then placed the coyote and the meat north of the fireplace. The woman
looked closely at it and then said to the two hunters: "Alas! that poor
one! That is no coyote. Thanks that you have not killed it. Where did
you find it?" They told her that they had captured it in their but where
they had been hunting, and related all the circumstances. She at once
sent one into the village after some Tomóala, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) the other one she sent to the woods after
some juniper branches.

While they were gone she boiled some water, and when the man with the
Tomóala returned, she poured the water into a vessel and put a hook from
the pods of the Tomóala into the neck and another one into the back of
the coyote. She then placed the latter into the water, covered it with a
piece of native cloth (möchápu), then placed her hand upon the cover,
took hold of the two hooks and kept twisting and turning them, by which
operation she pulled off the skin of the coyote. Throwing aside the
covering of the vessel she threw away the skin, and in the vessel was
found the maiden whom she had thus restored. She still had her clothes
on and her hair tied in whorls just as she had left the village. The
woman asked her how she had met with this fate, and the maiden told her
the whole story. Spider Woman comforted her saying, "You poor one. That
Yellow Corn-Ear maiden is bad, but you will take revenge on her."

Hereupon the other hunter returned with the juniper branches. She took
the maiden, the branches, and the water into another room and there
bathed the maiden, then gave her some corn which the maiden ground into
meal. After a number of days Spider Woman told the maiden that she
should go home now as her mother was very homesick after her child, but
she said she would call somebody in first; so she ascended her housetop
and cried out to her neighbors that they should come in. In response to
her announcement a great many

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

Katcinas who lived around there came into her house, asking her what she
wanted of them. "Yes," she said, "there is this maiden here and I want
you to return her to her house," and then told them the whole story.
They were willing. She then dressed up the maiden nicely, putting her
hair into new whorls and placing over her shoulders a new atö'ö, and
then instructed her that she should have her father make two báhos and a
number of nakwákwosis for the leader of the Katcinas and for the leader
of the singing, and also told her how she should behave towards and get
even with her enemy, the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden. Hereupon they went to
the village, the maiden going in the rear of the line of Katcinas.
Having arrived near the house of the village chief (Kík-mongwi), where
the Pongówe kiva is at present situated, they performed their first
dance, singing while they danced.

This was at early dawn, the so-called white dawn (qöyángwunu). Their
singing at once arrested the attention of some of the early risers, who
hastened to the place where the Katcinas were dancing. Soon the news was
whispered around that the Katcinas had brought a maiden to the village,
and some soon recognized the girl and ran to the house of her parents.
The latter, however, refused to believe the news, and four messengers
had to be sent to them before they believed. They then went to the
dancers, who in the meanwhile had arrived at the dancing plaza in the
center of the village. "So you have come," the mother said, and began to
cry and wanted to take her daughter with her, but the latter said, "Wait
a little," and then told her father that he should take two báhos and a
number of nakwákwosis, and while he did this the Katcinas continued
their dancing and the mana remained waiting by their side. When finally
the father brought the prayer-offerings he gave one báho to the leader,
the other to his daughter. After the dancing was over, the daughter gave
her báho to the leader of the singing. The nakwákwosis were distributed
among the other Katcinas, and after the father had thanked the Katcinas
for returning his child and had told them that he was very happy, they
returned to their home, the parents taking with then\] their daughter.

She rested there during the whole day, but early the next morning went
to grind corn, singing a little song which told about her recent
adventures. Her friend, the Yellow Corn-Ear maiden, heard her sing and
at once visited her, expressing her great delight at her return. She was
treated cordially, the maiden just having returned not manifesting any
ill-feeling towards her at all, according to the instructions of Spider
Woman. She was biding her time. They ground

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

corn together all day again as they had done formerly. In the evening
they went after water again to the same spring where they had gotten
water before. While they were filling their jugs the Yellow Corn-Ear
maiden noticed that her friend was dipping her water with a peculiar
little vessel (which Spider Woman had given to her) and that the water,
as it was running into the jug, looked very beautiful, showing the
different colors of the rainbow. She said to her friend: "What have you
there? Let me see that little cup." "Yes," her friend said, "that is a
very good cup, and the water tastes well from it, too." Hereupon she
drank from it and handed it to her friend. She admired it very much and
also drank from it. Immediately she fell down and was turned into a bull
snake. "There! You remain that way now too," the Blue Corn-Ear maiden
said; "you tried to destroy me, but you will now have to remain that way
because no one will help you and restore you." She then laughed, picked
up her jug and returned to the village.

The bull snake left the place and wandered about. It often gets hungry,
but as it cannot run very fast it has difficulty in getting its prey,
hence it captures its prey by charming and drawing it towards it by its
powerful inhalations, which is still frequently observed by the Hopi. It
lives on little rabbits, mice, birds, squirrels, etc., which it charms
by its inhalations and then kills them.

This maiden in the form of a bull snake later on went to the village
once and there was killed by her own parents, who of course did not know
that they had killed their own daughter. Hereupon the maiden, or rather
her soul, was liberated and could then go to the Skeleton House. Ever
since some of the sorcerers (Pópwaktu) will occasionally leave their
graves in the form of bull snakes. Bull snakes are often seen coming out
of certain graves still wound in the yucca leaves with which the corpse
was tied up when laid away. If such a bull snake in which a sorcerer is
supposed to have entered happens to be killed, the soul of the sorcerer
living in it is set free and then goes to the Skeleton House (Máski).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_71"></span>[105:1](toth029.htm#fr_73.md) A pû'hu (road or
path) consists of one or more small feathers--usually eagle feathers-to
the stub end of which are fastened a single and a twisted string. These
feathers are placed near springs, in front of shrines, altars, on paths
and near graves, as paths for clouds, spirits, deities, etc., Whom the
Hopi wish to follow the paths.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[105:2](toth030.htm#fr_74.md) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_73"></span>[107:1](toth030.htm#fr_75.md) Martyinia proboscidæ,
Miller.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 28. A Journey to the Skeleton House](toth031.md)
