[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth027)  [Next](toth029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 25. HOW THE ANTELOPE MAIDEN WAS RECONCILED. <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_64.md)

Alíksai! At Zuni the people were living, and the two sons of the village
chief were racing with each other. At a place called Aámusha some one
dangerous (núkpana), lived. A path led by this place, and as the two
brothers were racing they came to this bluff and when they were close by
they heard some one call, "Come here. There is something beautiful here,
come and see it. Oh, no, there is nothing there," the boys said. "Yes,
come and see, there is something beautiful here," the voice replied. So
they approached closer, and they saw on the top of the bluff a beautiful
maiden. It was an Antelope Maiden. She at once drew up the elder brother
by a long, deep inhalation. She then said to the younger brother: "Even
if you bring your beads here, the most valuable possession of the Zunis,
I shall not give you back your brother, as I do not want your beads."

Hereupon the younger brother ran home. "Why do you come alone?" his
father said. "Yes," he said, "when we were racing there a beautiful
maiden called us and then drew my brother up with her breath, on top of
the bluff. "Oh!" the father said, "Yes, some one dangerous lives there."
The father then told his son to

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

go and hunt up the Pöokónghoyas and ask their assistance. He cut a round
piece from the middle of a buckskin and made a ball which he tied to a
stick; also an arrow, to which he fastened blue-bird and parrot
feathers, and finally gave his boy some tobacco and then sent him (on
his errand. Going south, he all at once heard some one calling, and saw
Pöokónghoya and his brother, both being very small, wandering and
playing around there. He went first to the house where Spider Woman (Só
Wuhti), <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_65.md) the grandmother of the two
brothers lived. She called to the latter and said, "Stop, and come here,
some one has come," but they at first did not listen; so she called
again. They then came into the kiva and the messenger, handing them the
presents, said to them, "This I have brought for you. Way over there
lives a pretty maiden who drew my brother up to her, and now my father
has made these things and told me to bring them to you in order to see
what you thought about it and could do for us." They told him to go
westward to the Mole, his uncle. They said he would come to a hollow
place where a ladder was protruding, there the Mole lived, and he should
see what the Mole thought about it.

So the young man went to the house of the Mole, who told him to go
northward to his uncle. So he proceeded northward and came to a little
opening in the ground from which there came a breeze. "This must be the
place," the young man said, and thereupon a great strong wind came out
of the opening. It was the Storm (Hû'k'angwuu), who then invited him to
come in, so he went in and found a Hopi sitting in the house. He was a
handsome man, nicely dressed up, wearing a bandoleer over each shoulder,
also two buckskins tied crosswise over his chest. He wore a hurúnkwa on
his head, a kilt about his loins, and had black lines on each cheek,
while his body was painted up like the bodies of warriors. When they
were seated, Hû'k'angwuu asked him why he had come, then he related his
story. Hû'k'angwuu then said: "Let us smoke, then we will see what we
think about it." So he got out a large pipe and the young man smoked,
swallowing all the smoke without again exhaling it. He then said to his
host. "Itáha!" <span id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_66.md) "Itíwaya," <span
id="fr_69"></span>[3](#fn_67.md) the uncle replied; and then added: "You
are surely my nephew. Now, what is it that you want? what has happened?"
He then said: "My older brother and I were racing there and came to a
place where a beautiful maiden called us and she drew my brother up, and
now my father sent me out to see whether we could

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

do anything to get him back. Our beads, she said, she does not want. His
uncle then said, ''You go to Wálpi (a Hopi village distantly located),
and see the Snake people there, who used to have snake dances here and
were driven away from here to Wálpi when the snakes bit somebody, and
see what they have to say about it.

So the young man proceeded to Wálpi, although it was far away. So he
came to Wálpi and there found the Snake people. They were handsome and
dressed up like warriors and like Snake people (Tcutcúcona).

When he had entered they asked him: "Why have you come here?" "Yes," he
said, "we were racing there where we live, and coming to the bluff,
Aámusha, somebody spoke to us and said: "You come here, come in here.
There is something handsome in here," and then she drew up my elder
brother, and now my uncle, Storm, told me to come here and see you. Now,
are you the ones, and what now? What do you think about it?" "We shall
see," they said, and then began to smoke. The young man again swallowed
all the smoke, which pleased the Snakes <span
id="fr_70"></span>[1](#fn_68.md) and they said, "You are truly our nephew.
What is it that you want?" ''Yes," he said, "we were racing there and
that maiden drew up my elder brother and said that she did not want our
stone beads even if we would bring them.'' "Yes," the Snakes said, "she
does not want them." The Tcutcúcona then showed him a báho, saying,
''This the maiden wants, she does not want beads, but she wants such
báhos. You look at this báho well and then make one like it; or," they
continued, "we shall make one for you. You take that along and then you
look at it well and make báhos like it and give them to the maiden.
These she wants." So he took one with him and returned home.

When he arrived at his home he showed the báho; they looked at it and
then made a good many of them. With these they proceeded to the place
where the maiden had enticed the young man. The young man, his father,
the two Pö'okongs, their grandmother (Spider Woman) and Storm were in
the party. Spider Woman had taken a seat behind the ear of Pöokónghoya.
When they arrived at the bluff the father said, ''We have come to get my
child." "What have you brought with you?" the maiden replied. "We have
brought these báhos," the father said, and hereupon Storm raised them
all up and lifted them on the bluff. The mána at once fled into her
house, and Storm pushed the whole party into the house also. "What have
you brought?" the mána again asked. "This we have brought, this here."

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> Whereupon they showed her the báhos.
"Thanks," she said, "these I want. Of course I shall give him to you,
but let us first play a game," whereupon she spread sand upon the
floor." Now, you play first," she said. So the Hopi planted different
kinds of seed in the sand and thrust the báhos into the sand around the
border, whereupon the things planted grew up quickly. "Thanks," she
said, "you certainly know something. These I want and you shall
certainly take him along. But we shall race first, we shall follow the
sun." So she and the young man that had procured the báho arranged for a
race. The young man mounted an eagle breath feather, the mána turning
into a Tókchii (a swift snake, similar to the racer). They started
together, but by and by the mána got ahead of the young man. They
circled around the sun, started back, the maiden still being in the
lead. Spider Woman then took a reed, pointed it towards the racers, and
by a strong inhalation drew the young man forward, increasing his speed
so that he arrived at the house first, thus having beaten the mána in
the race. The mána then said, "You take him along, you have beaten me."
Whereupon she drew him forth from another room. He was nearly dead. In
the inner room were many bones of young men who had perished there. The
Antelope Maiden had been angry because no bahos had been made for her
for a long time, and hence she had killed so many young men. But since
these people now revived her bahos, she was reconciled, and after that
killed no more people, and the Zunis were freed from this danger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[99:1](toth028.htm#fr_66.md) Told by Tawíima
(Mishóngnovi).

<span id="fn_65"></span>[100:1](toth028.htm#fr_67.md) Kohk'ang Wuhti
(Spider Woman) is often called Só Wuhti (Old Woman or Grandmother).

<span id="fn_66"></span>[100:2](toth028.htm#fr_68.md) My uncle (on father's
side).

<span id="fn_67"></span>[100:3](toth028.htm#fr_69.md) My nephew (on
brother's side).

<span id="fn_68"></span>[101:1](toth028.htm#fr_70.md) The idea that
swallowing the smoke, when smoking, is considered as an accomplishment,
requiring special courage and strength, occurs in various Hopi tales.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 26. The Pö'okongs and the Bálölöokong](toth029.md)
