[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth188)  [Next](toth190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 76.--THE BADGER, THE COYOTE, AND THE KÓHONINO MAIDEN.

Badger and Coyote are great friends. Coyote has found place where
Kóhonino maiden has died and when hunting together one day Coyote
suggests that they shall revive her. They find maiden's bones, which
they place in heap, and Badger covers with his black kilt. That maiden
may have flesh and color he sends Coyote to get grass and red paint,
which he wets with water Coyote gets from spring. Badger then makes
Coyote go away, as otherwise maiden will not revive. Badger sings and
passes paint over bones and grass several times and maiden is alive. She
asks what he wants, and he calls Coyote. She is willing to go home with
them. On the way Coyote covets mána, but Badger is not willing and says
she is to be their clan sister. Coyote is still anxious to have maiden
and bites her in calf of leg. Badger expostulates with him and maiden
falls down and dies again. Badger takes body on his back to bury her and
Coyote follows. Badger asks why he follows and Coyote goes. He comes
again while Badger is digging grave and they bury maiden and return
home. They stay at Coyote's house that night. In morning Badger goes
home, inviting friend to visit him next day. As he goes home he thinks
how he shall kill Coyote. He kills four bull-snakes, which he cuts into
short pieces and puts pieces in drying pot. The snakes are fat. He then
makes hurúshuki. Coyote comes and they commence to eat right away.
Coyote asks what it is that tastes so good. Badger says he did not know
what to set before him, so he opened his abdomen, took his entrails out
and roasted them, and his abdomen closed up again. In proof he shows
abdomen with little scratch he has made on it. Coyote believes him and
says he will do that, too. He asks Badger to visit him in morning and
borrows knife and pot. In morning Coyote puts pot on fire, opens abdomen
with knife and paws and entrails drop out. He takes hold of large
intestine and drops dead. Badger comes and finds friend dead. He takes
fat from Coyote and returns to his house. He spreads fat on ant hill
near and ants move away. This is why ants do not remain where coyote fat
is placed and that Coyote fat is used for ant bites.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 77.--The Coyote and the Kókontu-maidens.](toth190)
