[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth002)  [Next](toth004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2. HURÚING WUHTI AND THE SUN <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

Alíksai! A very long time ago there was nothing here in the world but
water. Only away off in the west where Hurúing Wuhti lived there was a
small piece of land where she lived. She lived in a hill or bluff called
Taláschomo. Hurúing Wuhti owned the moon, the stars, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4) and all the hard substances, such as beads,
corals, shells, etc. Away in the east lived the Sun, painted up very
beautifully. The Sun was very skillful. One time Hurúing Wuhti sent the
Moon to the Sun, throwing him through (the intervening) space so that he
fell down in front of the Sun. He told the Sun that Hurúing Wuhti wanted
him; then he arose and passed through the sky back to the west. The Sun
also soon rose and followed the Moon to the west, to the house of
Hurúing Wuhti. "Have you come?" the latter said. "Yes, I have come. Why
do you want me? I have come because you wanted me." "Thanks," the
Hurúing Wuhti said, "thanks that you have come, my father, because you
shall be my father." "Yes," the Sun said, "and you shall be my mother,
and we shall own all things together." "Yes," Hurúing Wuhti said,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

"now let us create something for you." "All right, thank you," the Sun
replied.

Hereupon they entered another chamber which was very beautiful, and
there all kinds of the skins of different kinds of animals and birds
were hanging. So Hurúing Wuhti got out a bundle and placed it on the
floor. It was a large piece of old native cloth (möchápu). She then
placed on the floor all kinds of bird skins and feathers. Hereupon she
rubbed her body and arms, rubbing off a great many small scales from her
cuticle. These she took into her hands, rubbing the two palms of her
hands together, and then placing these small scales on the feathers and
skins. Hereupon she covered the whole with the möchápu. The Sun kindled
a little fire at the east side of the pile. Hurúing Wuhti then took hold
of two corners of the cloth and began to sing, moving the corners to the
time of her singing. The Sun took hold of the other two corners and also
waved them, but he did not sing. After they had waved the corners four
times, the things under the covering commenced to move, and soon they
began to emit sounds, whistling and chirping the way the different birds
do. Hereupon Hurúing Wuhti took off the covering saying: "We are done,
be it this way." There were all different kinds of birds, those that fly
around in the summer when it is warm. As she took off the covering the
birds commenced to fly, passed through the opening and flew out into the
air, but soon all returned, gathering again in front of the two. "You
shall own these," Hurúing Wuhti said to the Sun, "they are yours."
"Thanks," the Sun replied, "that they are mine." Hurúing Wuhti then
handed to the Sun a large jar made of a light transparent material like
quartz crystal. Into this the Sun placed all the birds, closing up the
jar.

Hereupon the Sun said: "Now, let us create something for you, too."
"Very well," Hurúing Wuhti said. Then the Sun placed a small quantity of
different kinds of hair on the floor. Furthermore, a little quantity of
the different kinds of paints that he was painted up with. He then let
his beard (rays) drop upon these objects, also shook his wings towards
them. They then covered up the things again, each took hold of two
corners of the covering, and the Sun then sang a song. Soon something
began to move under the covering, and when they removed the latter an
antelope, deer, cotton-tail rabbit, jack-rabbit, and mountain sheep
jumped up, and after running around in the large room for a while, they
returned and assembled again in front of the two. "You take these, you
shall own them," the Sun said to Hurúing Wuhti. "All right, thank you,"
the latter said. Hereupon these animals took places close to the Hurúing

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

Wuhti, whom they considered as their mother afterwards. "You shall own
these, they shall be yours," the Sun said once more to Hurúing Wuhti,
for which she thanked him.

The latter then put the Sun into an opening in the floor of the house,
through which the Sun departed with the vessel containing the birds.
After having passed through the opening, the Sun returned under the
earth to the east again, and when he came out he turned over the land
which belonged to Hurúing Wuhti, and which had been under water, and by
so doing made the world (tû'wakachi) land. The Sun at once noticed a
great many beings come out of the water and moving. about on the shore
of the land. He first called them the Water Lice (bá-atuhtu), but when
he had risen to the middle of the sky he noticed that they were people,
and he called them White People (Bahánas), some Spaniards (Castílians),
and others Mormons (Mámona). He then poured out of the jar all the birds
which then went flying around in the air and increased.

From this time on the Sun always went towards the west, entering the
house of Hurúing Wuhti, passing out below, and returning to the east
again. When he came there this time Hurúing Wuhti said: "Have you come?"
"Yes," the Sun said. "Thanks," the Hurúing Wuhti replied, "let us create
something again. What have you found out?" "Yes," the Sun said, "land
has come out every where, and everything is beautiful, and the water is
beautiful, too. Now, to-morrow when I shall rise there will be blossoms
and flowers and grass all over the land. "Very well," Hurúing Wuhti
said, "but let us make something now again. What shall we make?"
Hereupon she fed the Sun honey, and other good food. When the Sun was
through eating, Hurúing Wuhti again said: "Well, now, what shall we
make? Let us use the covering again," placing the same covering that
they had used upon the floor. Hereupon Hurúing Wuhti rubbed her legs and
feet, rubbing off some more particles of cuticle. These she took into
her hands, working them into a small ball, which she placed on the
floor, and covered it up with the möchápu. They then again took hold of
the four corners of the covering, Hurúing Wuhti singing a song. Soon
something moved under the covering and the crying of a little child was
heard, which soon said: "I am hot, am perspiring." They uncovered it and
found a little maiden. "O my!" Hurúing Wuhti said: "Only one has been
created. That is not good, it must not be this way." Hereupon she put on
the covering again and, then repeated the song. Soon a second voice was
heard, and removing the covering they found a little boy, the little
brother of the mána. His first sound was a groan as that of a

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

small child. Hereupon he also said: "I am very warm," and wiped off the
perspiration from his face and body. "Have you come?" Hurtling Wuhti
said. "Yes, we have come. Thanks," she replied.

They were brother and sister. So the children sat up. "Have you anything
to say?" Hurúing Wuhti asked them. "Yes," they said, "why do you want
us?" "Yes," Hurúing Wuhti replied, "why my father, the Sun, has made a
beautiful earth and I want you to live on this earth. That is why I want
you. So I want you to go eastward now, and wherever you find a good
piece of land, there you settle down. By and by others, too, shall come
to you.'' Before they started the Sun asked Hurúing Wuhti who these two
were, how they should be called? And Hurúing Wuhti named the youth
Múyingwa, and the maiden Yáhoya. Hereupon the two started and left.

The Sun and Hurúing Wuhti prepared. to create some more. It was at this
time still night. Hurúing Wuhti now rubbed her abdomen with both hands,
and took from her umbilicus a small quantity of the scales which she
twisted together. All this scaly matter, thus rubbed from her body, she
then placed on the floor, covering it up with the aforesaid cloth. They
again took hold of the corners, sang over it, and as they lifted up the
corners the fourth time, something began to move under the covering.
They took the covering off and there was another being all in
perspiration. It was again a maiden. She wiped off the perspiration from
her body with some sand that was on the floor, and sat up. Hurúing Wuhti
told her not to rub her body any more, as the sand had already adhered
to her body and the latter was dry. She hereupon told the maiden that
she should be called Sand Clan member (Tuwá-wungwa), and Lizard Clan
member (Kúkuts-wungwa). Hurúing Wuhti hereupon sent the maiden off after
the other two, giving her, however, one grain of shelled corn before she
left.

By this time it became a little lighter and the Sun said to Hurúing
Wuhti, she should hurry up. So the latter this time rubbed her face, and
the inside of her nose, and from the scales thus rubbed off she formed a
little ball, placed it on the floor, and again covered it. They went
through the same process as before. Soon they heard a child crying like
a Hopi child would cry, and another one like the crying of a coyote.
Removing the covering, they found a youth and a maiden, both also
perspiring profusely and wiping off the perspiration. "Why do you want
us?" the children asked. "Yes," Hurúing Wuhti said, "we have made this
beautiful world here and there is hardly anybody living there yet, and
that you should live here

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

somewhere we wanted you." She then said that the mána should be a
Burrowing Owl Clan member (Kókop-wungwa), and the youth coyote Clan
member (Ísh-wungwa). Hereupon she gave one grain of shelled corn to each
one and told them now to follow the others, and that they should travel
quickly.

Hereupon they created once more in the same manner as before. When they
were ready to lift up the covering they heard somebody grunt, and
another one seemed to be angry, so after they had partly lifted up the
covering they dropped it again, but the two under it said, "Remove that,
we are very hot." So they removed it and there was one child like a
Hopi. It was the one that had grunted like a bear. To this one Hurúing
Wuhti gave the name Bear-Clan member (Hón-wungwa). She gave a grain of
shelled corn to him and sent him on. The other,
Head-with-the-Hair-Pushed-over-it-Backward (Tálqöto), was a Navaho, and
to him Hurúing Wuhti gave a little piece of spoiled meat-and sent him
on. This is the reason why the Navaho use meat, instead of corn like the
Hopi.

Hereupon the Sun again passed through the opening in the floor,
returning to the east under the earth. The next day when he arose again
and had traveled a distance, he saw in the distance smoke arising at
different places, and noticed that the people who had been created were
camping there. As he rose higher he saw at a distance a maiden and a
youth who were traveling along, but seemed to be very tired. The maiden
would sometimes carry her little brother on her back, then she would set
him down and the two would join hands and travel along together. When
the Sun came nearer he asked them: "Where do you come from? Who are
you?" "Yes," they said, "We have come out away off there somewhere."
"All right, the Sun said," you travel on." Hereupon he gave them water
to drink and a little corn for food. He then said to the youth that he
should be called Sun Clan member (Tawá-wungwa), and to the maiden he
gave the name Forehead Clan member (Kál-wungwa), whereupon he told them
to travel on east ward. The Sun and Forehead clans later came to
Shupaúlavi, the Bear Clan to Shongópavi, and the Burrowing Owl Clan to
Mishóngnovi, while the Sand Clan went to Wálpi. Múyingwa and his sister
settled down somewhere west of a large spring situated south of
Shongópavi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_3"></span>[5:1](toth003.htm#fr_3) Told by Kúhkiuma
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5:2](toth003.htm#fr_4) This is the only instance
where I have heard the moon and stars spoken of as being owned or
controlled by Hurúing Wuhti. The informant did not know the songs
mentioned in this tale.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3. Coming of the Hopi From the Under-world](toth004)
