[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth136)  [Next](toth138.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 24.--HOW PÖ'OKONG WON A BRIDE.

Pöokónghoya and brother Balö'onghoya live with grandmother, Spider
Woman. They hear that maiden refuses to marry, and they tell grandmother
they will go and try. She tries to dissuade them, as they are small and
unsightly. In evening they take squash seeds and some little sticks and
go to village. They make stone traps to catch mice near maiden's house.
She sees them, and asks what they are doing. She asks them to set traps
at her house, as there are many mice. They set traps in house and near
mealing bin. They set mealing tray instead of small stone, as in other
traps. They kill antelope, and in night place it under píki tray. Next
morning maiden finds antelope and tells father. They think it is caught
by trap. In evening Pö'okongs go again and set traps, and maiden again
asks them to set traps in house. While doing so, father comes and tells
them about antelope. He says if something is again caught in trap they
are to come for daughter. In night Pö'okongs kill deer and place it
under piki tray trap. Daughter finds it, and father tells her to wait
for somebody there at night. Pö'okongs quarrel about maiden, and
grandmother decides Pö'okong must go. In evening he goes, mother fills
tray with meal, and Pö'okong leads daughter away to house. Grandmother
takes meal and tray from maiden, and invites her to eat hurúshuki.
Maiden is told to put very little in mouth, but it increases. Maiden
grinds corn for three days.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

On fourth day grandmother calls for neighbors to come and assist in
head-washing. Maiden sits close to kiva entrance, and clouds come and
rain upon her. Pö'okongs constantly play with ball and stick, and with
feathered arrows. Spiders prepare bridal costume. One day Spider Woman
washes heads of Pö'okong and bride. She give, maiden bridal costume and
sends her to mother's house. Pö'okong follows with quantity of meat.
Spider Woman instructs Pö'okong not to talk much, and in evening to sit
on floor looking at wrist-bands. After eating at mother's house,
Pö'okong sits on floor and holds wrist-band before eyes and looks
through it. In morning Pö'okong goes to visit Spider Woman. When she
hears what he has done, she says he is kahópi . In planting time
Pö'okong goes to Spider Woman and she gives him small parcel of
different kinds of corn. He goes with father-in-law to plant, and takes
parcel. They plant one grain of corn at time, and it soon grows up. It
rains heavily and much grass grows up. Spider Woman tells Pö'okong that
he should form ant-hills throughout field, meaning that he should
diligently hoe it. He goes to field with hoe, but finds ant-hills, and
forms small ant-hills throughout field. When he tells grandmother, she
calls him fool, and tells him to go and "wiklolantanangwu." He goes and
obtains fat, which he scatters through corn-field. He returns without
having hoed. When he tells Spider Woman what he has done, she calls him
great fool, and explains that she meant he was to hoe field. Pö'okong
finds father-in-law very sad about condition of corn. He tells him
hoeing shall be done that day. They go to field. Spider Woman asks
clouds to hoe field. While men are hoeing, clouds come and water runs
through corn-field in streamlets, covering up grass with sand and earth.
Pö'okong's wife bears son, who grows up and plays with children. Father
makes him bows and arrows. Sometimes he shoots children. Oraíbi angry
and say Pö'okongs should go to their own house. Pö'okong returns home
with son, leaving wife with her parents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 25.--How the Antelope Maiden Was Reconciled.](toth138.md)
