[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth219.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 109.--A RAID ON THE HOPI VILLAGES.

Inhabitants of two villages used to lie further northeast, where they
were harassed by Utes. For five years they are left in peace. In sixth
year their enemies find them out and camp eastward of mesa. Young men
are sent to find out who they are. Inhabitants of one village move to
the other village, where they can better defend themselves. Enemies go
to empty village and follow their tracks on horseback, but they cannot
get up. Many of them are shot by people in village. Afterwards by going
around mesa they get into village and capture some women and maidens.
Warriors follow them, but they escape. People pack up all their things
and go in line to Oraíbi, where they are admitted and still live.

110.--THE EARLY SPANISH MISSIONS AT ORAÍBI.

Long ago Spaniards make inroads on Oraíbi. They make peace and Spaniards
ask to be permitted to live in Oraíbi. Hopi consent and assist Spaniards
in building house. It is in spiral form and in center is house. Meeting
house with bell tower is afterwards built, Hopi are baptised by Tûtáachi
who is joined by another Tûtáachi, who brings them clothing and shoes in
carts on heavy wooden wheels. Hopi assemble on Sundays and priests speak
to them. Soon they ask Hopi to work for them. They send them to springs
to get water and they then set them to make cisterns. Spaniards bring
cattle and Hopi buy calves for corn. Some cattle drag logs to village.
For four years everything goes well and it rains often. Then priests
forbid Hopi to have Katcina dances and make báhos. It is very warm and
very dry. Hopi begin to have ceremonials again and deposit
prayer-offerings, but it does not rain. Padres continue to oppress Hopi
and demand food. They disregard Hopi's feeling as to their religion and
trample under foot chastity of women and maidens. Number of oppressors
go away, leaving padre alone. Hopi meet in council and finally decide to
get rid of priest. Nobody will go, but finally Badger clan volunteers.
They proceed to Mission and knock at door. Padre

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

refuses to open it at first. When he does so they rush into room, drag
him out of house, and cut his throat. They throw his body into gulch and
pile stones upon it. They then wait to see what will happen. Other
villagers follow example and get rid of their padres. They expect
Spaniards will come to revenge brethren, but no one comes and they
destroy houses of Spaniards, divide logs and timbers, and use them for
kivas. Some of smaller bells still owned by Agave fraternity.
