[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth167)  [Next](toth169) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 55.--THE ROOSTER, THE MOCKING-BIRD, AND THE MAIDEN.

Beautiful maiden persistently refuses all offers of marriage. Chief of
north brings her bundle of presents, which she looks at, but returns
bundle, saying she does not want it. Rooster goes as handsome youth to
maiden who is pleased with him. Tells him to remain over night and
return in four days, and then she will go to his house. On third day
Mocking-bird, who has heard about Rooster, goes and asks maiden to marry
him. She promises to marry him and speaks to mother about it. Rooster
has seen Mocking-bird going upon mesa, and he also goes same day to
house. They have altercation and agree to have contest in three days to
see who knows most about making light. Rooster goes in search of
assistance. While resting near báho shrine, somebody tells him to come
in. He enters and finds many maidens. He is seated and given shelled
corn to eat. He goes on his journey until he comes to large rock with
opening. He crows repeatedly and door opens. He enters and finds many
roosters and chicken, men, women, youths and maidens. After he has been
fed, they ask what he has come for. He tells them about maiden and of
his contention about light. They promise to try and do something for
him, but that Mocking-bird understands something and has assistance of
Kwátokwuu. In evening they sing and crow all night. After third crow,
yellow dawn appears, and after singing two more songs sun rises. Chief
says they have accomplished it right and that rooster can go home
without fear. He returns running very fast. He is again fed by maidens.
<span id="page_302">p. 302</span> They tie dry corn-husks to his tail.
As he runs they rattle, and as he is scared he runs very fast. Next day
he walks through village and then notifies Mocking-bird to come that
night and watch him. In evening Mocking-bird goes to Rooster's house,
and Kwátokwuu goes to his house. Rooster sings all night, and when he
has nearly done Mocking-bird slips away and notifies Kwátokwuu, who
spreads his large wings across eastern sky, completely covering up dawn,
Rooster crows after singing last two songs, but it does not become
light, so he has failed. Mocking-bird flies away and sun soon comes up.
In evening Mocking-bird invites Rooster to come and watch him. He sings
and whistles all night, and after last two songs suit rises. Maiden
marries Mocking-bird. She hears two children, boy and girl. Boy is child
of Rooster and girl of Mocking-bird. Women since then said to be
children of Mocking-bird, and that is why they talk and jabber so much.
Men are considered children of Rooster and that is why they are so
gentle and docile.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56.--The Toad and the Snow Katcínas.](toth169)
