[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth022)  [Next](toth024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

## 20. PÖOKÓNGHOYA AND HIS BROTHER AS THIEVES. <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_59)

Alíksai! At Shongópavi they were living; at the place where Shongópavi
used to be and where there are still the ruins of the old village, they
were living. North of the village, but close by, lived Pö'okong <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_59) and his brother. They lived there with
their grandmother. Often they would play with their ball, and one time
they were also playing with their ball, striking it, and playing with it
towards Toríva. When they arrived here they were thirsty, and went into
the spring to drink water. When they had satisfied their thirst they
were going to continue their playing, when they saw a lot of báhos at
the place where the water comes out. "Let us take these along," the
younger brother said, and taking one of the báhos, he swallowed it. "You
swallow one too," he then said to his elder brother; but by this time
the latter discovered in the recess in the rocks somewhat high up, some
potsherds, or bowls, with different kinds of paints which the Flute
priests had deposited there. "Let us take some of this," he said to his
younger brother, whereupon he put into his ball, through little holes
and openings that had been made in the buckskin covering through long
usage, some of each kind of paint. After having put the paints into the
ball he sewed up the holes. Hereupon he replaced the ball again and then
said to his brother: "Now let us go, and before we will get home it will
rain if we continue to beat our ball now in this way."

So they started, beating the ball towards the Corn-Ear Bluffs that are
still standing at the place where the old village of Mishóngnovi used to
be. One of the brothers was beating the ball forward and the other one
backward, and in this way they proceeded to the village. Before they had
reached the village, the people of Mishóngnovi had discovered them. They
were beating their ball around north of the village for a little While,
the children of the village looking on and shouting at them. Hereupon
they entered the village and kept beating their ball through the
village. All at once they entered one of the kivas and found that the
Flute priests were assembled in this kiva for their ceremony. In one of
the trays that were standing on the floor was lying a lightning frame,
thunder board, netted water jug, etc. This tray they grabbed and went
out. None of the priests said anything.

Hereupon they went into another kiva where the Snake priests

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

were assembled for their ceremony. They were just washing the snakes in
a bowl. The Pöokónghoyas grabbed a bull-snake (lölö'okong), put it into
a snake-sack and left the kiva, the younger brother holding this bag
under one arm, the elder brother carrying the tray with the objects. In
this manner they proceeded towards the Corn-Ear bluffs,, constantly
beating their ball. When they arrived at the Corn-Ear Bluffs they found
a great many báhos, little artificial melons, watermelons, and peaches
which the Hopi had made and deposited in the different niches, cracks,
etc. They had been deposited here by the different societies in their
different ceremonies as prayer-offerings, that they might have an
abundance of these things. On top of the rocks they saw the Watcher
(Tû'walahka), who owns this rock. It was Cótukvnangwuu, who was sitting
there in the form of an old man. "Oh my!" the younger brother said, "How
many prayer-offerings there are here! Let us steal some of them and take
them home;" but the elder brother refused to do so, so the younger
brother ascended the rock along a crack and took from one of the places
where the prayer-offerings had been deposited a corn báho, a watermelon,
and a melon, and brought them down.

Hereupon they started homeward again, beating their ball. They again
went by the spring Toríva where they drank, this time, however, not
stealing anything. They then started towards Shongópavi along the trail.
After they had gone a little distance they shot the lightning frame, and
twirled the bullroarer several times. By the time they had reached the
canyon, or gulch, right east of Shongópavi, and as they were beginning
to ascend to the village, clouds had gathered in the sky and it began to
thunder and rays of lightning began shooting through the sky. Soon it
began to rain.

They began to run towards their house, and just as they arrived there
they once more shot the lightning frame and twirled the thunder board.
By this time it thundered very hard and loud, and lightning was
flashing. One of the Hopi houses in the village was struck and
shattered. By this time they had arrived at their house. "Who are those
little mischief makers that are coming there?" their grand Mother said.
"You are bad." But the two brothers rushed into the house and put the
lightning frame, thunder board, the snake, the little artificial melons,
báhos and the paint, which they had brought with them, quickly but
secretly into two pots which they covered up. And because the
Pöokónghoyas afterwards had these things they were the cause that it
always rained and the Hopi had good crops.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[84:1](toth023.htm#fr_61) Told by Kúhkuima
(Shupaúlavi).

2 Pö'okong and the diminutive form Pöokónghoya are used promiscuously by
the Hopi, as may be seen in several of these tales.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 21. How the Pö'okongs Destroyed Cóoyoko And His Wife](toth024)
