[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth108)  [Next](toth110.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 106. A KATCINA RACE CONTEST BETWEEN THE WÁLPI AND THE ORAÍBI. <span id="fr_195"></span>[1](#fn_193.md)

Halíksai! In Wálpi the people were living, but at the place where the
old village stood before the people had moved on the mesa. And in Oraíbi
the people were also living. The Wálpi always had races west of the
village in the valley for practice. When they had become strong, they
said: ''Let us go to Oraíbi and race there, because they are not strong
and nimble." One time they had a Katcina race in Wálpi again, as they
used to have frequently. One of the Oraíbi youths who had a friend in
Wálpi went to visit his friend on that day, though he had not heard
about there being a race there. As the Katcinas were coming towards
evening his friend said to the Oraíbi youth, that he should stay all
night and see the Katcinas, and then go home in the morning. So the
Oraíbi youth remained for the Katcina race.

They did not come until towards evening. When they had arrived on the
plaza the Kóyemsis challenged the young men of the village to come and
race with the Katcinas. The Oraíbi youth enjoyed seeing the race, but he
was somewhat timid and afraid to participate in the race. When the race
was over the young men of the village had long races yet down in the
valley, but they said to one another, that no one should tell the Oraíbi
youth that they intended to go there and race with the Oraíbi. In the
evening, however, the friend of this young man told him that the Wálpi
had been practicing and that they intended to come to Oraíbi and race
with the Oraíbi youths. He added that they should also practice in
Oraíbi for this coming contest, and said that these Wálpi were braggarts

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

and not so strong as they said they were. When he had told him this they
retired for the night.

Early the next morning, before he had eaten a morning meal, the Oraíbi
youth returned to his village, running very fast. When he arrived there
he told the crier to make an announcement. The latter announced that the
youths of the village should assemble on the plaza, as a certain youth
had something to communicate to them. Hereupon the young men assembled
on the plaza and asked the young man what he had to tell them. He said
that he had been in Wálpi, that they had Katcina races there and
practiced running, and that they were going to come over here to race
with them, so they should now go and practice running and thus become
strong. "Let us race here north of the village," he added. "They were
going to come here without informing us, but my friend there told me
about it."

So they assembled at Hohóyahki, north of the village, and there had two
races. "Let us stop now," they said to each other; "if we race too long
one gets tired and does not recover from his fatigue." Thus they
practiced for four days. On the fifth day the Wálpi came. They did not
know, however, that the Oraíbi had heard about their coming. When the
Wálpi arrived at the spring K'eqö'chmovi, east of Oraíbi, where there
were then no houses, they dressed up at that spring so that the Oraíbi
should not find out so soon, but the Oraíbi had noticed them. When they
had dressed up they ran towards the village, following a trail straight
up towards the Katcínkihu Kuwáwaima. Here they gathered and Stopped for
a little while and then ran towards the village.

The people of the village, though they had known of their coming, acted
as if they had not seen them. Two of the Katcinas were Kóyemsis who
carried gifts in the form of comíviki, roasted sweet corn ears, etc.
When they had arrived at the plaza one of the older Oraíbi went to them
and asked: "Have you come? Have you arrived?" "Yes," the Kóyemsis
replied. "On what account did you come?" they were asked. "Yes," the
Kóyemsis said, "we have come to contend with your young men in a race."
Hereupon the old man asked the Oraíbi youths to descend from the houses
and race with these Katcinas. Immediately a large number of the young
men came down, laid off their clothes, and raced with the Katcinas. As
so many entered the race the Katcinas were soon tired. They did not
capture one Oraíbi racer, did not even get near enough to strike him
with their yucca leaf whips.

When they were through racing they had not caught a single

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

Oraíbi youth, and the Oraíbi had won from them all the presents. The
Katcinas were very tired. The man who had received them on the plaza
gave them at least some prayer-meal, whereupon they returned to the
Katcina house south of the village, where they laid off their costumes.
They then again met the Oraíbi men to race with them west of the
village. "You have beaten us," they said to the Oraíbi, "if we do not
win in this race then we shall indeed be very much dejected." They then
descended from the village on the west side, ran towards Mûmû'shvavi,
from there south-westward, then south around the mesa point, and
ascended the mesa from the east side, thus describing a very large
circle.

The Wálpi again could not overtake the Oraíbi and when they got to
K'eqö'chmovi, the Wálpi were very tired and gave up the race. The two
Kóyemsis who were a little older than the others and were not quite so
tired went up to the Katcina house and got the costumes of the Wálpi,
whereupon the Wálpi all returned, very much in despair. They went very
slowly and were very quiet. "The Oraíbi," they said among themselves,
"are very strong." It was early in the morning when one after the other
arrived at Wálpi, some of them being so tired that they had fallen far
behind. They agreed that they should not go and race with the Oraíbi
again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_193"></span>[256:1](toth109.htm#fr_195.md) Told by Kwáyeshva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 107. The Last Fight With the Navaho](toth110.md)
