[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth128)  [Next](toth130) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 16.--HOW BALL-HEAD (TATCIQTÖ) WEDDED AN ORAÍBI MAIDEN.

Young man thinks he will try to marry maiden who has refused all young
men of village. He sees her grinding corn, and tells her to stop. They
converse, and when she finds out who he is, she consents if mother
willing. Parents say he will be welcome. Next morning young man prepares
ten bunches of corn ears and proceeds to village. Maiden asks him to
come in and they sit on opposite sides of fireplace. Young man wears
mask of Ball-Head. He gives her corn of which she eats and takes to
parents. Maiden says she will now save corn meal she is grinding. Maiden
grinds blue corn four days, and on fifth day white corn. In evening
young man comes for his bride. She goes with him to his grandmother,
taking tray of white meal. After being invited by grandmother and young
man to come in, she enters. She hands

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

tray to grandmother, and after evening meal they retire, mána sleeping
with grandmother. In morning, after making prayer-offerings to dawn and
sun, mána shells corn. Young man calls chickens, who eat corn. He tells
chickens to sit on banquette and then sings to them, accompanying song
with drum. Chickens sway bodies from side to side to time of singing,
and so grind corn in bodies. They then vomit meal into tray and leave
kiva. Maiden thus saved trouble to grind meal. Young man hunts, and they
prepare much food. Grandmother calls neighbors to come and eat. They
come, each bringing part of bridal costume. In morning grandmother
washes mána's head with yucca suds. Afterwards she dresses mána in
bridal costume. Grandmother sprinkles road of meal, and children go to
bride's house, where they are welcomed by her mother. Young people live
in village, which prospers, as young man is Katcina. Wife goes astray
and husband leaves village. People then become poor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17.--The Áhö'li And Other Wálpi Katcinas.](toth130)
