[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth122)  [Next](toth124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10.--ORIGIN OF THE YÁYAATU SOCIETY.

Man has little boy, who is visited by children of village. They are
lazy, and steal wood to prepare food they have stolen in village.
Priest's son suggests they go and gather their own wood. They steal
burden bands and go and gather brush in valley. When ready to start
home, Hawk, in form of man, comes and invites them to his kiva. After
smoking, they exchange terms of relationship. Hawk-man dresses boys up
in costume, gives each eagle feather, stands them in line and tells them
to do what they see him do. They jump

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

down from kiva, and run about through brush. Hawk-man seizes priest's
son, throws him on cloth, and other boys carry him to kiva, where he is
thrown through opening. He comes out unhurt, and other boys are treated
in the same way without being hurt. They return to kiva and see round
oven dug into earth, in which old woman keeps up fire. Hawk-man throws
first priest's son and then other boys into ovens, and woman spurts
medicine on them. When costumes burned off, Hawk-man takes bodies and
covers them with cloth north of fireplace. He sings songs over them and
they begin to move and are alive again. Old woman then washes their
heads and gives each white corn ear. Hawk-man tells them to go home,
take their wood to Blue Flute kiva, and remain there for him. He hands
priest's son eagle wing feather, and youths leave. They go to kiva. When
it is dark, Hawk enters and takes seat near fireplace. They smoke, and
then Hawk makes gruel which he feeds to youths. He says they are not to
go home, and that in morning some are to sit in north end of kiva and
some in south. The former are to be fire-jumpers and Yáyaatu, and the
latter singers. He sprinkles meal line between them and selects one for
witch-man. They are to sit apart all next day. They remain there four
days, Hawk-man coming to feed them every night. In evening of following
day he brings costumes and yellow paint. Watcher digs four ovens on
plaza and others bury long cotton string and stretch strings along
houses. In morning watcher begs wood and heats ovens. Hawk-man dresses
up and paints others in kiva. At noon singers come out, throw pinch of
meal towards sun, march to plaza, where they line up and sing. Yáyaatu
then go to plaza, priest's son carrying cloth, and then they rummage
through village. People get angry and they return to plaza, where
priest's son jumps into oven and is carried into kiva and resuscitated
by Hawk-man and old woman. Others are treated in same way. They then
dance and perform jugglery, and are discharged by Hawk-man. Next morning
youths go home and are no longer dangerous. They form Yáyaatu Society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11.--The Origin of Some Mishóngnovi Clans.](toth124.md)
