[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth011)  [Next](toth013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 9. THE WANDERINGS OF THE SPIDER CLAN (KOHK'ANG-ÑAMU). <span id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33)

In the under-world many people became very bad. They had many
contentions, and began to kill the people and also killed the chief's
son; so the chief concluded that they would move away from there. But
the question was, how to get out?' So he sent the Mótsni to find a place
where they could get out. He flew up and found an opening, and came back
and reported the same to the chief. So the Village Chief (Kík-mongwi)
and the Crier Chief (Chaák-mongwi) planted a pine (calávi), which grew
up very fast, but did not quite reach the opening. They then planted a
reed (bákavi) which also grew up fast and reached through the opening.
On this reed they climbed till, first the Horn people (Áaltu), who then
stood outside and held the protruding part of the reed or ladder. Many
people then followed.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

The Mocking-bird (Yáhpa) was sitting outside and distributed the
languages to the People. As they were climbing up one of them dropped
one of his moccasins. Below the Hopi had pretty moccasins, but as this
moccasin was dropped and the man had to make another one, and could not
make it as nicely as the other one had been, the Hopi now have not very
nice moccasins. The people had not yet all come out when the chief
stopped them and closed up the opening, but one of the sorcerers
(Pópwaktu) had also come out.

From here the people now started on different routes, the White Man
taking the most southern route. All the other people took different
routes further north. The 'Hopi brought with them Mû'yingwu, whose body
consisted entirely of corn, his feet being ears of corn, so that he
could not move very fast. The Hopi were to have the horse, but as they
tried to ride him they could not do so, as they did not put any bridle
on him; so the Navaho, wearing a band around their head, tried it and
they could ride him. The two matched together better for that reason
because they also bridled the pony, probably with yucca leaves.

They had not gone very far when the chief's son took sick and died. They
thought that the sorcerer who was with them had killed him, but the
latter said: "Nobody has died, he is not dead; just go and look down
into the opening through which we came. He is down there." So the chief
went and looked down there, and beheld his child walking about in the
other world. So they took the Powáku with them. He said that hereafter
no one would be really dead, but the people who would die would simply
go back to the lower world. After they had travelled for some time, just
how long tradition does not say, the Coyote who had carried the stars in
his hand, and was traveling with the Hopi people, threw the stars into
the sky so that from that time it was somewhat light during the night.

The White People had taken with them the Spider which was very skillful,
so that when they had traveled some distance the Spider rubbed some
scales from her skin, and from these created burros. These the White Men
afterwards used for carrying their burdens. So they got along faster and
reached the place where the sun rises first. When they arrived there a
star arose in the south, which told the other migrating people that some
one had arrived at the sunrise. This was a signal that they had agreed
upon before starting. This star is said to have influence over the
animals, and the old people say that whoever wants to own a horse,
cattle, sheep, etc., should pray to this star, which the Hopi are doing
to this day.

So the people traveled on. All at once one party came upon a

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

bear that had died there. They were called the Bear (Hónawu) clan. Right
after them came another party, who cut straps from the skin of the bear
and were called Piqósha clan, the name given by the Hopi to this
peculiar strap. Another party followed and found the cadaver covered
with spider web, from which they were called Spider (Kóhk'ang) clan. A
fourth party found blue-birds sitting on the cadaver and they were
called the Blue-bird (Chóro) clan. A fifth party found that maggots had
eaten out the eyes, leaving the cavities bare with a little fat still
attached to the bone. From this they were called Fat Cavity clan
(Wíkorzh-ñamu). A sixth migrating party came upon the scene and found
that a mole had dug his way up under the place where the cadaver had
been lying, and hence they were called Mole (Mû'yi) clan. <span
id="fr_34"></span>[1](#fn_34) Here the parties who had thus received
their clan names soon separated, and the Spider clan after this wandered
about and stopped at various places for a long time. The other clans did
the same, living shorter or longer periods at one place, which accounts
for the many smaller and larger ruins with which the country is covered.

Finally the Spider clan arrived at a spring (about four miles north of
the present village sites of Mishóngnovi and Shupaúlavi) called
Homìqöpu. Here they remained for some time, there still being ruins at
that place. From here this clan moved to a place about a mile northeast
of Shupaúlavi, called Chûkúvi. At the foot of the mesa on which this
village was situated was a very large spring. The Squash (Batánga) clan
then ruled in this village, the chief belonging to that clan. The Sand
(Tûwá) clan was also one of the clans being numerous in the village at
that time. The inhabitants of the different villages were often harassed
by enemies, among them the Utes and Apache. It seems that even the
inhabitants of the different villages often made raids on each other.
For this reason the inhabitants of Chûkúvi and those of old Mishóngnovi,
which was situated, however, west of its present location, way down the
mesa, moved on the mesa and built the present village of Mishóngnovi.

In Mishóngnovi the Blue-bird clan was then in charge of the village, the
chief belonging to that clan, but it seems that this clan, shared the
chieftainship with the following clans, which furnished the Kík-mongwi,
the Village Chief, in the order named, for four year,

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

a new chief being elected every four years: After the Blue-bird clan
followed the Bear clan, then the Bátki clan, and lastly, the Squash
clan, The Sand clan, having lived in the village of Chukúvi, is said to
have moved to Oraíbi, east of which village they had had fields while
they were still living at Chukúvi. At the time when the people lived at
Chukúvi, Shúpaúlavi was also inhabited, but it seems that the people
then, too, lived farther down, probably at the so-called First Ledge,
but when Mishóngnovi was built the people of Shupaúlavi also moved on to
the top of the mesa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[38:3](toth012.htm#fr_33) Told by Tawíima
(Mishóngnovi).

<span id="fn_34"></span>[40:1](toth012.htm#fr_34) Traditions with regard
to the clans having received their names on this occasion vary somewhat.
While some say the name of the Wíkurzh-ñamu is derived from a netted
gourd (wikuru), others, as in this tale, derived the name from wikoro,
as explained in the text. Furthermore, the order of the clans having
received their names here somewhat differs in the different tales; and
lastly some also mentioned an Ant clan as the last one having obtained
its name. Cf. tale No, 3, "The Wanderings of the Bear Clan."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 10. The Origin of the Yáyaatu Society](toth013)
