[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth073)  [Next](toth075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 71. THE COYOTE AND THE TURKEYS. <span id="fr_143"></span>[2](#fn_141.md)

Halíksai! At Íshmovala the Coyote was living, and at Nûvátûk'aovi, a
short distance east of Íshmovala, the Turkey lived. They both had
children and were great friends, and often visited each other. One time
when the Coyote came to the house of the Turkeys they fed him piñon
nuts, which he relished very much. The little Turkeys were very nicely
figured, and the Coyote enjoyed looking at them. He envied them for
their beautiful feathers and was wondering how they were figured so
nicely. As he looked at them he stroked their bodies with a forepaw.
"Yes," the Turkey mother said, "I baked these, my children. I put them
into an oven and baked them, then I ate their meat, but I did not break
any bones, nor did I bite into any bones. Them I left entirely unhurt.
Early in the morning I

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

put them into a tray, waved them up and down, singing the following song
over them:

Pipichacha, pipichacha (archaic).  
Talahoya, hûwamu, itimu!  
Wake up, please, my children!

Then I threw all the bones outside and there my children got alive
again, and since then they are so beautifully figured." She was, of
course, deceiving him. "Oh!" the Coyote said; "yes, these are very
pretty, and I shall do the same."

In the evening he returned to his house and early the next morning he
went after wood. Returning with the wood, he heated his oven. He made
the oven very hot, then took one of his children and pitied it, but the
little Turkeys had been so pretty and he had so envied them for their
pretty figuring, that he threw the little Coyote into the oven. Hereupon
another one, and another one, as he had a great many children. He threw
them into the oven until the oven was full. He placed a stone over the
opening and plastered up the oven. While they were being baked in the
oven he ground some corn to make some hurúshiki. So in the evening he
took them out of the oven and found them thoroughly baked. He took out
one after another and then commenced to eat. They tasted very fine. He
ate all the meat, but the bones he did not hurt. He did not break any,
nor did he crush any with his teeth. Gathering the bones into a basket
he went to sleep.

During the night the Turkey mother said to her children: "We had better
flee away from here on account of your uncle, the Coyote, because he
will be very angry and will certainly come and devour us." Hereupon she
sent her children away to the San Francisco Mountains (near Flagstaff).
She took the pelts, blankets, etc., in which they had been sleeping, and
rolling some of the smaller ones up, placed them on the floor and
covered them up so as to make them appear as if they were still
sleeping, under the covering. Hereupon she followed her children.

The Coyote in the meanwhile got up once and looked whether the sun was
not yet rising, but it was still dark. After a while he looked again and
then the sun came out. He at once took the tray (tûchaíya) containing
the bones of his children, went out with it, waved it up and down the
way the Turkey Woman had shown him, and sang the song which she had told
him she had sung over the bones of her children. Hereupon he also threw
the bones away. But alas! nothing became alive, and only the bones were
lying there. When he saw what had

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

happened he cried bitterly and became very angry. "I shall go over to
the house of the Turkey," he said, "and shall certainly devour the
little Turkeys too." Hereupon he went over to his friend's house,
running very fast. When he came to the house he at once entered and
thought they were all sleeping nicely. He jumped upon their beds and
grabbed what he believed to be the young Turkeys, but found that nobody
was there. They had deceived him. "Ah," he said, "they have run away,
but I shall certainly overtake them." So he rushed out, hunted up the
tracks of the Turkeys and followed them running very fast. While the
Coyote was following their tracks, the Turkeys had arrived at the Little
Colorado River, but when they had crossed it the little Turkeys were
very tired. "I shall leave you here," their mother said, "and run ahead
of you." But one of the little ones was crying very bitterly. The Turkey
mother ran ahead to the San Francisco mountains and informed the Turkeys
living there about what had happened. "You that are strong come quickly
and help us; the Coyote is following us and he will kill my children.
You go quickly and get them." So two of the Turkey men that were very
strong came out and ran towards the place where the Turkey mother had
left her children. The latter, however, remained because she was very
tired.

The Coyote in the meanwhile found the little Turkeys and chasing them,
said: "Aha, I shall devour you" (Alí kurzh nu úmui cówani). The little
Turkeys were running around and crying very bitterly. just as the Coyote
was about to take one of the little Turkeys the two Turkey men came upon
him, grabbed the little ones, of which there were two, took them on
their backs and ran away with them. "Why do you take them away?" the
Coyote cried. "I am hungry and I want to eat them. That is the reason
why I followed them." But they did not listen, and as they were strong
and the Coyote was very tired, he had to return to his home hungry. But
before he got home he died.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_140"></span>[199:1](toth073.htm#fr_142.md) Referring to the
exposed roots of trees, herbs, etc., standing up above the ground.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[199:2](toth074.htm#fr_143.md) Told by Kwáyeshva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 72. The Chíro and the Coyote](toth075.md)
