[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth065)  [Next](toth067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 63. THE COYOTE, THE BAT, AND THE HUMMING-BIRD. <span id="fr_132"></span>[2](#fn_130)

A long time ago the Coyote lived at Ishmovala, west of the village; a
Bat at Tovítoala, north-west of the village; and a Humming-bird at
Tóhchipchookpu, also north-west of the village. They were all three
close friends. The Bat and the bird often visited the Coyote, spending
their time there in joking, laughing, and eating. The Coyote, being a
great hunter, always had plenty of rabbit meat and other

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

game, which he would cook and place before them, and which they enjoyed
very much. One time the Bat thought that he would invite his two friends
to his house, but he was worried as to what he would give them to eat,
so his thoughts were directed to the village of Oraíbi. He said to
himself: "I am going to the village after dark and perhaps some one of
the rich people may have forgotten to take their meat in that they are
drying, and I am going to get some of it." So ill the evening he
proceeded to the village and was flying around, but found no meat; so he
went home discouraged. "Now what shall I do?" he thought. "I am going to
try it again, and perhaps I shall find an open window through which I
can get into some house and find some food inside." This he did, and
finding at one place some tallow, he broke off a piece and carried it
home. Returning to the same house he got some more. Hereupon he procured
some meat in the same manner, making also several trips after meat. He
then in the same manner procured some píki, of which he fetched a goodly
supply to his house. "Now, my friends will want some salt with this
food," he thought, and so he went in search of some salt, which he found
and carried to his house. After he had thus laid in a supply of food for
his anticipated visitors, he commenced to think what he should say to
them when they would inquire as to the source where he obtained the
food. He began thinking of some one that was his friend and whose name
he could mention, and thought of the Badger, who lived east of Oraíbi,
at Badger-Ditch (Honáncik'a). Hereupon he retired but did not sleep much
that night, as he was very busy thinking over the anticipated visit of
his two friends. In the morning he proceeded to the house of the Coyote,
and from there to that of the Hummingbird, inviting them to visit him
that day. They promptly accepted the invitation and paid their friend a
visit. At noon the Bat said, "Now let us eat." Whereupon he prepared a
meal of the things he had procured. First he fried some of the meat,
which he then placed in a bowl in which he had melted some of the
tallow. They then ate, enjoying the food very much. While they were
eating they were wondering where their friend procured the food, and in
the course of their conversation, which was very animated, they asked
him about it. He promptly stated that his friend, the Badger, had given
it to him, They doubted it, but said nothing, but when they went home,
soon after the meal, they talked about the matter and agreed that their
friend had probably deceived them. Before they parted, the Coyote
invited the bird to visit him in the evening. This the bird did, and
their conversation soon again turned upon the subject of the food which
they had so much enjoyed at their friend's house. They again

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

were wondering where he procured it, but soon agreed that he must have
stolen it in Oraíbi, and that he had deceived them, 1n order to get even
with their friend, they concluded that they would "song-tie" him, that
is, they would make a song about their friend. They at once started to
compose a song, but did not finish it to their satisfaction. So, after
the Humming-bird had left, the Coyote kept thinking over the song, and
during the night, while he could not sleep, finished it. The next
morning he at once went to the house of the bird, to whom he sang this
song, to the satisfaction of both of them:

Sawya, Sawya!  
    Bat, Bat!  
Tucivakiota, tucivakiota.  
    In the hollow, In the hollow!  
Anawit kwitaat  
    Along its excrements  
Tucanmuruta, tucanmuruta  
    A ridge (of) dirt, a ridge (of) dirt!  
Kikanqö, kikanqö  
    To the village, to the village.

The following is supposed to be the complaint of the party whose food
the bat carried off:

Iyumukvi, akwihkwistkae  
    From my inner chamber, because fat he got  
Kalatötö matototimaia.  
    The Kalatötö are running about.

They practiced the song until they both knew it. Hereupon the Coyote
returned to his house, the Humming-bird saying he would invite the Bat
to come over in the evening, which he did. When the Bat arrived, the
bird went over to the Coyote's house, telling him that their friend was
waiting for them. The Coyote at once also proceeded to the house of the
bird, where the latter soon proposed to have a song. The Bat consented,
saying that they wanted to be happy together. So they stood up in a line
and the bird commenced to sing the song which the Coyote had made. The
Coyote at once chimed in and the Bat also commenced to sing with them
the best he could, but soon found out that a joke was being played on
him, and that he was being song-tied by his two friends. As soon as he
had found this out he stopped singing and became angry. "You have
song-tied me," he said to the others. "The Coyote has made the song; you
both have made it. Now this ends our friendship." Whereupon they
dispersed and never became friends again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_129"></span>[189:1](toth065.htm#fr_131) Told by Kúhkiuma
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_130"></span>[189:2](toth066.htm#fr_132) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 64. The Coyote and the Humming-bird](toth067)
