[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth044)  [Next](toth046.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

## 42. THE BLIND MAN AND THE LAME MAN. <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_102.md)

A long time ago there was an earthquake at Oraíbi. It was a very nice
day; people had eaten their breakfast as usual, and were happy. Then
towards noon the earth and the houses began to move and to tremble, and
very soon there was a great noise like thunder, but nothing could be
seen and the people did not know where it came from. They ran to their
houses and everywhere to see what was the matter. Sometime in the
afternoon the earth trembled very much, and a large piece of ground sank
down at Skeleton gulch (Másvövee), so called because at one time a great
many slain people were thrown there. This is situated about half a mile
northeast of Oraíbi; the piece that sank down reached nearly to the
village of Oraíbi. There was also a very large crack right on the public
square or plaza of the village.

By this time the people got frightened very much, and all left the
village, running toward the north. In the village there lived in one of
the houses a blind man, and in another house a cripple who could not
walk. When these noticed that some serious disturbance was taking place,
they got very much frightened, and the blind man called over to the
cripple asking for information. The latter answered that the earth had
been trembling and the village had been in motion, and that all the
people had left the village. The cripple then asked the blind man to
come over to his house. The blind man asked the cripple to come over to
his house, but after a while the cripple prevailed, and the blind man,
taking a stick and feeling his way before himself, tried to reach the
house of the cripple, the latter directing him which way to go. When he
had arrived at the house the cripple said: "Let us also flee. You carry
me on your back, and I shall show you the way." This they did, the
cripple turning the head of the blind man in the direction in which he
wanted him to turn and to go. Thus they left the village, also in a
northerly direction, following the others.

A short distance north of the village a large elk met them, coming from
the north. "O my! what is that?" the cripple said, on the back of the
blind man. ''What is it?" the latter asked. "Something very large. It is
nearly black, and yet it is not quite black." The blind man, who had
been a great hunter in his youth, when he still had his eyesight, at
once suspected what it might be, and asked for details, and soon
concluded that it must be an elk. Before leaving the village

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

the blind man had suggested that they take a bow and arrows along so
that, in case they needed some food, they could kill some game. When
they had come opposite the elk the cripple suggested that the blind man
shoot the elk, as his own hands were also somewhat crippled, and he was
unable to handle a bow. He put an arrow on the bow, and the blind man
got the bow ready, the cripple doing the aiming for him. The elk was now
standing west of them, and at the proper time the cripple told the blind
man to shoot. He shot and killed the elk.

They were now very anxious to roast some of the meat, but had nothing to
skin the animal or cut the meat with; so they went there and with one of
their arrows they dug out the eyes of the elk. The blind man then, being
directed by the lame man, gathered some sticks of wood and they built a
fire, starting the fire by rubbing wood and fire sticks together. They
placed the two eyes on the fire and waited. When the eyes got very hot
they burst with a great report. "Hihiyá!" the men exclaimed, and both
jumped up, the lame man finding that he could walk, and the blind man
finding his eyes opened. "Ishutí," the blind man said. "What is it
(hintí)?" "My eyes are open." "Yes, and I can walk," the other man
replied. By this time it had become evening. "Now let us remain awake
all night," the man who had been blind said, "because if we go to sleep
my eyes might stick together again." "Yes, if I lie down I might find
that I cannot walk again in the morning," the other one replied. So the
first one handed the other a small twig of ö'cvi (Ephedra), saving to
him, "If you see that I go to sleep, you prick my eyes so that I awake."
The other one handed the blind man, as we shall call him for brevity's
sake, also some prickly weed, saying "If you see me sit down you prick
my body so that I remain standing." Thus they remained awake all night
watching each other.

Early in the morning they concluded that they would follow the tracks of
the inhabitants of the village who had fled. They, finally found them in
a timber quite a distance to the north. "What has happened to you?" they
said. "Why, you were blind and lame, and now you can see and walk."
"Yes, they said , "something has happened to us: and now let us go back
again to the village. There is nothing the matter there any more." So
the people all returned to the village, these two taking the lead, and
that is the reason why Oraíbi is again inhabited. If these two had not
brought the people back they would never have returned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_102"></span>[151:1](toth045.htm#fr_104.md) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 43. Big Head And Goat Horn](toth046.md)
