[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth149)  [Next](toth151.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 37.--THE YOUTH AND MAIDEN WHO PLAYED HIDE AND SEEK FOR THEIR LIFE.

Oraíbi youth going to watch father's fields, passes house of maiden. She
asks if she may go with him. He consents, and she follows him, taking
piki rolls. After eating, they play hide and seek. Mána hides first
under some úyi , and youth cannot find her. Youth then hides under bush
of pawíhchoki, Where mána finds him. Mána pulls out tassel of cornstalk
and crawls into opening, replacing tassel. Youth hunts through
corn-field but cannot find her. He has to hide, and going through field
hears Sun calling him. Sun throws down rainbow and youth climbs to Sun,
who hides him behind his back. Mána follows his tracks and is puzzled.
Finally she presses drops of milk out of breast, examines drops in her
hand, and sees reflection of Sun with boy behind him. Youth next time
watches which way mána goes and traces her to watermelon patch, but he
cannot find her. She bursts open watermelon and comes out, Youth now
becomes unhappy and goes to hide. He hears voice and sees small hole by
side of small cornstalk. It is house of Spider Woman. He enters and she
spins web across opening. Mána tracks him to

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

edge of corn-field, but cannot find him. She takes mirror from bosom and
sees opening of Spider's hole reflected. She tells youth to come out,
and he does so very dejected. Mána goes to hide fourth time. She crosses
watermelon patch. goes into ditch, and turns into tadpole. Youth hunts
for her and being tired, drinks from ditch, but cannot find her, and
tells her to come out. Mána emerges from water and tells him she saw him
drink. Youth again goes to hide, and Spider Woman tells him to go to his
uncle Áhû' who lives in temporary shelter. He goes, and Áhû' pulls out
loose knot from corner pole, into which he puts youth, closing up
opening. Mána hunts for him, and reaches shelter, but cannot find him.
She wets tips of fingers, and presses point of forefinger into right
ear. She hears youth in hiding-place, and tells him to come out. They go
to their place again, but then they return to shelter. Mána digs hole
close to corner post, and saying she has beaten him, she tells youth to
take off his shirt and his beads. Then she grabs him by hair, bends him
over hole, and cuts his throat with knife, letting blood run into hole.
She closes hole, digs another to north, and dragging body, buries it in
grave. She takes shirt and beads with her home. Parents of young man
inquire of maiden if she knows where he is. She says she does not, as he
drove her away. Parents have killed sheep, but eat little, and flies
come to meat. Woman drives flies off. Fly objects, and says she will go
and hunt child when she has sucked meat. Woman tells Fly where boy went,
and Fly goes to field. She discovers traces of blood, and opens hole.
She finds grave, and sticking all blood from first opening, ejects it
into body. Heart begins to beat, and soon youth rises up. He complains
of thirst, and Fly tells him to go to ditch and drink. Afterwards they
return to house of parents. Fly tells them that maiden has youth's shirt
and beads, and that he is to go for them, and when she gives him shirt
he is to shake it at her, and so also with beads. Fly tells youth not to
eat piki rolls maiden will offer him. He goes, and mána brings food
which he declines. She gives him shirt and beads, and he shakes them at
her. Fly tells parents to go to mána's house. They hear noise in house.
Maiden is changed into Child-Protruding Woman and dresses in white ówa
and has hair tied, but face and clothes are bloody. Noise continues, and
deer, antelope, and rabbits, which are costumes of slain youths, dash
out. Mána tries to stop them, and grabs last one. She wipes hands over
her person and rubs it over face of antelope, etc. She tells people that
they will now have difficulty in hunting animals and disappears with
game. Ever since she has lived at Little Colorado River. She controls
game and hunters make prayer-offerings to her.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 38.--The Maiden Who Stole the Youth's Costume.](toth151.md)
