[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth051)  [Next](toth053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 49. CHÓRZHVÛK'IQÖLÖ AND THE EAGLES. <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_110)

A long time ago there lived a family right north of where now the
Náshabe kiva is situated. The family consisted of a father, mother, two
daughters, and a son. The latter would always go and hunt eagles as soon
as warm weather set ill in spring, and later on take care of them, so
that he would never find any time to assist his father in his field
work. The two maidens would get angry at their brother

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

because he would not assist their father to make a living, and they
would tell him that he should go and work in the field. He would say,
however, that he had to take care of his eagles, of which he usually
caught and kept a great many.

One spring he only captured two young eagles. He was very much
depressed, saying: "Why has this happened to me; I usually capture a
good many eagles, and now I only found two." Yet he took them home and
cared for them. One morning after he had gone out to hunt food for his
eagles, the mother and two maidens concluded to go to the field also.
The girls got angry at the eagles and beat them. Thereupon they locked
up the house, hiding the wooden key of the wooden lock somewhere near
the fireplace. The mother had gone to the field early in the morning
with her husband. When the girls arrived in the field the father said to
them: "So you have come." "Yes," they said, "we have come." "Very well,"
the father said, whereupon the maidens assisted their parents in weeding
and hoeing their field.

When the young man came home some time during the day, he was very
thirsty and tried to get into the house. "Well, now," he said, "some one
locked this door." "Yes," the Eagles said, "your sisters locked it, and
the key is buried near the fireplace under some ashes;" whereupon the
young man found the key and opened the door. The Eagles told him that
his sisters had beaten them, and told him that he should dress up and
that they wanted to go to where the family was. So the young man painted
his legs yellow, with sik'áhpiki, tied some bells or rattles round his
legs, and some eagle's feathers in his hair, put on a kilt, sash, and
belt, and decorated his body in different colors. Over his cheeks and
nose he made a black line. He placed a number of strands of beads around
his neck and ear pendants around his ears. One of the Eagles said, "I am
going to carry you on my back." So he mounted the Eagle, holding himself
with both hands to the wings of the Eagle, and the other Eagle taking
the lead, they began to ascend. The people in the village observed them
and recognized the young man, and said, "Oh! Why is that Eagle carrying
Chórzhvûk'íqölö!" <span id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_111)

As they started , the Eagle that carried him said to him, he should sing
the following Song:

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p>Haoo Inguu! Haoo Inaa!<br />
Itah uuyiyuu kamuktiqöö.<br />
Shilakwuyata</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p>Hao, my mother! Hao, my father!<br />
Our corn grown high.<br />
Corn husks.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

<table data-border="0" width="798">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p>Tûtûbena tûtûbena.<br />
Ayay Tûtûbena.<br />
Tûtûbena, tûtûbena.<br />
Yâââ.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top" width="50%"><p>(Are) figured, (are) figured. <span id="fr_114"></span><a href="#fn_112">1</a><br />
Aha (are) figured.<br />
Are figured, (are) figured.<br />
Yâââ.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

While he was singing this they kept soaring upwards above the village,
and after flying around in a circle four times they proceeded southward
towards the field in which his people were. When they had come near the
field the young man sang the same song again. The sisters heard him, and
said, "Listen, our brother is coming from somewhere, because we hear him
sing." They looked along the path but could see nothing. When the Eagles
were close by the sisters discovered them and recognized their brother.
"Oh!" they said, "why are you carrying our brother?" but they received
no answer. Hereupon the Eagles descended somewhat, and the parents, whom
the maidens had told about it, asked them to come down and leave their
son with them, but instead of doing that, the Eagles began to rise,
again circling around four times, the young man singing the song four
times. By this time they had soared up very high, and finally were out
of sight. The parents and sisters cried very much, especially the
latter. The family immediately went home, mourning as they went along.

The Eagles kept flying higher and higher to their home. Arriving at an
opening away up in the sky, they passed through into the world where the
Eagles dwell, and from where they come down in response to the prayers
of the Hopi and hatch their young for the Hopi here in this world. The
two Eagles proceeded somewhat eastward from the opening, onto a very
high bluff around which, in the. valley, were many houses that were all
perfectly white and in which the Eagles lived. The two Eagles deposited
the young man on the top of that bluff, and told him, ''Here you will
have to stay, because your sisters were bad to us and beat us,"
whereupon they left him. He was very despondent over the matter and
thought that he would jump down from the bluff. He said, "If I remain
here I will die with hunger anyway, so I may just as well jump down and
die quickly.'' But soon a little Wren appeared on the bluff, jumping up
and down the edge. He spoke to the little Wren, asking whether there was
no possibility of him getting down, but he received no answer. Soon the
little bird flew away, but came back

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

again, acting in the same manner. All at once a black Spider, that had
been informed about the matter by the Wren came up the bluff The Spider
came close to the man, saying to him: ''Well, now, you poor one, here
you are all alone." After thus having pitied him, the Spider continued:
"Well, just stay here," and left him. But soon she returned, bringing
with her two small, fine, downy turkey feathers, and handed them to the
young man, saying: "You sleep or, one of them and cover yourself with
the other, so that you do not get cold during the night." She then began
pitying him, saying that it was too bad that his animals (meaning the
Eagles) had treated him so badly after he had taken such good care of
them. Hereupon she again left him and he spent the night on the bluff.
Early in the morning the Wren came again. "So you have come again, the
young man said, but the Wren did not answer. It went, however, along the
edge of the bluff again to the place where the Spider had come up and
when the young man looked there, too, he saw a narrow crack in the
bluff, reaching away down to the ground. The Wren at once began to pull
out one feather after another from its wings, putting them at short
intervals into the wall of the crack, while it was holding itself also
on the sides of the crack. When the feathers from the wings were all
gone it pulled out the feathers from its tail, thrusting them also into
the side of the crack. When the tail feathers were all gone it had not
yet reached the bottom by far. So it began to pull out the small
feathers from all over the body and continued to build its little ladder
with these feathers, but the bottom was still not reached, so that
finally it had to pull out even the small down all over its body, with
which it finished the ladder. It now ascended the bluff again on its
improvised ladder, and when it came to the top the young man hardly
recognized it. It was entirely naked, having kept only its bill. It now
invited the young man to follow it, and climbed down this ladder,
assuring him that he would get down safely, and there was no reason for
him to be afraid. So they descended and when they had safely reached the
ground the Wren told him to wait there for it, whereupon it commenced to
ascend again, holding itself to the sides of the crack. As it slowly
mounted it pulled off with its bill the feathers from the wall of the
crack and replaced them where they had been taken out from its body.
When it had reached thc top it had all its feathers again and then flew
down. Here it told the young man to go towards the place from where it
had come. showing him the direction, and then left him.

The man proceeded as directed, and when he finally stopped at a place he
heard a voice saying: "Step back a little, you almost are

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

on my house." It was Spider Woman. She invited him into her house, but
he said: "The opening is so small, how shall I get in?" She removed the
small sticks and pieces of grass that were built up around the opening,
thus enlarging the opening so that he could enter. "Now," she said to
him, "you must be very hungry. It is too bad that those Eagles which you
treated so well should have been so bad to you. You had better stay here
and live with me now." Hereupon she gave him a tiny piece of meat, a
very small quantity of hurúshuki (a kind of doughy mush), and half a
nut, and invited him to eat. "Oh!" he thought, "how shall I get
satisfied with this small quantity. I shall surely remain hungry," but
when he took the hurúshuki, and placed it in his mouth, she said to him:
"Oh, you must not take it all, you must just take a small quantity, and
you must only suck the meat." He did so and when he began to eat it, it
increased in his mouth, filling his mouth entirely. The same was true of
the nut, and the meat, the latter being white meat of some kind of a
fowl, as the old woman explained to him upon his request. After he had
eaten, Spider Woman made a ball for him of pitch and hair, the same as
the Hopi use to-day in their races in early spring. In the morning he
took that ball, left the house and ran southward, kicking the ball
before him as the Hopi do at the present day. Arriving at a small lake
he saw at its banks some little birds, and having learned that Spider
Woman relished that kind of meat very much, he killed one of the birds
and took it along. On his way back he again kicked the ball before him,
and at the last kick it dropped down into the Spider Woman's house, by
which she knew that he had returned. "Thanks, that you have come back."
She expressed her satisfaction at him having brought some more meat, and
said: "Now, you must put this away and we must not eat very much of it
at a time, so that it may last us several months." The young man laughed
at her, saying, "Yes, I will be nibbling at it for a long time." She
told him that the meat which she had had before, she had found, the bird
evidently having been killed by some other bird, and she had lived upon
that bird for a long time.

The next day he went out again, bringing home this time two birds that
he had killed. She thanked him very much again, saying, that now they
could eat all they wanted. She then warned him that he should never go
towards the west, as there were some bad people living there that would
hurt him. The third day he again went to the lake, taking with him this
time a throwing stick. When he arrived there he killed a large number of
birds and brought them back with him. On this trip he again kept kicking
the ball before

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

him. When he brought all these birds into Spider Woman's house and
placed them on the floor, she was very happy, and thanked him for it
many times. "Now," she said, "we can eat meat and need no longer simply
suck it," as they did before. "I am going to live well now, on account
of you, (by your help)," she added. On the fourth day he again made the
trip in the same manner, to the aforesaid lake, but this time he thought
he would turn around to the right, westward, and see at least who it was
that was living there and that was reported to be bad. He thought if any
danger threatened him he could easily run away. So he traveled westward,
kicking before him his ball. All at once the ball disappeared and he
found that it had dropped into a kiva. He approached the kiva and waited
outside. All at once some one called from within, saying, that he had
been seen and that he should come in, as nobody would hurt him, So he
went in and found that his ball was lying north of the fireplace. He was
again, with the utmost kindness, invited to sit down, with which he
complied. He thought that those who lived here could by no means be
called dangerous or bad. The man living in the kiva had long eyelids
that were hanging down on his breast and that had to be laid back over
his head when he wanted to see. His name was Hásohkata, and soon he
said: ''Now, let us play totólospi." The young man consented, but
Hásohkata beat him twice. "What will you pay me now?" he asked the young
man. "I do not know," the latter said, "I have nothing. You may take my
ball, however. I do not want that," Hásohkata said, ''but you may lie
down outside at the entrance of my kiva and it will not be so cold
then," for it had by this time become fall and the weather was getting
cold. The young man consented, but Hásohkata said to him: ''I am afraid
you will run away then, so I am going to tie your hands and feet," which
he did. In a little while the young man began to feel very cold while he
was lying outside of the kiva. Spider Woman, in the meanwhile, became
uneasy about her young friend, saving, "It is now about half noon and he
is not yet here, he undoubtedly did not follow my advice and went
westward and fell into the hands of the bad people. She at once went to
look him up and found him lying at the kiva's opening, his hands tied on
his back and his feet also tied together. "Aha!" she said, "here you are
lying just as I thought. You must be hungry; now, that is the reason why
I came. Now, you stay here until I return and get something for you." So
she returned to her house and got two fuzzy, short turkey feathers. With
these she returned and placed one beneath him and with the other one she
covered him up. <span id="page_165">p. 165</span> Hereupon she returned
to her house and commenced to meditate on the matter. "Why did he take
away my friend," she thought, "and how shall I get him back again. That
man there in the kiva is a bad man and he will not want to give back to
me my grandchild. I am going out to call somebody in here." So she went
out and called out to her people, saving: ''All assemble here, but do
not tarry, be quick about it," Those that responded at once were
specially animals of prey, such as the bear, wildcat, panther, mole,
etc. Her house was completely filled. ''Why do you want us in such a
hurry?" they asked. "Yes," she said, "that there Hásohkata has hung my
grandchild up to smoke (referring to the fact that objects that are
smoked are sometimes suspended in the hatch-way over the fireplace). So
now, I want you to go and take my grandchild away from Hásohkata." "All
right," they said, ''but how shall we do it?" "You must also gamble with
him," she said. They then agreed upon certain games that they were going
to play, and sticks that they should make, etc., and then left, being
led by the old woman. Hásohkata in the meanwhile kept laughing at the
young man lying outside of his kiva entrance. "Now, you are cold by this
time, are you?" he kept saying to him, and while he was still talking in
that manner the rescuers arrived at the kiva. Before they started,
however, from Spider Woman's house, she had prepared. a set of báckshivu
(a cup game). This she had brought with her. While they had proceeded to
Hásohkata's house the Mole had proceeded to the same place underground
and was waiting under the house of Hásohkata. When the others arrived at
the kiva they were invited to come in by Hásohkata. He spoke very kindly
to them. North of the fireplace was still the drawing of the totólospi
game that he had played with the young man. In reply to his urgent
request to come in, Spider Woman said: ''We have come to gamble with
you. You are smoking my grandchild here and we have come to beat you at
playing, and are going to take him away." "All right," he said, "come
right in," whereupon they entered, entirely filling the kiva. "All
right," they said, "who will commence?" "You play first," Hásohkata
said," because you proposed it." Spider Woman was happy over it, and put
up her four gaming cups on the north side of the fireplace. The Mole,
still being under the floor, saw it and placed the little ball under one
of the cups, pushing it up very bard, however, that it could not drop
out in case that cup was chosen and thrown down by the player. Now, they
said to Hásohkata, "Guess under which it is, and we will see whether you
will win." He pondered a long time, then threw down

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

one of the cups, but the ball was not under it. Hereupon he threw down
another one, but the ball was not under that one. "Now, that is enough,"
Spider Woman said, "you have not found it." So she put up her four cups
again, the Mole again fastened the ball in one of the cups quickly,
closing up the opening in the floor, and then Hásohkata was again
challenged to guess. He again threw down two cups without winning one
game. "My!" he said, ''Who are you? Why are you trying to keep away your
things from me? You have beaten me, so take the young man along." Spider
Woman then herself threw down one of her cups and said, "Here under this
one is the ball." This made the old man somewhat angry and he refused to
let his captive go, but he challenged them to another trial, Outside of
his kiva grew very strong kwíngwi, which is a brush, the sticks of which
are very hard. He told them that if they would break down or pull out a
certain amount of that stuff he would consider himself beaten. The Mole
hearing this, quickly made its way underground to the brush and soon
gnawed off all the biggest roots of a great deal of brush. The others
did not know anything about this and so when they came out of the kiva
the old woman said to the others: "Now, let us try to pull this out and
see whether we can do it." They commenced, and in a short time had
pulled out so much, even with parts of the roots, that Hásohkata
considered himself beaten even before they had pulled out all that the
Mole had loosened. "All right," he said, "you take with you all that I
have and you will be rich, you have beaten me." They returned to the
kiva, untied the young man and all again entered the kiva of Hásohkata.
"Now," Hásohkata said to them, "take with you all of my things here,
because you have beaten me twice." There were a great many objects
throughout his kiva, such as clothing, bows. quivers, arrows, and other
things that he had taken away from visitors with whom he had gambled and
whom he had killed, throwing their corpses into a big hole that was full
of bones.

After they had taken everything, they said to him: "But what shall we do
to you?" He replied: "You have taken all my things, let me alone." To
this they did not agree. "We are going to kill you," they said. "So the
Bear grabbed him, tore open his breast, and tore out the heart of
Hásohkata, which he took with him. The Wolves, Coyotes, Wildcats, etc.,
hereupon fell upon the corpse, tearing it to pieces and devoured it.
These animals still do the same to-day, killing people whenever they
have an opportunity to do so, whether these people are good or bad, and
that is the reason why the Hopi hunt and kill those animals if they can
do so.

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

After they had left the kiva, Spider Woman told them all that they could
now go to their respective homes. She took her grandchild with her and
also returned to her home with him. Here she told him that he should
fear nothing after this because nobody would now hurt him, that having
been the only one that was bad and dangerous. The Wren had in the
meanwhile been down to this earth and had seen the parents of the young
man and found out that they were longing for their lost son, and when it
returned it told Spider Woman about it. So about four or five days after
they had returned from Hásohkata's kiva, she told him that he might go
home now, as his father and mother were homesick after him. She did not,
however, tell him how she had found it out, and she promised him that
the next day she would go with him. So the next day they went to the
opening through which the Eagles had brought the young man. They looked
down and could see nothing. Everything looked as if we are now looking
upward. So Spider Woman placed around the opening sticks and brush of
all kinds just the same as around a spider hole. Over this she then spun
a great deal of web and before cutting the thread she told the young man
to mount her back. Hereupon they began to descend, the thread of spider
web unraveling at the opening as they descended farther and farther
downward. She advised the young man to keep his eyes closed, which he
did. They struck the earth somewhere close to the field of the young
man's parents. Here he left Spider Woman and started to his parents'
home himself. When he arrived at his home one of the neighbors said to
his parents: "Some one has come; your child has come," but they would
not believe it. "He will never come, he is gone," the mother said. When
he entered the house he said: "I have come." "Who are you?" the father
said. "I am Chórzhvûk'íqölö." "No, you are not the one." "Yes, I am," he
said; but at last the father recognized him and said, "Yes, you have
come." The mother then, too, recognized him and she was very happy. The
sisters who had been waiting and longing for their brother, were also
very happy that he had returned. So they were all united again and maybe
they are still living there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[159:1](toth052.htm#fr_112) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_111"></span>[160:1](toth052.htm#fr_113) The name signifies:
Bunch of blue-bird wing feathers.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[161:1](toth052.htm#fr_114) This refers to the
fact that the Hopi, especially the children, often fold up a strip of
corn husk and with their teeth mark different figures in it, which are
then shown in different places of the husk when the latter is opened and
held against the light. This was probably a song which the boy had been
singing with his sisters and by which he wanted to make himself known,
in which he was successful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 50. The Hawk and the Child](toth053)
