[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth057)  [Next](toth059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 55. THE ROOSTER, THE MOCKING-BIRD AND THE MAIDEN. <span id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_121)

Halíksai! In Oraíbi they were living. At the place where now Pongñámana
lives, lived a Rooster. Somewhat south of Lâ'nangva, among the
peach-trees, lived the Mocking-bird (Yáhpa). In the village at
Bakvátovi, a place in the extreme north-west part of the village, lived
a beautiful maiden with her father and mother, This mána persistently
refused all offers of marriage. The young men of the village would bring
presents to her, but no one succeeded in winning her affections. The
chief of the north, Bamúyaomongwi, heard about it and so he came to the
village trying to win the maiden. He brought with him a bundle of
presents, which he was carrying over his shoulders. When he came to the
house he left his bundle of presents outside.

The mána was grinding corn-meal. Without stopping the grinding she
looked up to the visitor and saw a very handsome youth before her. "Why
do you not talk to me?" he said. "Yes," she said, "who are you, going
around here?" "Yes," he replied, "I came after you and I have left my
bundle outside. Go and get it

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

and look at it." She stopped her grinding, went out and found a yellow
reed receptacle (shongóhkaki), which she took into the house. Opening it
she found in it two yellow bridal robes (ówa), a pair of yellow
moccasins, and a yellow big belt (wokókwâwa). But she did not want it.
Wrapping it all up again, she handed it to the youth, and said: "I do
not want it. You go down. Very well," he replied, picked up his bundle
and left.

When the Rooster heard about this in the evening he went over to the
house of the maiden, and found her drying some coarsely ground meal
which she was stirring in a pot over the fire. He went into the house,
and the maiden saw before her a very handsome youth, dressed in a red
shirt which was figured with short black lines all over. He wore
turquoise ear pendants and on top of his head a bunch of red feathers.
He acted very kindly and gently. He seated himself by the side of the
fireplace and busied himself with picking up and setting down and
examining the different objects around the fireplace. The mána was
pleased with him and began to converse and chat with him. She told him
he should remain with her over night and then return in four days, and
then she would go over into his house. "Very well," he replied. The
following days the mána kept on grinding corn.

On the third day the Mocking-bird, who had heard about the Rooster
having been at the maiden's house, also went over and asked her to marry
him. He also appeared as a handsome youth, and the mána was pleased with
him. She promised that she would marry him, and spoke to her mother
about it, telling her that this youth had come after her. "Very well,"
the mother said, "do not mistrust him." The Rooster, who had been told
to come the next day, had seen the Mocking-bird go upon the mesa, and
so, without waiting for the appointed time, also went to the house on
the third day, and while the mána was still talking to the Mocking-bird
he was at the door and knocked, Hereupon he entered and found the
Mocking-bird there. "What are you doing here?" he asked the latter. "I
came to fetch this maiden," the Mocking-bird replied. "Not so," the
Rooster said, "I shall fetch her to-morrow. You are not worth as much as
I. I own all these people here; they are mine. When I crow in the
morning they all get up." "I am worth as much as you are," the
Mockingbird replied. "When I twitter or sing in the morning it gets
light." "Very well," the Rooster replied, "let us contend with each
other and see who knows most. In three days we shall have a contest.
Until then no one shall get the maiden."

Hereupon they both left the house and went to their homes. The

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

Rooster was thinking to whom he should apply for assistance and courage.
Early the next morning, after he had had his morning meal, he left the
village, descended the mesa, and ran along the trail northwest (the
trail that at present leads to Mû'enkapi). Arriving at Bow Mound
(Aoátchomo), about thirty-five miles northwest of Oraíbi, he was tired
and seated himself on a stone that was near by a báho shrine, where he
rested. As he moved somewhat on the stone, an opening appeared in the
shrine and somebody said to him, "Come in." So he entered and there
found a great many maidens, one of whom prepared a seat for him and told
him to be seated. Hereupon she entered another chamber and brought a
tray with some shelled corn, which she set before the Rooster, inviting
him to eat. He picked and ate it like chickens eat, and when he was
satisfied the maiden said, "You were tired. Now you will reach your
destination." Hereupon he went out and continued his journey. He now had
been somewhat revived and ran fast.

Finally he arrived at Mû'enkapi, passed it, and ran on until he came to
a steep bluff. There was a ladder standing at the bluff, which he
descended. He then proceeded westward and finally came to a large rock
where there was an opening. Here he crowed repeatedly, when a door was
opened and a voice called out that he should come in. He entered and
found a great many men, women, youths, and maidens, who were all
Roosters and Hens. They seemed to be happy that he had come. "Thanks,"
they said, "that you have come." They offered him a seat and again fed
him some shelled corn. When he had satisfied his hunger, they asked him
what he had come for. "Yes," he said, "there in Oraíbi we are contending
over a maiden, and we are going to contend about our knowledge of light.
and now I have come here to see what you can do for me." "Very well,"
they said, "very well, we shall at least try. The Mocking-bird is also
very something. He understands a great deal and he has the assistance of
the Kwátokwuu, but we shall at least try."

When it was evening they assembled and sang all night. When they had
sung four long songs the Roosters all crowed. Hereupon they sang four
more long songs and then crowed again. After singing three more songs
they crowed a third time. The yellow dawn had by this time appeared, and
after singing two more songs, the sun was rising. "We have accomplished
it right," the chief said, "so you go home now without fear, and think
that you will accomplish your end." So the Rooster returned, running
very fast. When he arrived at the Bow Mound he was again tired, so that
he had not been running very fast for some time. He again entered and
was fed there

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

as before. "I am very tired," he said to the maidens, "I shall not get
home." They laughed at him, saying: "Of course you will get home. We
shall dress you up and then you will get home all right." So they took
some dry corn-husks, tied them together, and then fastened a number of
them to his tail, He then left, and as he was running these corn-husks
rattled; he became scared and ran very fast. Arriving at his house he
entered and removed the corn-husks. He now felt strong.

So he rested all night, and the next day he was walking through the
village. In the evening he went over to the Mocking-bird and notified
him that he should come over that night and watch him, whereupon he
returned. The Mocking-bird notified the Kwátokwuu, saying that the time
had now come, and that he should go with him and assist him. "Very
well," the latter said. So in the evening the Mocking-bird went over to
the Rooster's house and the Kwátokwuu entered the Mocking-bird's house,
where he stayed during the night. The Rooster was singing all night, the
Mocking-bird watching him. When the Rooster was nearly done and the dawn
was about to appear, the Mocking-bird slipped away and notified the
Kwátokwuu. The latter at once left the house and spread his large wings
across the eastern sky, completely covering up the dawn. The Rooster
crowed after singing the first four songs, the second four songs, the
third four songs, and finally after singing the last two songs, but it
would not become light; the sun did not hear him and would not rise. So
he failed.

The Mocking-bird left his house, flew away, and after awhile the sun
rose. The Rooster had been defeated.

During the day the Rooster again went around in the village, and in the
evening the Mocking-bird invited him to come over to his house and watch
him also. So in the evening the Mocking-bird was singing all night.
After he had sung four songs he whistled, which he repeated after having
sung another four songs, and after he had sung an additional three songs
he again whistled, and the dawn began to appear. He then sang his-last
two songs, whereupon the sun rose. "You see, I know much," the
Mocking-bird said in a triumphant way. "Yes," the Rooster admitted,
"yes, you understand a great deal. You know about making it light. You
shall have the maiden, and I shall be behind you."

So the maiden married the Mocking-bird. By and by she bore two children,
one a boy and one a girl. The boy was the child of the Rooster, and the
little girl the child of the Mocking-bird. So the women of the village
are ever since that time said to be the children

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

of the Mocking-bird, and that is the reason why they talk and jabber so
much, because the Mocking-bird is a great talker. The men of the village
have ever since been considered to be the children of the Rooster, and
that is the reason why they are so gentle and docile. If all the people
had been the children of the Rooster they would all be gentle and kind
and not talk so much.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[176:1](toth058.htm#fr_123) Told by Kiwánhongva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 56. The Toad and the Snow Katcínas](toth059)
