[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth003)  [Next](toth005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

## 3. COMING OF THE HOPI FROM THE UNDER-WORLD. <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5)

A long time ago the people were living below. There were a great many of
them, but they were often quarreling with one another. Some of them were
very much depraved. They abused the women and the maidens, and that led
to very many contentions. So the chiefs, who were worried and angry over
this, had a council and concluded that they would try to find another
place to live. So they first sent out a bird named Mótsni, to find a
place of exit from this world. He flew up high but was too weak and
returned without having been successful. They then sent the Mocking-bird
(Yáhpa). He was strong and flew up very high and found a place of exit.
Returning, he reported this to the chiefs.

In the meanwhile the chiefs had caused a great flood. Many
Bálölölkongwuus <span id="fr_6"></span>[2](#fn_6) came out of the ground
with the water, and a great portion of the people were destroyed. When
the Mocking-bird had made his report to the chiefs the latter said: "All
right, that is good. We are going away from here.'' They then announced
through the crier that in four days they would leave, and that the women
should prepare some food, and after they had eaten on the fourth day
they would all assemble at the place right under the opening which the
Mocking-bird had found. This was done.

The chiefs then planted a pine-tree (calávi), sang around it, and by
their singing made it to grow very fast. It grew up to the opening which
the Yáhpa had found, and when the chiefs tried and shook it, they found
that it was fairly strong, but not strong enough for many people to
climb up on, especially its branches, which were very thin. So they
planted another kind of pine (lö'oqö), sang around it, and made it also
to grow up fast. This tree and its branches was much stronger than the
other, but while the first one had grown through the opening, this one
did not reach it entirely, its uppermost branches and twigs spreading
out sideways before they reached the opening. Hereupon they planted in
the same manner a reed (bákavi), which proved to be strong, and also
grew through the opening like the calávi. Finally they planted a
sunflower (áhkawau), and as it was moist where they planted it, it also
grew up very fast and to a great size, its leaves also being very large;
but the sunflower did not reach the opening. Its very large disk
protruded downward before it reached the opening. The sunflower was
covered with little thorns all over.

Now they were done with this.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Hereupon Spider Woman, Pöokónghoya, his brother Balö'ongawhoya, and the
Mocking-bird that had found the opening, climbed up on the calávi in the
order mentioned. After they had emerged through the opening, Pöokónghoya
embraced the calávi, his brother the reed, both holding them firmly that
they should not shake when the people were climbing up. The Mocking-bird
sat close by and sang a great many songs, the songs that are still
chanted at the Wúwûchim ceremony. Spider Woman was also sitting close by
watching the proceedings. Now the people began to climb up, some on the
calávi, others on the lö'oqö, still others on the ahkavu and on the
bákavi. As soon as they emerged, the Mocking-bird assigned them their
places and gave them their languages. To one he would say: "You shall be
a Hopi, and that language you shall speak." To another: "You shall be a
Navaho, and you shall speak that language." And to a third: "You shall
be an Apache, a Mohave, a Mexican,", etc., including the White Man. The
language spoken in the underworld had been that of the following Pueblo
Indians: Kawáhykaka, Ákokavi, Kátihcha, Kótiyti; these four branches of
the Pueblo Indians speaking essentially the same language.

In the under-world the people had been very bad, there being many
sorcerers and dangerous people, just like there are in the villages
to-day who are putting diseases into the people. Of these Pópwaktu, one
also found his way out with the others. The people kept coming out, and
before they were all out the songs of the Mocking-bird were exhausted.
"Hapí! pai shúlahti! Now! (my songs) are gone," and at once the people
who were still on the ladders commenced returning to the under-world,
but a very great many had already come out, an equally large number
having remained in the under-world, but the Kík-mongwi from below was
with the others that came out of the kiva. The people who had emerged
remained around the sípapu, as the opening was, and has ever since been
called.

At this time no sun existed and it was dark everywhere. The half-grown
son of the Kík-mongwi took sick and died, so they buried him. His father
was very angry. "Why has some Powáka come out with us?" he said. "We
thought we were living alone and wanted to get away from those dangerous
men. That is the reason why we have come out, and now one has come with
us." Hereupon he called all the people together and said: "On whose
account have I lost my child? I am going to make a ball of this fine
com-meal and throw it upward, and on whose head that ball alights, him I
shall throw down again through the sípapu." Hereupon he threw the ball
upward to a great height, the people all standing and watching. <span
id="page_12">p. 12</span> When it came down it fell upon the head of
some one and was shattered. "Ishohí! so you are the one," the chief said
to him. But as it happened this was the chief's nephew (his younger
sister's son). <span id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7) "My nephew, so you are
núkpana (dangerous); why have you come out with us? We did not want any
bad ones here, and now you have come with us. I am going to throw you
back again." So he grabbed him in order to throw him back. "Wait," he
said, "wait! am going to tell you something." "I am going to throw you
back," the chief replied. ''Wait," his nephew said again, "until I tell
you some thing. You go there to the sípahpuni and you look down. There
he is walking." "No, he is not," the chief replied, "I am not going to
look down there, he is dead." But he went and looked down and there he
saw his boy running around with other children, still showing the signs
of the head washing which the Hopi practice upon the dead immediately
after death. "Yes, it is true, it is true," the chief said, "truly there
he is going about." "So do not throw me down there," his nephew said,
"that is the way it will be. If any one dies he will go down there. Let
me remain with you, I am going to tell you some more." Then the chief
consented and let his nephew remain.

It was still dark, and as there was no sunshine it was also cold, and
the people began to look for fire and for wood, but as it was so dark,
they could find very little wood. They thus lived there a while without
fire, but all at once they saw a light in the distance and the chief
said: "Some one go there and see about it." When they had still been in
the lower world they had occasionally heard footsteps of some one up
above. So some one went in search of the light, but before he had
reached it he became tired and returned. Another was sent and he got
there. He found a field in which corn, watermelons, beans, etc., were
planted. All around this field a fire was burning, which was kept up by
wood, and by which the ground was kept warm so that the plants could
grow. The messenger found a very handsome man there. He had four strands
of turquoise around his neck and very large turquoise ear pendants. In
his face he had two black lines running from the upper part of his nose
to his cheeks, and made with specular iron. By his side was standing his
friend (a mask) which looked very ugly, with large open eye-holes and a
large mouth. So it was Skeleton (Másauwuu) whom they had heard walking
about from the other world. "Who are you?" Skeleton asked the messenger.
''Where do you come from?" "Yes," he replied, "we have come from below,
and it is cold here. We are freezing and we have no fire.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

"You go and tell your people and then you all come here to me." So he
returned and the people asked him: "Now, what have you found out? Have
you found anybody?" "Yes," he said, "I have found somebody and he has a
good crop there." Skeleton had fed the messenger with some of his good
things which he had there. The people had not brought much food with
them from below and so they had not very much left. The people were very
glad for this invitation and went to the place where Skeleton lived. But
when they saw the small field they thought: "Well, that will be gone in
a very short time," but Skeleton always planted and the food was never
gone. When they came there they gathered some wood and built a fire and
then they warmed themselves and were happy. Skeleton gave them roasting
ears, and watermelons, melons, squashes, etc., and they ate and
refreshed themselves. Some of the plants were very small yet, others
still larger, so that they always had food.

So the people remained there, made fields, and they always kept up a
fire near the fields, which warmed the ground so that they could raise a
crop. When the crop had matured they gathered it all in, and when they
now had provisions they planned to start off again, but there was still
no sun, and it was cold. So they talked about this, saying: "Now, it
ought not remain this way." So the chiefs all met in council with
Skeleton, and talked this matter over in order to see whether they could
not make a sun as they had had it in the underworld, but they did not
just know how to do it. So they finally took a piece of dressed buffalo
hide (hâkwávu), which they cut in a round shape, stretched it over a
wooden ring, and then painted it with white dû'ma (kaoline). They then
pulverized some black paint (tóho) <span id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8)
with which they drew a picture of the moon around the edge of this disk,
sprinkling the center of the disk with the same black color. They then
attached a stick to this disk. Hereupon they stretched a large piece of
white native cloth (möchápu) on the floor and placed this disk on it.
All these objects they had brought with them from the under-world.

They then selected some one (the story does not say whom) and directed
him to stand on this moon symbol. Hereupon the chiefs took the cloth by
it, corners, swung it back and forth, and then threw it upward, where it
continued swiftly flying eastward into the sky. So the people sat and
watched. All at once they noticed that it became light in the east.
Something was burning there as they thought. The light became brighter
and brighter, and something came up in the east. It rose higher and
higher, and where the people were it

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

became lighter and lighter. So now they could go about and they were
happy. That turned out to be the moon, and though it was light, the
light was only dim and the people , when working in the fields, would
still occasionally cut off their plants because they could not see very
distinctly, and it was still cold and the people were freezing, and they
still had to keep the ground warm with fires. So. the people were
thinking about it. The chiefs again met in council, and said: "Ishohí!
It is better already, it is light, but it is not quite good yet. it is
still cold. Can we not make something better?" They concluded that
perhaps the buffalo skin was not good, and that it was too cold, so they
decided that this time they would take a piece of möchápu. They again
cut out a round piece, stretched it over a ring, but this time painted
it with oxide of copper (cákwa). They painted eyes and a mouth on the
disk, and decorated the forehead of what this was to resemble in yellow,
red, and other colors. They put a ring of corn-husks around it, which
were worked in a zigzag fashion. <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)
Around this they tied a táwahona, that is, a string of red horse-hair,
finally thrusting a number of eagle-tail feathers into a corn-husk ring,
fastened to the back of the disk. In fact, they prepared a sun symbol as
it is still worn on the back of the flute players in the Flute ceremony.
To the forehead of the face painted on the disk they tied an abalone
shell. Finally the chief made nakwákwosis of the feathers of a small
yellowish bird, called iráhoya, which resembles a fly-catcher, but has
some red hair on top of the head. <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10)

Of these nakwákwosis the chief tied one to the point of each eagle-tail
feather on the sun symbol. They then placed this symbol on the white
cloth again, again asked some one to stand on it, and, as in the case of
the moon, they swung the cloth with its contents into the air, where it
kept twirling upward and upward towards the east. Soon they again saw a
light rise in the east. It became brighter and brighter and warmer. That
proved to be the sun, and it had not come up very high when the Hopi
already felt its warmth. <span id="fr_11"></span>[3](#fn_11) After

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

the sun had been created and was rising day after day, the people were
very happy, because it was now warm and very light, so that they could
attend to their work very well. The children were running around and
playing. They were now thinking of moving on. They had a great many
provisions by this time, and so the chiefs again met in a council to
talk the matter over. "Let us move away from here," the chiefs said;
"let us go eastward and see where the sun rises, but let us not go all
together. Let some take one route, others another, and others still
further south, and then we shall see who arrives at the place where the
sun rises first. So the people started. The White People took a southern
route, the Hopi a more northern, and between them traveled what are now
the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico. Often certain parties would remain at
certain places, sometimes for several years. They would build houses and
plant.

Soon they became estranged from each other, and would begin to attack
and kill one another. The Castilians were especially bad, and made wars
on other people. When starting, the chiefs had agreed that as soon as
one of the parties should reach the place where the sun rises, many
stars would fall from the sky, and when that would happen all the
traveling parties should remain and settle down where they would be at
that time. The White People having taken a southern route, were more
gifted than the other people. When they had become very tired carrying
their children and their burdens, one of the women bathed herself and
took the scales that she had rubbed off from her body and made horses of
these scales. These horses they used after that for traveling, so that
they could proceed very much faster. In consequence of this they arrived
at the place where the sun rises before any of the other parties arrived
there. And immediately many stars fell from the sky. "Aha!" the people
said who were still traveling; "Some one has already arrived." Hereupon
they settled down where they were. It had also been agreed upon before
the different parties started, that whenever those who did not reach the
place where the sun rises should be molested by enemies, they should
notify those who had arrived at the sunrise, and the latter, would then
come and help them.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[10:1](toth004.htm#fr_5) Told by Lomávântiwa
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_6"></span>[10:2](toth004.htm#fr_6) Great water serpent.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:1](toth004.htm#fr_7) According to others it
was a maiden.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[13:1](toth004.htm#fr_8) These paints are still
universally used in their ceremonies.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[14:1](toth004.htm#fr_9) Lamávântiva says that
the Hopi are very secretive about making this zigzag ring. They do not
want any one to witness the manufacturing of this peculiar object.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[14:2](toth004.htm#fr_10) The Hopi say that this
red spot resembles fire, and hence the feathers of this bird are very
much prized for prayer-offerings, whose object it is to produce warm
weather.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[14:3](toth004.htm#fr_11) Which is said to come
partly from those small nakwákwosis and partly from the glittering shell
which is said to also contain heat. As the shell glitters the light is
said to proceed from the sun on account of that shell. The man that was
thrown up with the sun is said to hold the sun in front of himself, but
the rotation of the sun is caused by the Hurúing Wuhti of the east and
the Hurúing Wuhti of the west who keep drawing and rotating the sun with
a string. The man who was thrown up with the moon is also said to be
still behind the moon, but instead of holding the moon in the center, as
is the case of the sun, he still holds her by a stick that they attached
to it when the moon was made. The increase and decrease of the moon is
caused by a covering which is probably the piece of cloth in which the
moon disk and the man were thrown into the sky at the time when the moon
was created.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4. The Wanderings of the Hopi.](toth005)
