[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth036)  [Next](toth038) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 34. THE KÓHONINO HUNTER. <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_85)

Halíksai! A long time ago the Kóhonino came out at the place where the
salt comes out. They ascended, traveled southward, and there built some
houses in cliffs, where they lived. They were always

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

hunting deer, antelope, mountain sheep, etc. One time one of the
Kóhonino was also going to hunt. He soon discovered a flock of mountain
sheep in one of the cliffs. He shot and hit one of the larger bucks,
which however got away. He followed him all day, and finally the animal
got tired and arrived at a place where he was about to jump down, when
the hunter shot him again. He began to stagger and finally fell, but
before he died he tumbled partly down the bluff, where he died. The
hunter climbed down to the place where the animal was lying, but his
foot slipped and he fell down, too. He fell deeper, rolling over the
ledge on which the animal was lying. His fall was so severe that both of
his eyes fell out and he remained lying there unconscious.

When evening came the Kóhonino in the village waited for the young man
to return, but when he did not return they finally ate their evening
meal and kindled their fire, still waiting for the hunter to return, but
he did not come. They kept up their fire all night and did not go to
sleep. In the night the hunter revived, but as a skeleton (másauwuu). He
arose and went towards the place where his people were living, but he
pitied himself, saving, "Oh! I!" and then began to moan as follows:

Havacova <span id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_86) Kahnina,  
At Blue, Blue Kohoninas,  
Iwayahana. Haara  
It will be good. Eyes  
Paama takoyma! Hinayahanaa <span id="fr_89"></span>[2](#fn_87)  
All gone, Oh! Oh!  
Hanina <span id="fr_90"></span>[3](#fn_88) takoyma  
Oy ovoyoy ah --------.

While he was thus moaning he proceeded towards the bluff where his
people were living. They were still up and had lights burning. When he
came close to the village they saw and heard him. One of them said,
"Listen! A coyote goes crying" (Mo! kushash chavoko). Another one said,
"No, a wolf goes crying" (Opa, hatakwi chavoko). "No" (Opa), a third one
said, "A Skeleton is crying" (Maiyoma chavoko). They now looked and by
that time the Skeleton had come within the radius of the light of their
camp-fires. Then they saw that it was a Skeleton. "Oh!" (Ma!) they said,
"it is a Skeleton" (Maviyoma). "Oh! we all shall flee" (Ma! payam
kiwakvako). <span id="fr_91"></span>[4](#fn_89)

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

Hereupon they all picked up their things, the women throwing their
children on their backs, the men their buckskins, meat, etc., and then
they fled. The Skeleton took possession of the houses that the Kóhonino
had left, and has been living there ever since. The Kóhonino went
westward and finally arrived at a very steep bluff. This they ascended
and settled down there in the valley near Green Bluff, where they have
been living ever since, and this is why the Kóhonino settled down at
this place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_84"></span>[124:1](toth036.htm#fr_86) This kiva was last
occupied by women and was dismantled probably about forty years ago. The
flag-stones of the floor were used for the floor in the present Kwán
kiva, and the timbers were used for reconstructing the Cakwálânvi kiva,
those of the latter kiva being used in reconstructing the Coyote and the
Singer kivas. It is said that the reason for this exchange was that the
old, heavy timbers in the Cakwálânvi kiva were somewhat rotten and so
had to be used on narrower kivas, while the Cakwálânvi kiva used the
longer timbers of the Chórzhovi kiva in reconstructing their wider kiva.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[124:2](toth037.htm#fr_87) Told by Tangákhoyoma
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_86"></span>[125:1](toth037.htm#fr_88) After Green Bluff
(Cakwátupka), where they now live.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[125:2](toth037.htm#fr_89) The narrator was
unable to give the meaning.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[125:3](toth037.htm#fr_90) The narrator was
unable to give the meaning.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[125:4](toth037.htm#fr_91) These phrase, are in
the Kóhonino language.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 35. The White Corn-ear Maiden and the Sorcerers](toth038)
