[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth048)  [Next](toth050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

## 46. THE JUG BOY. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_105.md)

In the village of Háno the people were living. The Háno know how to make
the earthen jugs, and one time a handsome young woman also made an
earthen jug. She kneaded the clay and when her hands were tired she
trampled it with her feet, so that the wet clay spurted all
around. <span id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_106.md) By and by this woman bore
a child, but it was an earthen jug, inside of which was a little boy,
who cried when he was born. The women who were present were happy.
"Ishuní!" they said, "you have borne a child," whereupon they washed the
jug child, and in that way the child grew up. But the mother nursed it,
holding her breast over the opening of the jug when the child nursed.

By and by the child grew up and began to talk like the Háno, and from
that time on the child refused to take the mother's breast; it asked for
some food, and from there on it ate food which the mother put into the
jug. Thus the child grew to be a young man. One time it rained and then
it snowed, and the young men then went hunting. In the evening they came
home carrying the rabbits. That jug youth envied them. He had a
grandfather, and said to the grandfather, "My grandfather." "Hay!" the
latter replied. "I want to go hunting, too." "Very well," he replied,
and then the grandfather made a bow for him and arrows, and tied
feathers to the arrows, and when he had made them he tied them to the
jug handles. He also tied some food to the jug and a burden band with
it. These things he made.

Then the grandfather lifted the jug up, carried it down from the village
and left it there. He said to him, "Now go on; there in the field they
are hunting, hence when you proceed and find rabbit tracks somewhere you
follow them. This kind of tracks they have," whereupon he drew them for
him. Now then he (the jug youth) moved forward in a wabbling manner and
descended somewhere along the path. When he had descended he went
somewhere northward from the village. Then he moved up and down that
way, and sure enough somewhere found some tracks. He followed them and
there, sure enough, a rabbit was running. Now that jug youth moved very
fast, so that the mouth of the jug whistled. He circled around the
rabbit once, then the rabbit jumped into the wash. The jug youth also
came and jumped down. When he landed on the ground he burst into two and
a Hopi came bouncing out of it.

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

After that he at once untied the bow and arrows and burden band. He now
took the burden band, the bow and arrows, and followed the rabbit. The
rabbit became tired and sat down. When the youth found him he shot it.
He then followed another one and killed it. Thus he killed four. He now
tied them up and carried them on his back and then went home from there.
When it was evening he came to his mother carrying the rabbits, and she
was truly happy. "Oh my! Thanks that you have killed them, thanks,
thanks," she said. The grandfather now also said: "Thanks, thanks, why
you have fixed yourself up somewhere, and hence you are now a Hopi and
have carried these here to me. Thanks! Why now subsisting on your
account I shall live here." When he had thus spoken to him, after that
that one lived as a Hopi, and after that he always provided something
for his mother, and then subsisting on his account (by his assistance)
they lived there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_105"></span>[155:1](toth049.htm#fr_107.md) Told by
Tangákhoyoma (Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_106"></span>[155:2](toth049.htm#fr_108.md) A part of it
entered her genitalia and she became pregnant from it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 47. The Crow As A Spirit of Evil](toth050.md)
