[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth006)  [Next](toth008) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### a. THE SPIDER CLAN

This clan traveled northward. The chief first, the people following.
After four nights they carne to a nice country, where the "North Old
Man" (Kwináe Wuhtaka) lives. But it was cold there.

The chief decided that there they would stay. So the people were glad
and began to plant corn, watermelon, melons, sweet corn, etc. The chief
had brought with him the cult and altar of the Blue Flutes. When the
corn began to grow the chief put up his altar, sang and fluted, but he
did all that alone. So the corn, etc., grew nicely, but when it tasseled
and the ears began to develop, it became cold and the crop was
destroyed. "Ishohi!" (Oh!) the people exclaimed.

They tried it another year, but the same: thing was repeated in every
respect. Again no crop. Another year it was tried, but now the corn only
began to tassel, and the fourth year it was still very small when the
frost killed it. Then there was dissatisfaction. "Ishohí! (Oh!) Our
Father, you have spoken falsely, you said it was good here." So they all
also started southward after the Bear People.

After the first night the chief said to his wife: "You bathe yourself."
This she did (in warm water). Then she rubbed her body and collected the
small scales which she had rubbed from her skin and handed them to her
husband. He laid them on a blanket until there was a considerable
quantity of them. He then wrapped this in a reed receptacle, sang over
it and waved it four times, whereupon the scales turned into burros and
rushed out. "What is that?" the people asked. "Those are burros," the
chief said. So they were glad that now they would not have to carry
everything themselves any longer, and the chief said that now they would
move on towards the rising sun.

The chief and his wife repeated the same performance, but instead of
burros, Spaniards came out. To them the chief said: You put supplies and
your things on the burros and follow the other Hopi (that is, the Bear
clan), and when you overtake them, kill them. So the Castilians went
south, and the Spider people went south-east, following a Stream
(Nönö'pbaya, a rolling stream, because of the high recoiling waves).
They came to a nice place where they stayed one

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

year and planted and reaped a crop. From there they proceeded
south-east, stopped another year at a certain place, where they again
planted, but were harassed by enemies. They saved a portion of the crop
and proceeding farther south-east they ascended a bluff or mesa, staying
another year and planting in the valleys.

Thus they stopped in all at ten different places, but being constantly
harassed by the people along the water, they never planted more than
once. Finally they arrived where the sun rises and the Americans
(Bahánas) live. With them they became friends; here they planted, their
children learned the language a little, and they stayed there three
years. They also here learned that the Bear clan had been there and had
already gone westward again. The Spider people followed, arrived at
Oraíbi, where they found , the Bear clan, whom they joined. Their chief
was then Machíto. They also had the Â'ototo and Áholi Katcinas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: b. the Bear Clan](toth008)
