[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth113)  [Next](toth115.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 1.--ORIGIN MYTH.

When nothing but water, Hurúing Wuhti, deity of hard substances, lives
in ocean in east. Another Hurúing Wuhti lives in ocean in west. Sun also
exists, and before rising in cast dresses in skin of gray fox, but soon
exchanges it for skin of yellow fox, whereupon morning dawns. Two
deities cause dry land to appear in midst of water. Sun sees no living
being and tells deities. They consult and make Wren of clay. Wren flies
over earth and reports no living being exists. However, Spider Woman is
living in southwest. Deity of west makes many other birds to inhabit
world. The two deities teach them sounds they should make. Deity of west
makes different kinds of animals, which are taught their different
languages. Deity of east makes of clay first woman, then man, to live on
earth and understand everything. Deity makes two tablets of hard
substance and draws characters on them with wooden stick. She rubs with
palms of hands palms of woman and man, who then understand writing on
tablets. Deities teach them language. Deity of east takes them over
rainbow to her home. They stay four days, and then she tells them to go
and select place to live. They build small house. Spider Woman makes man
and woman of clay. They are Spaniards. She teaches them Spanish language
and gives them tablets and imparts knowledge to them by rubbing hands,
as deity of east had done with "white man," She creates two burros for
them. Spider Woman creates other men and women, giving different
language to each pair. She forgets to create woman for certain man, and
afterwards fails to create man for certain woman. Tells woman to go and
find man and live with him. They meet and live together, but they soon
quarrel and separate. They come together again, and separate, and so on.
This is why there are so many contentions between men and their wives.
Hurúing Wuhti of west now creates many people in pairs, husband and
wife. They live in west and lead nomadic life, living on game. There are
many contentions among people, and deity of west goes to live in ocean
in west. Tells people to pray to her there. Deity in east does
something. Spanish are angry and two go with guns to abiding-place of
Hurúing Wuhti. She gets them to lay down their arms and asks them to
lift stone. They try and their hands adhere to stone. Deity then rubs
guns to powder and disappears through opening in floor of kiva. From
there she exerts influence on stone and releases men when they promise
to exchange with others good things they have.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2.--Hurúing Wuhti and the Sun.](toth115.md)
