[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth106)  [Next](toth108.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

## 104. THE DESTRUCTION OF AOATOVI. <span id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_191.md)

Alíksai! At Aoátovi they were living. The village chief had some fine
nice fields there. North of the village were two springs. The village
chief also had a son, but all the maidens of the village were afraid of
this youth and refused to marry him. He was a great hunter and always
went hunting. So one time he again led a hunting expedition. They went
south-west of the village, away off, where they assembled at a certain
place. They had built their fire. Some of the maidens of the village
took part in the hunt. They then formed two parties, and these spread
out to form a circle. There were a great many rabbits and they killed a
great many. A large hawk took part in the hunt too. He would swoop down
on the rabbits and kill them. This he did for the village chief's son,
so that when they went home the village chief had a great deal of game
to carry home. When the sun was low they arrived at the spring close to
Aoátovi. Here they drank and then they went up to the village. On the
way up they ate many peaches and watermelons that were growing close to
the mesa. The peaches were just beginning to get ripe.

The village chief's son not having anything to carry, ran ahead to the
village, wrapped up in his blanket, and seated himself on top of a house
and watched for the hunters to come up. When they assembled in the
village he came down and met his father in the house. Here they ate
supper. When they were through his sister removed the remnants. The
father then smoked on the game, whereupon the son addressed his father
and said: "My father, I am unhappy here, and now our children (people)
they shall be happy here only this long too. Let us do something to
them. You go to Toríva tomorrow morning." "Is that so?" the father said.
"Yes," the son replied.

So early in the morning the village chief repaired to the village of
Háno, where he met the chief of that village. "Why have you come?" the
latter said. "Yes," the visitor replied, "my son spoke to me something
not good last night, and I have come to tell you about it. The maidens
of our village refuse to marry him. They run away from him and so we
want you to come and fetch our people. You notify the other villages and
then you come sometime and bring powder of Spanish pepper with you, and
then when they are all in their kiva you give them that pepper.
"Hereupon the village chief returned to his home. The chief of Háno went
to inform the inhabitants

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

of Sitchomovi, and of Wálpi, both of which villages were then situated
north of the mesa where there are now some ruins. He told them that the
next night they should get ready for the expedition.

So the next evening the people of the three villages came out, -went
down the mesa and repaired to the village of Aoátovi, where they camped
at the spring north of the village at the foot of the mesa. There was a
great storm raging at that time. So in the evening they ascended the
mesa. The men were still in their different kivas eating their evening
meals. The enemies drew out the ladders from the kivas so that the men
could not come out. They then gathered the women and children, and while
some of the raiders drove them off in little bunches and parties, others
threw firebrands into the kivas and destroyed the men. The captives were
taken to the villages and distributed there where they remained.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_191"></span>[254:1](toth107.htm#fr_193.md) Told by Kúhkuima
(Shupaúlavi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 105. How An Oraíbi Chief Punished His People](toth108.md)
