[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth007)  [Next](toth009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### b. THE BEAR CLAN

This clan had gone south from the sípahpuni. They had with them the
Â'ototo Katcina. They soon found the Young Corn Ear (Píhk'ash) people
with the Áholi Katcina, who wanted to join them. So the Bear clan chief
took them along. They stopped at a place and here had a good crop
because they had the two Katcinas with them. The next year they came to
a clear stream. In all they stopped ten times before arriving at the
Americans, where the sun rises. Here they stopped four years. Their
children learned a little English. The land being scarce, the Americans
told them to go west and hunt land for themselves, and if anybody would
be bad to them (núkpana) and cause their children to die, they (the
Americans) would come and cut the Núkapana's heads off. This was told
them, because they (the Americans) had been told that down in the old
home there had been Pópwaktû (sorcerers, etc.). So they traveled
westward, found the Pueblo, but no good land that they could get. So
they finally arrived at Shongópavi, where some people lived, and there
they settled down.

One time the people saw that the chief, Machíto, held a sweet corn-ear
between every two fingers, at the same time eating from the other hand.
Corn was very scarce at that time, so the people spoke to him about his
greediness, at which he got angry and left, taking with him the Â'ototo
and Áholi. Hunters later found them at a rock, now Bean Spreading Place
(Báhpu-Möyanpi), where there is still a stone on which there is some
writing called Machítûtûbeni. Machíto left his wife at Shongópavi, also
his people, who then formed

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

the Shongópavi Bear clan. When the hunters found him they informed the
people at Shongópavi.

Some went there to get them back, but Machíto would not listen to them.
Then his wife went to him but he would not listen to her either. So they
left him. Machíto took a big stone and went with them for some distance
to make the landmark between Oraíbi and Shongópavi. The people said
several times: "Put it here." But he would not listen until arriving at
a place called "Ocápchomo," where he placed it, thus making a landmark
between the fields of the Shongópavi and his own.

Then Machíto and the two Katcinas went up the Oraíbi mesa where they
remained. Later the Spider people arrived. Machíto asked about their
wanderings and they told him. He wanted to know why the corn would not
grow although they had the Flute cult. The Spider clan chief accused the
"North Old Man." Machíto then said: "All right, you may live here, but
as your cult does not seem to be effective, you watch the sun for me,
and when he has arrived at his south limit, you tell me, and we shall
have the Soyál ceremony. Also your pü'htavi does not seem to have been
good, so I want you to make my kind of pü'htavi." <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22)

After the matter had been settled between Machíto and the Spider clan
chief, the latter's people came up. Among these were also the Lizard
clan, to which the Sand clan is related. These names were given to
people while wandering. One would find and see something, perhaps under
peculiar circumstances, and he called after it. The Lizard people were
also asked what they knew and when they said the Maraú cult, they were
also permitted to stay, but were requested to co-operate in the Soyál
ceremony. For that reason Pungñánömsi, who is of the Bear clan, and
village chief, now makes the pûhu (road) in the night of the Maraú
ceremony from the nátsi at the south end of the kiva towards the rising
sun.

The Rattle-snake (Tcû'a) clan also came with the Spider clan to Oraíbi,
but it is not known how or where this clan became a part of the Spider
clan, The Badger people understand medicines, hence they prepare the
medicine--for instance, charm liquid--for the Flute, Snake, Maraú, and
other ceremonies.

Another Badger clan and the Butterfly (Pówul) came from Kíshi-wuu. These
brought the Powámu and Katcina cult.

The Divided Spring (Bátki) clan came from where the sun rises.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

They came to the village of Oraíbi and arranged a contest at Muyíovatki
where each planted corn, the Blue Flutes sweet corn, the others,
Wupákaö, over which they played the whole day. The sweet corn grew
first, and so the Blue Flutes to this day go to the village in
processions, etc., first closing the well (batñi) on the plaza. Later
the Drab Flutes (Masítâlentu) had to throw their meal, mollas, etc.,
from a distance to the warrior (Keléhtaka) of the Cakwálâlentu, who put
them into the well in the booth for them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_22"></span>[29:1](toth008.htm#fr_22) It is thought that
this refers to the mutual celebrating of the Soyál ceremony, in which
all are supposed yet to participate. Machíto had brought the Soyál altar
and cult with him. The Píhk'ash People had Áholi Katcina and the screen
(Ómawn) now used in the Soyál and the corn Ceremonies. The Â'ototo has
the water and rain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 6. The Snake Myth.](toth009)
