[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth151)  [Next](toth153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 39.--THE TWO PUEBLO MAIDENS WHO WERE MARRIED TO THE NIGHT.

Two sisters refuse to marry. Night goes and asks them to marry him. They
consent if parents are willing. Parents are willing and Night comes next
evening for brides. Outside of village is large tray. They take place on
tray and are carried through air to gulch where Night lives. They see
room with bones of women stolen by Night in village. and whom he has
thrown there as soon as they become pregnant. Women become pregnant,
Younger sister goes to lake to get water and Frog speaks to her. He
tells her they must go home that night by trail which leads to their
home. In evening sisters go after water and Frog again tells them to go
home by trail. They travel and see Spider Woman, who goes with them.
Next day Spider Woman sees clouds and says they will overtake them. When
three come nearly to village, clouds overtake them and women are killed
by lightning. Elder sister is delivered of little boy and younger one of
little girl. Children live and nurse. Mothers are alive during night.
but are dead during day. When children are grown they ask about father.
Mothers tell them that grandparents live in village near, but that they
are bad. They contend and kill any one who is beaten, and who cannot
guess what is in something hanging on top of ladder, which is little
turtle. Children start and mothers ask them to bring them clothes: and
say that if grandparents do not say anything they also will go. Children
arrive at village, enter kiva, and sit down. When asked they tell who
they are. When they have eaten they have to play game and boy wins. They
are then asked to guess what is wrapped up at top of ladder. They
equivocate and then brother says little turtle, Grandfather admits they
are his grandchildren and tells them to kill him. They refuse, but ask
for something. They obtain bow and arrows and clothes and then clothes
for mothers They say mothers will come, if nothing is said to them.
Children return to mothers. After evening meal all dress up and proceed
to village, all abreast. They ascend ladder and women call out and
receive no answer. They descend into kiva and again call. They do this
three times and grandmother responds. Immediately two children and two
grandchildren fall dead. If they had been quiet once more, all would
have lived together happily.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 40.--How Hiyónatitiwa Defeated the Plan of His Enemy.](toth153)
