[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth092)  [Next](toth094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

## 90. THE MICE, THE OWL, AND THE HAWK. <span id="fr_169"></span>[1](#fn_167.md)

A long time ago a little Mouse (Hómihtci) lived south of the village of
Oraíbi at Scent Hill (Hovakapchomo), because a certain herb called
hovákpi <span id="fr_170"></span>[2](#fn_168.md)--that which has an
odor--was growing there in great abundance. Near by, on top of the rocks
south of Oraíbi, lived a big Owl that seemed to be determined to kill
the little Mouse. The Owl would frequently be flying around the hole of
the Mouse, sometimes when the latter was outside darting towards it, so
that the Mouse often had a narrow escape from death. The latter made
various plans to protect itself. Finally it went to get a. number of
sticks from a weed called Tâve. <span id="fr_171"></span>[3](#fn_169.md)
These the Mouse pointed at the end and placed in the ground all around
the hole, so that the points were protruding from the earth. One night
the Owl again swiftly flew down towards the hole trying to catch the
little Mouse, which was running about between the stakes. One of the
sticks pierced the Owl's breast and killed it. The Mouse at once went to
work and pulled out all the Owl's feathers and carried them into its
hole, tying some of them into little bunches. "But what shall I do with
all these feathers?" it asked itself. "I am going to get my neighbors
together and arrange a dance."

So after dark the Mouse went out and called out: "You, my neighbors who
live here, come here to my house quickly." So a great many Mice at once
assembled in the house of the one who had invited them and asked: "Why
do you want us here?" "Yes," the Mouse answered, "I have killed this Owl
here and do not know what to do with all the feathers, so I thought we
would have a dance and dress up in these feathers, and that is the
reason why I called you in." Hereupon it distributed all the feathers
and all made little bunches of them and tied them on their heads. They
concluded that early in the morning they would have a dance, and one
they requested to make a song (yâ'waata). The following song was soon
prepared, and then all practiced it so that they might be acquainted
with it in the dance:

Tuhuckan chohona, tuhuckan chohona;  
Dancing busily, dancing busily;  
Chonanikae,  
To be busy again.  
Ahâ! âhâhâhâ!

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

The meaning is that they dance in order to bring about an opportunity to
get at some seeds and kernels again.

By this time it was morning and a number of them were sent after some
more sticks, which were again pointed and thrust into the ground in the
same manner as the first sticks had been put in, only somewhat farther
away from the house (hole) of the Mouse. This was done for protection in
case any more Owls should be around while they were dancing. They then
tied the larger feathers of the dead Owl in a large bunch and set it in
the center of the inclosure. This was to serve to them as a típoni,
around which they were going to perform their dance. They then got ready
for the dance, Though they were only small they had large bunches of
feathers (nákwas) on their heads. The leader held a little bow with some
tiny arrows.

The dance that they were performing was an imitation of the dance of the
Mómchitû Fraternity. They were very careful to keep within the limits of
the sticks that they had put in last. While this dance was going on, a
large Hawk was sitting on a rock south of Oraíbi. "Aha," he said, "there
is something going on somewhere. The Mice are enjoying themselves." He
at once swooped down on them, ignoring the pointed sticks, as he was
very strong, and killed a great number of Mice, taking one in each
talon. These he carried to Ishmovala, a rock west of Oraíbi, on the top
of which he devoured them.

Those that had not been killed rushed away into their houses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[229:1](toth093.htm#fr_169.md) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_168"></span>[229:2](toth093.htm#fr_170.md) Artemisia filifolia
Torrey.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[229:3](toth093.htm#fr_171.md) Sarcobatus
vermiculatus Torrey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 91. The Sparrow-hawk and the Hâ'kwâ](toth094.md)
