[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth054)  [Next](toth056.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 52. THE KALÁTÖTÖ <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_117) WHO WISHED TO HAVE HAIR ON HIS HEAD. <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_118.md)

Halíksai! At Kutúkwûhschomo (so called after a certain kind of grass,
Kutúkwûhci, that grew on that hill), used to live a Kalátötö. In' the
village of Oraíbi lived many people. Kalátötö would often visit the
village and try to find something to eat among the refuse near the
village. The children of the village, finding the Kalátötö would tease
and worry him, snapping their finger nails against his head, so that
sometimes he would almost die. He would then retire to his house again.
This happened very often and the Kalátötö was thinking how he could get
some hair at least on the head, like the Hopi children had, who
otherwise were just as nude as the Kalátötö. He had no hair nor any
protection of any kind over his entire body. He finally concluded that
he would go to the timber and get some pitch, which he did. Taking some
of this pitch to his house he went to the village to hunt some hair that
had been thrown on the piles of refuse by the Hopi, and finding some, he
took it to his house and was very happy.

The next morning he put some of the pitch on his head and pasted some
hair on it, so that he now had hair like the Hopi children. He was now.
very happy and made a visit to the village again. The children soon
discovered him again and said: "Here is somebody," and one of the
children soon recognized the Kalátötö, saying, "It seems to be the
Kalátötö, but he has now hair." "It smells very much like pitch here,"
some of the children said, "he has put pitch on his head," and they at
once took little sticks and putting one end of them on his head the
pitch adhered to the sticks. As the Hopi children are very fond of pitch
they began to chew the pitch, scraping all off of his head.

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

He was very sorry and returned to his home, gathering up, however, the
hairs which the children had pulled out of the pitch and thrown away,
and he took them along. He meditated about the matter all night, and in
the morning went into the timber north of the village again. Finding
some cactus, he took with him some of the juice to his house. In the
morning he put some of this on his head and again pasted the hair to the
juice, which adhered firmly after the juice had nearly dried.

So he went again to the village. The children seeing him said: "Here he
has come again," and once more tried with little sticks to remove his
head covering, but they soon found that this time it was not pitch. So
he remained there a while, the children again worrying him. Towards
evening he went home, and by that time the juice had dried so thoroughly
that it began to crack and fall off with the hair. He was now again very
unhappy.

At that time it was píki providing day (píktotok'a) in the village,
preparatory for a Katcina dance. The Kalátötö was very unhappy, as he
had hoped to attend the dance with the hair on his head. The next
morning he again repaired to the woods to get some more pitch, which he
found quickly. Bringing it to the house, he again felt happy, thinking
that now he would have hair to attend the dance the next day. He was
very happy and in the evening put some of the pitch on his head again,
pasting new hair to it. He then retired and slept well that night. In
the morning he heard the Katcinas dance and wanted to go to the village,
but the pitch had gotten warm during the night and the hair and pitch
adhered closely to the floor on which he had been sleeping. He made
repeated efforts to rise, but could not. So he heard the Katcinas dance
and sing all day, but could not get up. As he finally became very hungry
and no one brought him anything to eat, he perished there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_117"></span>[172:1](toth055.htm#fr_119.md) Not fully
identified. The Hopi say it looks somewhat like a locust but has short
wings and is of a light brown color with darker stripes across its back.
It is larger than a cricket, to which also it bears a resemblance in
certain respects.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[172:2](toth055.htm#fr_120.md) Told by Kwáyeshva
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 53. The Child Who Turned Into An Owl](toth056.md)
