[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth114)  [Next](toth116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 2.--HURÚING WUHTI AND THE SUN.

Hurúing Wuhti lives on small piece of land in west, and owns moon,
stars, and all hard substances. She sends Moon for Sun in east. He goes
to her, and they agree to own all things together. The y take skins of
all kinds of birds, and Hurúing Wuhti places them on floor. She then
rubs small scales from her cuticle between palms of hands and places
scales on feathers and skins and covers them with native cloth. Sun
kindles fire at east side. They

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

wave four corners of cloth, Hurúing Wuhti singing, four times, and
things begin to move and emit sounds as birds do. On removal of cover
birds fly out into air, but return. Hurúing Wuhti gives them to Sun, who
places them in jar of transparent stone. Sun places different kinds of
hair on floor with small quantity of his paints. He lets his beard drop
upon objects and shakes wings towards them. They cover things up, each
holding two corners of covering, and Suit sings song. Antelope and other
animals jump up and run around. Sun tells Hurúing Wuhti they are hers,
and they afterwards consider her as their mother. Sun returns under
earth to east and makes land by turning over land of Hurúing Wuhti which
is under water. He sees beings come out of water whom he calls White
People, Spaniards and Mormons. He pours bird-; out of jar and they fly
around in air and increase. Sun returns to Hurúing Wuhti's house in
west. She creates little maiden and little boy from pieces of her
cuticle. She sends them away to live on earth, and names youth Múyingwa
and maiden Yáhoya. With scale matter from her umbilicus Hurúing Wuhti
makes another maiden. She calls her Sand Clan Member and Lizard Clan
Member, and sends her after other two, giving her grain of shelled corn.
Hurúing Wuhti now rubs her face and inside of nose, and from scales
makes child that cries like Hopi child would cry, and another that cries
like coyote. She says maiden shall be Burrowing Owl Clan Member and
youth Coyote Clan Member. She gives them each grain of shelled corn and
tells them to follow others. Again Hurúing Wuhti creates as before, and
they hear somebody grunt and another one angry. The former is child like
Hopi, and she names it Bear-Clan Member. She gives him grain of corn and
sends him on. The other, Head-with-the-Hair-Pushed-over-it-Backward, is
Navaho. She gives him piece of spoiled meat and sends him on. Sun
returns to east, and next day he sees smoke arising at different places
and people camping. He sees maiden and youth traveling along very tired.
He gives them water to drink and little corn for food. He calls youth
Sun Clan Member and maiden Forehead Clan Member and tells them to travel
eastward.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3.--Coming of the Hopi From the Under-world.](toth116)
