[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth069)  [Next](toth071.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 67. THE COYOTE AND THE TURTLE-DOVE. <span id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_135.md)

Alíksai! The Shongópavi were living in their village, and South of the
village there was a hill called Kwákchomo. There was a great deal of
this grass called kwákwi there. A Turtle-dove one time was rubbing out
the seed from the tassels of this grass, and while doing so cut her hand
with the sharp edge of one of the blades of grass. It bled profusely,
and the Turtle-dove was moaning as follows:

Hooho, hoo, hooho, hoo, hooho, hoo,  
Ho-ho-ho-

While she was moaning a Coyote came along and heard somebody singing, as
he believed. So he approached the place. When he arrived at the place he
saw the Turtle-dove sitting and leaning forward in deep distress. "Are
you singing?" he asked the Dove. "Are you thus singing?" "No," she said,
"I am not singing; I am crying. I have cut myself." "No, you are
singing," the Coyote replied. "Now you sing to me." "No," the Dove
insisted, "I was crying," thus refusing to confirm the Coyote's
statements. "Now, if you are not willing to sing to me, I shall devour
you," the Coyote said. The Dove then yielded and sang the above song
again. The Coyote then imitating the song of the Dove, left her and ran
away.

As he was running he stumbled over a rock and fell down. As he fell he
lost the song, so that he was only able to say, "Ho-ho-ho." So the
Coyote made up his mind to go back again to the Turtle-dove, and,
arriving at the place where she was sitting, he began to urge her to
sing. "But I am not singing," she said, "I am crying." But he would not
listen, so she again sang her song to him. He again ran back, singing
the Turtle-dove's song as he was running. Again he stumbled over a rock
and lost the song. He again tried to sing, but could only say,
"Ho-ho-ho." So he again returned to the place Where the Turtle-dove had
been, but the latter had gone immediately after the Coyote had left her,
leaving at the place where she had been

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

sitting a stone which very much resembled her form, and was also placed
in about the position in which the Dove had been sitting. "I have fallen
down again and have forgotten my song, so I came back again," the Coyote
said, but he received no reply. "If you do not sing I am going to devour
you," and again receiving no reply, he grabbed what he believed to be
the Dove, but found that it was a stone. He broke all his teeth, and
much blood was streaming from his mouth. He at once ran back and taking
his way towards Shupaúlavi, came to the spring Toríva, which he
approached in order to drink. As he put his mouth to the water he saw a
bloody face staring at him from the depth of the water. Not knowing what
it was, he did not dare to drink, and ran away. Making his way
northward, he ran to another spring by the name of Nánkava, which is
situated north of Shupaúlavi. Here he again saw his reflection in the
water, and did not dare to drink. He then ran to a third spring by the
name of Íshk'achokpu. Seeing the same reflection in the water again, he
was angry and gnarled, or rather belched, at it, from which the spring
has derived its name, the Coyote Belching Water. He again was afraid to
drink, but was very tired and thirsty by this time. "I am going to run
to Oraíbi," he said to himself; "there is a place where there is some
water, and I believe there is nobody living in that place." So he ran to
a place south-east of Oraíbi, called Kurítvahchikpu. When he arrived at
this place he again put his snout to the water, and was just about to
drink when he discovered a skeleton staring at him from the water. This
time he was very angry and tore up the rocks around the spring, from
which that place has derived its name. He by this time was so thirsty
and exhausted that he fell down and died there.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_135"></span>[195:1](toth070.htm#fr_137.md) Told by Lomávântiwa
(Shupaúlavi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 68. The Coyote and the Blue Jays](toth071.md)
