[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth067)  [Next](toth069) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

## 65. HOW THE COYOTE WAS DECEIVED BY THE WREN. <span id="fr_134"></span>[1](#fn_132)

Halíksai! A long time ago, when they were living in Oraíbi, the Coyote
Woman lived at Íshmovala. She had four children. She always went hunting
mice and other little animals, which she brought to her children and fed
them to the latter. She went to the spring, Flute Spring (Lâ'nva) and
Dawn Spring (Taláova), after water for her children, but as she had no
water vessel she brought the water in her mouth. When she had given one
of the children to drink she would run again and get some more for the
other children until they were all satisfied. In that way she was
feeding and watering her children.

One time she again went after water to the Dawn Spring, filling her
mouth very full. When she returned she saw a Wren sitting on a rock, and
when she came near the bird, the latter was jumping up and down from one
rock to another singing as follows:

Calapongki, cholo, cholo,  
Calapongki, cholo, cholo,  
Riuw, riuw.

When the Coyote saw it she had to laugh, and spilled the water from her
mouth. "Now then, why are you dancing there that way that I had to laugh
and spill my water; I shall have to get some more," whereupon she ran
back to the spring to get some more water. When she came back with her
mouth full she thought that this time she was not going to laugh, but
when she arrived at the place where the Tû'chvo was dancing and saw the
latter dance and heard him singing in the same manner, she again had to
laugh, saying: "Poáh," by which she again spilled the water. But this
time she was angry and said: "Why are you dancing and singing here that
way that I have to spill this water? My children are thirsty and they
will die. Now, I am going back to get some more water, and if you are
doing that still when I return and I spill the water again, I shall
devour you." Hereupon she returned to the spring to fill her mouth
again.

While the Coyote was gone the Wren slipped out of its skin and dressed
up a stone with the skin so that it looked like a Wren. This artificial
bird he put up where he had been sitting and he himself slipped under a
rock, waiting for the Coyote. When the latter came along the Wren began
singing the same song from under the rock. The Coyote began to laugh,
saying: ''Poáh" and spilled the water. She was now very angry. "Now
then," she said, "you are still singing

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

that way here and I am going to devour you," whereupon she grabbed the
stone dressed in the bird's skin and crushed it. She broke all her teeth
so that the blood was streaming from her mouth. She ran back to the Dawn
Spring in order to wash her face, but as she stooped over the water she
saw some on-e with a bloody face staring at her. She at once left the
spring without having drunk any water, and ran to Spider Spring, where
she was scared away in the same manner. From here she ran to Dripping
Spring (Shívukva), where she met with the same disappointment. Hereupon
she ran to Hotvâl Spring (Hótvâlva). Here again she was scared away by
the face staring at her, and without daring to drink she rushed away
westward to the Grand Canyon. Arriving at the rim of the Canyon she
jumped into the canyon and perished.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[193:1](toth068.htm#fr_134) Told by
Tangákhoyoma (Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 66. The Áahtu and the Coyote](toth069)
