[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth124)  [Next](toth126.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 12.--THE DESTRUCTION OF PALÁTKWAPI.

After coming from under-world, people remain with Skeleton some time.
When they travel eastward large party comes to Palátkwapi. Among them is
Divided Water clan. Old man belonging to this clan is shamefully
mistreated, and he reports to village and other chiefs, complaining of
young men. Village chief says they will move away. He tells son to run
to Pine Ridge. They are sorcerers. On his return, chief makes four masks
which his son puts on, the last being like that of Skeleton. He has
fingers cut from old corpses tied to

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

wrists as rattler. Chief gives young man long cedar bark fuse and tells
him to return to Pine Ridge and set pine on fire. He does so, and on
return grinds corn on sister's mealing stone. He now acts as ghost and
again goes and sets other timbers on fire. This he does several nights,
and watchers are set to catch him. On fourth night he is caught and put
into kiva. People assemble, and village chief requests some one to take
masks off ghost. Man does so, and they see ghost is chief's son. He
tells them to plant báhos in five places and to have four days' feast,
and leaves kiva. They have feast and are much relieved when nothing
happens. In fourth year afterwards old man who had before complained of
young men makes many báhos of hard wood. He makes points very sharp.
Village chief sends crier chief to announce four days' feast. People are
mistrustful and do not prepare feast. Night following old man tells
chiefs to dress him up and put him in katcina shrine on plaza. When all
are asleep they dig hole in shrine that will admit man. They place in
his arms all his báhos, with Bálölöokong whistle and little bowl of
water to whistle into. They destroy appearance of opening. Then they
sing sorcerers' songs. Old man ejects rumbling sounds and says he has
been successful. They leave old man who thrusts part of hand through
opening. When this is noticed he sings and lowers little finger. Next
morning he sings again and lowers next finger, and so on three days.
Then water begins to come out where báhos had been planted four years
previously. They suspect flood is coming and they have great feast. On
fourth day old man in grave sings and lowers fourth finger. Immediately
he emerges as large Bálölöokong, and Bálölöokongs shoot forth from
ground with streams of water in all parts of village. Houses fall and
bury many persons. Others fly to large house on high ground. In one
house old men climb on tray shelves and turn into turkeys. Chiefs meet
in council and make báhos, crush beads and turquoise into powder, of
which they make two balls. They then call son of village chief and his
sister and dress them up. They are to drive back Bálölöokongs which are
shooting swiftly through water. Old man Bálölöokong is still standing
where he emerged. Young men takes some báhos, and mána tray containing
two balls and other báhos and they wade into waters. Young man grasps
large Bálölöokong and presses him into water. Serpent, with young man
and sister, disappear and never return. Everything is destroyed in
village. Only old men turkeys survive, and two little boys who had been
sleeping during flood and were not drowned. Surviving people make food
altar and leave village, leaving two children. Turkey takes pity on
children and sends them to food altar to eat. Big Bálölöokong comes and
looks after people. He sees children and says he is their grandfather.
Tells them where to get food and to find knife. Says they are to follow
parents. Makes them cut piece of flesh out of his back, and says if
little of meat is rubbed among paint for báhos it will rain. Children
start, and on third day are exhausted, and fall asleep. God of Thunder
descends to help them. They are frightened until he removes his mask. He
gives them food. Third day he returns and promises them lightning and
thunder with which to kill their enemies and teaches them war songs and
how warrior who brings home scalp is to act. In morning he tells
children to follow people, and that they are to pray to him. They go and
finally find mother, who thought they had perished. They tell about
piece of flesh. Bátki people use it with paint and heavy rains come.
Children become bad, and when grown up they start off to kill some one.
They pray to God of Thunder, who comes and teaches them how to kill

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

Apache who are near. In morning they go and are surrounded by Apache.
After arrow shooting for some time elder brother shoots lightning and
all Apache are slain. They scalp large and fierce warrior, and cut out
his heart and, taking moccasins and costumes of slain, return. God of
Thunder comes and tells them to throw scalp on man who is to be War
Chief. They return home and are discharmed. Scalp is thrown and War
Chief made. People leave Homólovi, and after wandering some time Bátki
clan goes to Aoátovi, and others, who become Forehead Clan, arrive near
Shongópavi, and finally settle in Shupaúlavi. Chief of Shongópavi
informs Spaniards in New Mexico that inhabitants of Shupaúlavi wish to
be taken away. Spaniards come to Keams Canyon. Chief of Wálpi informs
chief of Shupaúlavi and they go together to see leader of Spaniards.
They satisfy leader that he has been deceived, and after trading for
clothes they have brought, Spaniards return. They never encroach on Hopi
again, but people at Shupaúlavi are scared by false news that Spaniards
are coming, and many move to Shongópavi.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13.--The Revenge of the Katcinas.](toth126.md)
