[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth025)  [Next](toth027) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 23. THE PÖ'OKONGS ATTEND A DANCE. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_62)

Halíksai! In Oraíbi the people were living, and north of the village at
Achámali lived the Pö'okongs with their grandmother, Spider Woman. One
time the Pö'okongs heard that the Lálakontu were going to have a dance
at Shongópavi. "Our grandmother," they said, "Ha!" she answered. "They
are going to have a dance at Shongópavi," the Pö'okongs said, "and we
want to go and look on, too." "Very well," she said, "you go there, but
you are unsightly, and no one will invite you in to eat, so you take
this food along." Hereupon she handed them a little hurúshuki. They took
this and their feathered arrows and their corn-husk wheels and left.

As they went along they changed about in throwing their wheels and
shooting their feathered arrows at them. They thus arrived at the
village, passed through the village, and down the mesa south of it, away
into the fields in the valley south-east of Oraíbi. It was noon by the
time they got there. Here they came to a sand hill, where a great deal
of kutúk-wuhci (a kind of grass) was growing. As the wind was blowing
hard the grass was waving and producing a hissing noise. When the
Pö'okongs saw it, they said: "This grass is dancing here, let us attend
this dance," whereupon they stooped down and looked at the grass as it
was swaying from side to side, being moved by the wind.

In the evening they returned to the village, not, however, playing this
time as they went along. When they arrived at their grandmother's house
she asked: "Have you come?" "Yes," they replied, "and we are very
tired." "To be sure," she said, "because it is far to Shongópavi. Did
you see the dance well? How did they dance?" "Yes," they said, "we
looked at it well and we enjoyed it.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

We went to the fields south-east of Oraíbi and there on a sand hill we
found something in tassels there, and the wind was waving it, and it
always said, psh-sh-sh-sh-sh-, and there we remained and looked .at that
dance." "You are fools," Spider Woman said; "that was not Shongópavi.
Shongópavi is farther on and is away high up, and when the Lálakontu
dance they hold pótas in their hands and wave them up and down, and then
they throw them into the air and the men shout and catch these pótas.
Now, I was thinking that you would also bring one that we could put our
hurúshuki in, and that is the reason why I sent you. Why, what you saw
there was simply kutúk-wuhci that was waving in the wind. Fools you
are!"

They were then living there and soon a Lálakontu dance occurred at
Mishóngnovi. "Now, I am going to send you there," Spider Woman said to
the Pö'okongs; "the Oraíbis are certainly going there too, to look on.
But you must go, straight ahead there and not be playing as you go
along. When you go down you will see the Oraíbis going and you follow
them, and when you get there you look on well. You will see them throw
trays. You will hear the men shout and get the trays. You look at
everything well and do not be slow about it; now go on. "When they had
eaten their meal Spider Woman said: "Now, do not take your wheels and
arrows along." So they started and passed along through the village and
followed the trail. They saw the Oraíbis going to Mishóngnovi. They
followed them this time without playing on the road, and finally they
also arrived at Mishóngnovi. But they were filthy, and the phlegm that
was running out of their noses they would wipe over their hands, and the
people saw it. As the dance was going on, and the trays and sieves were
thrown up, the Pö'okongs saw the men getting them, but they did not get
any. Then the people of Mishóngnovi invited their friends to come to
their houses and eat with them, but no one invited the Pö'okongs. So
they became very hungry, and towards evening they said to each other:
"Let us go home now, because we are getting hungry. But we are going to
take some trays along." While the women were dancing the two went into
the circle and each one snatched a tray from one of the dancers and then
they ran home.

When the grandmother saw the pretty trays that they had brought she was
very happy. "Thanks," she said, "thanks. Now you have been there, now
you have seen it, and you have brought some pretty trays in which we
shall keep our hurúshuki." "Yes," they said, we were there and saw the
dance. So that is the way they are doing. We enjoyed it. But no one
invited us to eat, and we are Very hungry." Hereupon Spider Woman placed
some hurúshuki

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

before them and fed them. The Pö'okongs were angry that they had not
been fed in Mishóngnovi.

At that time the Hopi found salt at a place north-west, not quite so far
away as they have to get it now. The salt belonged to the Pö'okongs, so
they said: "We are going to remove that salt farther away. If they had
fed us, although we are unsightly, they could continue to get it from
the place close by; but as they have not fed us we are going to remove
it far away, so that they will be put to a greater trouble in getting
their salt." Spider Woman at first objected, but they would not listen
and started. Arriving at the nearest place where there was some salt
they picked that up and carried it away a long distance, descended a
very steep bluff with it, and laid it down there. So ever since the Hopi
can find only a very little salt at the first place and have to get most
of their salt from that farther place, which is so very deep down and so
difficult of access.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_62"></span>[90:1](toth026.htm#fr_64) Told by Tangákhoyoma
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 24. How Pö'okong Won A Bride](toth027)
