[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth109)  [Next](toth111) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 107. THE LAST FIGHT WITH THE NAVAHO. <span id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_194)

The Navaho had repeatedly raided the other villages, though the Oraíbi
had never had a real encounter with that warlike tribe, by which they
were surrounded, but they did not allow themselves to be lulled into a
false safety. They kept their bows in order, their quivers full of
arrows, and did not forget to constantly practice shooting. One day
while a number of the men had been practicing with their bows and arrows
on the west side of the village, at the foot of the mesa, where they had
filled several sand piles with arrows, the news was called down to them
from the edge of the mesa that a large cloud of dust was seen in one of
the wooded canyons towards the north-east, and that it looked as if a
great many people were approaching the village. It was towards evening.
The men gathered up their bows and arrows and hastened to the village.
Here the roofs were covered with expectant people, whose faces were
turned towards the approaching dust cloud about six miles towards the
north-east. It soon became clear to all that an expedition was
undertaken against the village of Oraíbi on the part of the Navaho.
Suddenly the Hopi

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

noticed that the approaching enemy halted and evidently had struck camp
for the night. A great many camp-fires were soon seen at the place where
they camped. These were kept up all night. The greatest excitement
prevailed in the village. The different clans were invited to assemble
in the ancestral homes of their respective clans, where councils were
being held during the greater part of the night, as to what was to be
done to meet the approaching danger. After these councils were over the
village crier invited all the people to the public plaza of the village.
Firewood was being brought together and a large fire was kept up in the
center of the plaza. The situation was discussed in all its aspects.
People encouraged one another. Those who were expected to set out as
warriors were especially encouraged; they were told that they should be
careful of their lives and that any plunder that might be found on the
enemies, such as weapons, clothing, etc., should be owned by whomsoever
succeeded in taking it. All narratives about this event agree in this
fact, that a number of Hopi, who either were entirely discouraged from
the beginning or saw no hope of their gaining the victory, and who
perhaps acted as traitors, went to the Navaho during the night. They
took with them such presents. as buckskins, blankets, different articles
of clothing, etc. Arriving at the Navaho camp each one approached some
Navaho warrior and told him: "I want you to kill me to-morrow in the
battle." "What will be the price for it?" he was asked by the Navaho
warrior. "This," the Hopi answered, and handed him the present that he
had brought. Hereupon the Navaho warrior would puncture the foot of the
Hopi, near the ankle, over a pot that had been put into the ground, and
the blood thus extracted would be allowed to run into the pot. The loss
of blood so weakened the Hopi warriors that they could only walk slowly
on the next day and were easily singled out by the Navaho. These Hopi
hereupon returned to the village, not of course telling their brethren
what they had done at the Navaho camp.

The Navaho during the night sang their war songs and performed their war
ceremonies. Early in the morning at the so-called white rising--as the
Hopi called the early dawn--the Navaho broke camp and made towards the
village of Oraíbi. At the so-called yellow dawn--as the Hopi called the
dawn immediately before sunrise--they had reached a place north of the
village where they ascended the mesa and filled the entire space north
of the village.

The Hopi had not been idle during the night. After they were through
with the councils and had made up their minds that they would have to
fight, they began to prepare for the approaching encounter. <span
id="page_260">p. 260</span> The Hopi at that time had a great many
buckskins Every warrior wrapped two or even more of these around the
upper part of his body, taking care that the thick head and neck part of
the buckskin covered his chest or abdomen. Arrows and bows were secured
wherever they could be gotten. Furthermore, they armed themselves with
stone tomahawks, boomerangs, and throwing-sticks of every description.
Some put the head-dresses peculiar to their societies on their heads,
for instance, those belonging to the Horn Society, two horns; those
belonging to the Agave Society, one horn, and so on. Most of them tied
some feathers into their hair. When all were ready they lined up north
of the village, filling the whole space from the rim of the east side to
the edge on the west side of the mesa. The warrior chief of the
Burrowing Owl clan performed certain war rites, the same, it is said,
that are still performed as a part of the great Soyál ceremony.

A water tray was placed on the ground, many fetishes and amulets, bones,
etc., were placed around the medicine bowl, and a number of war songs
chanted. At the conclusion of the ceremony the bodies of all the
warriors were decorated with certain spots, the material used being a
peculiar stone, which is found west of Oraíbi. This stone is called
pöökóngnayöö (war god vomisis). The war chief pulverized this stone,
mixed it with the water from the medicine bowl, and decorated the bodies
of the warriors by rubbing his hand over the outside of the lower and
upper leg close to the knee, the outside of the lower and upper arm
close to the elbow, and over his heart and back. It is, in fact, the
same decoration which may now be seen on the body of the snake dancers.

By this time the Navaho began to come nearer and the Hopi drew up in
line ready to meet them. The leader of the Navaho, being mounted on a
pony and dressed in a large piece of bayetta (a red European cloth),
with not only his but also his pony's body covered, rode up to the Hopi.
After saying something to them, which, however, history has failed to
record, he shot the first arrow into the crowd of the Hopi, without
hitting any of them. Hereupon he swung around his pony and (lashed back
to his people, who now rushed towards the Hopi, and the battle was
opened, The sun had not yet risen. The battle at once became very
fierce; the Agave, Snake, Lizzard, Burrowing Owl, and Squash clans took
the lead. They were armed with shields, war clubs, tomahawks, etc. They
were followed by those fighting with bows and arrows. While the first
line served with their shields as a protection, striking, of course,
their assailants with their war clubs wherever they had an opportunity,
the archers

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

shot into the enemy through the spaces between the warriors in front of
them. The Hopi succeeded in driving the Navaho slowly backward to a
place a few miles north-east of Oraíbi where they drove them off the
mesa. One of the Navaho had lived in Oraíbi a while, and in fact had
been initiated into the Wû'wûchim society. He could speak the Hopi
language and called out to one of the Hopi warriors by the name of
Chiníwa: "You had better fight us here where we now are and do not
follow us, but remain where you are, because you will all be killed. Our
people have not yet all arrived; there are many more farther east.''
Chiníwa conveyed this information to his brethren warriors but without
avail. The Hopi followed the Navaho, and in the valley both drew up a
line of battle ready to again engage in regular battle. While the two
lines of warriors were facing each other, a Navaho woman, being mounted
on a pony, grabbed a lance from a Navaho warrior, dashed towards the
line of the Hopi, followed by her people. They broke through the line of
Hopi and thus divided the latter into two parties. These they at once
surrounded, which placed the Hopi at a disadvantage.

The sun was by this time just rising and the Hopi saw that the Navaho
warriors were simply dressed in their loin cloths, some having on
moccasins. Their bodies were decorated with red paint over which they
had drawn their fingers when it was still wet, making their bodies full
of lines. Their hair was hanging down their backs loose. They were all
mounted on ponies. The Hopi, however, had this advantage, that their
bodies were well wrapped with heavy buckskins, while those of the Navaho
were nude, so that a great many more of the arrows of the Hopi proved
fatal to their enemies than vice versa. The Hopi say that many of the
Navaho arrows were shot into the buckskins that were wrapped around
their bodies and were dangling down on all sides from their bodies. This
accounts partly for the fact that the Hopi, though outnumbered by their
enemies, were not exterminated.

The battle lasted until late in the afternoon. The Hopi would break
through the circles of the warriors surrounding them, but were always
surrounded again by new parties, so that the circles surrounding the
fighting Hopi became smaller and smaller. The Hopi say that the Navaho
were much better provided with shields than they were, so that they
could cover themselves completely when encircling the Hopi, but the Hopi
say they would not always shoot at the enemies just in front of them but
would sometimes threaten them and then turn around quickly and then
shoot at somebody else from the side and past their shields. They also
say that the

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

Navaho in charging them on their ponies would often, after they had shot
an arrow, or saw that they were threatened by some special Hopi warrior,
turn their ponies around quickly and lower themselves by the side of the
pony, while they dashed away, but often the Hopi still succeeded in
shooting them even in that position.

The arms of the Navaho also consisted of bows, arrows, shields, and war
clubs, and some few had guns and pistols which they had procured from
the Spaniards. In the afternoon a small party of Hopi succeeded in
climbing the point of the mesa north-east of the battle-field, called
Shongóhtoika. They were followed by some of the Navaho warriors, but the
latter soon had to give up the pursuit on account of the many rocks and
boulders that are scattered close to the mesa. The party of Hopi
remained at the edge of the mesa looking down upon the battle-field.
Here the nephew of Chiníwa had in the meanwhile been shot in the foot so
that he could not walk. His uncle Chiníwa said to him: ''You will
probably not get away here." "No, perhaps not," the young man answered,
''but I want at least to shoot some one yet." So he laid all his arrows
that he still had in his quiver on his lap and shot into the body of the
Navaho, when the latter at once surrounded him and killed him with their
lances and clubs, and tore from his body his buckskin and clothing, In
the meanwhile the men on the edge of the mesa counseled with one another
whether they should go down and assist their hard-pressed brethren, but
only three were willing. These went down and hid behind rocks, towards
which a party of Navaho was driven by a party of Hopi. When the
retreating Navaho had come within shooting distance of the three Hopi
hidden behind the rocks, the latter killed a number of them from their
safe shelter. Hereupon the Navaho scattered, giving the Hopi who were
pursuing them an opportunity to also rush behind the rocks where they
were greeted by their three valiant brethren. All now ascended the mesa
where they proceeded in a north-westerly direction along the edge of the
mesa. They were preceded by the party of Navaho who had pursued them to
the foot of the mesa, and who had in the meanwhile rounded on their very
swift ponies on the point of the mesa and ascended on the point of the
opposite side, but it seems that this party of Navaho for some reason or
other--because they were afraid, the Hopi say--failed to attack them.
All they did was to wave the buckskins, clothing, etc., that they had
taken from their slain brethren, and mock them.

The Hopi finally found a place where they could descend the

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

mesa, crossed the small valley, which is quite deep, stopped at one
place and then reached a small spring by the name of Ohówikba. Here they
rested, as they were very thirsty and a number of them were wounded. The
latter asked their comrades to dress their wounds the best they could
then carry them home the rest of the way, which was done. The Navaho
party who had pursued these Hopi had not followed them, they had
descended the mesa at some other place, but made for the village of
Oraíbi. In the valley where the main battle-ground was, the fighting had
also ceased by this time. The different groups of fighting Hopi had
succeeded in cutting their way through their assailants and were running
towards the village, leaving a great many dead and wounded behind. The
Navaho had also lost very heavily, but it is said that the Navaho
carried their wounded away while the battle was raging, taking them all
to a certain place from which they later took them with them, tying them
on their ponies. The retreating Hopi were followed by bands of Navaho,
while other bands of the latter tried to outflank them and to reach the
village first. <span id="fr_197"></span>[1](#fn_195)

While both parties were drawing closer to the village, the Hopi
retreating and the Navaho following them, more or less fighting was
going on, about which various details are still mentioned when the
events of this important day of Hopi history are related. For instance,
when the Hopi had arrived on top of the first mesa south of the
battle-field, six of them hid in a stone inclosure. Whether it was a
sheep corral or a temporary shelter that some Hopi had built, is not
known. Here they were at once attacked by a party of Navaho whom they
kept at a respectable distance with their well-directed arrows. The
Navaho seeing that they could not overpower these men with their bows
and arrows procured from some of their comrades some firearms. With
these they kept shooting at the imperfect inclosure until they had
killed five out of the six men. The sixth one jumped out of the
inclosure, rushed through the attacking party, and jumped down at a
steep though not very high place from the

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

mesa. Of the various missiles that were fired at him, none proved to be
fatal. The Navaho followed him to the edge of the mesa, but had not the
courage to jump after him. He hid away under a projecting rock where he
stayed all day.

While this happened, one of the Hopi warriors, who had proven himself
especially brave, had rounded the point of this mesa and was making his
way towards the village of Oraíbi. He was followed by several Navaho who
hit him several times, but owing to the fact that he was well wrapped
with good buckskins, none of the shots took fatal effect. These Navaho,
as the Hopi believe, became somewhat superstitious about this man. The
latter claim that the pursuing party abandoned pursuit of this one
warrior, saving to one another: "Do not follow that man. He is very
brave and will surely kill you." Some of the Hopi by this time
discovered that among the Navaho warriors there were some Hopi from the
village of Wálpi. These Wálpi had so thoroughly disguised themselves
with paint and by combing their hair in the same manner as the Navaho
that they had not been recognized before. One of the first to recognize
them was the man lying under the rock, who noticed that the short front
hair of one of the Wálpi dropped from behind his ear. Soon the brave
warrior just mentioned also recognized the Wálpi, and at once addressed
them, saving: "So, you are with them too, we thought there were only
Navaho." "Oh!" the Wálpi said, "we are being recognized now. Let us kill
him. If we do not kill him he will certainly tell on us in Oraíbi. But
how shall we kill him, shall we attack him and shoot him?" "No," some
one said, "let us go and capture him." Hereupon some of them dismounted
and they as well as some on horseback formed a ring around the man and
then closed in on him, He broke the skull of one of them with his
tomahawk, whereupon he was immediately overpowered and thrown upon the
ground. One of the Wálpi by the name of Shíita knelt on his breast and
forced a lance into his throat, killing him. They took all his clothes
and buckskins, cut open his breast, tore out his heart, which they took
with them. All this was observed and later on reported by the man hidden
under the rock not far away. The Wálpi then took their victim on a horse
and took him with them to Wálpi, where they placed him in a small hut or
inclosure which a herder had built for a temporary shelter throwing
stones upon him.

In the meanwhile troops of Navaho, among whom were many women, had
reached the village where the Hopi who had remained behind had assembled
their flocks of sheep on the plaza, which the

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

Hopi say was crowded with sheep. They had closed up the passages to the
plaza with beams, rocks, etc., placing also guards at every opening,
watching the sheep. When the Navaho arrived, however, they tore down the
barriers in the opening on the north side and drove the sheep out. The
Navaho women were busily engaged in shelling the corn north of the
village and loading it on their ponies. One Hopi watching one of the
approaches was shot in the leg by one of the Navaho. The Navaho seemed
to be in a hurry, for they only rifled some of the houses on the north
side of the village! The arrival of the Hopi warriors by that time may
also have been a cause of their not carrying their depredation farther
than they did. When they had loaded a number of ponies with corn they
left the village, taking also with them all the sheep that had been
assembled in the plaza. Somewhat north-east from the main battle-field
they camped. Here they also had, during the battle, taken a great many
of their dead and wounded, and they later admitted that there were a
great many of them. They tied the dead, as well as the wounded, on their
ponies, and then left for their homes. It is also said that a great many
of their ponies that they took with them had been wounded in the fight,
and later on they told the Hopi that on the way quite a number of them
died. These they left behind them. Also a number of the wounded died
while they were traveling, and it is said that all that died were buried
at a place somewhere west of Kí'shiwuu, a place about sixty miles
north-east of Oraíbi. It is also said that there was a great deal of
mourning among the Navaho as they returned from this expedition. Most of
the information on the Navaho side was later on brought to Oraíbi by the
aforesaid Mâ'yalolo and another Navaho by the name of Lâ'totovi, both of
whom had been with the Hopi for some time, and had been initiated into
their Wû'wûchim society.

After the Navaho had left the village, stragglers of the Hopi warriors
kept coming in. Many of these were wounded; some of them had to be
carried to the village. These called the ones who carried them Fathers.
All the wounded were placed in an ancestral home of the Coyote clan.
Here the "Fathers" of the wounded remained with their "Children." During
the night and the following day some died. During this time there was a
great deal of mourning and weeping. The corpses of those who died were
taken out and cared for by those who had cared for them while they were
sick. On the fourth day those who still survived were taken to their
homes, that is, not where their families were, but to the homes of their
parents,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

where they were then taken care of. Some of the wounded Hopi later on
also died, while a great many of them recovered. <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](toth111.htm#fn_196)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_194"></span>[258:1](toth110.htm#fr_196) Told by Qöyáwaima
(Oraíbi).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[263:1](toth110.htm#fr_197) The number killed
on both sides will perhaps never be fully ascertained, but the
aforementioned Navaho, Mâ'yalolo had become a member of one of the Hopi
societies, later on came to Oraíbi, and he is authority for the
statement, which the Oraíbi keep reiterating, that a great many more
Navaho were killed than Hopi. He also stated, which of course is also
substantiated by the Hopi, that a great many Navaho ponies were also
killed. It is reasonable to believe that this statement is correct from
the fact, already mentioned, that the Navaho were fighting with naked
bodies, while the Hopi were well protected by buckskins which they had
wound around them. It seems that they were about equally well armed, and
the courage of the Hopi was probably as great as that of their
assailants. The fact that the Navaho where mounted, of course placed the
Hopi at a disadvantage while they were fighting on even ground, but
wherever the Hopi could withdraw behind rocks or into other
unapproachable places, the Navaho derived but little benefit from their
ponies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 108. A Hopi Raid On A Navaho Dance](toth111)
