[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](toth012)  [Next](toth014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 10. THE ORIGIN OF THE YÁYAATU SOCIETY. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

Ishyaoí! In Oraíbi they were living. In the home of the Reed clan lived
the Yáyaa-mongwi. This Fraternity has now died out, but its altar
paraphernalia are still kept in the house. A long time ago a man and his
wife had one little boy. Some children of the village would often visit
this boy. They were lazy, though their parents often told them to work,
and get wood, herd sheep, etc. They would not listen, but often
assembled at this house where they would prepare some food in the
corners in front of the house, having stolen the food in the village. In
a corner in front of the house they would build their fire, The wood
they stole from the different houses in the village. So the men in the
village were very angry at them and so were the mothers of these
children. "You are lazy," they often told them. "You do not want to
work, and we are not going to feed you." So they would go and steal some
food in the houses and eat that.

One time the priest's son suggested to the others: "Let us go and get
some wood ourselves. Some one go and steal a hide strap (piqö'sha)
somewhere." So after they had eaten they went through the village and
gathered up piqö'shas of different lengths and returned. They left the
village on the east, drank at K'eqö'chmovi, and then went farther east
and gathered some dry brush in the valley. After they had all gathered
their bundles the priest's son said: "Are you all done?" "Yes,'' they
said. "All right, then let us go home now," he said. But just when they
were ready to start a Hawk in the form of a man carne upon them. He wore
many strands of beads around his neck and had a black line painted with
specular iron running over his nose down to the cheeks. The hair of all
of the children was very much disheveled, so he laughed at them. "Are
you getting wood?" he said. "Yes," they replied, and he again laughed at
them.

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

His kiva was close by. "You come in here," he said to the children, so
they went in. It was a kiva just like those in the village. He invited
them to sit down on the banquette that ran along the wall, so they sat
down. He then took a seat near the fire-place, filled a pipe and took
two puffs from it. He then said to the children that they should take a
seat near the fireplace, too. He handed the pipe first to the priest's
son, who smoked, addressing the man as "My father" (Ínaa), which pleased
the man very much. All then smoked, one after another, all exchanging
terms of relationship, the older ones addressing the younger ones, "My
younger brother," and the younger ones the older ones as "My older
brother." He then said to them that they should remain, as he was going
to feed them, and after having eaten they might go home.

Hereupon he went into another room and brought back a large roll of
qö'mi (a bread made of the meal of roasted sweet corn-ears) which he fed
to them. After they had eaten he went into another chamber and brought
forth a large roll of kilts, eagle wing feathers (kwávok'i), ear
pendants, eagle breath feathers, to be tied into the hair, beads, etc.,
and handed all these to the children. Hereupon he dressed up all the
boys, tying the kilts behind. He then handed an eagle feather to each
one and directed them to stand in a line. Hereupon Kísh Taka, the
Hawk-man, took a mö'chápu, which is a native cloth or ówa, wrapped it
up, and holding it under his left arm, took a stand at the south end of
the line, saving to the youths: "Now then, whatever you see me do, you
do the same." Hereupon he commenced to go around the kiva crying, "Ow"
(long drawn). They went around in a circle in the kiva four times
emitting the same sounds at short intervals. Hereupon he went up the
ladder, the youths following him. Outside he again told them to do as
they would see him do. He jumped off the kiva, ran about through the
brush, the youths always following him and all constantly saying. "Ow,
ow." Suddenly he threw down the mö'chápu, spreading it on the ground,
grabbed the priest's son, threw him on the cloth, and then asked the
other youths to take a hold of the cloth at different places and in this
way they carried the priest's son to the kiva, throwing him through the
opening into the kiva.

Hereupon they waited, and in a little while the youth came out of the
kiva again, unharmed. Hereupon he grabbed another of the youths and they
threw him down, and in this same manner every one was thrown into the
kiva and came out unharmed. Then the Hawk-man went into the kiva, being
followed by all of the youths. He was called the uncle of the youths.
After they had entered the kiva

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

he drew aside a curtain from one of the inner chambers and in the room
behind the curtain were four round ovens (kóici) dug into the earth, in
which an old woman kept up a fire. The Hawk-man then grabbed the
priest's son, threw him into one of the ovens, the old woman spurting
some medicine on him as he fell in. Hereupon the other youths were
thrown into the ovens. As soon as the costumes were burned off the
bodies, the Hawk-man took them out again and placed all the, bodies
north of the fireplace in the kiva, and covered them with the
aforementioned piece of native cloth. When this was done he sat down and
sang a song over the bodies. Soon the bodies under the cloth began to
move and the priest's son was the first to come out, the others
following soon, all now being alive again.

Hereupon he told them to sit down on the banquette on the west side of
the kiva. The old woman now came out and washed the heads of the youths,
giving a perfect white ear of corn (chóchmingwuu) to each one. The Hawk
hereupon addressed them, saying: "Thanks, that you are now done. You are
now prepared. You can go home now. Take your wood to the Blue Flute
(Cakwálânvi) kiva, and enter that kiva and remain there. Do not go into
the houses to get something to eat, but wait for me there. After sundown
I shall come to you." Hereupon he handed an eagle wing feather
(kwávok'i) to the priest's son, whereupon the youths left.

When they came with their bundles of wood to the Blue Flute kiva the
people saw them and said: "Aha! the lazy boys have gotten their own
wood. Now maybe they will not steal any more." When they had put down
their wood, they ran to the houses where they had gotten the burden
straps and threw them on and into the houses, without, however, entering
them. They all returned to the kiva at once without having partaken of
any food. The sun had now gone down. They waited awhile and after the
evening dawn had disappeared and it was quite dark they heard somebody
come. It was the Hawk, in whose kiva they had been, and he at once
entered the kiva. "Are you all sitting here?" the Hawk asked. "Yes, we
are all here. Sit down," the youths replied. So the Hawk took a seat
near the fireplace and at once filled a pipe and they all smoked.

The Hawk had brought with him a small bowl and some kwíptoci (meal from
white corn that has first been soaked and then popped). Of this meal he
made a gruel in the bowl, which he fed to the youths.

He then told them that they should not go home, but early in the morning
some of them should take a seat in the north end of the kiva and the
others in the south end of the kiva. The first should be fire jumpers
(Tövúchochoyanik'am) and also Yáyaatus. The others

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

should be the singers (Tátaok'am). Between the two parties he sprinkled
a meal line on the floor of the kiva. One he selected to act as
watchman. He should keep up the fires at the fireplace and keep out
intruders. He told them that they should remain in a sitting posture in
the kiva all of the next day and that they should fast all day. In the
evening he would return and feed them again. Thus they were assembled
here in the kiva, and each one had his "mother" (his white corn-ear)
standing against the wall by his side. The people were wondering the
next day why the little thieves, as they called them, were not coming
out to hunt something to eat. Finally one of the women approached the
kiva, looked in, and saw them sitting in an erect posture. "Oh," she
said to the people, "they are assembled (yû'ngiota) in there."

They remained in this way in the kiva for four days, their uncle coming
every night to feed them and look after them. Early in the morning after
the fourth clay he washed their heads. The following day it was Totókya
(a name always applied to the day preceding a ceremony). In the evening
of this day the Hawk-man brought with him the costumes for the youths,
consisting of kilts, beads, eagle feathers, twisted yarn
(naálöngmurukpu), ear pendants, ankle bands, and also some yellow paint
(sik'áhpik'i). All these he placed on the floor north of the fireplace.
During the night the youth who had been watching the fireplace in the
kiva dug four ovens on the plaza south-west of the kiva, while the
others buried a long cotton string in the ground on the same plaza. They
also stretched long strings along the houses of the village, pasting
them to the walls with qö'mi dough. Early in the morning the watcher of
the kiva went around through the village begging for some wood. With
this he heated the four ovens on the plaza. The people wondered what he
was going to do, some suggesting that perhaps he was going to bake some
píkami (a food prepared in small ovens outside of the houses for festal
occasions).

While this youth was beating the ovens the Hawk dressed up all the
others in the kiva. He painted a wide yellow band from shoulder to
shoulder running down over the chest; the lower arms and lower legs he
also painted yellow, and a yellow ring around the abdomen. Their faces
he covered with corn-pollen. They had many strands of beads and also
some strands of the twisted yarn consisting of dark blue and brownish
red yarn. Large bunches of eagle feathers were tied to the top of their
heads, and an eagle tale feather was tied on each side of their head in
such a manner that their points extended backward. From these tail
feathers were also

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

suspended strands of the twisted yarn. Old Hopi Women's belts were tied
over the kilts. Strands of the same yarn were tied around their wrists.

At about noon the singers came out first, each one throwing a pinch of
sacred meal towards the sun. The Hawk-man and the old woman remained in
the kiva. As soon as the singers had emerged from the kiva they went
with long strides to the plaza (the same where now the Snake dance takes
place) where they lined up and sang.

As soon as they had formed in line the Yáyaatu also emerged from the
kiva and went to the plaza with long strides, the priest's son carrying
this time the möchápu which the Hawk-man had used when initiating the
youths. While the first party continued singing, the Yáyaatu rummaged
through the village, ascending the roofs of the houses, jumping onto the
people, tearing up and throwing down chimneys, taking hold of children
and people and swinging them over the edge of the roof and threatening
to throw them down, etc. The people got very angry at them and beat them
with sticks, so they finally returned to the plaza. Arriving there, the
priest's son, now the leading priest of this order, banding the möchápu
to one of the others, jumped into one of the ovens. The others drew him
out dead, wrapped him up in the möchápu, took him to the kiva and threw
him into it. Here he was at once resuscitated by the Hawk-man and the
old woman and came up apparently unharmed, having on again the same
costume as the one that had been burned off his body in the oven. While
this was going on, others had jumped into the various ovens and were
drawn out immediately, thrown into the kiva, and treated the same way.

By this time the parents and relatives of these youths became very much
alarmed and began to cry and complain that their children were killed
that way, but the young man that had been watching the kiva told them
not to come near, saying that they were going to have a dance yet. After
they were through with this performance, their leader went into the kiva
and brought out a möchápu, in which he had something wrapped up. This he
placed on the ground on the plaza and all the Yáyaatu crowded around
this bundle. Covering another large möchápu over them, they occupied
themselves for a short time with the bundle. They then threw off the
covering and standing in a circle around the bundle they sang. In a
little while they opened the bundle and there were many fine, large
watermelons in it. Leaving these watermelons on the plaza, the leader
again went Into the kiva, brought out another bundle, over and around
which they went through the same performance. Uncovering this bundle

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

a great many little cotton-tail rabbits jumped up, which they
distributed. among the children. The singers kept up their singing
during all these performances.

The Yáyaatu now all entered the kiva. Soon they came out again, some
hunting and uncovering the strings that they had buried and attached to
the houses. Others that followed them wound the strings up on balls.
Whenever one string was found and wound up, another one was hunted and
wound, so they all went through the village hunting and winding the
strings that they had buried. Suddenly they all proceeded to the house
of the Cotton-tall Rabbit clan (Táb-ñamu), where Homíhoiniwa and his
family now live, and here one of the strings ran into a water-jug. This
they lifted up without drawing the string out, and carried it also to
the plaza where they split it in two. It was found that on the inside a
cloud symbol was painted in each half jug. They lifted up the two parts
of the jug and showed the cloud symbols to the people. Hereupon they
covered up the two parts, sang over them, and when they took the
covering off the jug was whole again as before, whereupon they returned
it to the house.

The leader once more went into the kiva and came back with a bowl
containing some diluted white kaolin (dûmákuyi). This they took to the
top of the Maraú kiva, which is so situated that from it a long high
bluff, which is called Canávitoika, can be plainly seen in the distance
(probably eight or ten miles to the west). The Yáyaatu now gathered
around the bowl and putting eagle feathers into the white kaolin they
moved them up and down in the air, as if whitewashing that distant
bluff, and behold, the bluff, though far away, at once assumed a white
color. All the people could plainly see that it was being whitewashed,
though it is far away. Hereupon they returned to the plaza. the singers
now stopping their singing. They cut up the watermelons and distributed
slices. All then entered the kiva again, the mothers and the relatives
of these youths now crowding towards this kiva wanting to get their
children. The watcher of the kiva kept them back, saying, however, that
they had not yet been discharmed.

When they had all entered the kiva the Hawk-man discharmed them and then
set nö'ekwiwi and white píki before them, saying: "Now eat and then you
sleep in the kiva one night. In the morning when your people come for
you you can go with them." In the evening the mothers again came and
clamored for their children, but the youth, that was watching the kiva,
told them to go home, as they were going to sleep there one night. The
Hawk-man and the old

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

woman then wrapped up all the costumes and other paraphernalia returned
to their kiva in the valley east of the village. Only the corn-ear
mothers they left for each one. In the morning the youths all went to
their homes, and after that they were no longer bad and dangerous. They
formed the Yáyaatu Society and directed their prayers towards the place
where their uncle, the Hawk-man, lived, and where they had been
initiated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_35"></span>[41:1](toth013.htm#fr_35) Told by Wikvaya
(Oraíbi).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 11. The Origin of Some Mishóngnovi Clans](toth014)
