[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth019)  [Next](toth021.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 17. THE AHÖ'LI AND OTHER WÁLPI KATCINAS. <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_55.md)

Alíksai! In Wálpi and Sitcómovi they were living, but not at the places
where the villages now are, but where they used to be. In Wálpi lived an
old man, the Ahö'li Katcina. He had with him a little maiden who was his
sister, the Katcín-mana. As he was very old and feeble this maiden would
always lead him. In the other village, Sitcómovi, lived a youth with his
old grandmother, and as she also was very feeble he took care of her and
used to lead her. One time the Ahö'li and the little maiden went to
their field 'south of Wálpi where they wanted to plant. They carried
with them little pouches containing seeds. In their field was a báho
shrine, and when they came to their field the Katcina first deposited
some prayer-offerings in the shrine, first some corn-meal and then also
some nakwákwosis which he drew forth from his corn-meal bag. This bag he
had tied around his neck.

In this shrine lived Mû'yingwa and his sister Nayâ'ngap Wuhti. "Have you
come?" Mû'yingwa said. "Yes, we have come," they replied. "Thanks,"
Nayâ'ngap Wuhti said, "thanks, our father, that you have come. You have
remembered us. No one has thought about us for a long time and brought
some offering here, but you have thought about us." And she began to
cry. Hereupon Ahö'li gave to each one a stick upon which some
nakwákwosis were strung, and also some corn-meal. Hereupon Nayâ'ngap
Wuhti was crying still more. "Yes, we have come here," the Katcina said,
"we are pitying our people because they have not had any crops for a
long time, and now we thought about you here and have

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

brought these prayer-offerings here. And now you pity them and let it
rain now, and when it rains then a crop will grow again and they will
have something to eat, and they will then be strengthened and revived,
because they are only living a very little now.

Hereupon he took out his little bundles of seed and gave to the goddess
a small quantity of yellow, blue, red, and white corn as an offering.
These he placed before her on the ground. The two deities then arose.
Mû'yingwa had in his left hand a móngkoho, móngwikuru, and a perfect
corn-ear (chóchmingwuu). These he pointed upwards towards the sky. The
female deity held in her hand a squash, which was filled with all kinds
of seeds, and as Mû'yingwa pointed up the objects towards the sky she
raised the squash with both hands, and then forcibly threw it on the
ground on the seeds which the Ahö'li had placed there. "There," she
said, "in this way I have now planted for all of your people these seeds
and they will now have crops." Thereupon Mû'yingwa handed the objects
which he held in his hand to the Katcina, saying, "You take these with
you and with them you produce rain and crops for your children, the
people in Wálpi."

So the Ahö'li and the Katcín-maha returned, first going to their booth,
or shelter (kísi), that was near by in the field. Here they partook of
the food which they had brought with them. "Thanks," the Ahö'li said,
"thanks that our father was willing. We shall not now go back to the
village in vain." "Yes, thanks," the mána also said. Hereupon they
returned to the village. It was now late in the afternoon. As they
passed the top of the mesa upon which Wálpi is now situated, they heard
somebody singing on top of the bluff, but they went on, and arriving at
their kiva they sat down north of the fireplace and smoked over the
objects which they had brought with them. "Thanks that we have
returned," the Ahö'li said, ''that we have not been too late for our
people. We shall now possess our people." And as they were smoking and
thus talking somebody came and entered the house. It was the youth who
lived with his old grandmother in Sitcómovi. He came in. "Thanks that
you have come," he said, "thanks that you have come and provided
something for our people here," whereupon he shook hands with them. "Sit
down," Ahö'li said, "and smoke, too." So the youth filled the pipe with
tobacco that he had brought with him and also smoked over the objects.
He took special pains to blow the smoke in ringlets upon the objects.
After he had done that four times, also praying to the objects, they
became moist so that the water was beginning to flow from them,
indicating that their efforts

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

had been successful and that these objects would produce rain, which was
symbolized by this moisture.

Hereupon the youth prepared to return to his home, but Ahö'li restrained
him and said: "Now, tomorrow when the sun rises we shall make a
prayer-offering and you must do the same, because when we came we heard
somebody sing away up there somewhere." So early the next morning they
dressed up in their costumes, the Katcina being dressed in a tû'ihi, a
kilt, and his mask; his body also being painted nicely. In his right
band he carried a stick, natö'ngpi, to the middle of which were tied
beads and a bundle of báhos. In his left hand he carried the objects
which he had obtained the previous day. The mána was dressed as the
Katcín-manas are yet dressed to-day. She carried in her left arm a tray
(póta), containing different kinds of seeds. They proceeded to a báho
shrine west of the present village of Wálpi, half-way down the mesa.
Here they sprinkled a little meal to the sun and on the shrine, this
little rite being called kúivato. As they were performing this rite they
again heard the same voice singing on top of the mesa, which they had
heard before.

There were then no villages on top of the mesa, but the shrine of
Taláwhtoika was there already, and at this shrine some one was singing.
When looking up they say that it was the Big-Horn (Wopákal) Katcina.
Hereupon they returned to their house, but immediately started up on the
mesa to look for and meet the one that they had heard singing. So they
went up and reached the top of the mesa somewhat west of the bahóki.
Here they noticed some one dressed in a white mask with very small
openings for the mouth and eyes. His body was also white and he wore a
thin bandoleer with blue yarn over his shoulder. He was standing by the
side of the shrine shaking a rattle of bones slowly up and down. After
having shaken the rattle four times he started off. "Wait," the Ahö'li
Katcina said, "wait, we have heard some singing up here and want to see
who it is." "Yes," the other Katcina, which was the Â'ototo, replied,
"yes, I am not singing, but we are two of us here, and the other one was
singing." By this time the Big-Horn Katcina came from the west end of
the mesa holding in his left hand a bow, and having a quiver strung over
his right shoulder. He had a green mask with a big horn on the right
side and an ear on the left. He wore a nice kilt, nice ankle bands, and
his body was painted up nicely. When he arrived at the shrine he asked
the Â'ototo: "Why do you tarry here?" "Yes," the Â'ototo replied, "these
are detaining me." "Why?" the Big-Horn Katcina asked. "We heard some

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

body singing here," the Ahö'li replied, "and we came up here to see who
it was, and so it is you. Now, what do you think," he continued, "let us
go down all together and then we shall possess the people," and he told
the Katcinas about what they had obtained and were going to do. So the
two Katcinas were willing and they prepared to go down.

The Â'ototo took the lead and was followed by the Ahö'li Katcina, and
the mána, the Big-Horn Katcina coming last. This way they went down a
part of the way at a place west of the present village of Háno. Here
they made a báho shrine (bahóki), erecting some stones as a mark between
the villages of Háno and Sitcómovi. This shrine is still there. They
then went farther down to the present gap north of Háno to the large
shrine with the twisted stone which is still there, Here they met
somebody coming out of that shrine and then going up and down there. It
was somebody dangerous (núkpana), who had large protruding eyes and a
big mouth in his mask, and many rattles around his body and along the
front part of his legs. His arms were painted white, his body red.
Around his shoulders he had a small blanket of rabbit skin. On his feet
he had old, torn, black moccasins. In his right hand he had a large
knife, in his left hand a crook, to which a number of mósililis were
attached. <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_56.md) It was the Cóoyoko, who
used to kill and devour children there. When the Katcinas saw him they
said to him: "Do not trouble us, we are going to possess these people
here. We are going home now. You can destroy the bad ones, since you are
bad anyway, but do not trouble us.

Hereupon they descended and went to their home. When they arrived at the
house of the Ahö'li, which was a very beautiful house, the Ahö'li said:
"Now, here we are, and you stay with us. It is not good down here it
does not rain, but up there where you are it is better. When it will
rain here you can go back, but we want to help the people first. So
to-morrow morning we shall go to the fields and plant for the people.
"During the night they did not sleep but they were singing all night, on
their masks, which they had standing in a row in the north side of the
room. When the yellow dawn was appearing before sunrise it commenced to
rain, and it rained hard. Towards noon the Katcinas dressed up, putting
on their masks, went out, crossed the mesa, came to the fields south of
the mesa, and there they beheld large fields of corn, patches filled
with melons, watermelons, and squashes. Everything was growing
beautifully.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

Having looked around a little while they turned around, taking with them
a watermelon, an ear of fresh corn, and a melon. It was still raining so
that their feet sank deep into the ground.

When they arrived close to the mesa somebody met them. It was
Big-Skeleton (Wokómásauwuu), who owns the earth and the fields. He lived
about half-way down the mesa near the mesa point. He told the Katcinas
that they should go up the mesa and prepare a house there and live
there, and from there they should perform their rites. So they went up
on top of the mesa and have lived there ever since. Soon after that the
Wálpi also commenced to move up the mesa and build the new village,
where it is at the present time situated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_55"></span>[77:1](toth020.htm#fr_56.md) Told by Kúhkuima
(Shupaúlavi).

<span id="fn_56"></span>[80:1](toth020.htm#fr_57.md) Mósililis, cone-shaped
shells from one to two inches long, which are tied by means of thin
buckskin thongs to sticks that are from six to eight inches long and
bent at one end. These rattles are highly prized by the Hopi and are
used in various ceremonies, but, chiefly in those of the Flute
Fraternities. Shells of this kind are among the objects found in the
ruins of Tusayan.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 18. The Two War Gods and the Two Maidens](toth021.md)
