[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Native
American](../../index)  [Hopi](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](toth148)  [Next](toth150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002DUCNKA/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Traditions of the Hopi*, by H.R. Voth, \[1905\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## 36.--WATERMELON-RIND WOMAN ([HÖLÖ'KOP](errata.htm#0) WUHTI.md).

Pretty maiden refuses all offers of marriage. Grandmother of young man
called Piwítamni, because he patches her wrappers and blankets, tells
him to ask hand of maiden in marriage. He refuses because he is poor,
and his blanket much patched. Grandmother gives him two fawns and tells
him to take them to maiden at certain rock. In evening he goes and finds
maiden pulverizing

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

some rock. She sees fawns and asks for them. He gives her fawns and she
takes them home. When grandmother hears, she tells young man to go to
maiden's house, and if parents talk good to bring her in evening he goes
and maiden's parents recognize him. Father tells daughter to fill tray
with meal and go along with young man. She goes with him, and is greeted
by grandmother, who after they have eaten, shows her small room with
very poor-looking couch on which to sleep. Maiden grinds corn for four
days, but there is no one to prepare her bridal costume. Grandmother
tells grandchild to go and cry out for relatives to come and eat. They
come and have good feast, after which they give bundle containing
costumes. In morning bride goes home, and people are surprised to see
her dressed up in ówa. She carries second ówa and belt in front of her,
and goes home to parents. Afterwards Piwítamni lives with wife, and is
always poor. He proves to be lazy. His wife has to live partly on
watermelon rinds thrown away by others, from which she derives her name.
Young man has place in kiva. but he has little to eat. Only one old man
sits by him when he eats. Others laugh at him. He tells grandmother that
one man says he will feed wife with good food, and then take her away
from him. Next day old man who sits near him tells him to wait until
others have done. He does so, and he goes to grandmother's house and
brings great many watermelons. He goes again and brings great deal of
meat. He and old man eat together, and when done others come and take
what is left. One man does not come, and then says they will bring their
wealth to-morrow, and whoever is richest shall live with young man's
wife. Next day they go for their possessions and fill kiva. Then
Piwítamni goes to grandmother's house, and she gives him great many
sashes. He returns and grandmother gives him buckskins in great
quantities. Next time she gives him bundle of large buckskins, so that
he is very rich. Old man takes all Piwítamni's things to his wife, Men
want another test, and next day go around -village and examine corn
piles, They find Piwítamni's house filled with corn, watermelons, and
squashes, so he is ahead of them, and no one dares to take his wife from
him. She is no longer called Watermelon-Rind Woman.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 37.--The Youth And Maiden Who Played Hide And Seek For Their
Life.](toth150.md)
