[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr07)  [Next](arr09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

\]

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

# CHAPTER V

### PARACELSUS

AUROLUS PHILLIPUS THEOPHRASTUR BOBASTUR VON HOHENHEIM, immortalized as
Paracelsus, was born in 1493. He was the son of a physician of repute,
who has been described as a Grand Master of the Teutonic Order, and it
was from him that Paracelsus took his first instruction.

At the age of sixteen he entered the University at Basle, where he
applied himself to the study of alchemy, surgery, and medicine. With the
science of alchemy he was already acquainted, having previously studied
the works of Isaac Hollandus, whose writings roused in him the ambition
to cure disease by medicine superior to the material at that time in
use, for apart from his incursions into alchemy, Paracelsus is credited
with the introduction of opium and mercury into medicine, while his
works indicate an advanced knowledge of the science and principles of
magnetism. These are some of the achievements which would seem to
justify Manly Hall's description of him as 'the precursor of chemical
pharmacology and therapeutics and the most original medical thinker of
the sixteenth century.'

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

The Abbot Trithemius, an adept of a high order, and the instructor of
the illustrious Henry Cornelius Agrippa, was responsible for Paracelsus'
initiation into the science of alchemy. In 1516 he was still pursuing
his research in mineralogy, medicine, surgery, and chemistry under the
guidance of Sigismund Fugger, a wealthy physician of the city, but was
forced to leave Basle hurriedly after trouble with the authorities over
his studies in necromancy. He started out on a nomad's life, supporting
himself by astrological predictions and occult practices of various
kinds.

His wanderings took him through Germany, France, Hungary, the
Netherlands, Denmark, Sweden, and Russia. In Russia he is reported to
have been taken prisoner by the Tartars and brought before the Grand
Cham at whose court he became a great favourite. Finally, assuming this
story to be true, he accompanied the Cham's son on an embassy from China
to Constantinople, the city in which the supreme secret, the universal
dissolvent, the alkahest, was imparted to him by an Arabian adept. For
Paracelsus, as Manly Hall has said, gained his knowledge 'not from
coated pedagogues, but from dervishes in Constantinople, witches,
gipsies, and sorcerers, who invoked spirits and captured the rays of the
celestial bodies in dew; of whom it is said that he cured the incurable,
gave sight to the blind, cleansed the leper, and even raised the dead,
and whose memory could turn aside the plague.'

Paracelsus ultimately returned to Europe, passing along the Danube into
Italy where he became an army surgeon. It was here apparently that his
wonderful

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

cures began. In 1526, at the age of thirty-two, he re-entered Germany,
and at the university he had entered as a youth took a professorship of
physics, medicine, and surgery. This was a position of some considerable
importance, and was offered to him at the instance of Erasmus and
Ecolampidus. Perhaps it was his behaviour at this time that eventually
led to his title 'the Luther of physicians,' for in his lectures he made
so bold as to denounce as antiquated the systems of Galen and his
school, whose teachings were held to be so unalterable and inviolable by
the authorities of that time, that the slightest deviation from their
teachings was regarded as nothing short of heretical. As a crowning
insult he actually burnt the works of these masters in a brass pan with
sulphur and nitre! This high-handed behaviour, coupled with his original
ideas, made him countless enemies. The fact that the cures he performed
with his mineral medicines justified his teachings merely served further
to antagonize the medical faculty, infuriated at their authority and
prestige being undermined by the teachings of a 'heretic' and 'usurper.'
Thus Paracelsus did not long retain his professorship at Basle, but was
forced once again to leave the city and betake himself to a wanderer's
life.

During the course of his second exile we hear of him in 1526 at Colmar,
and in 1530 at Nuremburg, once again in conflict with the doctors of
medicine, who denounced him as an impostor, although once again he
turned the tables on his opponents by his successful treatment of
several bad cases of elephantiasis, which he followed up during

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

the next ten years by a series of cures which were amazing at the
period.

Franz Hartmann in his 'Paracelsus' says:

'He proceeded to Maehren, Kaernthen, Krain, and Hungary, and finally to
Salzburg, to which place he was invited by the Prince Palatine, Duke
Ernst of Bavaria, who was a great lover of the secret art. But he was
not destined to enjoy a long time the rest he so richly deserved. . .'

He died in 1541 after a short sickness in a small room at the White
Horse Inn near the quay, and his body was buried in the graveyard of St.
Sebastian. One writer supposes the event to have been accelerated by a
scuffle with assassins in the pay of the orthodox medical faculty, but
there is no actual foundation for this story.

Not one of his biographers seems to have found anything remarkable in
the fact that at sixteen years of age Paracelsus was already well
acquainted with alchemical literature. Even allowing for the earlier
maturity of a man in those times, he must still have been something of a
phenomenon in mental development. Certain it is that few of his
contemporaries either could or would grasp his teachings, and his
consequent irritation and arrogance in the face of their stupidity and
obstinacy is scarcely to be wondered at. Although he numbered so many
enemies among his fellow physicians, he also had his disciples, and for
these no praise was too high for him. He was worshipped as their Noble
and Beloved Monarch, the German Hermes, the Philosopher Trismegistus,
Dear Preceptor

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

and King, Theophrastus of Blessed Memory and Immortal Fame.

 

I am indebted to Mr. Arthur Edward Waite's translation from the German
of the Hermetic and Alchemic Writings of Paracelsus for many of these
facts of I life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Alchemy in The Sixteenth and Seventeenth
Centuries](arr09)
