[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr12)  [Next](arr14) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

# CHAPTER II

### THE SPIRIT OF MERCURY

In the previous chapter I spoke of the substances Mercury, Sulphur, and
Salt as being analagous to the Spirit, Soul, and Body. What I intend to
convey is that the Spirit of the Metal is the Spirit of Mercury (a
volatile essence which in its gaseous state is an Aether), the Sulphur
is the Soul or the Blood, and the Salt the Ashes or the Body.

Again I quote from Basilius Valentinus, Father of Modern Chemistry:

'*Of the Spirit of Mercury*.'

'Though I have a peculiar Stile in writing, which will seem strange unto
many, causing strange Thoughts and Fancies in their Brains, yet there is
reason enough for my so doing; I say enough, that I may remain by my own
experience, not esteeming much of others prating, because it is
concealed in my knowledge, Seeing having alwaies the preheminence before
Hearing, and Reason hath the praise before Folly: Wherefore I now say,
that all visible, tangible things are made of the Spirit of Mercury,
which excels all earthly things of the whole world, all things being
made out of it, having their Off-spring only from it; for all is found
therein which can perform all whatsoever the Artist desires to find; It
is the beginning to operate Metals,

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

when it is become a spiritual Essence, which is meer Air flying to and
fro without wings; it is a moving wind, which after it is expelled its
dwelling by *Vulcan,* it is driven into its *Chaos,* where it again
enters, and resolves itself into the Elements, where it is elevated and
attracted by the Sydereal Stars after a Magnetical manner unto
themselves, out of love, whence he proceeded before, and was operated
because it affects its like again, and attracts it to it. But if this
Spirit of *Mercury* can be caught, and made corporal, it resolves into a
Body, and becomes a pure, clear, transparent water, which is the true
spiritual water, and the first *Mercurial* Root of the Minerals and
Metals, spiritual, intangible, incombustible, without any mixture of
earthly Aquosity; it is that Celestial water, whereof very much hath
been written; for by this Spirit of *Mercury* all Metals, may if need
require, be broken, opened, and resolved into their first Matter,
without Corrosive; it renews the age of Man or Beast, even as the
Eagles; it consumes all evil, and conducts a long Age to long Life. This
Spirit of *Mercury* is the Master-Key of my Second Key, whereof I wrote
in the beginning; wherefore I will call; *Come ye Blessed of the Lord,
be anointed, and refreshed with water, and embalm your Bodies, that they
may not putrefie or stink;* for this Celestial Water is the beginning,
the Oyl, and the means, seeing it burns not, because it is made of
spiritual Sulphur; the Salt Balsam is corporal, which is united with the
Water by the Oyl, whereof I will afterwards treat more at large, when I
shall write of them, and mention them.

'And that I may further declare what is the Essence, Matter and Form of
the Spirit of Mercury, I say, that its Essence is blessed, its Matter
spiritual, and its Form earthly, which yet must be understood by an
incomprehensible way; these are indeed harsh

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Expressions, many will think, thy Proposals are
all vain, strange Effusions, raising wonderful Imaginations, and true it
is that they are strange, and require strange people to understand these
Sayings; it is not written for Peasants, how they should grease
Cart-wheels, nor is it written unto those who have no knowledge of the
Art, though they be never so learned, or think themselves so; for I only
account them Learned, who next unto Gods Word, learn to know Earthly
things, which must be pondered and judged by the Understanding, founded
upon a true Knowledge, to distinguish Light from Darkness, who choose
that which is good, and reject the evil.

'It is needless for you to know what the beginning of this Spirit of
*Mercury* requires, because it can in no wise help nor advantage you,
only take notice of this, that its beginning is supernatural, out of the
Celestial, Sydereal and Elementary, bestowed on it from the beginning of
the first Creation, that it may enter further into an Earthly Substance.
But because this is necessary which hath been declared to you, leave the
Celestial to the Soul, apprehend it by Faith, and let the Sydereal
likewise alone, because these Sydereal Impressions are invisible and
intangible, the Elements have already brought forth the Spirit perfect
into the world by the Nutriment, therefore let that alone likewise; for
man cannot make the Elements, but only the Creator, and remain by thy
made Spirit which is already formal and unformal, tangible and
intangible, and yet is presented visibly. So have you enough of the
first Matter, out of which all Metals and Minerals grow, and is one only
thing, and such a matter which unites itself with the *Sulphur* in the
following Chapter, and enters into a Coagulation with the *Salt* of the
first Chapter, that it may be one Body, and a perfect Medicine of all
Metals, not only to bring forth in the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

Earth at the beginning, as in the great World, but also by help of the
vaporous Body to transmute and change, together with the augmentation in
the lesser World: Let not this seem strange to you, seeing the Most High
hath permitted, and Nature undertaken it.

'Many will not believe this, esteeming it impossible, despise and
vilifie these Mysteries, which they understand not in the least, they
may remain Fools and Idiots till an illumination follows, which cannot
be without God's Will, but remains till the time predestinate. But wise
and discreet men, who have truly shed the sweat of their Brows, will be
my sufficient witnesses, and confirm the Truth, and indeed believe and
hold for a truth all that which I write in this case, as true as Heaven
and Hell are preordained, and proposed as Rewards of good and evil to
the Elect and Reprobate. Now I write not only with my hands, but my
Mind, Will and heart constrain me to it: Those who are highly conceited,
illuminated, and world-wise, hate, envy, scandalize, defame and
persecute this Mystery to the utmost Rind, or innermost Kernel, which
hath its beginning out of the Center; but I know assuredly, there will
come a time, when my Marrow is wasted, and my Bones dried up, that some
will take my part heartily, after I am in the Pit; and if God would
permit it, they would willingly raise me from the dead; but that cannot
be; wherefore I have left them my Writings, that their Faith and Hope
may have a Seal of Certainty and Truth, to testifie of me what my last
Will and Testament was, which I ordained for the poor, and all the
Lovers of Mysteries, though it did not behove me to have wrote so much,
yet I could not refrain without prejudice to my Soul, but to drive a
Light or Flash through a Cloud, that the Day might be observed, and the
dark Night, thick and gloomy, rainy Weather expelled.

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

'Now how the *Archaeus* operates further by the Spirit of Mercury in the
Earth, or Veins of the Earth, take this Advice, that after the spiritual
Seed is formed by the impression of the Stars from above, and fed by the
Elements, it is a Seed, and turns itself into a *Mercurial* Water, as
first of all the great World was made of nothing, for when the Spirit
moved upon the Water, the Celestial Heat must needs raise a Life in the
cold waterish and earthly Creatures; in the great World it was Gods
Power, and the Operation of the Celestial Lights; in the little World it
is likewise Gods Power, and the Operation to work into the Earth by his
Divine and Holy Breath. Moreover the Almighty gave and Ordained means to
accomplish it, that one Creature had obtained power to operate in the
other, and the one to help and assist the other, to perform and fulfil
all the Works of the Lord; and so an influence was permitted the Earth
to bring forth by the Lights of Heaven, as also an internal Heat, to
warm and digest that which was too cold for the Earth, by reason of its
humidity, as unto every Creature a peculiar fashion according to its
kind; so that a subtile sulphurous Vapour is stirred up by the Starry
Heaven, not the common, but another more clarified and pure Vapour,
distinct from others, which unites itself with the *Mercurial*
Substance; by whose warm property, in process of time, the superfluous
Moisture is dryed up, and then when the soulish property comes to it,
which gives a preservation to the Body and Balsam, operating first into
the Earth by a spiritual and sydereal influence, then are Metals
generated of it, as it pleaseth the Mixture of the three Principles, the
Body being formed according as it assumes unto it the greatest part of
those three. But if the Spirit of *Mercury* be intended and qualified
from above upon Animals, it becomes an Animal Substance; if it goes upon
Vegetables by order,

it becomes a Vegetable Work; but if, by reason of its infused nature, it
fall on Minerals, it becomes Minerals and Metals, yet each one hath its
distinction as they are wrought, the Animals for themselves, the
Vegetables on another manner and form by themselves, and so likewise the
Minerals, each one a several way, whereof to write particularly would be
too tedious, and yield large and Various Narrations.

.      .      .      .      .

'This is the summe in brief, that without the Spirit of *Mercury,* which
is the only true Key, you can never make Corporal Gold potable, nor the
Philosophers' Stone. Let it remain by this Conclusion, be silent; for I
my self will at present say no more, because Silence is enjoyned thee
and me by the orderly Judge, recommending the Execution and further
search thereof to another, who hath not as yet reduced the Matter into a
right Order.'

And here the words of Alexander von Suchten, from the 'Blessed Casket of
Nature's Marvels' by Benedictus Figulus:

'The primary matter of man and the primary matter of the great world are
one and the same thing. But this primary matter of the world and of man
is a Crystalline Water of which Holy Writ says "Before God created
Heaven and Earth, the Spirit of the Lord brooded over the waters." This
water became a primary matter of both. But where remains the Spirit of
the Lord, which brooded over the waters, after the two worlds, i.e.
heaven and earth, and man had been created from the same? I reply, in
the primary matter of man and of the world, God who is Perfection, has
wished to dwell in Man. But here the following question might be put;
how did man know--since the

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

primary matter of man and the world is a crystalline water--how could
man know whether the Spirit of the Lord had remained in this primary
matter of the world, or of man? I reply, he knew it by the Art of Water,
for Water was his teacher. This teacher shewed him how the world dies,
how the Spirit departs from it, how the body is without spirit, the
spirit without body. He saw how the spirit returns to the body, and the
body revives. He saw by the decay of the world that it did not become
again what it had been before. Hence it became plain to him that God
dwells not in that which passes away, but in that which is eternal.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III: The Quintessence (I)](arr14)
