[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Alchemy](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](arr23)  [Next](arr25) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

### SECTION V

"My Son, that which is born of the Crow is the beginning of this Art.
Behold, now I have obscured the matter treated of, by circumlocution,
depriving thee of the light. Yet this dissolved, this joined, this
nearest and farthest off, I have named to thee. Roast those things,
therefore, and boil them in that which comes from the horse's belly for
seven, fourteen or twenty-one days. Then will the Dragon eat his own
wings and destroy himself. This being done, let it be put into a fiery
furnace, which lute diligently, and observe that none of the spirit may
escape.

"And know that the periods of the earth are in the water, which let it
be as long as until thou puttest the same upon it. This matter being
thus melted and burned, take the brain thereof and triturate it in most
sharp vinegar, till it becomes obscured. This done, it lives in the
putrefaction, let the dark clouds which were in it before it was killed
be converted into its own body. Let this process be repeated, as I have
described, let it again die, as I before said, and then it lives.

"In the life and death thereof we work with the spirits, for as it dies
by the taking away of the spirit, so it lives in the return and is
revived and rejoices therein. Being arrived then at this knowledge, that
which thou hast been searching for is made apparent in the Affirmation.
I have even related to thee the joyful signs, even that which doth fix
the body. But these things, and how they attained to the knowledge of
this secret, are given by our ancestors in figures and

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

types. Behold, they are dead. I have opened the riddle, and the book of
knowledge is revealed. The hidden things I have uncovered, and have
brought together the scattered truths within their boundary, and have
conjoined many various forms; even I have associated the spirit. Take it
as the gift of God."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section VI](arr25)
