[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc08)  [Next](ipc10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### THE MAHÂYÂNA

<span class="small">New gods—All of them S’iva—A Mask of Buddhism on
some of them—Dhyâni or Heavenly Buddhas—Dhyâni Bodhisatwas—Conversion of
the Relic Cairn of Early Buddhism into S’iva's Lingam Disguised as a
Chaitya—Chaitya Worship at Mathura—S’iva Buddhism a Worship of S’iva
with "Left-handed" Tântrika Rites—It is to be found in all Buddhist
Kingdoms—Rapid survey.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> Mahâyâna movement introduced many new
gods.

As a test question let us inquire who, according to the Mahâyâna made
the world?

The first answer is—"Îshwara or Âdi Buddha,"—the "Cause of all
existence." "From his Dhyâna the universe was produced by him!" <span
id="fr_97"></span>[\*](#fn_97)

I copy this from Mr. Hodgson's extracts of the old Sanskrit literature
rescued in Nepal when Buddhism was driven from India.

Another name is mentioned by him—"Tathâgata." He also made the world,
for he is the same being as Adi Buddha. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[\*](#fn_97)

But the matter does not stop here:—

Îshwara being the Absolute, and being imaged as residing in Nirvritti,
the awful and untravelled haunts of divine repose, deputed five Dhyâni
or heavenly Buddhas to make the World.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

Their names are:—

\(1\) Vairochana.

\(2\) Akshobhya.

\(3\) Ratna Sambhava.

\(4\) Amitâbha.

\(5\) Amoghasiddha.

But these seem to have passed on the work to five "Heavenly
Bodhisatwas." <span id="fr_99"></span>[\*](#fn_98)

\(1\) Samantabhadra.

\(2\) Vajra Pâni.

\(3\) Ratna Pâni.

\(4\) Padma Pâni.

\(5\) Viswa Pâni.

Still, the number of divine beings credited with making the earth is by
no means exhausted:—

"I salute that Dharma (Durgâ) who is Prajnâ Pâramitâ (the Wisdom of the
Other Bank), pointing out the way of perfect tranquility to all mortals,
and leading them in the paths of perfect Wisdom; who by the testimony of
all the sages produced and created all things." <span
id="fr_100"></span>[†](#fn_99)

But even that does not exhaust the whole list.

"For the sake of obtaining Nirvritti I devote myself to the feet of
'Sañgha,' who having assumed the three gunas created the three
worlds." <span id="fr_101"></span>[‡](#fn_100)

But again the list is still unexhausted, for it appears that Sangha in
the work of creation is mixed up with Amitâbha.

But the creation of the world even after all this elucidation is still a
puzzle, for we learn that Sangha is another name for Padmapâni, one of
the "Bodhisatwas," and that Padmapâni is "Avalokitishwara," and
"Maitreya," the coming Buddha. <span id="fr_102"></span>[§](#fn_101)

<span id="img_pl06"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 6.&lt;br&gt;
THE CHAITYA LINGAM.](tn/pl06.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl06.jpg)  
PLATE 6.  
THE CHAITYA LINGAM.  
</span>

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

S’iva has got a thousand names, and if we concede that the Mahâyâna was
his Pantheism we might pass over this absurd and contradictory catalogue
of mythological phantoms without much comment. But literal minds, when
they discourse about Buddhism, treat all these phantoms as real beings,
and make the contradictions doubly contradictory. Resolved into their
ultimate these gods are two—Sîva, and Maitreya Buddha or Sîva wearing
the mask of Sâkya Muni.

What was S’ivism viewed from the outside? "His worshippers," says
Professor Hayman Wilson, "contented themselves with flinging 'water, oil
and faded flowers’ on his emblem the Lingam."

What was early Buddhism viewed from the outside? Offerings to the relics
of Sâkya Muni, placed under a Tope or Stûpa? (heap).

Now S’iva Buddhism to harmonise these two ideas converted the
relic-mound or Chaitya from the curve taken by a heap of stones thrown
at random one upon the other to a dome like the lingam.

A rough sketch ([Pl. 6](#img_pl06)) shows how this was done. Above (Fig.
1) is an early cairn, like the Sanchi Tope. Then (Fig. 2) I give the
early Lingam, which was a large block of bed-rock, left when excavating
a cave-temple. Fig. 3 is a miniature dome-chaitya, the old relic-mound
made into S’iva's emblem. In Fig. 4 we get the "Jew's harp," as it is
called, the Lingam to be seen in every bazaar.

When Mr. Brian Hodgson went as British Minister to Nepal he was
astonished to find an abundance of these lingams. The Chaitya, or
relic-mound, had been "metamorphosed into a lingam"; and, as he tells us
"its worship may now be seen in numerous instances in Nepal, *e.g.*, at
Kâlî's temple, on the roadside near Tundi Khel." <span
id="fr_103"></span>[\*](#fn_102) He applied to his teacher, Amirta Nanda
Bandhya, who assured him that the

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

borrowing had been on the other way, the Hindus had taken the Buddhist
Chaitya and broken off the Chûla mani, or spire, from each, and called
it a S’iva lingam, but that is a gloss that we cannot accept.

To build a sepulchral cairn to a dead saint or Buddha, and to honour his
relics with offerings and rotatory peregrinations is a conceivable act,
especially if, as with the Abbé Paris, strange cures can be effected at
his tomb. But to build a sepulchral Tope to a saint who is not yet dead,
nor even yet born, is a wild idea. Its object was to banish Sâkya Muni
to a Nirvâna of Nothingness, and to change the worship of him and his
relic-mounds to a worship of relic-domes despoiled of relics but
tenanted by Maitreya, and other Bodhisatwas (monks of high spiritual
progress that will one day be Buddhas).

The invaluable Chinese traveller, Hiouen Thsiang, describes in his
"history" <span id="fr_104"></span>[\*](#fn_103) the relic-mound worship
at Mathurâ when he visited the city. The early Buddhists, the disciples
of the Little Vehicle, paid homage to the relics of Śâriputra,
Maudgalyâyana, Ânanda, and other great Buddhist saints, who had each one
a handsome stûpa in that city, but the disciples of the Great Vehicle
"worshipped the Bodhisattwas" in their topes. Fa Hian bears a similar
testimony. <span id="fr_105"></span>[†](#fn_104)

That traveller was nearly lost at sea, but he prayed to "Bodhisatwa
Avalokitiswara," and the storm abated. Hiouen Thsiang, on the other
hand, was caught by pirates on the Ganges, who proposed to sacrifice him
to Durgâ. He prayed to Maitreya Bodhisatwa, the coming Buddha, and
likewise escaped.

Now, the forcible intrusion of S’iva and his lingam—and also his
left-handed or Tântrika rites is what I call S’iva-Buddhism. Let us make
a hasty examination

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

of the chief Buddhist kingdoms, one by one, to see if the change was at
all general.

#### TIBET.

The Tibetans have Tantric rites and human sacrifices, and many writers
maintain that these are only outside relics of the earlier, or Bon,
religion; but that is against all evidence. The Dalai Lâma claims to be
the head of the Buddhist movement. Avalokitishwara (S’iva in person) is
said to have brought Buddhism to Tibet. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[\*](#fn_105) He is incarnate always in the Dalai
Lâma. He is represented like S’iva, with four arms. His wife Avalokitî,
as the "White Târâ," is compared by Surgeon-Major Waddell to the
Madonna, as regards her benign influence in the community; but she
transcends all that has been hitherto imagined of cruel malignity and
devilry as "Lha-mo," the "great Maharani." "She is credited with letting
loose the demons of disease, and her name is scarcely ever mentioned,
and only then with bated breath." <span id="fr_107"></span>[†](#fn_106)

Tibet is also furnished with an army of fiends, the demons of the
terrible Kâla-Chakra, as soberly organised as the army of gods and
Buddhas. Indeed, they may be described as that army daubed over with
Indian ink. Every god of the Brahmans has his counterpart presentment in
hell.

These are clothed for the most part in the richest China silks and
crapes, and wear [pantomime](errata.htm#16) masks, and upon their
stomachs human skulls, skulls richly embroidered. And the celestial
Buddhas figure as "demoniacal Buddhas," Kâla-Chakra, Heruka, Achala,
Vajra-vairabha, etc. The "celestial Bodhisatwas" are also "ferocious and
bloodthirsty, and only to be conciliated by constant worship of
themselves and their female energies, with offerings and sacrifices,

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

magic circles, special mantras, charms." <span
id="fr_108"></span>[\*](#fn_107) The "energies" of these demoniacal
Bodhisatwas are the "Dakkini fiendesses." All the Buddhist Lâmas crowd
to the festival of the "She-devil Devî," who is worshipped for seven
days like Devî, in India, to gain security from disease for the coming
year. <span id="fr_109"></span>[†](#fn_108)

Of the vast literature of orthodox Buddhist sorcery I will speak in the
next section.

#### NEPAL.

I have already dealt with S’iva worship in Nepal in treating of the
Chaitya. Mr. Hodgson found this worship of the Chaitya, or lingam as he
supposed it, everywhere. He also was astonished to find the statue of
S’iva in every temple, "even in the penetralia."

The Buddhist Dharma, the Sophia of the Gnostics, has for one name "S’iva
Sakti," the wife or female energy of S’iva. One of the holy books is
called Trikand Sesh (the three-throated Serpent—Sesh, S’iva's emblem).
The initiation, or baptism, is given by Mr. Hodgson:—

Several names of S’iva are used in this ritual, Avalokitisvara, Visva
Karma, Vajra Pâni, and the postulant vows to devote himself to the
worship of the Chaitya. "When the purely Buddhist ritual is exhausted,"
says Mr. Hodgson, "the Tantric esoteric comes on,—which consists of the
worship of the Balis. Flesh, blood and spirits are put into a conch
shell. The celebrant wears a mask of Bhairava, and holds his terrible
pasá or noose. Nâgas, Yakshas, Râkhsasas, devatas, have all their Balis.
Many names are given including the Bali of Mahâ Kâla himself—(S’iva as
"great Time").

If the foulest Tantrik rites form the chief part of the initiation of a
Buddhist postulant, it seems quite

<span id="img_pl07"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 7.&lt;br&gt;
CHAITYA-LINGAM WORSHIP. &lt;i&gt;From
Amarâvatî&lt;/i&gt;.](tn/pl07.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl07.jpg)  
PLATE 7.  
CHAITYA-LINGAM WORSHIP. *From Amarâvatî*.  
</span>

<span id="img_pl08"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 8.&lt;br&gt;
SAMANA DEVA RAJAH.](tn/pl08.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl08.jpg)  
PLATE 8.  
SAMANA DEVA RAJAH.  
</span>

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

plain that they cannot be called mere barnacles on the outside of the
ship.

When the Buddhist hierarchy was driven northward from their monastery at
Nalanda near Buddha Gaya, Nepal received for safety a large portion of
the esoteric Sanskrit literature. A great number of these rituals are
called Tântras, or treatises setting forth the worship of the
"left-handed" gods. No less than seventy-four of these Tântras are
catalogued by Brian Hodgson, including the terrible Kâla Chakra. Great
secrecy is maintained concerning these books.

#### CHINA.

The Rev. Samuel Beal has told us that the divine being "Quan Yin," was
there sometimes worshipped as a female and sometimes worshipped as a
male. He has told us, too, that Quan Yin in Chinese is the same as the
Sanskrit word Avalokitisvara, or "S’iva looking down." Quan Yin
dominates the rituals.

And China, too, has the Kâla Chakra and all the Tântras or esoteric
works; and practises all the sorceries. These superstitions are put down
to local "Dragon worship" and "Taoism"; but a great religion like
Buddhism of old, which has an imposing ecclesiastical centre, and many
branch churches which have each in its most secret penetralia some
seventy-four cherished spell books and grimoires, expounding secret
esoteric rites to, let us say, seventy-four different yakshas—such a
church cannot be called a mere prey to paltry local superstitions.

#### CEYLON.

A god with a white elephant at his feet is a popular print in Ceylon.
There are several in Mr. Upham's book. He tells us that this god is
Samana Deva Râjah, so called from Samane Galle (Adam's Peak), "where he
is now living with his deities with power

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

over Ceylon." The white elephant is Buddha in a Nirvâṇa of uselessness.
I give a rough sketch of one of these from my sketch book. A strange,
spoon-shaped aureole or cadre surmounts all the principal gods and
demons in Ceylon prints, and each stands on a stone,—aureole, god and
stone making up the outline of a columnar Lingam. Buddha is reported to
have handed over this stone, the Minne Phalange, or Stone of Supremacy,
at the date of his death to Samane Deva Râjah.

Sagittarius in the Indian Zodiac is called the Bow of S’iva.

Ceylon took a very prominent part in the present strange revival of
interest in the West of the Buddhist movement. Great credit is due to
the missionaries, who studied the language for their own purposes. And
in the records of the island they found it asserted that the Buddhism of
Ceylon was the earliest and genuine Buddhism. But since the travels of
the Chinese pilgrim Hiouen Tsiang have been disinterred, that idea is no
longer tenable. <span id="fr_110"></span>[\*](#fn_109) The great
revolution called the Mahâyâna (Great Vehicle) included Ceylon in its
vortex. Indeed, one prominent Oriental scholar, Horace Hayman Wilson,
thought that the fusion of strict Buddhism with the Indian religions
came from Ceylon. <span id="fr_111"></span>[†](#fn_110)

Samana Deva Râjah, as his name implies, is Deva or S’iva, and the
Kappooism, or devil-dancing in Ceylon, is pretty well known. The amount
of devils to be conciliated is large, if according to Mr. Moncure
Conway, eighty-four thousand charms are required for the purpose. It is
urged that this sorcery is a reminiscence of the Naga worship that
prevailed

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

in the island before it was converted to Buddhism. Again we have the
defence set up that these devils are mere barnacles on the outside of
the ship.

Much has been made of the fact that the names of some of the Mahâyâna
gods mentioned at the beginning of this chapter are not known in Ceylon.
From this it is argued that Ceylon knows nothing of the Mahâyâna
movement, but the names Tathâgatha, Sañgha as a god, Purusá, Maitreya,
are in all the rituals and holy hooks, and these are Mahâyâna gods. The
test name is "Maitreya," who according to Professor Rhys Davids under
the name of Nâth has his statue in almost all the Wiharas. <span
id="fr_112"></span>[\*](#fn_111) In the Mahâwanso it is announced that
the Cingalese King Dhatuseno, built a fine temple to Bodhisatto Mettêyyo
and "invested his image with every regal ornament." <span
id="fr_113"></span>[†](#fn_112) Guards to the distance of one yogana
specially protected this temple. Was this Mettêyyo an ordinary
Bodhisattwa, *i.e.*, a yokel ignorant as yet of all spiritual
illumination? If so, how did Dhatuseno know that he was to be the next
Buddha, and that his name was "Nâth." If, on the other hand, this
Maitreya was the clumsy subterfuge by the aid of which the Mahâyâna
sought to depose the worship of Śâkya Muni, it is plain that King
Dhatuseno was not altogether ignorant of Mahâyâna teachings.

#### BURMAH.

If a Burmese is knocked down suddenly in the street, he cries out, "Phra
Kaiba" ("God help me"), but he does not believe in any God at all. This
is what we learn from Bishop Bigandet, <span
id="fr_114"></span>[‡](#fn_113) who goes on to say that the "God" thus
involuntarily invoked cannot be Buddha, for folks there openly maintain

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

that Buddha never interferes in human affairs. For Tantrik rites, the
Burmese are well furnished with spirits called "Nats." Major Waddell
believes that this word is the Sanskrit "Nâth" (Lord), also applied to
the Spirits of the left-handed Tântrika. Major Phaire combats this, and
says it is an old local word for local demons. The Burmese priests
advise the laity to have recourse to the devil dancers when they get
ill. A wigwam is built up for the offerings, then the dancer commences
to dance softly, working up bit by bit to corybantic frenzy. When she
(for a woman is preferred) falls down exhausted and half dead, she is
consulted by the sorcerer about the malady, and the Nat that is causing
it.

This theory of a Buddha still intelligent, but no longer interested in
the cares of humanity, is plainly a version of the teaching of the
Seśvara Sankhya, which says the same thing of S’iva.

#### JAPAN.

I had many opportunities of conversing with Captain Pfoundes, a
gentleman who spent more than eight years of his life in a Japanese
temple. He tells me that the statue of Amitâbha is everywhere in Japan,
under the title of Amida Butz, and that this is quite distinct from
Shaky Muni, and much more reverenced by them. Under the title Niorai, a
loftier and more abstract divinity, still is known to the Japanese. Here
we get Ishwara, also his five activities for Amitâbha is one of the five
Dhyâni Buddhas. And the Tantrik rites can, of course, be credited to the
Shinto exorcists.

Professor Knox tells us that Shaka Muny is completely obliterated by
Amitâbha; also that the demons of the Islands fought a great battle with
the demons of Buddhism on its arrival, but the magical powers of the
latter were deemed superior. Then Shinto

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

was pacified on being told that their demons were incarnations of
Buddha. <span id="fr_115"></span>[\*](#fn_114)

#### SIAM.

The Siamese believe that there is no God, only causation (Karma), which
word perhaps ought to be rendered "Destiny."

An old scripture, the "Traiphoom" describes the making, and also the
periodical destruction of worlds, and the conversion through long
stretches of time of devils into angels, and of angels back again into
devils. <span id="fr_116"></span>[†](#fn_115)

In Crawford's "Embassy to Siam" is an account of a funeral procession in
honour of a dead king. Sixty or seventy giants and masked figures, gods,
Balis, and Yakshas. followed the corpse. The left-handed gods of
Buddhism are said to be gigantic.

#### JAVA.

Mr. Crawford, treating of Java, declares that the fact most worthy of
attention in respect to the images of Buddha is that they never appear
in any of the great central temples as the primary object of worship,
but in the smaller surrounding ones.

He instances the fact that the lingam is everywhere and also palpable
images of S’iva as the Yogi, or with Ganga in his topknot. His view is
that "genuine Buddhism was S’ivism;" and that in Java Buddha is not
worshipped at all. It is through him that I can shortly give some
valuable information about a head without a jaw, which betrays all the
attempts of the Buddhists to appropriate S’ivan temples. Mr. Crawford
was before his time.

And what was the philosophy of these Buddhist organisations?

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

The Buddhists of the S’iva Buddha movement were divided broadly into two
great schools,—the Swabhavikas and the Aishwarikas.

Mr. Brian Hodgson thus speaks of these two sects:—

"The Swabhavikas deny the existence of immateriality. They assert that
matter is the sole substance, and they give it two modes called
Pravritti and Nirvritti, or action and rest, concretion and abstraction.
Matter itself, they say, is eternal (however infinitesimally attenuated
in Nirvritti); and so are the powers of matter, which powers possess not
only activity, but intelligence." <span id="fr_117"></span>[\*](#fn_116)

On the other hand, as Hodgson tells us, the Aishwarika sect "admits of
immaterial essence, and of a supreme, infinite, self-existent Deity, Adi
Buddha (or, as their name suggests, Ishwara S’iva), but they deny that
he interferes with the affairs of men." <span
id="fr_118"></span>[†](#fn_117)

These schools are plainly echoes of the two ancient Yoga treatises of
S’iva's ascetics, the Karika of Kapila, and the Yoga Śâstra of
Patanjali.

Launched in the West by the Buddhist missionaries, these two tractates
have strongly affected the Gnostics, the Christians, the Moslem, the
secret societies of the Middle Ages. And now, thanks to Spinoza, it is
their quaint destiny to be the Bibles of the great modern controversy.

Büchner, the High Priest of the Scientists, has declared that the
Sankhya's inert, unknowable Ishwara is the God of modern science,
whereas, thanks to Spiritualists like Boehme, and to the Kabbala,
S’ivism has had immense influence with the secret mystical societies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_97"></span>[107:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_98) Hodgson, "Religion of
Nepal," p. 77.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[108:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_99) Hodgson, "Religion of
Nepal."

<span id="fn_99"></span>[108:†](ipc09.htm#fr_100) *Ibid*, p. 142.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[108:‡](ipc09.htm#fr_101) *Ibid*, p. 88.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[108:§](ipc09.htm#fr_102) Hodgson, p. 142.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[109:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_103) Hodgson, "Religion
of Nepal," p. 139.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[110:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_104) Hiouen Thsiang,
"Histoire," p. 104.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[110:†](ipc09.htm#fr_105) Fa Hian,
"Pilgrimage," p. 101.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[111:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_106) Schlagintweit,
"Buddhism in Tibet," p. 63.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[111:†](ipc09.htm#fr_107) Waddell, "Buddhism of
Tibet," p. 364.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[112:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_108) Waddell, "Buddhism
of Tibet," p. 131.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[112:†](ipc09.htm#fr_109) *Ibid*. p, 365.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[114:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_110) See Monier Williams,
"Buddhism," p. 162. Major Waddell, "Buddhism in Tibet," p. 123. See also
my "Buddha and Early Buddhism" which deals with the dishonesty of the
Cingalese records.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[114:†](ipc09.htm#fr_111) See Emerson Tennant,
"Ceylon," Vol. L., p. 379.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[115:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_112) Rhys Davids,
"Buddhism," p. 201.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[115:†](ipc09.htm#fr_113) Turnour, "The
Mahâwanso," p. 258.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[115:‡](ipc09.htm#fr_114) Bigandef," 183.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[117:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_115) Knox, "Religion of
Japan," p. 88.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[117:†](ipc09.htm#fr_116) Alabaster, "The
Modern Buddhist," p. 17.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[118:\*](ipc09.htm#fr_117) Hodgson, "Religion
of Tibet," p. 23.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[118:†](ipc09.htm#fr_118) Hodgson, "Religion of
Nepal," p. 25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. Avalokitishwara](ipc10)
