[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ipc09)  [Next](ipc11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766135209/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*India in Primitive Christianity*, by Arthur Lille, \[1909\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

### CHAPTER VII

#### AVALOKITISHWARA

<span class="small">The great Monastery of Nalanda—The "High Priest of
all the World"—Is he the modern Pontiff of Tibet?—S’iva supposed to be
incarnate in each successor—S’iva and Durgâ worshipped in all Buddhist
rituals.—Great revolution effected by King Kaniska—Strong remonstrance
on the part of the "High Priest of all the World"—He declares that the
encroaching cultus is pure S’ivism and Nihilism.</span>

<span class="smallcaps">Schlagintweit</span> tells us that
Avalokitishwara brought Buddhism to Tibet in the seventh century A.
D. <span id="fr_119"></span>[\*](#fn_118)

We have seen that the Dalai Lama claims to be the head of the Buddhist
Church with Avalokitishwara for divine guide. Was this a more ancient
claim?

Certainly, there was a "High Priest of all the world" as early as the
second convocation, according to the Mahâwanso, <span
id="fr_120"></span>[†](#fn_119) and this Achârya, as he was also called,
was always the pupil of his predecessor, as General Cunningham has
pointed out. <span id="fr_121"></span>[‡](#fn_120)

Hiouen Thsiang throws some light on the status of the Achârya in his
day. He gives him the same title as is given to him in the Mahâwanso. It
must be mentioned that India at this time was governed by a powerful
monarch, Śîlâditya, whose dominions, according to Dr. Hunter, extended
from the Punjab to North-East Bengal—from the Himalayas to the Narbadda
River.

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

But the centre of the Buddhist spiritual power and the centre of the
imperial power were many miles apart. The emperor's capital was Kanouj.
The Rome of the Buddhists was still in Magadha, and their largest
ecclesiastical centre on a mountain at Nalanda (Baragaon). It would seem
as if this spot was not in the actual territory ruled by Śîlâditya, for
a king named Kumâra, in Eastern India, sent a message to the Mahâthêrô
that if he did not send Hiouen Thsiang to him, he would come to Nalanda
and make it a heap of ruins. As a nod from King Śîlâditya brought this
king fawning along the Ganges in a superb travelling palace to pay his
homage, we may presume that Śîlâditya's soldiers were not actually
posted at Nalanda. If they had been, King Kumâra would no more have
thought of threatening to lay it in ruins than the King of the Belgians
would propose to go and burn the palace of the Archbishop of Paris.

Hiouen Thsiang's visit to Nalanda and its convents throws some light on
the sunny days of Buddhism. These convents were built by King Śakrâditya
and his five successors. There were eight courts surrounded by a long
brick wall. Lines of tall towers pierced the sky. Pavilions adorned with
coral were surmounted, some with domes, and some with graceful
pinnacles, amongst which floated the mountain mists. The houses of the
"Men of Pure Life" were four storeyed. The temples had pillars,
ornamented with dragons, and rafters shining with rainbow tints.
Precious jade adorned the red columns and the richly-carved roof. The
pilgrim tells us that Indian architecture was exactly like the Chinese.
"Carved balustrades allowed the light to shine through them," says the
worthy pilgrim. We can easily conjure up the scene.

Vast tanks outside the convents were spread with the blue lotus. The
spot had once been a mango

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

garden, and as such, was given to Buddha by a rich merchant. The fine
mango plantations still gave shade to the "Men of Pure Life." Inside, or
attached to the convent, when Hiouen Thsiang visited it, were no less
than ten thousand monks. Amongst the many convents in India, he adds,
were none as rich and as grand as this. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[\*](#fn_121)

The Achârya was so respected that "nobody dared even mention his
name." <span id="fr_123"></span>[†](#fn_122) He was alluded to as the
"Treasury of Dharma (Saddharmakośa)."

Hitherto, in India, kings and monks had always paid their reverence to
the Chinese pilgrim. As his adventures are given to us by two of his
disciples, this may be a little exaggeration to gratify Chinese
susceptibilities. But when Hiouen Thisang was presented to the Achârya
in the Nalanda convent, there can be no mistake as to who paid the
homage on that occasion. Twenty old monks introduced the pilgrim to
Dharmakośa:—

"When he was in the presence of the superior he paid him all the duties
of a disciple, and exhausted every token of homage. In obedience to the
sacred regulations and the official etiquette, he (the Chinese pilgrim)
moved forwards on his knees, supporting himself on his elbows. He struck
the ground with his forehead, and made it resound with the tappings of
his feet." <span id="fr_124"></span>[‡](#fn_123)

The Convocation of Kanouj took place shortly after this, and its details
were fixed by the High Priest of all the World.

The Grand Lâma of Tibet seems to me to be the representative of the
Âchârya of Magadha, who, on the sacking of the great vihâra of Nalanda,
took refuge first of all in North India, and on the expulsion

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

of the Buddhists from that quarter, escaped to Tibet. The traditions
that we possess, though scanty, seem to point to this conclusion. In
1417, there was already a Grand Lâma in Tibet, one Tsonkhapa, a Buddhist
from India. Like the earliest Âchâryas, he appointed his successor to
the office, one Dharma Rancha. <span id="fr_125"></span>[\*](#fn_124) It
is worthy of remark that the Lâma is recognised as the head of the
Buddhist Church by the Chinese and Japanese. M. Abel de Rémusat, in his
"Origines de l’Hiérarchie Lamaïque," cites the literature of the latter
to show that it was conceived that at the death of Buddha he at once
reappeared on earth in Bengal as a "teacher" of kings. That seems to be
as the Achârya; and it is stated that Buddha as the Grand Lâma is always
on earth. <span id="fr_126"></span>[†](#fn_125) Gengis Khan patronised
the Buddhists; and his grandson officially designated the "Master of
Doctrine" in Tibet, the "Living God," the "Self-existent Buddha,"
etc. <span id="fr_127"></span>[‡](#fn_126) Intolerant Mussulmans could
only have proceeded to such extremities on the supposition that a vast
body of Buddhists in their dominions believed that the Grand Lâma was
the Achârya, and that it was politic to conciliate them.

The Roman Catholic bishop Bigandet, was much astonished to find amongst
"the Burmans, Siamese, Cingalese and Tibetans" a distinct "hierarchy,
well-defined, with constitutions and laws," with "postulants,"
"catechumens," "heads of houses and communities," with a "Provincial"
whose jurisdiction extends over the Communities of his district, and
with a "Supérieur Général." In fact, he found in Buddhism a hierarchical
system very like that of the Roman Catholics, with even a Pontifical
Court and a College of Cardinals. He makes a special note of

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the fact that these hierarchies are so solidly organised that they have
everywhere lasted through centuries of change. <span
id="fr_128"></span>[\*](#fn_127)

Let us now consider the ritual of the Buddhist Churches to see if there
is any trace of S’iva worship there.

This is part of the litany in China:—

"And thou ever-present Kwan-shi-Yin Bodhisatwa who hast perfected
wondrous merit, and art [possessed](errata.htm#17) of great mercy, who
in virtue of thine infinite power and wisdom art manifested throughout
the universe for the defence and [protection](errata.htm#18) of all
creatures, and who leadest all to the attainment of boundless wisdom."

Professor Beal gives us this as part of a Chinese ritual. He has
explained to us before that [Kwan-shi](errata.htm#19) yin is
Avalokitishwara, that is, "S’iva looking down."

Let us now turn to Nepal.

"I salute that 'Sangha,' who is Avalokitishwara." This is part of the
solemn consecration of the novice. <span id="fr_129"></span>[†](#fn_128)

Let us now turn to Tibet.

"We implore thee, Oh, Revered Victorious Bhâgavatî (Durgâ) and Merciful
one, to purify us and all other beings of the universe thoroughly from
the two evil thoughts, and make us quickly obtain the perfection of
Buddhahood. If we cannot obtain this perfection within a few life
cycles, then grant us the highest heavenly and earthly happiness and all
knowledge, and preserve us from evil spirits, plague, disease, untimely
death, etc. <span id="fr_130"></span>[‡](#fn_129)

Here is portion of a hymn addressed to Durgâ as the "White Târâ (Star)."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">All hail Târâ, hail to thee!  
Deliveress sublime,  
Avalokita's messenger  
Rich in power and thought.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Hail to thee whose hand is decked  
With the lotus gold and blue,  
Eager soother of our woe  
Ever tireless worker thou.”</span>

</div>

Surgeon-Major Waddell is here reminded of the Litanies to the Virgin
Mary, who is "Stella Maris," like Târâ, also "Rosa mystica," the rose
doing duty for the lotus in the west.

The word "Durgâ" also means "Tower," and the Virgin Mary is the "Tower
of Ivory." Why Ivory? A curious Indian detail.

Other prayers are not so innocent.

"O Ghosts of heroes! Witches! Demoniacal Defenders of the Faith! The
holy guardians of the Commandments! and all those that we invited to
this place, I beg you all now to depart!

"O most powerful King of the Angry Deities, Strong Îśwara, and the host
of Country Guardian Gods and the others that we invited to this place
with all their retinues. I beg you all now to depart." <span
id="fr_131"></span>[\*](#fn_130)

It is here confessed that the Yakshas and female demons were "invited to
the place;" does that mean summoned by black magic?

Now, if we view these separate Buddhist organisations as a whole what do
we find?

\(1\) That the recognised head of the Buddhist hierarchies chased from
India, has taken refuge in Tibet, and that this Pontiff now is believed
to be S’iva in person.

\(2\) Everywhere S’iva, and the worship of the Lingam, has displaced the
harmless rites of early Buddhism.

\(3\) Everywhere the Left-handed Tântrikas, the cultus of S’iva as
Bhairava, and Durgâ as the terrible corpse-eating Kâlî, is adopted by
each Buddhist hierarchy in cases of sickness and worldly trouble.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

\(4\) Hodgson, giving the ritual of initiation, not of Nepal alone, but
of Nalanda, the Buddhist Rome, shows that the postulant is given a
little model Lingam with his rosaries and begging bowl and other monkish
necessaries, and is thus solemnly conjured:—

"First of all devote yourself to the Worship of the Chaitya," <span
id="fr_132"></span>[\*](#fn_131) the miniature Lingam.

\(5\) The worship of S’iva has invaded every ritual. "I salute that
'Sangha,' who is Avalokitishwara, etc."

\(6\) The popular chapel, if we may so call it, of the Buddhist
Cathedral, is a chapel for cultus of S’iva.

\(7\) All the Lâmas take part in the great Festival of the New Year in
honour of "She Devil Devî." And I will show by and by that the Cingalese
honoured Pattinee and her son with a similar festival, the Perahar. Each
lasted seven days, and was in fact the Durgâ Pûjah.

\(8\) The Bible of S’iva Buddhism is the Yoga S’âstra, the Bible of the
deistic followers of S’iva.

\(9\) The [philosophy](errata.htm#20) of S’iva Buddhism goes completely
on the lines of the controversy between the two forms of the Sankhya
philosophy—that which proclaims and that which denies a God.

Now this is no case of mere barnacles outside a ship. The barnacles have
boarded the vessel and a "barnacle" commands.

Many Orientalists have almost confessed this, but they will not consider
each Buddhist organisation as a portion of a harmonious and carefully
organised whole. Professor Rhys Davids believes the Adi Buddha came into
existence in the tenth century, A.D.; and Hindus only half converted,
"whose minds were still steeped in Brahmin mythology and philosophy,"
craved after

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

their old gods and restored the ancient rites. <span
id="fr_133"></span>[\*](#fn_132) Surgeon-Major Waddell believes that
"Tantrism" came into Buddhism in the seventh century A.D., and that the
Buddhists of India brought in the worship of Durgâ in order to secure
the support of the semi-origines, <span id="fr_134"></span>[†](#fn_133)
but, if so, why did they wait twelve hundred years for this desired
assistance. In point of fact, the Buddhists had that support all along,
for Buddhism was practically the religion of the yellow races and
Pariahs, who were forbidden by the white-faced Aryas to cultivate the
spiritual life, or even to look into the holy books under penalty of
death.

And there is a crucial reason why S’iva-Buddhism cannot be attributed to
piecemeal and independent influences acting from time to time from the
outside. The change must have been from the centre outwards, for a
hierarchy in each Buddhist kingdom had to be moved, and a hierarchy is
established to suffocate novel ideas, not to propagate them. Bishop
Bigandet, as we have seen, informs us that the Buddhist hierarchies mock
time and its changes They calmly watch the rise and fall of creeds and
monarchies, and governments from beyond the seas. In their presence even
the Vatican is a mushroom.

Now it seems to me that unusually strong leverage must have been put in
motion to simultaneously push all the hierarchies then in existence to
radical change. And since the days of Asoka no other monarch had
appeared in history who seemed as well qualified as Kaniska for the
gigantic task. With threats and wiles, Nalanda and the Buddhist pope
would have to be converted. The hierarchies must have worked from the
centre outwards.

Of course, the great change was almost unthinkable. It was a Makara
swallowing an elephant like the

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Capricorn of the
Indian Zodiac. I was at first as sceptical as the rest of the world;
although, knowing nothing of the theories of Mr. Beal, I myself had
already accepted about half of it, and put it forward in my "Popular
Life of Buddha" in the year 1883. I believed that the worshippers of
S’iva had changed the philosophy of early Buddhism, but I never guessed
that they had forced on the rising creed a new God, new rites, new
architecture, new biography.

I will quote a passage:—

"We see from the writings of Hiouen Thsiang that from its political side
the movement was aimed against the authority of the Âchârya of Magadha,
the Rome of the Buddhists. Kaniśka, a powerful Kashmîri, had conquered
vast territories that included Hindû Kush, Kabul, Yarkand, Khokan,
Kashmir, and Ladâk,—the plains of the Upper Ganges as far as Agra,—the
Punjâb, Râjputâna, Guzerat, Scinde. Such a large Buddhist empire would
require a strengthened discipline amongst the great army of monks.
Magadha was not included in this empire, and the two leading monks of
Kaniśka, Pârśvika, and Vasubandhu may have wished to
[establish](errata.htm#21) an ecclesiastical authority independent of
the 'High Priest of all the World,' as the Âchârya of Magadha is called
in the Mahâwanso. Perhaps the authority of the latter was ill-defined,
and perhaps it had become weakened, now that Magadha was no longer the
head quarters of a large empire. The leader of the religious movement
was a monk of the convent of Ayodhyâ—a visionary, one Asangha, who was
transported one night to the heaven Tuśita, and received the Yoga
S’âstra, the principal scripture from Maitreya himself. He indited many
of the chief S’âstras of the innovating Buddhism. He presided at the
Convocation summoned by King Kaniska to introduce it. The King wanted to
hold the Convocation at Magadha.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

"He wished to repair to Râjagriha," says Hiouen Thsiang, the Chinese
pilgrim, "to the stone palace where Kaśyapa had formed the collection of
sacred books. But the Honourable Pârśvika (his senior monk) said to
him:—'Take care, in that city are many heretics. Many conflicting
opinions will be expressed, and we shall not have time to answer and
refute them. Why compose S’âstras? The whole convocation is attached to
this kingdom. Your realms are defended on all sides by high mountains
under the guardianship of Yakshas.' <span
id="fr_135"></span>[\*](#fn_134)

"It is plain from this that the new creed was established in the teeth
of the High Priest of Magadha in his head-quarters at Nalanda, but
Magadha afterwards took it up." <span id="fr_136"></span>[†](#fn_135)

But the garrulous Chinese pilgrim lets in a great deal more light. He
tells us what the early Buddhists said of the change:—

"They said that the doctrine of the Great Vehicle did not come from
Buddha at all." It "differed in nothing from the teachings of the
Kâpâlikas." It was the "Carriage that drives to Nothingness"
(Śunyapushpa).

It is difficult to condense the controversy more lucidly than this. The
word Śunyapushpa describes the great Bible of the new creed, the Rakshâ
Bhâgavatî, a philosophy called justly by Brian Hodgson blank
"Pyrrhonism." It was urged that man was nothing, the outside world was
nothing, he came from nothingness, and to nothingness would return.
Rajendra Lala Mitra, the great native Orientalist, said that this
school, the Śunya Vâdis, was a well-known school of Hindu
philosophers—plainly S’iva worshippers. The Kâpâlika is the naked S’iva
mendicant, who,

<span id="img_pl09"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![PLATE 9.&lt;br&gt;
THE HEAD WITHOUT A JAW.](tn/pl09.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl09.jpg)  
PLATE 9.  
THE HEAD WITHOUT A JAW.  
</span>

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

smeared with cow dung and ashes, haunts tombs and eats offal.

The pilgrim announces that the leader of the great change was a Buddhist
monk of the monastery of Ayodhyâ, a visionary named Asangha, who was
miraculously transported one night to the Heaven Tuśita to the presence
of Maitreya, the coming Buddha. From his sacred hand he received the
Bible of the new creed, the Yoga S’âstra. <span
id="fr_137"></span>[\*](#fn_136) Now this volume, of course, had been
the Bible of the followers of S’iva for hundreds of years, a fact that
Asangha did not seem to know. Its alternative title is "Sesvara Sankyha"
(The Treatise of S’iva, the Serpent Sesh), and one of the two chief
schools of the innovating Buddhism that of the Aiśwarikas, or followers
of Ishwara (S’iva) plainly modelled all their ideas on this volume. Of
them more hereafter.

In a chapter about Avalokitishwara, there is one other point of great
importance. A stray passage in Crawfurd's "History of the Indian
Archipelago" seems to me to throw much light upon him. Mr. Crawfurd says
that S’iva worship in these regions has quite displaced the worship of
Sâkya Muni, and he mentions a very curious fact. In the temples he saw
often a monstrous head without a lower jaw. He asked the Munis what this
meant, and he was told that it represented S’îva. Now the word
"Avalokitiswara" means "S’iva looking down." At once I jumped to the
conclusion that the single head without the jaw was a simple expedient
to accentuate his all-seeing eyes. I was soon able to collect ample
evidence that this surmise was correct. I made some sketches, which I
reproduce. ([Plate 9](#img_pl09)).

No. 1 and No. 2 I drew from idols in the India Museum, South Kensington.
No. 3 comes from Tibet.

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I took it from
Major Waddell's book. No. 4 shows the goggle eyes in profile.

The central design on the same page is from the "Essay on the
Architecture of the Hindus" by Râm Râz, a native gentleman, published in
the year 1834. He calls this design a specimen of the "Ornaments at the
top of a Vimâna." His work gives numerous drawings of temples and
gateways (gopuras), and this strange head with the black goggle eyes,
and T may add, this strange arch, dominates almost every one. It is
plain that it means S’iva in his character of Avalokitiswara, S’iva who
looks down on all things; and the absence of the lower jaw is a homely
way of accentuating the importance of this special divine function. It
is to be observed that this head of Down-looking S’iva is not always
without a lower jaw. Major Moor's Hindu Pantheon has many specimens of
this divinity, some with lower jaws, some without. It came to Greece as
the head of Pan. It was also the Gorgon, as S’iva and Durgâ are one.

Another thing it certainly does, it gives us a touchstone which enables
us to detach the symbolism of S’iva-Buddhism from the symbolism of the
earlier cultus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_118"></span>[119:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_119) Schlagintweit,
"Buddhism in Tibet," p. 63.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[119:†](ipc10.htm#fr_120) "Mahâwanso," p. 21.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[119:‡](ipc10.htm#fr_121) "Bhilsa Topes," p.
72.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[121:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_122) "Hiouen Thsiang,"
Vol. I., pp. 150, 151.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[121:†](ipc10.htm#fr_123) See [p.
144](ipc12.htm#page_144).

<span id="fn_123"></span>[121:‡](ipc10.htm#fr_124) "Hiouen Thsang, "Vol.
I., p. 144.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[122:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_125) Schlagintweit,
"Buddhism in Tibet," p. 153.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[122:†](ipc10.htm#fr_126) See pp.
[24](ipc04.htm#page_24), [25](ipc04.htm#page_25).

<span id="fn_126"></span>[122:‡](ipc10.htm#fr_127) See pp.
[27](ipc05.htm#page_27), [28](ipc05.htm#page_28),
[29](ipc05.htm#page_29).

<span id="fn_127"></span>[123:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_128) Bigandet "Legende de
Gaudama," p. 499.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[123:†](ipc10.htm#fr_129) Hodgson "Buddhism in
Nepal," p. 142.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[123:‡](ipc10.htm#fr_130) Waddell, "Buddhism of
Tibet," p. 438.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[124:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_131) Waddell, "Buddhism
in Tibet," p. 443.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[125:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_132) Major Waddell cites
the ritual at length and bears witness to its general application.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[126:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_133) "Buddhism," p. 206.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[126:†](ipc10.htm#fr_134) Waddell, "Buddhism in
Tibet," p. 27-129.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[128:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_135) Hiouen Thsiang
"Memoirs" (Vol. I., p. 174), translated by Stanislaus Julien.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[128:†](ipc10.htm#fr_136) Lillie's "Popular
Life of Buddha," pp. 175, 176.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[129:\*](ipc10.htm#fr_137) Hiouen Thsiang,
"Histoire," translated by Stanislaus Julien, p. 514 *et seq*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. The Cave Temple and its Mysteries](ipc11)
