[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Evil](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](dol00)  [Next](dol02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0027P883W/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Devils of Loudun*, by Edmund Goldsmid, \[1887\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_v1_7">p. 7</span>

<span id="img_a00700"></span> ![](img/a00700.jpg)

### Introduction

THE following extraordinary account of the "*Cause Célèbre*" of Urbain
Grandier, the *Curé* of Loudun, accused of Magic and of having caused
the Nuns of the Convent of Saint Ursula to be possessed of devils, is
written by an eye-witness, and not only an eyewitness but an actor in
the scenes he describes. It is printed at "*Poitiers, chez J. Thoreau et
la veuve Ménier, Imprimeurs du Roi et de l’Université* 1634." I believe
two copies only are known: my own, and the one in the National Library,
Paris. The writer is Monsieur des Niau, Counsellor at la Flèche,
evidently a firm believer in the absurd charges brought against
Grandier.

<span id="page_v1_8">p. 8</span>

Magic appears to have had its origin on the plains of Assyria, and the
worship of the stars was the creed of those pastoral tribes who, pouring
down from the mountains of Kurdistan into the wide level where Babylon
afterwards raised its thousand towers, founded the sacerdotal race of
the *Chasdim* or *Chaldeans*. To these men were soon alloted peculiar
privileges and ascribed peculiar attributes, until, under the name of
Magi, they acquired a vast and permanent influence. Their temples were
astronomical observatories as well as holy places; and the legendary
tower of Babel, in the Book of Genesis, is probably but the mythical
equivalent of a vast edifice consecrated to the study of the seven
planets, or perhaps, as the *Bab* (court or palace) of *Bel*, to the
brilliant star of good fortune alone. Availing themselves of the general
adoration of the stars, they appear to have invented a system of
astrology—the apotelesmatic science—by which they professed to decide
upon the nature of coming events and the complexion of individual
fortunes, with especial reference to the planetary aspects.

In Persia magic assumed a yet more definite development. The Chaldeans
had attributed the origin of all things to a great central everlasting
fire. The foundation of the Persian system, usually ascribed to Zerdusht
or Zoroaster, was the existence of two antagonistic principles—Ormuzd,

<span id="page_v1_9">p. 9</span>

the principle of good, and Ahriman, the principle of evil. In Persia
everything associated with science or religion was included under the
denomination "magic." The Persian priests were named the Magnise or
Magi, but they did not arrogate to themselves the entire credit of
intercourse with the gods. Zoroaster, who was King of Bactria, made some
reservations for the sake of exalting the regal power, and taught that
the kings were illuminated by a celestial fire which emanated from
Ormuzd. Hence the sacred fire always preceded the monarch as a symbol of
his illustrious rank; and Plato says the Persian kings studied magic,
which is a worship of their gods.

It was, however, in Egypt, that magic received its development as an
art. The most famous temples in Egypt were those of Isis, at Memphis and
Busiris; of Serapis, at Canopus, Alexandria, and Thebes; of Osiris, of
Apis, and Phtha. Isis, the wife of Osiris, derives her name from the
Coptic word *isi*, or plenty, and would seem to typify the earth; but
she is usually represented as the goddess of the moon (Gr.
*kerasphôros*, the horn-bearing). Isis was also employed as a
personification of wisdom, and to a certain extent she may be regarded
as a symbol of the eternal will, her shrines bearing the enigmatic
inscription—"I am the all that was, that is, that will be; no mortal can
raise my veil." Horus was the son of

<span id="page_v1_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Isis, and was
instructed by his mother in the art of healing. Horus, synonymous with
light, is the king or spirit of the sun. Astrological science and magic
were earnestly and eagerly studied by the Egyptian priests. It was their
belief that the different stars exercised a powerful influence on the
human body. Their funeral ceremonies may be quoted as an illustration,
for they agree in sharing among the divinities the entire body of the
dead. To Ra, or the Sun, they assigned the head; to Anubis, the nose and
lips; to Hathor, the eyes; to Selk, the teeth; and so on. To ascertain
the nativity the astrologer had only to combine the theory of the
influences thus exercised by these star-related gods with the aspect of
the heavens at the moment of an individual's birth. It was an element of
the Egyptian as well as of the Persian astrological doctrine that a
particular star [controlled](errata.htm#0) the natal hour of
everyone. <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0)

Through the instrumentality of Orpheus, Musæus, Pythagoras, and others,
who had travelled in

<span id="page_v1_11">p. 11</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Egypt, and been
initiated by the priests into their mysteries, magic found its way into
Greece, and there assumed various novel developments. The Greek sorcery
was chiefly manifested in the peculiar rites of the Orpheotelesta, the
invocation of the dead, the cave of Trophônios, the oracles of the gods,
and the worship of Hekatê. The latter mysterious deity, the
moon-goddess, was the patron divinity of the sorcerers. From her, as
from one of the powers of the nether world, proceeded phantoms that
taught witchcraft, hovered among the tombs, and haunted crossways and
places accursed by the blood of the murdered or the suicide. "The Mormô,
the Cereops, the Empusa, were among the goblin crew that did her
bidding."

Rome borrowed her magic, no less than her art and literature, from
poetic Hellas. The occult science does not appear to have been known to
the Romans until about zoo years before the Christian era. But they had
previously cultivated a modification of the Etruscan sorcery, comprising
the divination of the future, the worship of the dead, the evocation of
their *lemures* or phantoms, and the mystic ceremonies of the
Mana-Genita, a nocturnal goddess of awful character. Numa was the great
teacher of the ancient Roman magic, which probably partook both of a
religious and medical character.

<span id="page_v1_12">p. 12</span>

The Christian church, at the outset of its history, forbade the practice
of pagan magic, but taught what may be described as a magic of its own.
Both Origen and Tertullian held that mania and epilepsy were produced by
the action of demons or evil spirits confined within the bodies of the
sufferers, and that these were to he exorcised by certain forms of
words. The church formally recognized the efficacy of exorcism in 367,
when the Council of Laodicea ordained that only those should practise it
who were duly authorized by the bishops. Connected with magic and
magical rites were the supposed curative properties of the relics of
saints, and the divine origin popularly ascribed to visions and ecstatic
trances.

In the middle ages magic asserted its supremacy over the whole of
Christian Europe; but it had entirely lost the religious character
communicated to it by the Chaldeans. It had degenerated into the "black
art." It dealt only with the night-side of nature, with the Evil One and
his imps, with the loathsome practises of witchcraft and the
enchantments of the necromancer. The scholar rose superior to this low
kind of theurgy, but he, too, no longer sought communion with the
heavenly powers; he devoted all his energies to the discovery of the
philosopher's stone and the elixir of eternal youth, to the sources of
illimitable wealth and [endless](errata.htm#1) life. \[*Encyc. Nat.* ix.
p. 52\].

<span id="page_v1_13">p. 13</span>

Born at Rouvère, near Sablé, at the very end of the sixteenth century,
Urbain Grandier was curate and Canon of Loudun. On obtaining this
living, he became so popular a preacher that the envy of the monks was
excited against him. Ile was first accused of incontinency; but, being
acquitted, his enemies instigated some nuns to play the part of persons
possessed, and in their convulsions to charge Grandier with being the
cause of their visitation. This horrible, though absurd, charge was
countenanced by Cardinal Richelieu, who had been persuaded that Grandier
had satirized him. It is this celebrated case which our credulous author
here endeavours to prove.

The reader will, no doubt, he interested in the wonderful effects said
to have been produced by exorcism. This word is a term applied to the
act of driving an evil spirit out of one possessed, by a command in the
name of some divine power. The ability to effect this by such means has
been accepted as a belief by pagans, Jews, and Christians, and
ceremonials with this object are still in use among the Roman Catholics
and the closer followers of the teachings of Luther, who continued to
keep his opinions in this respect after the Reformation. One of the
minor orders of the Roman Catholic clergy exercise the function, and it
is only used in cases of supposed demoniacal possession, in the
administration of baptism, and

<span id="page_v1_14">p. 14</span>

in the blessing of the holy oil or *chrism*, and of holy water. \[*Nat.
Encyc.* v., p. 389\].

"Is not my word like as a fire? saith the Lord; and like a hammer that
breaketh the rock in pieces?" (Jer. xxiii. 29).

"Healing by words, that is by the direct expression of the mental
power," says Van Helmont, "was common in the early ages, particularly in
the church, and not only used against the devil and magic arts, but also
against all diseases. As it commenced in Christ, so will it continue for
ever." (Operatio sanandi a primordio fuit in ecclesia per verbs, ritus,
exorcismos, aquam, panem, salem, herbas, idque nedum contra diabolos et
effectus magicos, sed et morbos omnes. *Opera omnia, de virtute magna
verborum et rerum*, p. 753). Not only did the early Christians heal by
words, but the old magicians performed their wonders by magic formulas.
"Many cures," says the Zendavesta, "are performed by herbs and trees,
others by water, and again others by words; for it is by means of the
divine word that the sick are the most surely healed." The Egyptians
also believed in the magic power of words. Plotin cured Porphyrius, who
lay dangerously ill in Sicily, by wonder-working words; and the latter
healed the sick by words, and cast out the devil by exorcism. The Greeks
were also well acquainted with the power of words, and give

<span id="page_v1_15">p. 15</span>

frequent testimony of this knowledge in their poems; in the oracles,
exhortation and prayer were universal. Orpheus calmed the storm by his
song; and Ulysses stopped the bleeding of wounds by the use of certain
words. Among the Greeks, healing by words was so common that in Athens
it was strictly forbidden. A woman was even stoned for using them, as
they said that the gods had given healing virtues to stones, plants, and
animals, but not to words (Leonard. Varius de fascino, Paris, 1587, lib.
ii. p. 147). Cato is said to have cured sprains by certain words.
According to Pliny, he did not alone use the barbaric words "motas,
daries, dardaries, astaries," but also a green branch, four or five feet
long, which he split in two, and caused to be held over the injured limb
by two men. Marcus Varro, it is said, cured tumours by words. Servilius
Novianus cured affections of the eyes by causing an inscription to be
worn suspended round the neck, consisting of the letters *A* and *Z;*
but the greatest celebrity was gained by Serenus Sammonicus by his
wonder-working hieroglyphics. They were supposed to be a certain cure
for fever, and were in the subjoined form:—

A B R A C A D A B R A

B R A C A D A B R

R A C A D A B

A C A D A

C A D

A

<span id="page_v1_16">p. 16</span>

Talismans were inscribed with various signs; and many customs still in
use in the East originate from them. Angerius Fererius, in his "Vera
medendi methodus, lib. ii. c. ii. de homerica medicatione," speaks very
plainly on this subject: "Songs and characters have not alone this
power: it exists also in a believing mind, which is produced in the
unlearned by the help of visible signs, and in the learned by an
acknowledged and peculiar influence." (Non sunt carmina, non
characteres, qui talia possunt, sed vis animi confidentis, et cum
patiente concordis, ut doctissime a poeta dictum sit:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">Nos habitat, non Tartara, sed nec sidera cœli;  
Spiritus in nobis qui viget, illa facit.</span>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Doctis et rerum
intelligentiam habentibus, nihil opus est externis, sed cognita vi
animi, per eam miracula edere possunt. Indoctus ergo animus, hoc est,
suæ potestatis et naturæ inscius, per externa illa confirmatus, morbos
curare poterit. Doctus vero et sibi constans, solo verbo sanabit; aut ut
simul intactum animum afficiat, externa quoque assumet.)

The living Word, which illuminated mankind through Christ, showed its
divine power over disease; and the true followers of Christ can perform
wonders by the power of his word. "Etenim sanatio in Christo Domino
incœpit," says Helmont, "per apostolos continuavit et modo

<span id="page_v1_17">p. 17</span>

est, atque perennis permanet."—Our Lord said to the sick man, Arise and
walk; and he arose and went his way: open thine eyes; and he saw: take
up thy bed and walk; and he stood up; Lazarus, come forth! and he that
was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with grave-clothes, and his
face was bound about with a napkin, &c. But what is this word, which is
sharper than a two-edged sword? It is the Divine spirit, which is ever
present, ever active; it is the Divine breath which inspires man. In all
ages, and in every nation, there have been men who possessed miraculous
powers; but they were inspired by religion—turned towards God in prayer
and unity. The Almighty sees the heart of the supplicant, and not alone
their words; he sees the belief and intention, and not the rank or
education.

Even the pious heathens prayed to God; and their peculiar worship
maintained the connection, and brought about a still closer union,
between individuals and God, and enabled them, in some measure, to
pierce the veil of ignorance and darkness. And the pious heathen
endeavoured with all his energies to raise himself to a more intimate
relation with God, and, therefore, a peculiar force lay in the means
employed; and what could be more powerful than prayer? and God, in his
comprehensive love and affection, would not leave, these supplicants
unanswered.

<span id="page_v1_18">p. 18</span>

It would be superfluous to enumerate many instances of the efficacy of
prayer, as exemplified in pious and believing men, which we might meet
with in all ages, and among all nations. In later times many are well
known. I shall, however, mention one, which appears to me the clearest
and least doubtful. Kiersen relates as follows: "I knew a seer who
gained a power of foretelling the future by prayer during the night on a
mountain, where he was accustomed to lie on his face; and he used this
power for the assistance of the sick in the most unpretending manner.
His visions are partly prosaic, partly poetical, and have reference not
only to sickness, but also to other important, and even political,
events, so that he has much resemblance to the prophets of the Old
Testament."

For those to whom the universe is a piece of clockwork, or a perpetual
motion, which continues moving for ever of its own accord—to whom the
everlasting power and wisdom and love in eternity and nature is as
nothing, prayer and supplication must seem objectless and insipid; but
they will never be able to perform the works of the soul. To these, the
magical effects are just as inexplicable (and, therefore, untrue) as the
magical phenomena are unknown. But, with all their knowledge and wisdom
of the world, nature will ever remain to them a mystery.

<span id="page_v1_19">p. 19</span>

This is not the place to enter more fully into this subject; but it may
not be superfluous to remember that in every word there is a magical
influence, and that each word is in itself the breath of the internal
and moving spirit. A word of love, of comfort, of promise, is able to
strengthen the timid, the weak, or the physically ill; but words of
hatred, censure, enmity. or menace, lower our confidence and
self-reliance. How easily the worldling, who rejoices under good
fortune, is cast down under adversity, and despair only enters where
religion is not—where the mind has no inward and divine comforter. But
there is, probably, no one who is proof against curse or blessing.
\[Ennemoser, *Hist. of Magic*, I., p. 120.\]

<span id="img_a01900"></span> ![](img/a01900.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[v1\_10:\*](dol01.htm#fr_0) To those interested
in the study of occult science, the publications and reprints issued by
Mr. R. Fryar, of Bath, must prove most interesting. As regards Egyptian
magic, especially the artistic reproduction of the celebrated Isiac
Tablet, with the learned essay thereon, by Mr. W. Wynn Westcott, is
invaluable. Happy is the collector who has secured a copy, however, as
the edition, like all Mr. Fryar's, is very limited, only zoo copies
being printed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](dol02)
