[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130048)  [Next](2130050.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XCVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p2"></span>*To Theodore, Curator* <span
id="fr_58"></span>[59](#fn_58.md) *of Ravenna.*

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p4"></span>Gregory to Theodore, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p5"></span>Although from the report of our
*responsalis* we have long heard many things of you to rejoice our
heart, yet now our son the abbot Probus, who has returned to us, has
reported still further such things of the charity of your Glory as it is
becoming should be told of a really good and most Christian son.  And,
since he has told us of such kind feeling on your part, and such
earnestness in arranging the peace as has not appeared even in our own
citizens who have previously been in your parts, we beg the mercy of
heavenly protection to recompense you for this in body and in soul both
here and in the world to come, seeing that you have not ceased to act
advantageously for the weal of many.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p6"></span>We inform you therefore that
Ariulf <span id="fr_59"></span>[60](#fn_59.md) has sworn to the observance
of the peace, not as his King swore <span id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md)
, but under the condition that no excess should in any way be committed
against himself, and that no one should march <span id="page_23">p.
23</span> <span id="ii.v.xliii-Page_23"></span>against the army of
Aroges <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) .  This being altogether
unfair and crafty, we take it as if he had not sworn,—since to some
extent he will easily find for himself an occasion of exceeding, and
will deceive us the more if we are not on our guard against him.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p10"></span>But Warnilfrid, according to whose
advice this same Ariulf acts in all respects, has scorned to swear at
all.  And so it has come to pass that from the peace which we so much
desired, we in these parts can have hardly any remedy, since we must
still, and for the future, be on our guard against the same enemies that
we have been on our guard against so far.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p11"></span>Furthermore, be it known to your Glory
that the King’s men who have been sent hither press us to subscribe to
the compact.  But remembering the insults which, to the injury through
us of the blessed Peter, Agilulph is said to have addressed to the most
illustrious Basilius, though Agilulph himself has entirely denied this,
we have still thought it prudent to abstain from subscription, lest we,
who are petitioners and mediators between him and our most excellent son
the lord Exarch, should find ourselves deceived in any respect, in case
of anything being perchance secretly withdrawn (*i.e. from the
compact*), and he should find an occasion of not assenting to our
petition.  And so we beg, as we have requested also of our aforesaid
most excellent son, that your Glory, with the charity whereby you are
united to us, would take measures to the end that, before these men
return from Arogis, the king may send them letters posthaste, to be,
however, handed on to us, ordering them not to call on us to subscribe. 
But, if it serves the purpose, we will cause our glorious brother, or
one of the bishops, or at any rate an archdeacon, to subscribe.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p12"></span>With regard to Augustus we thank you,
and are giving attention to his settling his cause with his adversary in
accordance with equity; having been unwilling that the trouble of
putting in an appearance with you should be imposed upon him, yet so as
not to deny justice to his adversary.

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p13"></span>With regard to other matters since it
has not been so far in our power to thank you adequately, we will for
the future send to you our *responsalis*, through whom, by the mercy of
God, we may be the more bound together in the charity wherein we are
knit to each other.  Moreover, the sorrow of your Glory affects us
exceedingly; but since a wise man knows all that can be said in the way
of comfort, we omit comforting you with words; but we attend you with
our prayers, beseeching Almighty God to guard the life and health of
yourself and all yours under the protection of His loving-kindness, and
to console your heart while in a state of affliction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_58"></span>[22:59](2130049.htm#fr_58.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p3"></span> “Erat forte magistratus municipalis,
qui annonæ civitatis curam gerit.”  *Note to Benedictine Edition.*

<span id="fn_59"></span>[22:60](2130049.htm#fr_59.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p7"></span> The Lombard duke of Spoletum, who had
besieged Rome, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> 592, previously to the invasion
of King Agilulph in person.  Cf. II. 3, 29, 30, 46, and *Prolegom.*, p.
xix.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[22:61](2130049.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p8"></span> For notice of the peace concluded with
the Lombard King Agilulph, cf. IX. 4, 42, 43; and *Prolegom*., p. xx.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[23:62](2130049.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p9"></span> Arogis (or *Arigis*) was the Lombard
duke of Beneventum.  Cf. II. 46.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle CV](2130050.md)
