[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130078)  [Next](2130080.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi.xii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLII.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p2"></span>To Eusebius, Archbishop of Thessalonica.

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p3"></span>Gregory to Eusebius, &c.

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p4"></span>If, most dear brother, we consider
attentively how great is the excellence of peace, we shall recognize
with what earnestness it should be cultivated by us.  For indeed our
Lord and Redeemer vouchsafed to leave and give it as a great boon to His
disciples, that He might thereby make those who were united to Him in
firmness of faith His associates in loving participation with Himself. 
For it is written, *Blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall be
called the children of God* ([Matth. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)<span id="ii.vi.xii-p4.1"></span>.md). 
Whosoever, then, desires to be the father’s heir, let him, by keeping
peace, not refuse to be his child.  For he who gives place to discord
surely makes himself to be without lot in so great a gift.  Seeing then
that by the mercy of God the purity of thy faith has been declared to
us, as was meet, with catholic rectitude, we are taken up with great
surprise that thou shouldest suffer those whom thou knowest to believe
well and to think aright to be needlessly scandalised by the fault of
certain persons, so that the reputation of thy Fraternity is clouded by
the guilt of others.  For how can one avoid suspicion of error who
extends sufferance to them that are in error?  Or what estimate of
himself can he expect, if he provides not for purging by open
satisfaction what fervour of faith requires to be purged?

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p5"></span>For indeed it is said that Luke thy
presbyter and Peter refuse to receive the Chalcedonian synod, and that
on this account the hearts of thy orthodox children are perturbed <span
id="page_50">p. 50</span> <span id="ii.vi.xii-Page_50"></span>with no
slight offence <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121.md) .  And, since
their zeal is not only to be praised but also to be altogether
cherished, we exhort that the care of thy Fraternity hesitate not to
investigate the matter with all activity and solicitude.  And, if those
persons should be found innocent of that pravity, remove offence from
the minds of thy children by giving them satisfaction, and among all
heresies anathematise especially Severus and Nestorius, so that
purification may engender charity among those with whom a sinister
suspicion concerning those heretics has, out of love of the faith,
produced dissension; and that one feeling of concord may salubriously
knit together those whom a pure and single confession of catholic truth
unites.  Nor let the doubters be thought unworthy of satisfaction, since
we are instructed by the Divine voice, *Despise not one of these who are
the least* ([Matth. xxviii. 18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018.md)<span
id="ii.vi.xii-p6.1"></span>).  Whoso, then, desires not that he who
instructs us should be despised, let him not reject the words of the
instructor; since he also of whom our Redeemer testified that he was a
vessel of election unto Himself admonishes us to keep the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of peace ([Ephes.
iv](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.vi.xii-p6.2"></span>.).  Hence whosoever refuses not to be held
by this bond of salvation, let him study the things that make for peace,
and afford no place for the foe; so that, having been enabled to advance
by the fierce dissension of brethren, he may be more stoutly trampled
on, when unity is established.

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p7"></span>If however, as we do not expect, they
should be found to be wounded by the dart of this error, the cure of
ecclesiastical exhortation must be applied to them, so that they may
either remain among the Lord’s sheep if healed, or be cut off from the
unity of the ecclesiastical body; to the end that from a slight loss
there may be a great gain, and that the removal of a part may make the
whole body free.  For it is the care also of a provident shepherd not to
delay casting out from consort with his sound sheep a sickly one that
admits not of cure, lest it should contaminate others with the taint of
its sickness, knowing that he cannot preserve the soundness of the rest
but by the ejection of this one.  Accordingly I once more warn you in
brotherly charity to investigate this matter with the utmost vigilance,
and to observe what we have written with the utmost care, lest by
consort with others you should make the right faith which you hold
doubtful.  For he who does not correct things that should be cut off
commits them.  Wherefore you must take thought with great solicitude and
with great provision in all ways, that the persons of those men be not
an offence to others, or common opinion injurious to you; that so a
shepherd’s gains may accrue to your Fraternity from the sheep committed
to you all the more as both sincere love and approved care shall have
made you solicitous for their custody.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_121"></span>[50:122](2130079.htm#fr_121.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xii-p6"></span> Those who refused to accept the
condemnation of “The Three Chapters” by the fifth council alleged that
it contravened the Council of Chalcedon.  It may be that the persons
referred to here, in their defence of what had been decreed in the fifth
council, had seemed to admit that it did contravene the fourth, which
they consequently were supposed to reject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXII](2130080.md)
