[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130064)  [Next](2130066) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lix-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXXV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lix-p2"></span>*To Maximus, Bishop of Salona* <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86) .

<span id="ii.v.lix-p4"></span>Gregory to Maximus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.lix-p5"></span>Having received the letters of our brother
and fellow-bishop Marinianus, and Castorius, our *chartularius*, having
also returned, we learn that your Fraternity have made most full
satisfaction with regard to the matters about which there had been
uncertainty; and we return great thanks to Almighty God that from our
inmost heart all rancour of sinister suspicion <span id="page_38">p.
38</span> <span id="ii.v.lix-Page_38"></span>has been eradicated.  On
this account I have been desirous of dismissing with the utmost speed
our common son, your deacon Stephen.  But the frequent pains of my
sicknesses have compelled me to retain him with me for a few days.  As
soon, however, as I have begun to be even slightly better, I have
provided for sending him forthwith back to you with joy.

<span id="ii.v.lix-p6"></span>Accordingly we send to you, according to
custom, the pallium for the sacred solemnities of mass; the meaning of
which we desire you in all respects to vindicate.  For the dignity of
this vestment is humility and justice.  Let, then, your Fraternity make
haste with all your heart to shew yourself humble in prosperity, and in
adversity, if ever it should ensue; upright in justice; friendly to the
good, and opposed to the froward; never discountenancing any one who
speaks for the truth; instant in works of mercy according to thy means,
and yet beyond thy means desiring to be instant; sympathizing with the
weak; rejoicing with men of good will; regarding the woes of others as
thine own; exulting for the joys of others as if for thine own; in
correcting vices severe, in cherishing virtues, soothing the minds of
hearers; in anger, retaining judgment without anger, but in calmness not
relinquishing the censorship of your severity.  This, dearest brother,
is the meaning of the pallium which you will receive, which if you act
up to, you will have inwardly what you are seen to have received
outwardly.

<span id="ii.v.lix-p7"></span>Furthermore I commend in all respects to
your Fraternity our brother and fellow-bishop Sabinianus <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87) ; and if there be any matters of dispute
between you, let them meanwhile be laid aside.  Let charity remain fixed
between you, that so, in case of contention ever arising about external
things, they may be examined without charity deserting the heart.  We
commend also our common son Honoratus:  concerning whom if it is the
case, as we have learnt through Castorius our *chartularius*; that
through him three previous archdeacons have been compelled to observe
the ecclesiastical custom by retiring at the expiration of five years,
we desire indeed that he may experience the charity of thy Holiness. 
For a judgment ought not to be solicited in a case which he himself has
judged.  If, however, it is not so, then, all swelling of heart being
repressed, and all grudge set aside, he ought to be received, and by no
means removed from the place which he now occupies.  Messianus also, the
*cleric* who had taken refuge with us, we have confidently committed to
the charge of our common son Stephen the deacon, being assured that in
the case of one whom we ourselves send to your Fraternity, you will not
show any grudge, but lend the countenance of your authority.  May
Almighty God keep you in His protection, and grant us so to act that
after the billows of this temporal state we may be able to attain with
joy to things eternal.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[37:87](2130065.htm#fr_86) <span
id="ii.v.lix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lix-p3"></span> See III. 47, note 2, and IX. 81.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[38:88](2130065.htm#fr_87) <span
id="ii.v.lix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lix-p8"></span> See IX. 80, VI. 27, note 6; VII. 17, IX.
80.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle CXXVII](2130066)
