[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130115)  [Next](2130117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p2"></span>(To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate
(Arles).)

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p4"></span>What affection should be bestowed on
brethren who come to us of their own accord is apparent from the fact
that they are usually invited to visit us for the sake of charity.  And
so, if our common brother the bishop Augustine should chance to come to
you, let your Love, as is fit, so affectionately and sweetly receive him
as both to refresh him with the boon of your consolation and teach
others also how fraternal charity should be cultivated.  And, since it
often happens that those who are placed at a distance learn first from
others of things that require amendment, if he should perchance intimate
to your Fraternity any faults in priests or others, do you, in concert
with him, enquire into them with all subtle investigation.  And do you
both shew yourselves so strict and solicitous against things that offend
God and provoke Him to wrath that, for the amendment of others, both
vengeance may smite the guilty and false report not afflict the
innocent.  God keep thee safe, most reverend brother.  Given the 10th
day of the Kalends of July, the 19th year of the empire of our most
pious lord Mauricius Tiberius Augustus, the 18th year after the same our
lord’s consulship, Indiction 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.](2130117)
