[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130174)  [Next](2130176.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c14"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>Second Part</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>Aphrahat the Persian Sage.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p3"></span>1.  *Name of Author of Demonstrations
long Unknown.*—The author of the *Demonstrations*, eight of which appear
(for the first time in an English version) in the present volume, has a
singular literary history.  By nationality a Persian, in an age when
Zoroastrianism was the religion of Persia, he wrote in Syriac as a
Christian theologian.  His writings, now known to us as the works of
Aphrahat, were remembered, cited, translated, and transcribed for at
least two centuries after his death; but his proper name seems to have
been for a time forgotten, so that in the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> of the fifth and sixth
centuries the *Demonstrations* are described as composed by “the Persian
Sage,” or “Mar Jacob the Persian Sage;” and a writer of the eighth
century, who had made a minute study of these writings and ascertained
their date, admits that he has been unable to find out “who or what he
was, his rank in the Church, his name or abode.”  Not only so, but the
name Jacob assigned (rightly or wrongly) to him has led to a <span
id="page_153">p. 153</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_153"></span>confusion of identity.  His works have
been ascribed for many hundred years—from a date not long after their
composition down to quite recent times, to an earlier Jacob, the famous
and saintly Bishop of Nisibis in the days of Constantine the Great.  It
is not until the tenth century that the true name of “the Persian Sage”
emerges to light as Aphrahat, by which he is unhesitatingly designated
by several well informed and accurate authorities of that and the three
succeeding centuries., and under which he is known to modern scholars.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p4"></span>2.  *Their Subjects, and
Arrangement.*—The *Demonstrations* are twenty-two in number, after the
number of the letters of the Syriac alphabet, each of them beginning
with the letter to which it corresponds in order.  The first ten form a
group by themselves, and are somewhat earlier in date than those which
follow:  they deal with Christian graces, hopes, and duties, as appears
from their titles:—“*Concerning Faith, Charity, Fasting, Prayer, Wars,
Monks, Penitents, the Resurrection, Humility, Pastors.*”  Of those that
compose the later group, three relate to the Jews (“*Concerning
Circumcision, the Passover, the Sabbath*”); followed by one described as
“*Hortatory*,” which seems to be a letter of rebuke addressed by
Aphrahat, on behalf of a Synod of Bishops, to the clergy and people of
Seleucia and Ctesiphon; after which the Jewish series is resumed in five
discourses, “*Concerning Divers Meals, The Call of the Gentiles, Jesus
the Messiah, Virginity, the Dispersion of Israel.*”  The three last are
of the same general character as the first ten,—“*Concerning Almsgiving,
Persecution, Death, and the Latter Times.*”  To this collection is
subjoined a twenty-third *Demonstration*, supplementary to the rest,
“*Concerning the Grape*,” under which title is signified the blessing
transmitted from the beginning through Christ, in allusion to the words
of Isaiah, “As the grape <span id="fr_319"></span>[320](#fn_319.md) is
found in the cluster and one saith, Destroy it not” ([Isa.
65.8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>).  This treatise embodies a chronological
disquisition of some importance.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p6"></span>3.  *Dates of Composition.*—Of the
dates at which they were written, these discourses supply conclusive
evidence.  At the end of section 5 of *Demonstr*. V. (*Concerning
Wars*), the author reckons the years from the era of Alexander (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>b.c.</span> 311) to the
time of his writing as 648.  He wrote therefore in <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 337—the year
of the death of Constantine the Great.  *Demonst*. XIV. is formally
dated in its last section, “in the month Shebat. in the year 655” (that
is, <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p6.3"></span>a.d.</span>
344).  More fully, in closing the alphabetic series (XXII. 25) he
informs us that the above dates apply to the two groups—the first ten
being written in 337; the twelve that follow, in 344.  Finally, the
supplementary discourse “Concerning the Grape” was written (as stated,
XXIII. 69) in July, 345.  Thus the entire work was completed within nine
years,—five years before the middle of the fourth century,—before the
composition of the earliest work of Ephraim of which the date can be
determined with certainty.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p7"></span>4.  *Extent and Limits of their
Circulation.*—These *Demonstrations*, though they fell far short of
attaining the unbounded popularity which was the lot of the countless
Hymns and Homilies of Ephraim, appear to have won for themselves a
recognized place in Syriac literature.  It is true that, in striking
contrast with the overwhelming numbers of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>mss.</span> containing portions, great or
small, of Ephraim’s works, which are to be met with in nearly every
collection of Syriac written remains, one complete and two incomplete
copies are all that have reached us of this series of twenty-three
treatises; and extracts or quotations from them very rarely occur. <span
id="fr_320"></span>[321](#fn_320.md)   Yet it is clear that com<span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_154"></span>positions which were thought worthy at
an early date of translation into at least one foreign tongue, must have
had some considerable reputation in the country of their origin; and it
may be presumed that these two or three <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p8.4"></span>mss.</span> (of the fifth and sixth
centuries), are the survivors of a fairly large number of which the
majority have perished.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p9"></span>The Armenian translation is probably
the earliest evidence now extant of the circulation (though under a
wrong ascription of authorship) of the *Demonstrations*, of which it
comprises nineteen.  Armenian scholars seem to agree in the belief that
it was made in the fifth century, before its original was more than a
hundred years in being.  An Ethiopic translation of the discourse “On
Wars” is extant, but there is no evidence that it formed part of a
version extending to all or any of the remaining twenty-two, nor is its
date even approximately determinable.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p10"></span>The manuscript evidence hardly reaches
so far back as that of the Armenian version.  The oldest extant <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> of these
discourses (Add. 17182 of the British Museum) contains the first ten,
and is dated 474.  With it is bound up (under the same number) a second,
dated 512, containing the remaining thirteen.  A third (Add. 14619) of
the sixth century likewise, exhibits the whole series.  A fourth
(Orient, 1017), more recent by eight centuries, will be mentioned
farther on.  Of the three early <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>mss.</span>, the first designates the
author as “the Persian Sage” merely, as does also the third:  the second
prefixes his name as “Mar Jacob the Persian Sage.”

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p11"></span>Among Syriac authors, the first to
show an acquaintance with these treatises, at a date prior to that of
the earliest of these <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p11.1"></span>mss</span>., is Isaac of Antioch, known as
“the Great,” whose literary activity belongs to the first half of the
fifth century.  In his works passages have been pointed out <span
id="fr_321"></span>[322](#fn_321.md) which are evidently borrowed with
slight change from the *Demonstrations*,—especially from that
*Concerning Fasting*, and (though less distinctly) from that *Concerning
Faith*.  The imitation, however, is tacit, and Isaac nowhere names the
work (or its author) whence he derived the illustrations and even the
expressions he uses in treating of these topics.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p13"></span>Before the close of the same century,
we find evidence that they were known—by repute, though apparently no
farther—to a Latin writer of Western Europe, Gennadius of Marseilles,
the continuator of St. Jerome’s work *De Viris Illustribus*, who wrote
about the year 495.  Though mistaken (as will presently be shown) about
their parentage, and incorrectly informed as to their number (which he
supposes to be twenty-six), Gennadius states their titles with such an
approach to accuracy, as to leave no room for doubt that the discourses
he describes are those of which we now treat.  He shows himself aware
that they are in Syriac, but gives no hint that he has ever seen them,
or that he is able to read them. <span id="fr_322"></span>[323](#fn_322.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p15"></span>In the seventh century, or (however)
early in the eighth, tokens appear of a revival of interest in them. 
Georgius, “Bishop of the Arabs,” <span id="fr_323"></span>[324](#fn_323.md)
a Jacobite prelate, having been applied to by one Joshua an anchorite
for information concerning the “*Epistles*” (as he styles them) of “the
Persian Sage” and their authorship, wrote (in Syriac) in the year 714 a
very full and elaborate reply, in which he cites at length passages from
several of them, including those (above referred to) in which the dates
of writing are stated with precision,—and he infers from these dates,
that the author, of whose name he professes himself to be ignorant,
wrote too early to be a disciple of Ephraim.  To <span id="page_155">p.
155</span> <span id="iii.iii.iii-Page_155"></span>this inference we may
safely assent, even though we hold that Ephraim wrote and taught earlier
in the century than Georgius endeavours to place him.  The point to be
noted is, that this learned and acute writer, though he had by careful
study made himself familiar with the *Demonstrations*, neither knows,
nor can guess at, the name of their author, nor can he record any
tradition concerning his identity.  He can only tell what he has learned
from their contents, that they were written from 337 to 345, by one who
was a monk, and a cleric; and that they were characterized by certain
peculiarities of doctrine.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p17"></span>5.  *Ascribed to Jacob of
Nisibis.*—Thus it appears that the series of discourses now known as the
*Demonstrations of Aphrahat*, were imitated, and transcribed, and
translated, into Armenian, and their titles cited by a Latin biographer,
and their contents minutely investigated by an able critic, within the
four centuries that followed the time of their composition; while
through all that long period the name of Aphrahat had passed out of
memory, and the “Persian Sage” simply, or else with the addition of an
ambiguous and misleading name, “Jacob, the Persian Sage,” was the
designation by which their author was usually known.  As we have seen,
the scribes of two <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>mss.</span>, of the fifth and sixth
centuries, and Georgius in the early eighth, confine themselves to the
former; and the scribe of the sixth, thirty-eight years later than the
earlier of the other two, uses the latter.  Misled by it, the Armenian
translator, and Gennadius in his biographical work, fell into the error
of identifying the Jacob who wrote the *Demonstrations* with a namesake,
the earlier and more conspicuous Jacob of Nisibis, of whom we have had
occasion to speak in treating of the life of Ephraim.  But of this
celebrated personage no writings are recorded, nor was he a
Persian, <span id="fr_324"></span>[325](#fn_324.md) but a native of Nisibis
(in his time a city of the Roman Empire), in 338, seven years before the
completion of the treatises in question.  As Jacob of Nisibis is thus
too early to be the author of them, so, on the other hand, Jacob of
Sarug, whom Assemani suggested in correcting the mistake of
Gennadius, <span id="fr_325"></span>[326](#fn_325.md) is too late; for he
was not born till more than a century after the date of the last
*Demonstration*.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p20"></span>6.  *Reappearance of the Name of
Aphrahat.*—It is not until some years after the mid-die of the tenth
century, that the “Persian Sage” first appears under his proper name,—of
which, though as it appears generally forgotten in the Syriac world of
letters, a tradition had survived.—The Nestorian Bar-Bahlul (circ. 963)
in his Syro-Arabic *Lexicon*, writes thus:—“Aphrahat \[mentioned\] in
the Book of Paradise, is the Persian Sage, as they record.”—So too, in
the eleventh century, Elias of Nisibis (Barsinæus, d. 1049), embodies in
his *Chronography*, a table, compiled from *Demonstr*. XXIII., of the
chronography from the Creation to the “Era of Alexander” (<span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>b.c.</span> 311), which
he describes as “The years of the House of Adam, according to the
opinion of Aphrahat, the Persian Sage.” <span
id="fr_326"></span>[327](#fn_326.md) —To the like effect, but with fuller
information, the great light of the mediæval Jacobite Church, Gregory
Barhebræus (d. 1286), in Part I. of his *Ecclesiastical Chronicle*, in
enumerating the orthodox contemporaries of Athanasius, mentions, after
Ephraim, “the Persian Sage who wrote the *Book of
Demonstrations*;” <span id="fr_327"></span>[328](#fn_327.md) and again in
<span id="page_156">p. 156</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_156"></span>Part II., supplies his name under a
slightly different form, as one who “was of note in the time of Papas
the Catholicus,” “the Persian Sage by name Pharhad, of whom there are
extant a book of admonition \[*al*., admonitions\] in Syriac, and
twenty-two Epistles according to the letters of the alphabet.” <span
id="fr_328"></span>[329](#fn_328.md)   Here we have not only the name and
description of the personage in question, but a fairly accurate account
of his works, under the titles by which the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>mss.</span> describe them, *Epistles and
Demonstrations*;—and moreover a sufficient indication of his date, in
agreement with that which the *Demonstrations* claim:  for one who began
to write in 337 must have lived in the closing years of the life of
Papas (who died in 334), and in the earlier years of the life of
Ephraim.  So yet again, a generation later, the learned Nestorian
prelate, Ebedjesu, in his *Catalogue* of Syrian ecclesiastical
authors, <span id="fr_329"></span>[330](#fn_329.md) writes, “Aphrahat, the
Persian Sage, composed two volumes with Homilies that are according to
the alphabet.”  Here once more the name and designation are given
unhesitatingly, and the division of the discourses into two groups is
correctly noted; but the concluding words appear to distinguish these
groups from the alphabetic Homilies.  Either, therefore, we must take
the preposition rendered “*with*” to mean “containing,”—or we must
conclude that Ebedjesu’s knowledge of the work was at second-hand and
incorrect.  Finally, in a very late <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>ms.</span>, <span
id="fr_330"></span>[331](#fn_330.md) dated 1364, is found the first or
chronological part of *Demonstration* XXIII., headed as follows:—“The
Demonstration concerning the Grape, of the Sage Aphrahat, who is Jacob,
Bishop of Mar Mathai.”  Here (though the prefix “Persian” is absent) we
have the author’s title of “Sage”; and the identification of the
“Aphrahat” of the later authorities with the “Jacob” of the earlier is
not merely implied but expressly affirmed.  Here, moreover, we have what
seems to account for the twofold name.  As author, he is Aphrahat; as
Bishop, he is Jacob—the latter name having been no doubt assumed on his
elevation to the Episcopate. <span id="fr_331"></span>[332](#fn_331.md)  
Such changes of name, at consecration, which in later ages of the Syrian
Church became customary, were no doubt exceptional in the earlier period
of which we are treating.  But the fact that Aphrahat was a Persian
name, bestowed on him no doubt in childhood—when he was still (as will
be shown presently) outside the Christian fold—a name which is supposed
to signify “Chief” or “Prefect,” and which may have seemed unsuited to
the humility of the sacred office—supplies a reason for the substitution
in its stead of a name associated with sacred history, both of the Old
and of the New Testament.  Here finally we have the direct statement of
what Georgius had justly inferred from the opening of *Dem*. XIV., that
the writer was himself of the clergy, and in this Epistle writes as a
cleric to clerics.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p27"></span>We have now brought together all the
known authorities who yield information concerning this collection of
treatises, and its author.  It remains that we should put into a
connected form the facts to which they testify, and point out the
inferences yielded by their notices, and by the treatises themselves.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p28"></span>7.  *His Nationality Persian, and
Probably Heathen.*—That the author was of Persian nationality, is a
point on which all the witnesses agree, except the fourteenth-century
scribe of the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>ms.</span> *Orient*. 1017, who however is
merely silent about it.  The name Aphrahat is, as has been already said,
Persian—which fact at once confirms the tradition that he belonged to
Persia, and helps to account for what seems to be the reluctance <span
id="fr_332"></span>[333](#fn_332.md) <span id="page_157">p. 157</span>
<span id="iii.iii.iii-Page_157"></span>of early writers to call him by a
name that was foreign, unfamiliar, unsuited to his subsequent station in
the Church, and superseded by one that had sacred associations.  As a
Persian, he dates his writings by the years of the reign of the Persian
King:  the twenty-two were completed (he says) in the thirty-fifth, the
twenty-third in the thirty-sixth of the reign of Sapor. <span
id="fr_333"></span>[334](#fn_333.md) —Again:  as a Persian of the early
fourth century, it is presumable that he was not originally a
Christian.  And this is apparently confirmed by the internal evidence of
his own writings; for he speaks of himself as one of those “who have
cast away idols, and call that a lie which our father bequeathed to us;”
and again, “who ought to worship Jesus, for that He has turned away our
froward minds from all superstitions of vain error, and taught us to
worship one God our Father and Maker.” <span
id="fr_334"></span>[335](#fn_334.md) —But it is clear that he must have
lived in a frontier region where Syriac was spoken freely; <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335.md) or else must have removed into a
Syriac-speaking country at an early age; for the language and style of
his writings are completely pure, showing no trace of foreign idiom, or
even of the want of ease that betrays a foreigner writing in what is not
his mother-tongue.  It is clear also that, at whatever age or under
whatever circumstances he embraced Christianity, he must have taken the
Christian Scriptures and Christian theology into his inmost heart and
understanding as every page of his writings attests.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p33"></span>8.*  Evidence that he was a Cleric,
and a Bishop.*—We have already seen that Georgius in his study of the
*Demonstrations* perceived the indications which prove the writer to be
of the Clergy.  He goes farther, and notes that the sixth (*Concerning
Monks*) is evidently written by a monk.  He might have added, what is
yet more important, that the fourteenth (which he rightly fixes on as
evidently written by a cleric) can hardly have been written by one of
lower rank than that of Bishop.  The translation of the opening sentence
of this discourse (which is an Epistle to the Bishops, Clergy and people
of the Church of Seleucia and Ctesiphon) is disputed; for “we being
gathered together have taken counsel to write this Epistle to our
brethren…the Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and the whole Church” (XIV.
1) may be read so as to make the “Bishops, Priests, etc.,” either, the
“*we*” who write,—or, the “*brethren*” who are written to. <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336.md)   Whichever construction is adopted,
the fact remains that Aphrahat here writes on behalf of a body of men
assembled in council, who through him admonished their “dear and beloved
brethren” whom they designate (farther on) as “the Bishops, Priests and
Deacons…and all the people of God who are in Seleucia and Ctesiphon.” 
It is not conceivable that any body of men but a synod of Bishops (with
their clergy and people present and assenting) would, in that age of the
Church, have taken upon itself to meet and consult and address such an
epistle of admonition and implied rebuke to that great see, the seat of
the “Catholicus of the East,” <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337.md)
the prelate who in the oriental hierarchy was inferior in dignity to the
Antiochian Patriarch alone, and in authority almost coequal with him. 
And it may be safely assumed that the writer of the Epistle was
one—probably the chief—of the Bishops in whose name it is written.  If
we accept the late, but internally probable, statement of the Scribe of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>ms.</span>
*Orient*. 1017 <span id="page_158">p. 158</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_158"></span>(above mentioned), that “the Persian
Sage” was “Bishop of the monastery of Mar Mathai,” we arrive at a
complete explanation of the circumstances under which this Epistle was
composed.  For the Bishop of Mar Mathai was Metropolitan of Nineveh, and
ranked among the Bishops of “the East” only second to the Catholicus;
and his province bordered on that which the Catholicus (as Metropolitan
of Seleucia) held in his immediate jurisdiction.  The Bishop of Mar
Mathai therefore would properly preside in a Synod of the Eastern
Bishops, met to consider the disorders and discussions existing in
Seleucia and its suffragan sees.  It thus becomes intelligible how an
Epistle of such official character has found a place in a series of
discourses of which the rest are written as from man to man merely.  The
writer addresses the Bishops, Clergy, and people of Seleucia and
Ctesiphon in the name of a Synod over which he was President, a Synod
probably of Bishops suffragan to Nineveh, and perhaps of those of some
adjacent sees.  Thus the admonition comes officially from “Mar Jacob
Bishop of Mar Mathai;” but the thoughts, and language, and literary form
are the production of Aphrahat personally, and he accordingly embodies
it as fourteenth in his alphabetic series of twenty-two treatises, in
which it is duly distinguished by its initial letter *nun*, the
fourteenth of the Semitic alphabet.  It certainly breaks the sequence of
subjects, coming after and before treatises relating to Judaism:  but
for the alphabetic sequence it is essential.—This alphabetic arrangement
was overlooked or ignored (as it seems) by the Armenian translator, who
has omitted four of the twenty-two and transposed others, placing the
fourteenth apart from the rest,—although in *Demonstr*. XXII. (which
however is not included in the Armenian version) the author recites all
their titles, arranging them in their order, and noting that it is the
order of the alphabet. <span id="fr_338"></span>[339](#fn_338.md)   In the
Syriac original the fact is beyond question that *Demonstr*. XIV. is an
integral part of the series; and we may rely with confidence on the
internal evidence it yields of the high ecclesiastical rank of the
writer <span id="fr_339"></span>[340](#fn_339.md) —evidence confirmed by,
and in its turn confirming, the statement of the fourteenth-century
scribe who makes him Bishop of the second see of the East. <span
id="fr_340"></span>[341](#fn_340.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p40"></span>Reverting to the subject of the
Persian nationality of Aphrahat, we note that this monastery of Mar
Mathai was on the eastern, that is, the Persian, side of the Tigris, not
far from what once was Nineveh and is now Mosul, on the precipitous
mountain Elpheph (now *Maklob*) where it still stands, though ruinous,
and is known by the name of *Sheikh Matta*, and is occupied by the
*Metram* (or Metropolitan) and a few monks.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p41"></span>9.  *His Writings little Concerned
with Current Controversies.*—To the remoteness of his <span
id="page_159">p. 159</span> <span id="iii.iii.iii-Page_159"></span>see,
and probably of the place of his obvious origin and abode, from the
centres of religious thought and controversy, is probably due the
notable absence from these discourses of all reference to the great
theological questions that had employed, and in his time were
engrossing, the leading minds of Christendom.  He began to write within
ten years after the Nicene Council and the Arian controversy, and the
disputations that grew out of it were still ripe, and continued to
abound long after.  The writings of Ephraim show how vehemently in
Aphrahat’s lifetime, or possibly a few years later, the theologians of
Nisibis and of Edessa deemed themselves bound to strive for the Faith
against Arians, Anomœans, Apollinarians,—and not less against the
surviving or revived heresy of home-grown production—that of
Bardesan. <span id="fr_341"></span>[342](#fn_341.md)   But in Seleucia and
Ctesiphon it is not heresy, but strife, self-seeking, and neglect of
duty, that are censured by the Synod through the letter which we know as
*Demonstr*. XIV., and the errors which the Bishop of Mar Mathai combats
for the benefit of those whom he addresses are the errors of the Jews
who refused and resisted the creed and the customs of the Church.  There
is in one place (*Demonstr*. III. 9) a passing reference to the
heresiarchs of the second and third centuries, Valentinus, Manes, and
Marcion; but it merely amounts to a brief statement in which the false
teaching of each is summed up in a sentence, each followed by the
question, Can one who holds such doctrine find acceptance before God by
his fasting?  No later heresy is even mentioned.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p43"></span>These facts not only confirm the
tradition which places him at Nineveh, but they go far to account for
the obscurity in which his name and his writings lay so long.  In an age
of excited controversy, these quiet hortatory discourses, marked by no
striking eloquence of style or subtlety of reasoning, dealing with no
burning question of the time, nor with any disputes more recent than
those of the two previous centuries, or those between Jew and Christian,
would hardly attain to more than a local circulation; and when they
penetrated to Edessa or other such centres of Syriac theological life,
would awaken but a languid interest.  That they did so penetrate is
certain; for of the existing <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>mss.</span> whence we derive their text,
one (the oldest) was written in Edessa in 474, and Isaac of Antioch, who
knew and imitated them, before that time, was a disciple of Zenobius of
Edessa.  But the paucity of such <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p43.2"></span>mss.</span>, and still more the oblivion
which so long covered the name of Aphrahat, prove, either, that the work
failed to attain popularity—or, that it provoked some prejudice which
led to its practical suppression.  It would be difficult, however, to
point out anything in it to which exception could be so seriously taken
as to be a bar to its acceptance.  None of the errors which so keen a
critic as Georgius detected in its theology—even if we admit the justice
of his censure—is such as to shock the orthodoxy of the fourth or fifth
century.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p44"></span>10.  *Possibly Suspected of a
Nestorian Tinge.*—Yet it is possible that theological prepossession may
indirectly have brought about the disfavour or at least disuse into
which the *Demonstrations* fell.  In Edessa there was an institution
known as the “School of the Persians,” to which as it seems disciples
from Persia resorted for theological instruction.  From Ibas, Bishop of
Edessa (435–457), who was infected with Nestorianism, the Nestorian
taint passed to Maris, a Persian (and through him to Persia generally),
and likewise to Maro, a teacher in the school.  After the death of Ibas,
the Persian and others who had followed him were expelled from Edessa,
by Nonnus his orthodox opponent and successor; and the school was
finally closed by the next Bishop, Cyrus, in the reign of Zeno <span
id="fr_342"></span>[343](#fn_342) (who died 491.md).  These facts may well
be supposed to have raised a prejudice against all writings coming from
a Persian source; and the works of “the <span id="page_160">p.
160</span> <span id="iii.iii.iii-Page_160"></span>Persian Sage,”
absolutely free though they are from any thought or phrase which could
be construed as favouring or tending in the direction that led to the
errors of Nestorius, may have come undeservedly under the ban issued
against the School of the Persians and all that was connected with it,
by the orthodox zeal of Cyrus.  It is probable that his writings were
read in that school, and that he himself may have studied them in early
life.  Prescribed in Edessa, the centre of Syriac theology, these
discourses would be effectually checked in their circulation in all
churches of Syriac-speaking Christendom that were anti-Nestorian. <span
id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p48"></span>11.*  Their Popularity in the Armenian
Church.*—How the book made good and held its footing in the Armenian
Church is perhaps more difficult to explain.  It is not indeed the only
instance in which an author, of whom no works are extant in their
original tongue, has survived and been widely known in a translation.  A
notable example is that of Irenæus, of whose great work on *Heresies*,
so well known in its early Latin dress, but a few fragments have reached
us, through citations, in Greek.  There is no obvious ecclesiastical
channel through which the knowledge of the writings of Aphrahat can be
supposed to have reached Armenia, unless by way of Edessa, before they
fell (as above suggested) into discredit in that city.  But it is to be
borne in mind that from and after the close of the fourth century
“greater (*i.e.* Eastern) Armenia was ruled as a dependency of Persia,
by Persian Kings.” <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344.md)   Of these
the earlier at least were Christians, and their policy led them to
promote the Syriac language and literature, as against the Greek, among
their people; until, under the Catholicus Isaac (d. 441), the Armenian
tongue was reduced to writing (in the characters then invested by
Mesrob), and a beginning made of an Armenian sacred literature by the
translation of the Scriptures into Armenian from the Syriac.  Versions
of the works of Syriac divines would naturally follow before long.  That
among these *Ephraim’s Commentaries* were conspicuous we have already
mentioned (p. 147):  that those of a Syriac Divine of Persian
nationality should be passed over is unlikely—a Divine too of such
repute as to have won the honourable title of “the Persian Sage,” and
who as occupant of a great Persian see was also known as Jacob of Mar
Mathai, metropolitan of Nineveh.  How readily his assumed name would
lead to his being confused with his far more widely known namesake of
Nisibis, we have already pointed out; and it is obvious that the name,
once attributed and accepted, would lend fictitious vogue to the book.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p50"></span>12.*  First Printed in an Armenian
Version.*—The mistake of the Armenian translator became, in later times,
the means of first making the work—though not the name—of Aphrahat known
to European scholars.  The Armenian version, containing nineteen of the
*Demonstrations* (XX. being omitted), was printed at Rome in 1756,
edited, with a <span id="page_161">p. 161</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_161"></span>Latin version, by Antonelli.  Its text
is derived from a transcript made in 1719, after an ancient copy in the
Armenian Monastery at Venice, by order of the Abbot Peter Mechitar, and
presented by him to Pope Clement XI. for the Vatican Library.  In this
edition, entitled *S. Patris Jacobi Episcopi Nisibeni Sermones*, the
discourses are not merely ascribed to Jacob of Nisibis, but the theory
is advanced by the editor, that the Armenian text is the original.  It
is hardly necessary to point out that the alphabetic arrangement of the
twenty-two discourses—which is not and could not be reproduced in
Armenian, <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345.md) a language with an
alphabet of thirty-eight letters—is alone sufficient to expose the
impossibility of this idea.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p52"></span>13.  *Recovery of the Post-Syriac
Original.*—The Syriac text, so long forgotten, was first discovered
among the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>mss.</span> of the great Nitrian
collection in the British Museum, by Dr. Cureton, whose name is so
honourably known as a great Syriac scholar, and editor of Syriac
documents.  He did not live, however, to accomplish his desire of
publishing it, but bequeathed that task to his still more eminent
successor, in the leadership of Syriac studies in England, the late Dr.
William Wright, then assistant keeper of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p52.2"></span>mss.</span> in the British Museum, and
afterwards Professor of Arabic in the University of Cambridge.  To him
is due the admirable *editio princeps* of the Syriac text of all the
twenty-three *Demonstrations* (from the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p52.3"></span>mss.</span> 14617 and 17182), issued in
London, 1869.  He did not, however, carry out his intention of adding to
this work a second volume, containing an English translation of the
whole.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p53"></span>Since then, another edition of the
series of twenty-two has been published in Paris (Firmin-Didot, 1894),
as the first volume of a *Patrologia Syriaca*, under the general
editorship of Dr. R. Graffin, lecturer in Syriac in the Theological
Faculty of the Catholic Institute of Paris.  This excellent work
includes a Latin Version, and is preceded by a learned and copious
Introduction, in which all questions relating to Aphrahat and his
writings are fully treated,—both of which are the work of Dom Parisot,
Benedictine Priest and Monk.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p54"></span>14.  *Was Aphrahat Prior to
Ephraim?*—In thus placing Aphrahat first as their projected series of
Syriac Divines, the learned editors follow the opinion which, ever since
Wright published his edition, has been adopted by Syriac scholars—that
Aphrahat is prior in time to Ephraim.  This is undoubtedly true (as
pointed out above) in the only limited sense, that the *Demonstrations*
are earlier by some years (the first ten by thirteen years, the
remainder by five or six) than the earliest of Ephraim’s writings which
can be dated with certainty (namely, the first Nisibene Hymn, which
belongs to 350).  It is then assumed that Ephraim was born in the reign
of Constantine, therefore not earlier than 306, and that Aphrahat was a
man of advanced age when he wrote (of which there is no proof whatever),
and must therefore have been born before the end of the third
century—perhaps as early as 280.  It has been shown above (p. 145) that
even if we admit the authority of the Syriac *Life* of Ephraim, we must
regard the supposed statement of his birth in Constantine’s time as a
mistranslation or rather perversion of the text.  Thus the argument for
placing Ephraim’s birth so late as 306 disappears, while for placing
Aphrahat’s birth no argument has been advanced, but merely conjecture;
and the result is, that the two may, so far as evidence goes, be
regarded as contemporary.  It is true that Barhebræus, in his
*Ecclesiastical History*, reckons Aphrahat as belonging to the time of
Papas, who died 335; but it is to be noted that in the very same context
he mentions that letters were extant purporting to be addressed by Jacob
of Nisibis and Ephraim to the same Papas,—and though he admits that some
discredited the genuine<span id="page_162">p. 162</span> <span
id="iii.iii.iii-Page_162"></span>ness of these letters, he gives no hint
that Ephraim was too young to have written them.  In fact he could not
do so, for in the earlier part of this *History* he had already named
Ephraim as present at the Nicene Council in 325, and had placed his name
before that of Aphrahat in including both among the contemporaries of
the Great Athanasius. <span id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p56"></span>15.  *His Use of Holy
Scripture.*—Concerning the canon and text of the Books of the Bible as
used by Aphrahat,—a subject hardly within the scope of this
Introduction—a few words must suffice.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p57"></span>In citing the Old Testament, he shows
himself acquainted with nearly all the Books of the Jewish Canon, and
with some, but not all, of the deutero-canonical books commonly called
Apocrypha—with Tobit, Ecclesiasticus (and perhaps Wisdom), and
Maccabees, but not Judith, Susanna, Bel and the Dragon, or Baruch.  He
follows the Peshitto rather than the Greek, but not seldom departs from
both; and he shows a knowledge of the Chaldee Paraphrase.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p58"></span>His New Testament Canon is apparently
that of the Peshitto;—that is to say, he shows no signs of acquaintance
with the four shorter Catholic Epistles, and in the one citation which
seems to be from the Apocalypse, it has been shown to be probable that
he is really referring to the Targum of Onkelos on [Deut. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006.md)<span
id="iii.iii.iii-p58.1"></span>. <span id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347.md)
  But he omits all reference also to the longer Catholic Epistles,
except 1 John.  He also passes over (of St. Paul’s Epistles) 2
Thessalonians, Titus, and Philemon.  But as regards the last, its
shortness accounts for the omission; and as to the former two, he can
hardly have been unacquainted with them, inasmuch as he knew 1
Thessalonians and 1 and 2 Timothy.  He designates the writer of Hebrews
as “the Apostle,” probably meaning to ascribe it to St. Paul.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p60"></span>In citing the Gospels, he seems
sometimes to follow the Diatessaron, which, as we have said, was in the
hands of his contemporary Ephraim, and which is known to have circulated
largely in the East until far on in the following century.  Sometimes,
however, his references seem to be to the separate Gospels as commonly
read.  It cannot be claimed for the Peshitto that he always or even
usually follows its text; nor yet does he uniformly agree with the
Curetonian, or with the probably earlier form of the Syriac Gospel
recently discovered by Mr. Lewis.  With each of these last, however, his
text has many points of coincidence.  In the rest of the New Testament,
we can only say that he must have had before him a text which diverged
not seldom from the Peshitto. <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348.md)

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p62"></span>16.  *Literary and Theological Value
of his Writings.*—From the Demonstrations, eight have been selected for
the present volume, viz.:  I. *Of Faith* (with *Letter of an Inquirer*
prefixed); V. *Of Wars*; VI. *Of Monks;* VIII. *Of the Resurrection of
the Dead*; X. *Of Pastors*; XVII. *Of Christ the Son of God*; XXI. *Of
Persecution*; XXII. *Of Death and the Latter Times*.  Of these, one only
(XVII.) is controversial,—directed against the Jews:  it is painfully
inadequate in the treatment of its great theme,—so inadequate as to
suggest the surmise that doubts may have arisen about the orthodoxy of
the writer, such as to discredit his works, and to account for the
neglect in which they lay (as we have seen) for centuries.  But in all
his writings his mastery of the Scriptures, of the Old Testament
especially, is conspicuous; and in many of them, especially in those of
a hortatory character, there is much force of earnest persuasiveness,
rising at times into eloquence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_319"></span>[153:320](2130175.htm#fr_319.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p5"></span> So in Peshitto; “*unripe grape*,” in
LXX.; “*new wine*,” in A.V. and R.V., with the Hebrew; but the Latin
Vulgate agrees with Peshitto.

<span id="fn_320"></span>[153:321](2130175.htm#fr_320.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p8"></span> In Rosen-Forshall’s and Wright’s
*Catalogues of Syriac <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>mss</span>., British Museum*, while but few
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p8.2"></span>mss</span>. (Add.
14619, Add. 17182, Orient. 1017. Rich. 7197) contain any portion of
Aphrahat, the list of <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p8.3"></span>mss</span>. of Ephraim’s works and
fragments nearly fills three columns.

<span id="fn_321"></span>[154:322](2130175.htm#fr_321.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p12"></span> Forget, *De Vita e Scriptis
Aphraatis* (1882), pp. 139–148; also (cited by him *S. Isaaci Antiocheni
Opp*. (ed. Bickell, 1873).

<span id="fn_322"></span>[154:323](2130175.htm#fr_322.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p14"></span> The titles given by Gennadius do not
number 26; some titles he omits; others he divides, treating as two what
is really one, in several instances.

<span id="fn_323"></span>[154:324](2130175.htm#fr_323.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p16"></span> See the text in Wright’s *Aphraatis*,
pp. 29 *ff*.; in Lagarde’s *Analecta Syr*., pp. 108 *ff.;* or Forget (as
above) pp. 8 *ff*.

<span id="fn_324"></span>[155:325](2130175.htm#fr_324.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p18"></span> The Armenian *Menologium*, subjoined
by Antonelli to the Armenian version, as printed by him, makes Jacob to
have been sister’s son to Gregory the Illuminator, the Apostle of
Armenia, to whom that version (impossibly) ascribes the letter prefixed
to *Demonstr*. I.  But this statement is probably an invention, devised
in order to connect Jacob with the Armenian Church.

<span id="fn_325"></span>[155:326](2130175.htm#fr_325.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p19"></span> *Biblioth. Orient*. I., p. 5.  A note
in <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>ms</span>.
Orient. 1017, suggests Jacob of Tagrit,—ignorantly, for he was of the
13th century.

<span id="fn_326"></span>[155:327](2130175.htm#fr_326.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p21"></span> For this extract, see Wright’s
*Aphraates*, pp. 38, 39.

<span id="fn_327"></span>[155:328](2130175.htm#fr_327.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p22"></span> The <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>ms</span>. of Barhebræus which Wright
(*Aphraates*, pp. 2, 3), follows in treating of this notice, seems to
identify the “Persian Sage,” with one “Buzitis,” who is mentioned
immediately before; and he conjectured therefore that “Buzitis” was a
scribe’s error for *Parhatis* (=Aphraates).  But other <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p22.2"></span>mss</span>. insert the
copulative particle so as to distinguish “the Persian Sage” from the
“Buzitis,” whose name precedes.

<span id="fn_328"></span>[156:329](2130175.htm#fr_328.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p22.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p23"></span> Part I., s. 26, c. 83; Part II., s.
10, c. 33.

<span id="fn_329"></span>[156:330](2130175.htm#fr_329.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p24"></span> *Ap. B. O*. III. i. (see p. 95).

<span id="fn_330"></span>[156:331](2130175.htm#fr_330.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p25"></span> British Museum, *Orient*. 1017.

<span id="fn_331"></span>[156:332](2130175.htm#fr_331.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p26"></span> The alternative explanation has been
suggested that Jacob was the name received by Aphrahat at baptism.  This
is refuted by Wright’s objection, that, if the name Jacob had been given
so early, the name Aphrahat would have been entirely disused or
forgotten.

<span id="fn_332"></span>[156:333](2130175.htm#fr_332.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p29"></span> Basil (*Homil. in Hexaem*. II. 6)
shows alike avoidance of the name of the foreigner Ephraim, and
designates him as “the Syrian.”  See above, p. 128.

<span id="fn_333"></span>[157:334](2130175.htm#fr_333.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p30"></span> *Demonstr*. XIV. 50; XXII. 25; XXIII.
69.

<span id="fn_334"></span>[157:335](2130175.htm#fr_334.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p31"></span> *Ib*. XVI. 7; XVII. 8.

<span id="fn_335"></span>[157:336](2130175.htm#fr_335.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p32"></span> Philoxenus of Mabug, likewise a
Persian, and a writer of pure Syriac, came from the border-region of
Beth-garme (*B. O*. II. p., 10).

<span id="fn_336"></span>[157:337](2130175.htm#fr_336.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p34"></span> Some prefer the latter construction;
but Wright (*Aphr*., pp. 8, 9), Forget (pp. 82 *ff*.), and Parisot
(*Patrologia Syr*. I., Tom. I., p. xix) seem to be right in maintaining
the former.  Another passage of *Dem*. XIV. (25) is translated by Wright
(*Ib*.), Parisot, and Antonelli (*Opp. S. Jacobi Nis*., p. 423), “The
laying on of hands which certain *men receive of us*;” but by Forget
(pp. 100, 101).…“which certain *men of us receive*.”  If the former are
right, the writer speaks as a Bishop; but Forget’s seems the true
rendering.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[157:338](2130175.htm#fr_337.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p34.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p35"></span> This ancient title is still borne by
the Head of the Nestorian Church:  the Jacobites from the sixth century
downwards have substituted that of “Maphrian”
(*Maphrino-fructificator*), *i.e.* propagator of the Episcopal
succession; which continues in use to the present day.

<span id="fn_338"></span>[158:339](2130175.htm#fr_338.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p35.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p36"></span> The Roman Editor (Antonelli) of the
Armenian text (1756) was misled by the displacement of *Demonstr*. XIV.,
and its omission from the list of Gennadius, as well as by its synodical
character, to reject it as spurious.  Had he known *Demonstr*. XXII., or
had he been aware of the alphabetical arrangement of the series, he
would have been guarded against this error.  The Synod however in whose
name *Demonstr*. XIV. is written cannot have been (as Wright supposed)
that of 334; for it was written in 344.

<span id="fn_339"></span>[158:340](2130175.htm#fr_339.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p37"></span> See also *Demonstr*. X. (below);
especially s. b., where he exhorts “pastors” (evidently Bishops) as one
set over them, in other words, their Metropolitan.

<span id="fn_340"></span>[158:341](2130175.htm#fr_340.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p38"></span> An examination of this <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p38.1"></span>ms</span>. leads to the
conclusion that its scribe was probably well informed in this matter. 
Its principal contents are, the “Book of Rays” of Gregory Barhebræus and
three of his minor works.  Between the first named and that which
follows is inserted the extract from *Demonstr*. XXIII., above specified
(p. 156), headed as we have seen with the author’s names and
additions,—“Aphrahat, the Sage, who is Jacob Bishop of Mar Mathai.”  Now
Gregory himself, as Maphrian, was Bishop of Mar Mathai, and died and was
buried in that monastery in 1286.  It may be conjectured that this <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p38.2"></span>ms</span>., written in
1364 (not 80 years after his death), may have obtained this passage of
Aphrahat, and the heading which assigns his see, from some collection
made by Gregory, among whose writings it here finds place.  If so, the
statement that he was Bishop of Mar Mathai rests on the authority of
Gregory, who would no doubt have within his reach authentic lists of the
names of his predecessors in that see.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p39"></span>For the monastery of Mar Mathai, see
Rich, *Koordistan*, Vol. II., ch. xv., pp. 73 *ff*.; Badger,
*Nestorians*, Vol. I., ch. ix., pp. 95 *ff*.  The former visited it in
1820; the latter in 1843 and 1850; and his account is illustrated with
an engraving of the monastery, and a plan of the Church.  He found the
*Metran* residing there, with two monks; and five villages, with some
350 families, formed his diocese.  In 1880 Sachau visited Mosul, and
records (*Reise*, ch. iv., p. 352) that a Bishop still resided in this
monastery.

<span id="fn_341"></span>[159:342](2130175.htm#fr_341.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p42"></span> See Ephraim’s words, cited above, pp.
129, 136.

<span id="fn_342"></span>[159:343](2130175.htm#fr_342.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p45"></span> Simeon of Beth-Arsam, *ap*., Assem,
*B. O*. I. 346, is our authority for this narrative.

<span id="fn_343"></span>[160:344](2130175.htm#fr_343.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p46"></span> Note that the authorities who know
the author as Aphrahat are of “the East” (in the ecclesiastical
sense—namely, the regions beyond the Tigris).  Bar-Bahlul and Ebedjesu
are Eastern, as being Nestorians.  Of the Jacobites, Elias Barsinneus
was of Mosul originally, and Gregory Barhebræus as Maphrian had his see
in Mosul and the whole East under his rule.  The scribe of the <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>ms</span>. *Orient*. 1017
wrote indeed in the Jacobite convent of Kartamin, but he was merely the
copyist of a <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p46.2"></span>ms</span>. of the works of Barhebræus,
obtained no doubt from Mosul.  On the other hand, of the three scribes
of the earlier <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.iii-p46.3"></span>mss</span>., who knew him only as “the
Persian Sage,” or as “Mar Jacob,” one was of Edessa, and all were
presumably Jacobites of the same regions; as likewise Georgius (also
connected with Edessa), and his correspondent (Joshua, of Anab).  Isaac
of Nineveh was Eastern, and Nestorian; but as he nowhere mentions the
author of the works with which he was evidently acquainted, he does not
come here into consideration.  Nor does Ennadius; inasmuch as we have no
means of discovering how he came to hear of their existence, or to
attribute them to Jacob of Nisibis:  we can only conjecture that his
informant may have been an Armenian.

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p47"></span>As to Barhebræus, the significant fact
is farther to be noted that in Part I., where he treats of the
Patriarchs and the western provinces, presumably drawing from Western
documents, he only speaks of “the Persian Sage:”  and the name Aphrahat
first appears in Part II., where the writer records, as Maphrian, no
doubt, from the tradition of his own church at Mosul, the names of the
notable persons of the time of his predecessor, Papas the Catholicus of
the East.

<span id="fn_344"></span>[160:345](2130175.htm#fr_344.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p49"></span> See Gibbon, *Decline and Fall*, ch.
xxxii. (p. 392, Vol. III. of Prof. Bury’s edition; also his *Appendix*
25, p. 504).

<span id="fn_345"></span>[161:346](2130175.htm#fr_345.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p51"></span> In the Armenian alphabet the number
of letters is 38.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[162:347](2130175.htm#fr_346.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p55"></span> Cp. *Eccles. Hist*. II. 10, cc. 31,
33, with I. 26, cc. 83, 85.

<span id="fn_347"></span>[162:348](2130175.htm#fr_347.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p59"></span> See *Demonstr*. VIII, 19 (also VII.
25), and cp. Apoc. II. 11.  (Parisot, Introduction, p. xliii.)

<span id="fn_348"></span>[162:349](2130175.htm#fr_348.md) <span
id="iii.iii.iii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.iii-p61"></span> It is important to note that he
quotes in full three (16, 17, 18) of the disputed “Last Twelve Verses”
of St. Mark’s Gospel.  (*Demonst*. I. 17.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephraim Syrus:  The Nisibene Hymns.](2130176.md)
