[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130177)  [Next](2130179.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.ii"></span> <span id="page_167">p. 167</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii-Page_167"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Nisibene Hymns.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>Hymn I.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p3"></span>1.  O God of mercies Who didst refresh
Noah, he too refreshed Thy mercies.  He offered sacrifice and stayed the
flood; he presented gifts and received the promise.  With prayer and
incense he propitiated Thee:  with an oath and with the bow Thou wast
gracious to him; so that if the flood should essay to hurt the earth,
the bow should stretch itself over against it, to banish it away and
hearten the earth.  As Thou hast sworn peace so do Thou maintain it, and
let Thy bow strive against Thy wrath!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p4"></span>*R*.  Stretch forth Thy bow against the
flood, for lo! it has lifted up its waves against our walls!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p5"></span>2.  In revelation, Lord! it has been
proclaimed, that that lowly blood which Noah sprinkled, wholly
restrained Thy wrath for all generations; how much mightier then shall
be the blood of Thy Only Begotten, that the sprinkling of it should
restrain our flood!  For lo! it was *but* as mysteries of Him that those
lowly sacrifices gained virtue, which Noah offered, and stayed *by them*
Thy wrath.  Be propitiated by the gift upon my altar, and stay from me
the deadly flood.  So shall both Thy signs bring deliverance, to me Thy
cross and to Noah Thy bow!  Thy cross shall cleave the sea of waters;
Thy bow shall stay the flood of rain.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p6"></span>3.  Lo! all the billows trouble me; and
Thou hast given *more* favour to the ark:  for waves alone encompassed
it, mounds and weapons and waves encircle me.  It was unto Thee a
storehouse of treasures, but I have been a storehouse of debts:  it in
Thy love subdued the waves; I in Thy wrath, am left desolate among the
weapons; the flood bore it, the river threatens me.  O Helmsman of that
ark, be my pilot on the dry land!  To it Thou gavest rest in the haven
of a mountain; to me give Thou rest also in the haven of my walls!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p7"></span>4.  The Just One has chastened me
abundantly, but it He loved even among the waves.  For Noah overcame the
waves of lust, which had drowned in his generation the sons of Seth. 
Because his flesh revolted against the daughters of Cain, his chariot
rode on the surface of the waves.  Because women defiled him not, he
coupled the beasts, whereof in the ark he joined together, all pairs in
the yoke of wedlock.  The olive which with its oil gladdens the face,
with its leaf gladdened their countenances:  for me the river whereof to
drink is wont to make joyful, lo! O Lord, by its flood it makes me
mournful.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p8"></span>5.  The foulness of my guilt Thy
righteousness has seen, and Thy pure eyes abhor me.  Thou hast gathered
the waters by the hand of the unclean, that Thou mightest make for me
purification of my guilt; not that in them Thou mightest baptize and
purify me, but that in them Thou mightest chasten me with fear.  For the
waves will stir up to prayer, which shall wash away my guilt.  The sight
of them which is full of repentance, has been to me a baptism.  The sea,
O Lord, which should have drowned me, in it let Thy mercies drown my
guilt.  In the Red Sea Thou didst drown bodies; in this *sea* drown Thou
my guilt instead of bodies!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p9"></span>6.  An ark in Thy mercy Thou didst
prepare, that Thou mightest preserve in it all the remnants.  That Thou
shouldest not desolate the earth in Thy wrath, Thy compassion made an
earth of wood.  Thou didst empty them one into the other; Thou didst
<span id="page_168">p. 168</span> <span
id="iii.iv.ii-Page_168"></span>render them back one unto the other. 
*But* my lands have thrice been filled and emptied again; and now
against me the waves rebel, to overwhelm the remnant that has escaped in
me.  In the ark Thou didst save a remnant; save in me, O Lord, yea in me
a leaven.  The ark upon the mountain brought forth; let me in my lands
bring forth my imprisoned ones!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p10"></span>7.  O Lord, gladden Thou in me the
imprisoned ones of my fortresses, Thou Who didst gladden those prisoners
with the olive leaf!  Thou sentest healing by means of the dove to the
sick ones that were drowning in every wave; it entered in and drove out
all their pains.  For the joy of it swallowed up their sorrow, and
mourning vanished away in its consolation.  And as the chief of a host
gives heartening to the fugitives, so *the dove* disseminated courage
among the forsaken.  Their eyes tasted the sight of peace, and their
mouth hasted to open in Thy praise.  As the olive leaf in the waves,
save Thou me, that Thou mayest gladden in me the prisoners of my
fortresses!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p11"></span>8.  The flood assails, and dashes
against our walls:  may the all-sustaining might uphold them!  It falls
not as the building of the sand, for I have not built my doctrine upon
the sand:  a rock shall be for me the foundation, for on Thy rock have I
built my faith; the secret foundation of my trust, shall support my
walls.  For the walls of Jericho fell, because on the sand she had built
her trust.  Moses built a wall in the sea, for on a rock his
understanding built *it*.  The foundation of Noah *was* on a rock; the
dwelling place of wood it bore up in the sea.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p12"></span>9.  Compare the souls which *are* in me,
with the living things that *were* in the ark; and instead of Noah who
mourned in it, lo! Thy altar mourning and humbled.  Instead of the
wedded wives that *were* in it, lo! my virgins that are unmarried. 
Instead of Ham who went forth *from* it and uncovered his father’s
nakedness, lo! workers of righteousness, who have nourished and clothed
apostles.  In my pains, O my Lord, I rave in my speech; blame me not if
my words provoke Thee!  Thou puttest to silence the prosperous when they
murmured:  have mercy on me as on them that were silenced aforetime!

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p13"></span>10.  Before Thy wrath Thou madest a
house of refuge, and all the nations rebelled against it.  Noah was
refreshed in rest, that his dwelling-place should give rest according to
his name.  Thou didst close the doors to save the righteous one; Thou
didst open the floods to destroy the unclean.  Noah stood between the
terrible waves that *were* without, and the destroying mouths that
*were* within:  the waves tossed him and the mouths dismayed him.  Thou
madest peace for him with them that were within; Thou broughtest down
before him them that were without:  Thou didst speedily change his
troubles, for light to Thee, O Lord, are hard things.

<span id="iii.iv.ii-p14"></span>11.  Hear and weigh the comparison of me
with Noah, and though my suffering be light beside his, let Thy mercy
make our deliverance alike; for lo! my children stand like him, between
the wrathful and the destroyer.  Give peace, O Lord, among them that are
within, and humble before me them that are without; and give me twofold
victory!  And whereas the slayer has made his rage threefold, may He of
the three days show me threefold mercy!  Let not the Evil One overcome
Thy lovingkindness:  seeing he has assailed me twice and thrice overcome
Thou him!  Let my victory fly abroad through the world, that it may earn
Thee praise in the world!  O Thou who didst rise on the third day, give
us not over to death in *our* third peril!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn II](2130179.md)
