[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130181)  [Next](2130183.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Hymn V.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p2"></span>1.  Cause to be heard in Thy grace, the
tidings of Thy salvation:  for an hearing has been made, a path of
passage; our minds have been downtrodden, by messages of terror.  *R.,
Praises to Thy victory!  Glory to Thy Dominion!*

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p3"></span>2.  Comfort Thou with profits, *though*
small and scanty, those that have had harvest, of hurt by their labour: 
at a time of profit, they have gained *but* loss.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p4"></span>3.  It is manifest that He has stood,
portioning wrath upon earth:  loss and profit in anger He divided. 
There are whom He has cast down of a sudden, and there are whom He has
puffed up of a sudden.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p5"></span>4.  To teach *us* that He can, chastise
in all ways; when He saw the persecutors, were terrible before mine
eyes, He laid me out before my children, and they my beloved chastised
me.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p6"></span>5.  Lo! He taught me to fear, Himself and
not man:  for when there was none to smite us, His wrath gave command of
a sudden, and every man stretched himself out, and chastised himself.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p7"></span>6.  In like manner that Babylonian, who
struck down all kings when he was confident and hoped that there was
none to smite him, God caused that by his own hands, he should strike
himself down.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p8"></span>7.  His majesty and his mind, of a sudden
became mad together:  he rent and cast off his garments; he went forth
and wandered in the desert; he drove himself out first, and then his
servants drove him out.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p9"></span>8.  He showed to all kings, whom he had
led captive and brought down, that not by his own power, could he have
overcome:  the power that struck him down, was that which punished them.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p10"></span>9.  I have stood and borne, O my Lord;
the blows of my deliverers.  Thou art able in Thy grace, to make me
profit by the smiters:  Thou art able in Thy justice to punish me by
*my* helpers.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p11"></span>10.  The day when the host was bold, to
come up against Samaria; their plenty and their pleasure, their
treasures and their possessions, they cast away and forsook and fled. 
He crowned her by her persecutors.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p12"></span>11.  My beloved ones crowned me, and my
deliverers healed me.  Through the guilt of my dwellers, my helpers
chastised me, give me drink from Thy vines, of the cup of consolation!

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p13"></span>12.  The corn and the vine, preserve, O
my Lord, by Thy grace!  Be the husbandman cheered, by the vine of the
grape-gatherer; be the vinedresser glad, in the corn of the husbandman!

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p14"></span>13.  They are joined each to each, the
corn and the grape.  In the field the reapers, wine can make cheerful,
in the vineyard the dressers, bread strengthens in turn.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p15"></span>14.  These two things have power, to
comfort my troubles:  the Trinity has power, to comfort more
exceedingly; whom I will praise because of a sudden, I was delivered
through grace.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p16"></span>15.  But the man whose life, is
preserved through grace, if he goes away to murmur, at the loss of his
goods, he is thankless for the grace, of Him who had pity on him.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p17"></span>16.  Of His own will He destroys, one
<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vi-Page_174"></span>thing instead of another.  He destroys
possession, and spares the possessor:  He destroys our plants, instead
of our lives.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p18"></span>17.  Let us fear to murmur, lest His own
wrath be roused, and He spare the possessions, and smite the possessor;
that we may learn in the end, His mercy in the beginning.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p19"></span>18.  Let us learn against whom, it is
meet for us to murmur.  Learn thou to murmur, not against the Chastener,
but against thine own will, that made thee sin and thou wast punished.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p20"></span>19.  Let us put away murmuring, and turn
unto prayer:  for if the possessor dies, his possessions also cease for
him; but while he survives, he seeks to recover his losses.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p21"></span>20.  Let consolations be multiplied, in
mercy to my dwellers:  let the remainder and residue, console *us* in
the midst of wrath; and cause Thou us to forget in the residue, the
mourning of our devastation!

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p22"></span>21.  Heal and increase O my Lord, the
fruits Thy wrath has left!  They seem to me like sick ones, that have
escaped in pestilence.  Make me to forget in these weak ones, the
suffering of the many!

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p23"></span>22.  While I speak, O my Lord, I call to
mind that this too is the month, when the blossom pined, and dropped off
in blight, may it return to soundness, to be a consolation!

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p24"></span>23.  For these escaped the pestilence,
that carried off their brethren.  The vines though voiceless, wept when
before them, a multitude was cut down and felled, of trees that they
loved.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p25"></span>24.  The company of plants, lo! the
earth misses!  The roots for the husbandmen, weep and cause them to
weep.  Their beauty had spread and gave shade, and it was torn away in
one hour.

<span id="iii.iv.vi-p26"></span>25.  The axe came nigh and struck; and
struck the husbandman; the blow *was* on the trees, and it caused the
husbandman to suffer; every axe that smote, he bore the pain of it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn VI.](2130183.md)
