[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130125)  [Next](2130127.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.v"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.viii.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.viii.v-p2"></span>*To Columbus, Bishop of Numidia* <span
id="fr_197"></span>[198](#fn_197.md) .

<span id="ii.viii.v-p4"></span>Gregory to Columbus, &c.

<span id="ii.viii.v-p5"></span>Inasmuch as it has long been known to us
how thy Fraternity is distinguished for priestly gravity and
ecclesiastical zeal, we have seen sufficient reason for thy taking part
in the cognizance of things that require rebuke, lest, if they should be
put off through connivance, every one should suppose that what he is
able to do is allowed him.  Now after what manner our brother Paulinus,
bishop of the city of Tegessis is alleged by his clerics and by those
who are constituted in sacred orders, to have been excessive towards
them in corporal correction, thou needest not to be told, seeing that,
before this complaint reached us, the matter, as we have learnt from
their statement, had already been made known to thee.  And, since
superiors ought not to have the right of punishing their subordinates
savagely, we have taken care to write to Victor our brother and
fellow-bishop, who holds the primacy among you <span
id="fr_198"></span>[199](#fn_198.md) , that, together with thy Fraternity,
or with others our brethren and fellow bishops whom you may think fit to
call in, he may take cognizance of and thoroughly investigate the case
between our aforesaid brother priest and his clergy.  And let thy Love
so give the matter thy close and careful attention, that the things that
have been reported to us may not pass without a hearing, lest discord
should be fomented in the Church, whence it ought by all means to be
banished.  And, if indeed the complaint of his clergy against him is
well founded, so take cognizance of his fault, which he has scorned of
his own accord to correct, with the <span id="page_90">p. 90</span>
<span id="ii.viii.v-Page_90"></span>force of our ecclesiastical decision
that he may both feel for the present what a grave offence he has
committed, and may learn for the future that he cannot do more than it
is lawful for him to do.  Above all things, then, we exhort thee that
thou study ardently to exercise the zeal which we know thee to have for
the sake of God.

<span id="ii.viii.v-p7"></span>And, inasmuch as our said brother
Paulinus is said to confer ecclesiastical orders through simoniacal
heresy, which is a thing awful to hear of, let it be thy care, along
with the aforesaid primate or others, to enquire thoroughly into this
also with all diligence.  And, if it should be found to be so (which God
forbid), effort must be made and action taken that both he who has not
feared to accept and he who has not feared to give a bribe may be
smitten by a sentence of canonical punishment, to the end that their
correction may avail as a reproof to many.  And, before this deadly root
acquires strength and slays many more, let it be condemned by the
decision of the whole council, so that no one may ever dare to accept or
to give anything for any order whatever, nor any be promoted for favour,
but all for merit, lest both ecclesiastical order be confounded, and
probity of life be held in contempt, if one that is unworthy should
receive the reward of merit.

<span id="ii.viii.v-p8"></span>Further we have given orders to Hilarus
our *Chartularius* that, if the case should require it, he refuse not to
take part in your enquiry.

<span id="ii.viii.v-p9"></span>If, therefore, it should be necessary,
inform him by letter that you wish him to come to you, to the end that
by treating the matter together with him you may better determine what
ought to be ordained.  In the month of March, Indiction 5.  \[N.B. *This
date is absent from several Codices.*\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_197"></span>[89:198](2130126.htm#fr_197.md) <span
id="ii.viii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.v-p3"></span> See II. 48. note 1.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[89:199](2130126.htm#fr_198.md) <span
id="ii.viii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.v-p6"></span> For the custom in Africa with regard to
the primacy, see I. 74, note 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Victor, Bishop.](2130127.md)
