[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130215)  [Next](2130217) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xl-p1.1"></span>Hymn LX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xl-p2"></span>1. O what amazement befel the Evil One,
of a sudden, my brethren:  when the sinful woman was corrected, and
gained Wisdom!—2. *R., Glory to the One Who alone, conquered the Evil
One; and to Him yea Him be also confession, Who vanquished Death!*—3. 
<span id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xl-Page_213"></span>The Evil One marvelled “Where *is* her
laughter? where her perfumes? where her dancing and outward ornament,
and inward wickedness?”—4. Instead of that light laughter, she is given
up to tears:  She has cut off her hair to wipe the dust, off the feet of
Jesus.—5. Naught lasts in her of any doctrine, nor abides in her:  from
our instruction she has escaped and cast away, all that I taught her.—6.
She has denied us and our acquaintance, and even as though:  she had
never seen me she has blotted my image, out of her mind.—7. The living
leaven of Jesus flew to her, Jesus was silent:  but she made bold to
press and enter, though none called her.—8. She forgot our love of
*many* years, and in the twinkling of an eye:  from between me and her
she removed *it, and* set Death *there*.—9. For instead of laughter
weeping delights her, and instead of paint:  a shower of tears, and
instead of ornament, a sad countenance.—10. Zaccheus I made chief of
extortioners, and her I made:  chief of wantons; my two wings, Jesus has
broken.—11. If so be Zaccheus becomes *his* disciple, and if so be she: 
becomes *his* hearer, henceforth they fetter, my craftiness.—12. Carved
images henceforth are a mockery and the carvers:  a derision, and the
worshippers a laughing-stock.—13. I shut *men’s* eyes that they might
not perceive, that they are carved images:  Jesus opens their eyes to
see that they are the works of *men’s hands*.—14. If Jesus has chosen
for Himself preachers, then our preaching:  whereof the whole world is
full, is put to silence.—15. For lo! the Chaldeans with the soothsayers,
and lo! the wizards:  with the diviners they are smitten and the
priests, with all evil ones!—16. Ye priests are ended and have given up
the Ghost from henceforth, depart ye diviners! become husbandmen, the
Chaldeans likewise, shall close their books.—17. If the Hebrews have
become His disciples, who by all miracles:  were not subdued, who of the
nations, shall not obey him?—18. If he begins to set straight the
reverse, He brings to naught our speech:  henceforth He will not
hesitate against us, He who rebukes all men.—19. In that I was
worshipped in all temples, our disgrace is greater:  than our honour
*was*, for all men spit, upon our altars.—20. Flesh of sacrifice becomes
abhorred, into fragments:  idols are *broken*, and carven images burn,
under their pots.—21. All our work becomes a laughing-stock, and a
ruin:  all that we have built, and a mockery, all that we have
taught.—22. The secret mysteries that I taught them, laboriously:  are
about to be spread abroad, on the housetops.—23. Of the Egyptians I was
more proud, than of any nation:  for they used to worship even, the
onions and garlic.—24. Lo! I fear lest even here, where delusion was so
great:  truth shall prevail that there exceedingly, Jesus may reign.—25.
And if when He was an infant, and fled and went down, Egypt marvelled: 
yea lulled him—this strangler of babes, loved their Babe.—26. Was it a
pledge He went down to give her, as a betrother:  giving assurance that
when of full age, He will also take her *to wife*?—27. Pharaoh cannot
set his foot *firm*, for this is no stammerer:  that he should deceive
Him, and no bondman, that he should lie unto Him.—28. Moses smote and
the Egyptians rebelled, and he chastised the people:  and the Hebrews
rebelled—Jesus is smitten, and gives life to all.—29. This is hard *to
understand* that not by force; lays He His yoke:  on the rebellious:  He
was rebuked, and He instructs others.—30. The spittle of His mouth,
wiped off and took away, the shame of Adam:  by the smiting of His
cheeks, He rooted out our wrathfulness, from His disciples.—31. By the
nails which he received, He made me to suffer.  I rejoiced when I
crucified Him:  and I knew not that He was crucifying me, in His
crucifixion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LXI.](2130217)
