[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130110)  [Next](2130112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxix-p2"></span>To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

<span id="ii.vii.xxix-p3"></span>Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxix-p4"></span>What good gifts have been conferred on
you from above, and with what piety heavenly grace has filled you, this,
among all the other proofs of your merits, intimates evidently to all
that you both govern the savage hearts of barbarians with the skill of
prudent counsel, and (what is still more to your praise), adorn your
royal power with wisdom.  And since, as you are above many nations in
both these respects, so also you excel them in the purity of your faith,
we have great confidence in your amending what is unlawful.  For the
contents of the letters you have already sent us are witness how your
Excellency has embraced our exhortation, and with what devotion you long
to fulfil the same.  But, since He Who is the giver of good dispositions
is wont to be their helper also, we trust that He may direct your causes
in His loving-kindness all the more favourably as He sees you to be
assiduous in His cause.  Do you God’s work, and God will do yours. 
Wherefore order a synod to be assembled, and, among other things, as we
have before written, studiously prohibit by the definition of a council
the sin of simoniacal heresy in your kingdom.  Offer a sacrifice to God
by conquering the enemy that is within, that by His help you may conquer
the enemies that are without; and that, according to the zeal you evince
against His foes, such you may feel Him to be in aiding you.  Believe
me, moreover, that, as we have learnt from the experience of many,
whatever is gathered together with sin is spent with loss.  If, then,
you wish to lose nothing unjustly, endeavour to the utmost to have
nothing got by injustice.  For in earthly matters loss has always its
origin in sin.  You, therefore, if you wish to stand above adverse
nations, if you would speedily, with God’s leave, be victorious over
them, receive with trembling the commandments of the same Almighty God,
that He Himself may fight for you against your adversaries, Who has
promised in Holy Writ, saying, *The Lord shall fight for you, and ye
shall hold your peace* ([Exod. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)<span
id="ii.vii.xxix-p4.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.vii.xxix-p5"></span>\[*In Collect. Pauli Diac.:  Data die
decima Kalend., Indict.* 4.  *In Remigiano:  Data die x Kalendas Julii,
Indict.* 4.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli.](2130112)
