[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130073)  [Next](2130075.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXI.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p2"></span>To Libertinus, Ex-Prætor.

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p3"></span>Gregory to Libertinus, &c.

<span id="ii.vi.vii-p4"></span>What straits you are in with regard to
the things of this world is not unknown to us.  But, since to those who
are placed in the utmost tribulation the only comfort is the mercy of
the Creator, rest your hope on Him, and turn to Him with your whole
heart, Who both justly allows whom He will to be afflicted and will
mercifully deliver one who trusts in Him.  To Him, then, give thanks,
and patiently endure what has been brought upon you.  For it is the part
of a right mind not only to bless God in prosperity, but also in
adversities to join in praising Him.  In these things therefore that you
are suffering let no murmur against God creep into your heart, since for
what purpose our Creator thus works is unknown.  For perchance,
magnificent son, thou didst offend Him in something when in a state of
prosperity, from which He would purge thee by kindly bitterness.  And so
neither let temporal affliction break thee down nor losses of thy goods
distract thee, since if, returning thanks in adversity, thou make God
propitious to thee by thy patience, both the things that were lost are
multiplied, and in addition to this, eternal joys held out to thee.  I
beg thee, however, not to take it amiss that we have written through
Romanus the guardian to order twenty suits of clothing to be supplied
from us to your servants, seeing that things, however small, which are
offered from the goods of the blessed Apostle Peter are always to be
taken for a great blessing, since he will have power both to bestow on
you greater things, and to hold out to you eternal benefits with
Almighty God.  The month of June, Indiction 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXV](2130075.md)
