[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130180)  [Next](2130182) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.v-p1.1"></span>Hymn IV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.v-p2"></span>1.  My God, without ceasing, I will tread
the threshold of Thy house; I who have rejected all grace, I will ask
with boldness, that I may receive with confidence.  *R., Our hope, be
thou our Wall!*

<span id="iii.iv.v-p3"></span>2.  For if, O Lord, the earth, enriches
manifold, a single grain of wheat, how then shall my prayers, be
enriched by Thy grace!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p4"></span>3.  Because of the voices of my children,
their sighs and their groans, open to me the door of Thy mercy!  Make
glad for their voices, the mourning of their sackcloth!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p5"></span>4.  O firstborn that wast a weaned
*child*, and wast familiar with the children, the accurst sons of
Nazareth, hearken to my lambs that have seen the wolves, for lo! they
cry.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p6"></span>5.  For a flock, O my Lord, in the field,
if so be it has seen the wolves, flees to the shepherd, and takes refuge
under his staff, and he drives away them that would devour it.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p7"></span>6.  Thy flock has seen the wolves, and lo!
it cries loudly.  Behold how terrified it is!  Let thy Cross be a staff,
to drive out them that would swallow it up!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p8"></span>7.  Accept the cry of my little ones, that
are altogether pure.  It was He, the Infant of days, that could appease,
O Lord, the Ancient of days.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p9"></span>8.  The day when the Babe came down, in
the midst of the stall, the Watchers descended and proclaimed, peace—may
that *peace* be, in all my streets for all my offspring.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p10"></span>9.  Seventy and two old men, the elders
of that people, sufficed not for its breaches.  The Babe it was, the Son
of Mary, that gave peace on every side.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p11"></span>10.  Have mercy, O Lord, on my children!
in my children call to mind Thy childhood, Thou Who wast a child!  Let
them that are like Thy childhood, be saved by Thy grace!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p12"></span>11.  Mingled in the midst of the flock,
are the cry of the innocents, and the voice of the sheep, that call on
the Shepherd of all, to deliver them from all.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p13"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iv.v-p14"></span>13.  There is a joy that is affliction,
misery is hidden in it; there is a misery that is profit, it is a
fountain of joys, in that new world.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p15"></span>14.  The happiness that my persecutor has
gained, woes are hidden in it; therefore I rejoice.  The wretchedness
that I have gained from him, happiness is concealed for me in it.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p16"></span>15.  Who will not give praise, to Him
that has begotten us, and can beget again, from the midst of evil
rumours the voices of glad tidings!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p17"></span>16.  Thou Healer of all, hast visited me
in my sicknesses!  Payment for Thy medicines, I cannot give Thee, for
they are priceless.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p18"></span>17.  Thy mercies in richness, surpass Thy
medicines: they cannot be bought, they are given freely, it is for tears
they are bartered.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p19"></span>18.  How, O my Master, can a desolate
city, whose king is far off, and her enemy nigh, stand firm without
*aid* of mercy?

<span id="iii.iv.v-p20"></span>19.  A harbour and refuge, art Thou at
all times.  When the seas covered me, Thy mercy descended and drew me
out.  Again let Thy help lay hold on me!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p21"></span>20.  Apply to my afflictions, the
medicine of Thy salvation, and the passion of Thy help!  Thy sign can
become, a medicine to heal all.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p22"></span>21.  I am greatly oppressed, and I hasten
to complain, against him that troubles me.  Let Thy mercy, my Lord, take
the bitterness from the cup, that my sins have mixed.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p23"></span>22.  I look on all sides, and weep that I
am desolate.  Very many though be my chiefs and my deliverers, one is He
that has delivered me.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p24"></span>23.  My young men have fled, O Lord, and
gone forth, and are like chickens, which an eagle pursues; lo! they hide
in a secret place:  may Thy peace bring them back!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p25"></span>24.  The sound of my grape-gatherers, lo!
my ears miss it, for their voices fail.  Let it <span id="page_173">p.
173</span> <span id="iii.iv.v-Page_173"></span>resound with the glad
tidings, O Blessed One of Thy salvation!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p26"></span>25.  A voice of terror, I have heard on
my towers; as my defenders cry, while they guard my walls.  Still Thou
it with the voice of peace!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p27"></span>26.  The noise of my husbandmen, shall
speak peace without my walls:  the shouting of my dwellers shall speak
peace within my walls, that I may give peace without and within.

<span id="iii.iv.v-p28"></span>27.  Make an end, O Lord, of the
mourning, of this Thy pure altar, and of Thy chaste priest, who stands
clothed in mourning, covered over with sackcloth!

<span id="iii.iv.v-p29"></span>28.  The Church and her ministers shall
give praise for Thy salvation; the city and its dwellers.  Be the voice
of peace, O Lord, the reward of their voices!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn V](2130182)
