[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130123)  [Next](2130125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p2"></span>To John, Subdeacon of Ravenna <span
id="fr_192"></span>[193](#fn_192) .

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p4"></span>Gregory to John, &c.

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p5"></span>Some monks who came to me from the
monastery of the late abbot Claudius have petitioned me that the monk
Constantius should be constituted their abbot.  But I was exceedingly
set against them as touching their petition, because they appeared to me
to be altogether of a worldly mind in seeking to have a very worldly man
for their abbot.  For I have learnt how this same Constantius studies to
possess property of his own:  and this is the strongest evidence that he
has not the heart of a monk.  And I have learnt further that he presumed
to go alone, without any one of his brethren with him, to a monastery
that is situate in the province of Picenum.  From this proceeding of his
we know that he who walks without a witness lives not aright:  and how
can he maintain the rule for others who knows not how to maintain it for
himself?

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p6"></span>Giving him up, therefore, they asked to
have a certain cellarer, Maurus by name, to whose life and industry
there are many testimonies, the late abbot Claudius also with certain
others having spoken in his praise.  Let thy Experience therefore make
careful enquiry; and, if his life should be such as fit him for a place
of government, cause him to be ordained abbot by our brother and
fellow-bishop Marinianus.  But, if there is anything decidedly against
him, and they cannot find any suitable person in their own congregation,
let them choose some one from elsewhere, and let him whom they may
choose be made abbot.  Further, take care by all means to tell our
aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop to put down with the utmost
earnestness the possession of property of their own by four or five of
the monks of the monastery, which it has been found so far impossible to
correct, and to make haste to cleanse this same monastery from such a
pest; since, if private property is held there by monks, it will not be
possible for either concord or charity to continue in this same
congregation.  What, indeed, is a monk’s state of life but a despising
of the world?  How, then, do they despise the world who while placed in
a monastery seek gold?  Wherefore let thy Experience so proceed that
neither the ordering of the place be deferred, nor any complaint reach
us any more on this subject.

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p7"></span>Furthermore, forasmuch as my late most
dear son Claudius had heard me speak something about the Proverbs, the
Song of Songs, the Prophets, and also about the Books of Kings and the
Heptateuch, which on account of my infirmity I was unable to commit to
writing, and he himself had dictated them for transcription according to
his own understanding of their meaning, lest they should be forgotten,
and in order that he might bring them to me at a suitable time, so that
they might be more correctly dictated (for, when he read to me what he
had written, I found the sense of what I had said had been altered very
disadvantageously), it is hence necessary that thy Experience, avoiding
all excuse or delay, should go to his monastery, and assemble the
brethren, and that they should produce fully and truly whatsoever papers
on divers Scriptures he had brought thither; which do thou take, and
transmit them to me with all possible speed.

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p8"></span>Further, about thy return, having
learnt that thou hast incurred serious trouble, we will consider by and
by.  Further, I have not been pleased to hear what has been told me by
certain persons; namely that our most reverend brother and fellow-bishop
Marinianus causes my comments on the blessed Job to be read publicly at
vigils; seeing that this is not a popular work, and engenders hindrance
rather than advancement to rude hearers.  But tell him to cause the
comments on the Psalms to be read at vigils, which mould the minds of
secular persons to good manners.  For indeed I do not wish, while I am
in this flesh, that what I may have said should be readily made known to
men.  For I took it amiss that Anatolius the deacon of most beloved
memory gave to the lord Emperor, at his request and command, the book of
Pastoral Rule, which my most holy brother and fellow-bishop Anastasius
of Antioch translated into the Greek tongue.  And, as I was informed by
letter, it pleased him much; but it much displeased me that those who
have what is better should be occupied in what is least.

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p9"></span>Further, in the third part of the
blessed Job, in the verse wherein it is written, *I know that my
Redeemer liveth*, I suspect that my aforesaid brother and fellow-bishop
Marinianus has a corrupt copy.  For in the copy in our bookcase this
passage is given differently from what I find to be in the copies
possessed by others; and consequently I have had this passage corrected,
so that our often-named brother may have it as it is in our bookcase. 
For there are <span id="page_89">p. 89</span> <span
id="ii.viii.iii-Page_89"></span>four words, the absence of which from
the passage may cause the reader no little difficulty.  Execute all
these things thoroughly and speedily.  And, if thou canst do nothing
with the most excellent Exarch, shew thyself not to have neglected to do
what is in thy power.

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p10"></span>What shall I say concerning the place
of Albinus, as to which the answer given us is plainly contrary to
justice?  Thou oughtest, however, to consider the case attentively. 
Furthermore, a little time ago we had enjoined thy Experience to treat
with our most eminent son the præfect to the end that the care of the
conduits (*formarum*) should be committed to Augustus the vicecount, in
that he is in all respects a diligent and energetic man <span
id="fr_193"></span>[194](#fn_193) .  And thou hast so far so put off the
business as not even to inform us of what thou hast done.  And so, even
now, hasten thou with all earnestness to treat with the same our most
eminent son, that the conduits may be entirely committed to the
aforesaid most distinguished man, to the intent that he may to some
extent succeed in repairing them.  For these conduits are so scorned and
neglected that, unless greater attention be given to them, within a
short time they will go utterly to ruin.  As thou knowest, then, how
necessary this business is, and how advantageous to the general
community, thou must use thy best endeavours that it may be committed,
as we have said, to the aforesaid man for his careful attention.  Given
in the month of January, Indiction 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_192"></span>[88:193](2130124.htm#fr_192) <span
id="ii.viii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p3"></span> This subdeacon John appears to have
been at this time the pope’s representative to Ravenna, the seat of the
exarch of Italy.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[89:194](2130124.htm#fr_193) <span
id="ii.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.iii-p11"></span> The reference is to the conduits or
aqueducts for supplying water to Rome, which it was the duty of the
officer called “præfectus,” who appears to have been at this time
resident at Ravenna, to keep in order.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).](2130125)
