[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130210)  [Next](2130212) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p1"></span> <span id="page_209">p. 209</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-Page_209"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Hymn LV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxv-p2"></span>1. Lo! the Evil One reproached Death,
and was in turn reproached:  from each and to each and against each,
*were* their taunts.—2. *R., To Thee be glory, Son of the Lord of All,
Who diedst for all:  for He was raised to give life to all, in the day
of His Coming!*—3. *S*., Jonah who conquered thee, and returned back
from Sheol, became my advocate *in asking*, why sinners were spared?—4.
*D*., Slander not, O Evil One, the son of Amittai:  he showed a face of
anger, that they might praise thee more.—5. *S*., Quite powerless is all
thy persuasion, O tyrant Death:  for there pleases me nothing, of all
thou hast said.—6. *D*., For when was the word of truth pleasing to
thee?  A gulf is between thee and truthfulness, O lying one.—7. I am
righteous all my days, with nought to repent:  I am he that rescues from
thee the sons of men.—8. *S*., Proclaim thy repentance, Death, thou art
well come:  lo! Saul also among the prophets, great cause of scorn.—9.
If thou, Death, be justified, then for myself:  I cut not off hope,
likewise, of repentance.—10. *D*., No idol with my Lord have I made, O
hater of thy Lord! lo! thou by dead idols, slayest the living.—11. *S*.,
That thou, Death, art half of me, I know, and I half of thee:  if half
of me repents, it repents, but I marvel.—12. *D*., Thy partner am I in
share, but not in sin:  mine are the slain and thine the slayers, whom
thou madest sin.—13. *S*., My craftiness weeps for itself, when I
dispute with thee:  my wiles mourn over me, when I meet thee.—14. *D*.,
Workers of witchcraft and soothsayers, with all *their* offences:  the
fire that thou kindledst in the world, in Sheol I have quenched.—15.
*S*., Thou penitent who strainest out gnats, and swallowest the just: 
the chaste shall rend thee, who cry, from within thy belly.—16. *D*., It
is the treasure-house *where* I keep all the righteous:  their
resurrection threatens *ill* to thee, who didst persecute them.—17.
*S*., The greedy one who carries all creatures, in his bowels:  lo! he
casts up to me that I am robbed, of my possessions.—18. *D*., Before the
stroke lament not, for it has not *yet* reached *thee*:  the day will
come when thou shalt cry out, and I shall hear and rejoice.—19. The fire
will come that shall strip off thee thy very skin:  as by the potsherd
thou didst strip the skin of Job.—20. *D*., The savour of sloth begins,
as if to hover on me; it is then a dream that I ceased, for a short
space.—21. It was not that words failed me, and therefore I was silent: 
it is for the time I grieve, that has passed idly.—22. The hurt *done*
by thy speech is very great:  would I had not heard it!  For my whole
mind is intent upon my work.—23. This humankind that is lost, was undone
by wandering thought:  slothfulness, with negligence, brought it under
yoke.—24. The madness of desire bid for wealth, and bought it: 
contention with boastfulness, were the sureties.—25. With persistence
for strength, I wage my war:  and if I neglect but a little, my sway is
naught.—26. By continual dropping, I clean the rocks:  for continual
dropping can dissolve even a mountain.—27. Habit even over nature,
becomes master:  it trains and leads even lions, as beasts of
burden.—28. Habit, repose, and increase, with persistence; by these is
freedom conquered, though stubborn above all.—29. If its will be firmly
set, it breaks the fetters; but if lax, a fragile net, can capture
it.—30. If so be that Freedom shouts, we are scattered:  but if she be
silent we gather together, to mock at her.—31. Let us cease from much
speaking, lest it lead to much sloth:  with one mind let us assail the
wall, and lo! it is broken down.—32. *S*., Go thou and see to diseases,
and I to snares:  for to me sins and to thee pestilences, are great
solace.—33. And even though I have paused, I have not paused from my
cares:  for my will at no time rests, but is ready.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LVI.](2130212)
