[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130193)  [Next](2130195.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Hymn XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>Concerning Abraham, Bishop of
Nisibis</span>.

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p3"></span>1.  Suffer, O Lord, that even my
lowliness, should cast into Thy treasury its farthing, even as the
merchant of our flock, who made increase of his talent of Thy doctrine,
and has departed and entered Thy haven.  I will speak of the shepherd,
under him who has become head of the flock; who was disciple of the
Three, and has become our fourth master.  *R., Blessed be He Who has
made him our comfort!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p4"></span>2.  In one love will I cause them to
shine, and as a crown will I weave them, the splendid blossoms, and the
fragrant flowers of the teacher and of his disciple, who remained after
him as Elisha; for the horn of his election and he was consecrated and
became head, and he was exalted and became master.  *R., Blessed be He
Who made him chief!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p5"></span>3.  And they in heaven rejoiced for
the flock, that by the pastor whom they fed, they feed it; the abode of
the shepherds under him rejoiced, because they saw the succession of
their degrees.  He took and set him as a mind in the midst of the great
body of the church, and his members came round him to buy of him life,
doctrine, new bread.  *R., Blessed be He Who made him their treasury!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p6"></span>4.  He chose him from the multitude of
shepherds, because he had given trial of his stedfastness; the time
tested him in the midst of the flock, and length of days proved him as a
crucible; for that he gave proof in his person, He made him a wall for
many.  Let thy fasting be armour to our country, thy prayer a shield to
our city, let thy censer purchase reconcilement.  *R., Blessed be He Who
has hallowed thy sacrifices!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p7"></span>5.  The Pastor who has been parted
from his flock, fed them on spiritual pastures, and by his exalted
staff, he defended them from secret wolves.  Fill thou up the room of
thy master, which thirsts for the sound of his melody; set up thyself as
a pillar, in the city of the trembling people; support her with thy
prayers.  *R., Blessed be He Who has made thee our pillar!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p8"></span><span id="page_187">p. 187</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xviii-Page_187"></span>6.  He has committed the Hand to
his disciple, the Throne to one that is worthy of it, the Key to one
that is proved faithful, the Flock to one that has excelled.  To thy
hand belongs the laying-on, to thy offering propitiation, and to thy
tongue consolation.  May peace adorn thy Dominion; be the watchmen
within and the congregations without.  *R., Blessed be He Who has chosen
thee for rejoicings!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p9"></span>7.  May thy doctrine abound, in deeds
more than words!  In saying few words, till Thou our land with labour,
that by much tillage the scanty seed may become rich, the increase of
the old seed, may come among us thirtyfold, and thy new seed sixtyfold. 
*R., Blessed be He Who multiplies an hundredfold!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p10"></span>8.  The wrath that was against thee
ceases, because peace flows over thee altogether; the jealousy against
thee is quenched, for thy love hourly flames forth:  thou hast broken
the string of envy, that it should smite none in secret; slander that
confounds, to it thy ear turns not, for open truth is pleasing to thee. 
*R., Blessed be He Who adorned thy members!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p11"></span>9.  Thou shalt give counsel in the
midst of thy people, like Jethro among the Hebrews; thou shalt
altogether go with him, who for thy profit counsels thee, thou shalt
altogether flee from him, who otherwise counsels thee:  Rehoboam shall
be a sign to thee; thou shalt choose counsels of profit, thou shalt
refuse counsels of envy.  *R., Blessed be He Who has counselled
comfort!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p12"></span>10.  The gift that has been given
thee, from on high it flew and came down:  thou shalt call it by a name
of man, thou shalt not bear it in another power, lest haply to its place
there should come, Satan in his guile, supposing, that the sons of men
have given it to thee, so that this freeborn gift should serve in
bondage to man.  *R., Blessed be He Who has handed down his gift!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p13"></span>11.  Thy master is painted in thy
person; lo! his likeness is on thee altogether; parted from us one with
us is he.  In thee we shall see those three, the excellent ones who are
parted from us.  Thou shalt be unto us a wall as Jacob, and full of
tenderness as Babu, and a treasury of speech as Valgesh.  *R., Blessed
be He Who in one has painted them!*

<span id="iii.iv.xviii-p14"></span>12.  I, too, the offscouring of the
flock, have not withholden aught that was meet:  I have painted the
similitude of these two, in the colours of these two; that the sheep may
see their adornment, and the flock their beauties.  And I who have
become a lamb endowed with speech, unto Thee, O God of Abraham, in the
posture of Abram will give Thee praise.  *R., Blessed be He Who has made
me His harp!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVIII.](2130195.md)
