[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130137)  [Next](2130139) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p2"></span>*To Paschasius, Bishop of Neapolis
(Naples*).

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p3"></span>Gregory to Paschasius, &c.

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p4"></span>Those who with pure intent desire to
bring to the true faith aliens from the Christian religion should study
kindness, and not asperity; lest such as reason rendered with smoothness
might have appealed to should be driven far off by opposition.  For
whosoever act otherwise, and under cover of such intention would suspend
people from their accustomed observance of their own rites, are proved
to be intent on their own cause rather than on God’s.  To wit, the Jews
dwelling in Naples have complained to us, asserting that certain persons
are endeavouring unreasonably to drive them from certain solemnities of
their holidays, so that it may not be lawful for them to observe the
solemnities of their festivals, as up to this time since long ago <span
id="page_97">p. 97</span> <span id="ii.ix.viii-Page_97"></span>it has
been lawful for them and their forefathers to keep and observe them. 
Now, if this is true, these people appear to be taking trouble to no
purpose.  For what is the use, when even such long unaccustomed
prohibition is of no avail for their faith and conversion?  Or why
should we lay down rules for the Jews as to how they should observe
their ceremonies, if we cannot thereby win them?  We should therefore so
act that, being rather appealed to by reason and kindness they may wish
to follow us, and not to fly from us; and that proving to them from
their own Scriptures what we tell them, we may be able, with God’s help,
to convert them to the bosom of Mother Church.

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p5"></span>Wherefore let thy Fraternity, so far as
may be possible, with the help of God, kindle them to conversion, and
not allow them any more to be disquieted with respect to their
solemnities; but let them have free licence to observe and celebrate all
their festivals and holidays, even as hitherto both they and their
forefathers for a long time back have kept and held them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVIII](2130139)
