[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130075)  [Next](2130077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p2"></span>*To Maximus, Bishop of Salona* <span
id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112) .

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p4"></span>Gregory to Maximus, &c.

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p5"></span>When our common son the presbyter
Veteranus came to the Roman city, he found me so weak from the pains of
gout as to be quite unable to answer thy Fraternity’s letters myself. 
And indeed with regard to the nation of the Sclaves <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) , from which you are in great danger,
I am exceedingly afflicted and disturbed.  I am afflicted as suffering
already in your suffering:  I am disturbed, because they have already
begun to enter Italy by way of Istria.  Further, of Julian the
scribo <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) , what shall I say,
seeing that I see everywhere how our sins find us out, so as to cause us
to be disturbed by the nations from without and by judges from within? 
But be not at all saddened by such things, since those who shall live
after us will see worse times; so much so, that they will regard us as
having had happy days in comparison with their own.  But, so far as thy
Fraternity has power, thou oughtest to oppose thyself in behalf of the
poor, in behalf of the oppressed.  And, even if thou shouldest be unable
to do any good, the very devotion of thy heart, which Almighty God has
given, is enough for Him.  For it is written, *Rescue them that are
drawn unto death, and forbear not to deliver them that are ready to be
slain* ([Prov. xxiv. 11](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#011)<span
id="ii.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>).  But if thou shouldest say, My powers are
insufficient, He who sees into the heart understands.  In all that thou
doest, then, desire to have Him Who sees into the heart well-pleased
with thee.  But whatever there is whereby He may be pleased omit not
thou to do.  For human terrors and favours are like smoke, which is
snatched by a light breeze and vanishes away.  Know this most assuredly,
that no one can please God and bad men.  Let, therefore, thy Fraternity
esteem thyself to have pleased Almighty God in such degree as thou
knowest thyself to have displeased froward men.  Yet let thy defence of
the poor itself be moderate and grave, lest, if anything be done too
rigidly, men should think you actuated by the pride of youth.  But our
defence of the poor must needs be found of such sort that both the
humble may feel protection and oppressors may not easily find what out
of a malevolent disposition they may blame.  Attend, then, to what is
said to Ezekiel, *Son of man, unbelievers and destroyers are with thee,
and thou dost dwell among scorpions* ([Ezek. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006)<span id="ii.vi.ix-p7.2"></span>). 
And the blessed Job says, *I have been a brother of dragons, and a
companion of owls* ([Job xxx. 29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029)<span
id="ii.vi.ix-p7.3"></span>).  And Paul says to his disciples, *In the
midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in
the world* ([Philip. ii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vi.ix-p7.4"></span>).  We ought, then, to walk all the more
cautiously as we know that we are living among the enemies of God. 
Further, with regard to the Photinianists, let thy Fraternity pay the
utmost attention; and, as thou hast begun, study how to recall them to
the bosom of holy Church.  But, if any should wish to come to me, and to
receive an explanation, let them first make oath that they will not
permit their <span id="page_47">p. 47</span> <span
id="ii.vi.ix-Page_47"></span>followers to persist in their error even
after an explanation has been received.  And then let thy Holiness
promise them that they will suffer no wrong from me, but that I will
give them an explanation.  If they should acknowledge the truth, let
them accept it; if they should not acknowledge it, I will dismiss them
unharmed.  But, if any of them should wish to come to us against you,
let thy Fraternity by no means detain them; for, when they come, they
shall either accept an explanation, or assuredly they will not see that
land any more.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_112"></span>[46:113](2130076.htm#fr_112) <span
id="ii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p3"></span> For a summary of previous dealings with
Maximus of Salona, and his long defiance of the authority of Rome, see
III. 47, note 2.  It appears from this epistle that all former
insubordination, which had called forth such fulminations, was now fully
condoned.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[46:114](2130076.htm#fr_113) <span
id="ii.vi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p6"></span> Cf. IX. 9.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[46:115](2130076.htm#fr_114) <span
id="ii.vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.ix-p7"></span> As to the designation *Scribo,* see II.
32, note 7; V. 30, note 8.  As to this Julian, so described, cf. IX. 41.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Innocent, Præfect of Africa.](2130077)
