[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130167)  [Next](2130169.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>IV.—Recapitulation of Authentic Facts of
Life.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>The *Life*, whence the above
narrative is mainly derived, though evidently put into its present form
by compilers many generations later than the time of Ephraim, is in its
leading outlines to be accepted as historically trustworthy, though it
has no doubt been largely amplified by the incorporation of exaggerated
or fictitious details.  Of its essential points, not a few are confirmed
by his own writings; and many more (as has been said above, p. 121), by
evidence of hardly later date,—especially by the *Encomium* of Gregory
of Nyssa (d. 395), who assures us that he derives his account from
Ephraim’s written statements and from no other source. <span
id="fr_276"></span>[277](#fn_276.md)   This Father, as being brother of
Basil with whom Ephraim was so closely associated in his later life, may
well have known personally the man of whom he wrote, and was at least in
a position to collect and verify with discrimination the facts of his
life.  Further, the general historical framework of the biography is
sufficiently attested as correct by the contemporary secular historians,
non-Christian as well as Christian—notably (as will appear farther on),
as regards the siege of Nisibis, by one whom Ephraim most abhorred, the
Emperor Julian.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p4"></span>It may be briefly affirmed that the
external independent evidence covers all the facts included in the
summary given above (pp. 120, 121), at the opening of this Section.  It
extends farther to many incidents related in the *Life*,—such as the
attempt of Sapor to take Nisibis by turning the river against its walls,
Ephraim’s encounter with the woman who met him as he entered Edessa and
her retort to his rebuke, his borrowing the music of the heretic in
order to popularize the orthodox teaching of his own hymns, the call to
the Episcopate and his evasion of it, the constancy of the faith of the
Edessenes when threatened by the persecutor Valens, the famine and the
work of relief organized by Ephraim in the last year of his life; also
to a few of the details which belong to or verge on the
supernatural,—the dream of the vine-shoot which foreshadowed his
literary fertility, the vision of the Angel with the book who appeared
to his brother-anchorite, and that of the dove, which he himself seemed
to see, inspiring the discourses of Basil.  In these facts, greater and
smaller taken together, we have sufficient data for the derivation of
the main outlines of his life and the leading features of his character.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_276"></span>[137:277](2130168.htm#fr_276.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iv-p3"></span> There is no ground for supposing
that Gregory could read Syriac.  It follows therefore that some of
Ephraim’s writings must have been at a very early date translated into
Greek; and that one of these was the *Testament* which Gregory refers to
no less than five times in the *Encomium.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Historical Criticism of Mediæval Amplifications.](2130169.md)
