[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130220)  [Next](2130222.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xlv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xlv-p1.1"></span>Hymn LXV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlv-p2"></span>1. *Man*, O Death, despise thou it not,
that image of Adam:  which like a seed is committed to earth, till the
Resurrection.—2. *R., To thee be glory Who didst descend and plunge,
after Adam:  and draw him out from the depths of Sheol, and bring him
into Eden!*—3. *Death*, I marvel at this seed, and at your words:  for
lo! after five thousand years, it springs not yet.—4. *M.*, Its present
state passes away, as winter *does*:  and as a handful of *corn* it
comes in the resurrection, to the garner of life.—5. *D*., That there is
vintage-time, lo! I know, but I have not seen:  the dead at any time
sown, or yet reaped.—6. *M*., There is coming a reaping, <span
id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span id="iii.iv.xlv-Page_217"></span>O
Death, that will leave thee bare:  and the Watchers shall go forth as
reapers, and make thee desolate.—7. *D*., When did I become husbandman,
instead of vine-dresser? who has turned Sheol the wine-press, into a
tilled field?—8. *M*., Does not the seed then teach thee, which decays
and dies:  and *is* cut off from hope, yet from the rain, recovers
hope?—9. *D*., A dream have ye seen ye feeble ones, of life from the
dead:  for in waking time the resurrection, ye do not see.—10. *M*., Thy
drowsiness hinders thee, that thou seest not:  the multitudes of
mysteries which cry aloud, of the resurrection.—11. *D*., I know that
seeds come to life, but I have not seen:  bones that grew in Sheol, and
sprang and came up.—12. *M*., All thy discourse is like thyself, for lo!
Ezekiel:  has taught thee how in the valley, the dead come to life.—13.
*D*., Trees have I seen how in summer, they put on their garments:  but
bones in their nakedness, are cast into Sheol.—14. *M*., Moses broke by
his splendour, thy heart, O Death:  the son of Adam has regained and put
on, the glory of Adam.—15. *D.*, Our law in Sheol is this, to keep
silence:  for you are words and for me deeds, O feeble ones.—16. *M*.,
How are the aged passed over if thou be vinedresser?  He Who hindered
thee from *taking* their lives, the same quickens all.—17. The babe in
the womb confutes thee, which is *as* buried there:  to me it proclaims
life from the dead, but to thee despoiling.—18. The despised flower
despises thee, for it is shut up and passed over:  yet though lost it is
not lost, but blossoms again.—19. The chick cries out from the egg,
wherein it is buried:  and the graves are rent by a Voice, and the body
arises.—20. For a body too is the chick, that is in the egg:  lo! its
body to our body proclaims, the life from the dead.—21. With the locust
thy plea is overthrown, and ended, O Death:  for in coming forth from
the dust it teaches, the life from the dead.—22. *D.*, I had been
content if already, the resurrection had been:  for the day of
resurrection had disturbed me less, than your judgments.—23. Merciful is
the Son of the Highest, yea good and just:  and will not harshly avenge
on me, the death of Adam.—24. Have ye then no understanding, to perceive
this:  that your father laid on you, this retribution?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LXVI.](2130222.md)
