[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130186)  [Next](2130188) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p1"></span> <span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xi-Page_178"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xi-p1.1"></span>Hymn X.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p2"></span>1.  My children have been slain; and my
daughters *that are* without me,—their walls are overthrown, their
children scattered,—and their holy places trodden down.  *R., Blessed is
Thy chastisement!*

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p3"></span>2.  The fowlers have taken, my doves out
of my strongholds,—which quitted their nests, and fled to the caves;—in
the net have they taken them.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p4"></span>3.  After the manner of wax, that melts
before the fire,—thus melted and dissolved, the bodies, of my sons
before the heat—and the drought of my strongholds.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p5"></span>4.  And instead of streams, of milk that
used to flow,—for my sons and my little ones, milk fails the sucklings,
and water the weaned children.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p6"></span>5.  The suckling falls, from its mother
and gasps,—because it cannot suck, nor can she give suck:—they breathe
out their spirit and die.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p7"></span>6.  How is it possible, that Thy grace
can refrain—the welling of its stream, when it is not possible to
restrain—the abundance of its flow?

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p8"></span>7.  And why has Thy grace, shut up its
mercies,—and withheld its streams, from the people that cry,—for one to
moisten their tongue?

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p9"></span>8.  And there was a pit, between them and
their brethren;—like the rich man who cried, and there was none to
answer,—to moisten his tongue.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p10"></span>9.  And as into the midst of fire, the
wretched ones were cast;—and heat in the midst of thirst, the fire was
blowing,—and kindling upon them.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p11"></span>10.  Their carcases were melted, and
dissolved by the heat;—they that had thirsted gave in turn the earth to
drink,—of the reek of their bodies.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p12"></span>11.  And the fort that with thirst, had
killed, its dwellers,—it drank in its turn of the flux from the
corpses,—that were melted by thirst.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p13"></span>12.  Who has seen a people—that were
burning with thirst,—while there surrounded them a wall of water and
they could not—moisten their tongue!

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p14"></span>13.  Surely with the judgment of Sodom,
were my beloved judged,—and my children smitten, with the torment of
Sodom;—though that was but *for* one day.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p15"></span>14.  The torment of fire, though it be
*for* one hour, O my Lord,—in lingering thirst, is a lingering death,
and a subtle punishment.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p16"></span>15.  After my sorrows, O my Lord, and my
bitter sufferings,—this is the best comfort, wherewith Thou hast
comforted me,—that Thou hast multiplied my afflictions.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p17"></span>16.  The medicine that I hoped, it is
sorrow decreed;—the binding up that I looked for, it is bitter
calamity,—that it seeks to work for me.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p18"></span>17.  And whereas I hoped to escape, from
the midst of the storm;—worse for me is the storm in it, even in the
harbour,—than that in the sea.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p19"></span>18.  Whereas I thought in my folly, that
I should anchor and escape—from the midst of the Gulf; my sins have cast
me back—again into the midst of it.

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p20"></span>19.  Look, O my Lord, on my limbs, how
the swords are thick in me,—and have left *their* mark on my arms; and
the scars of the spears,—are planted in my sides!

<span id="iii.iv.xi-p21"></span>20.  Tears in mine eyes, and in my ears
*ill* rumours,—wailing in my mouth, and mourning in my heart!—Add no
more, O my Lord, to me!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XI.](2130188)
