[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130201)  [Next](2130203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Hymn XXXVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p2"></span>1.  Death was weeping for her, even for
Sheol, when he saw her treasury that it was emptied.  And he said, Who,
then, has plundered thy riches?  Gehazi stole and was discovered; I am
stealing every day, *but* theft has not been laid to my charge.  I am
sent to Kings, in their sicknesses, their guards are set around them,
guards are also at their gate.  The soul of kings I snatch and I go
forth.  *R., Blessed is He Who has broken the sting of Death by His
Cross!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p3"></span>2.  All women grieve that are barren;
Sheol rejoices because of her barrenness; she is desolate if so be that
she brings forth.  The all-compelling Power constrained it, even the
bosom *that was* barren and cold, and it rendered back though wont to
deny its debts.  Rebekah, when the two babes afflicted her, asked for
death.  How great then the pain of Sheol, when there smote her strange
pangs; the dead were roused and brake forth and came out from her
bowels.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p4"></span>3.  Is this then perchance that saying,
which was heard by me from Isaiah? (but I despised it) when he arose and
said, “Who hath heard such a thing as this? that the earth should
travail in one day, and bring forth a nation in one hour.”  Is it this
that has come to pass? or else, is it reserved for us hereafter?  And if
it be this it is a vain shadow that I thought I am a king; I knew not it
was but a deposit I was keeping.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p5"></span>4.  Two utterances that were different,
have I heard from him, even this Isaiah.  For he said that a virgin
should conceive and bring forth; and he said again that the earth should
bring forth.  But lo! the Virgin has brought Him forth, and Sheol the
barren has brought Him forth; two wombs that contrary to nature, have
been changed by Him; the Virgin and Sheol both of them.  The Virgin in
her bringing forth He made glad; but Sheol He grieved and made sad in
His Resurrection.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p6"></span>5.  I saw in the valley that Ezekiel,
who quickened the dead when he was questioned; and I saw the bones that
were in heaps and they moved.  There was a tumult of bones in Sheol,
bone seeking for his fellow, and joint for her mate.  There was there
none that questioned, or that was questioned, whether those bones
lived.  Unquestioned, the voice of Jesus, the Master of all creatures
quickened them.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p7"></span>6.  Sheol was made sorrowful when she
saw them, even the sorrowful dead made to rejoice.  She wept for Lazarus
when he went forth, “Go in peace *thou* dead that livest, bewailed by
two houses of mourning.”  Within and without were lamentations for him;
for his sisters wept for him when he came into the grave unto me, and I
wept for him as he went forth.  In his death there was weeping among the
living; likewise in Sheol is great mourning at his resurrection.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p8"></span>7.  Now it is that I have tasted the
taste of his sorrow, even of him who weeps over his beloved.  The dead
that are thus beloved of Sheol, how dear *were* they to their fathers! 
The limbs which I severed and carried away, lo! they are shorn away and
carried off from me.  If I thus suffer for the departure of him, the
youth who was restored to life, blessed is He Who had compassion on the
widow; in her only son He gave peace to her dwelling that had been made
desolate.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p9"></span>8.  Lo! this suffering which I cause
men to suffer in their beloved ones, in the end on me it gathers itself
altogether.  For when the dead shall have left Sheol, for every <span
id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span id="iii.iv.xxvi-Page_199"></span>man
there will be resurrection, and for me alone torment.  And who is he
then that shall bear for me all these things, that I shall see Sheol
left alone, because this voice which has rent the graves, makes her
desolate and sends forth the dead that were in her midst?

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p10"></span>9.  If a man reads in the Prophets, he
hears there of righteous wars.  But if a man meditate in the story of
Jesus, he learns of grace and tender mercy.  And if a man think of
Jesus, that He is a strange God it is a reproach against me.  No other
strange key into the gate of Sheol could ever be fitted.  One is the key
of the Creator, that which has opened it, yea, is to open it at His
Coming.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p11"></span>10.  Who is he that is able to join
the bones, save that Power which created them?  What is it that shall
reunite the shreds of the body, save the hand of the Maker?  What is it
that shall restore the forms, save the finger of the Creator?  He, who
created and turned and destroyed, is He that is able also to renew and
raise up.  Another God is unable to enter in and restore creatures not
his own.

<span id="iii.iv.xxvi-p12"></span>11.  But were he another Power, I
should be very joyful that He is coming to me.  Into the bosom of Sheol
He would descend and learn that One alone is God.  Mortals that have
erred and preached that there are Gods many, lo! they are bound for me
in Sheol, and their Gods have never grieved because of them.  One God do
I know, and His Prophets and His Apostles do I acknowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XXXVIII.](2130203)
