[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130240)  [Next](2130242) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.xvi-p1.1"></span>Hymn XV.</span>

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.xvi-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Blessed is He above all in His
Birth!*  (bis).

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p3"></span>1.  Celebrate, O nations, this feast,
first fruits of all feasts;—recount the sufferings that were, and the
wounds and pains,—that we may know what plagues, He healed, the Son Who
was sent.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p4"></span>R., Blessed be He Who sufficed to heal
our pains!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p5"></span>2.  Celebrate, O saved nations, Him Who
saves all in His Birth.—Even my feeble tongue, has become a harp through
*His* mercy.—The excellency of the Firstborn, in His Festival let us
sing.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p6"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has made us meet
for His Feast!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p7"></span>3.  How then can any one, admire a
physician,—until he hear and learn, what were the pains he healed?—And
when our plagues are proclaimed, then is our Healer magnified.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p8"></span>R., Blessed be He Who is exalted in our
pains!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p9"></span>4.  Created things were worshipped: 
because the worshipper was foolish,—he used to worship all things; but
One they worshipped not.—He came down therefore in mercy and broke, the
yoke that enslaved all.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p10"></span>R., Blessed is He Who loosed our pains!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p11"></span>5.  The mercies of the Highest were
revealed; He came down and set free His creature.—In this blessed month,
wherein are made releases of *slaves*,—the Lord underwent bondage, to
call the bond to freedom.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p12"></span>R., Blessed is He Who brought freedom!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p13"></span>6.  The Lord of the months chose Him,
two months for His doings.—His Conception was in Nisan, and His Birth in
Conun.—In Nisan He sanctified them that were con<span id="page_253">p.
253</span> <span id="iii.v.xvi-Page_253"></span>ceived; and them that
were born He set free in Conun.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p14"></span>R., Blessed be He Who makes glad His
months!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p15"></span>7.  The Sun revealed in silence, his
worshippers to his Lord:—it was grievous to him, a servant, to be
worshipped instead of his Lord.—Lo! creation is glad, that the Creator
is worshipped.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p16"></span>R., Blessed is the Child that is
worshipped.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p17"></span>8.  The months wore three *crowns*, and
crowned Him in His triumphs.—Blessed *is* the Sun for His Birth, and for
His Resurrection desired,—and for His Ascension blessed; the months have
borne Him crowns.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p18"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has triumphed in
His months!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p19"></span>9.  Unveil and make glad thy face, O
Creature, in our feast.—Let the Church sing with voice; Heaven and earth
in silence!—Sing and praise the Child, who has brought release for all!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p20"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has annulled the
bonds!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p21"></span>10.  When fools did reverence to the
Sun, in reverence to him they disgraced him.—But now when all know he is
a servant, in his course his Lord is worshipped;—all servants rejoice,
that as servants they are reckoned.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p22"></span>R., Blessed be He Who ordered their
natures!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p23"></span>11.  We have done perverse things, who
have become servants of servants.—Lo! our freedom compelled him, a
servant, to become lord to us:—the Sun, the servant for all, we have
made Lord for all.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p24"></span>R., Blessed is He Who to Himself has
turned us!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p25"></span>12.  And the Moon too which was
worshipped, has been set free by His Birth.—For ’tis strange that by her
light, which enlightens the eyes,—by it the eyes were darkened, that
they gazed on her as a God.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p26"></span>R., Blessed be the beam that has
enlightened us!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p27"></span>13.  Fire commended Thy Birth, which
drew away worship from it.—The magi used to worship it:  they who have
worshipped before Thee.—They left it and worshipped its Lord; they
exchanged fire for the Fire.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p28"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has bathed us in
His light!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p29"></span>14. In place of the senseless fire that
eats up its own body of itself,—the magi adored the Fire Who gave His
Body to be eaten.—The live coal drew near and sanctified, the lips that
were unclean.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p30"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has mixed His Fire
in us!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p31"></span>15.  Delusion blinded men, to worship
created things:—fellow servants were worshipped, and the God of all was
wronged.—He Who is to be worshipped came down *to His* birth, and
gathered to himself worship.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p32"></span>R., Blessed is He Who by all is
worshipped!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p33"></span>16.  The All-knowing saw, that *men*
worship things that were made:—He put on a body that was made, that in
our custom He might take us captive,—and by a body that was made, drew
us to the Creator.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p34"></span>R., Blessed be He Who drew us with
guile!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p35"></span>17.  The Evil One knew how to harm us;
and by lights he blinded us,—by possessions he hurt us, through gold he
made us poor,—by the graver’s graven images, he made us a heart of
stone.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p36"></span>R., Blessed is He Who came and softened
it!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p37"></span>18.  They graved and set up stones,
whereon men should stumble.—They set them not on the highway, for the
blind to stumble on:—they called them Gods, that on them *with* open
*eyes* men might stumble.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p38"></span>R., Blessed is He Who exposed the idols
which they feared!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p39"></span>19.  Sin had spread its wings, and
covered all things,—that none could discern, of himself or from above,
the truth.—Truth came down into the womb, came forth and rolled away
error.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p40"></span>R., Blessed is He Who dispelled Sin by
His Birth!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p41"></span>20.  For Mercy endured not, to see the
way hindered.—When He came down for conception, He opened the way *and
made it* easy:—when He came forth in birth, He trod it and marked its
miles.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p42"></span>R., Blessed is the peace of Thy Way!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p43"></span><span id="page_254">p. 254</span> <span
id="iii.v.xvi-Page_254"></span>21.  He chose the Prophets; they cleared
the way for the people:—He sent the Apostles; they smoothed paths for
the nations.—The snares of the Evil One were shamed, when feeble men
cleared them away.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p44"></span>R., Blessed is He Who made our paths
plain!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p45"></span>22.  The graven images blinded, their
gravers in secret:—they graved eyes on stone, and darkened the eyes of
the soul.—Praise to Thy Birth that opened, the sight that was blinded.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p46"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has restored
sight!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p47"></span>23.  Let women praise Her, the pure
Mary,—that *as* in Eve their mother,—great was their reproach,—lo! in
Mary their sister,—greatly magnified was their honour.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p48"></span>R., Blessed is He Who sprang from women!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p49"></span>24.  Let the nations praise Thy Birth,
that they have gained eyes to see,—how their wine has made them reel;
and they have seen their own humiliation?—They come to know themselves,
and worship Him who has rescued them.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p50"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has taught
repentance!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p51"></span>25.  Its worship mankind—had spread
everywhere:—Him Who is *to be* worshipped it sought not, that worship
should be paid Him.—But He endured not—worshippers that err.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p52"></span>R., Blessed is He Who came down and is
worshipped!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p53"></span>26.  The gold of the idols worshipped
Thee, that Thou didst treat it as alms; which availed not apart, for the
uses of life.—It hasted to Thy purse, as it had hasted to the manger.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p54"></span>R., Blessed be He Whom Creation has
loved!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p55"></span>27.  The frankincense worshipped Thy
Birth, which had served demons.—It sorrowed *then* in its vapour:  it
exulted when it saw its Lord.—Instead of *being* the incense of
delusion, it was an oblation before God!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p56"></span>R., Blessed is Thy Birth which is
worshipped!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p57"></span>28.  The myrrh worshipped Thee for
itself, and for its kindred ointments.—The hands that bore its ointment,
had anointed abominable graven images.—To Thee the perfume was sweet,
from the anointing wherewith Mary anointed Thee.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p58"></span>R., Blessed is Thy savour which is sweet
to us!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p59"></span>29.  The gold that had been worshipped
worshipped thee, when the magi offered it.—That which had been
worshipped in molten images, gave worship to Thee.—With its worshippers
it worshipped Thee, it confessed that Thou art He that is to be
worshipped.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p60"></span>R., Blessed is He Who claimed worship
for Himself!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p61"></span>30.  The Evil One fled and his hosts, he
that used to exult in the world.—In the high places they sacrificed
heifers to him, in the gardens they slew bulls for him.—He swallowed up
all creation, he filled his belly with prey.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p62"></span>R., Blessed be He Who came and made him
disgorge!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p63"></span>31.  Of him the Lord said, that he had
fallen from Heaven.—The Abhorred One had exalted himself; from his
uplifting he has fallen.  The foot of Mary has trod him down, who
bruised Eve with his heel.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p64"></span>R., Blessed be He Who by His Birth laid
him low!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p65"></span>32.  Chaldeans went about, in all places
and led astray:—the preachers of delusion, were shamed through the
world,—they were shamed and overcome,—by the preachers of truth.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p66"></span>R., Blessed be the Babe Whom they
preached!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p67"></span>33.  Sin had spread out, her nets for
the draught.—Praise *be* to Thy Birth that captured, the nets of
delusion.—The soul took flight on high, which had been taken in the
deep.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p68"></span>R., Blessed is He Who prepared for us
wings!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p69"></span>34.  His Will was able, even by force to
rescue us.—*But* since *it was* not force that made us guilty, it was
not by force He purged us.—The Evil One by enticement enslaved us:  Thy
Birth enticed to give us life.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p70"></span>R., Blessed be He Who planned and gave
us life!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p71"></span><span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="iii.v.xvi-Page_255"></span>35.  The creatures complained that they
were worshipped; in silence they sought release.—The All-Releaser heard,
and because He endured it not He came down,—put on *the form of* a
servant in the womb, came forth, set free Creation.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p72"></span>R., Blessed be He Who made his Creation
his gain!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p73"></span>36.  Mercy was kindled on high, at the
voice of Creation that cried out:—Gabriel was sent; he came and gave
tidings of Thy Conception.—When Thou camest to the Birth, Watchers gave
tidings of thy coming forth.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p74"></span>R., Blessed be by Thy Worship above all!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p75"></span>37.  For greater is the joy of the Birth
than the Conception.—Yea it was one angel, that brought us tidings of
Thy Conception:—*but* in the joy of Thy Birth, a multitude of Watchers
brought tidings.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p76"></span>R., Blessed be Thy tidings in Thy day!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p77"></span>38.  Glory to Thee I too in Thy day,
will offer, O Thou that art worshipped!—Take of the fruit that is mine;
and give me mercy which is Thine!—For if the evil that is in me gives
gifts, how much more shalt Thou give Who art good!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p78"></span>R., Blessed is Thy wealth in Thy
servant!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p79"></span>39.  The two things Thou soughtest, in
Thy Birth have been done for us.—Our visible body Thou hast put on; Thy
invisible might we have put on:—our body has become Thy clothing; Thy
Spirit has become our robe.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p80"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has been adorned
and has adorned us!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p81"></span>40.  Height and depth were amazed, that
Thy Birth subdued the rebels.—For that we gave Thee hostages, Thou
gavest us the Paraclete:—when the hostages went up from us, the Captain
of the host came down to us.

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p82"></span>R., Blessed be He Who took away and sent
down!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p83"></span>41.  Come ye mouths of all and pour
forth, and be in the likeness of waters, and wells of voices!  May the
Holy Spirit come,—and sing glory through us all, to the Father Who has
redeemed us through His Son!

<span id="iii.v.xvi-p84"></span>*R., Blessed is He above all in His
Birth!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVI.](2130242)
