[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130156)  [Next](2130158) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVI.</span>

<span id="ii.x.vii-p2"></span>*From Felix Bishop of Messana* <span
id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242) *to St. Gregory.*

<span id="ii.x.vii-p4"></span>To the most blessed and honourable lord,
the holy father Pope Gregory, Felix lover of your Weal and Holiness.

<span id="ii.x.vii-p5"></span><span id="page_108">p. 108</span> <span
id="ii.x.vii-Page_108"></span>The claims under God of your most blessed
Weal and Holiness are manifest.  For, though the whole earth was filled
with observance of the true faith by the preaching and doctrine of the
apostles, yet the orthodox Church of Christ, having been founded by
apostolical institution and most firmly established by the faithful
fathers, is further built up through the teaching of divine discourses,
while instructed by your hortatory admonition.  To it did all the most
blessed apostles, endowed with an equal participation of dignity and
authority <span id="fr_243"></span>[244](#fn_243) , convert hosts of
peoples; and by salutary precepts and admonitions, piously and holily,
brought such as were foreknown in the grace of divine predestination
from darkness to light, from error to the true faith, from death to
life.  Following the merits of these holy apostles, and perfectly acting
up to their example, your honoured Paternity adorns with them the Church
of God by probity of manners and holiness of deeds; and, strong in
sacred faith and Christian manners, enjoins what should be done to
please God, and unceasingly follows and fulfils pontifical duties, thus
observing the precepts of divine law; since (as says the Apostle) *Not
the hearers of the law are just before God, but the doers of the law
shall be justified* ([Rom. ii. 13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013)<span
id="ii.x.vii-p6.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.x.vii-p7"></span>As we were meditating on these things,
news was brought us by certain who came from Rome that you had written
to our comrade Augustine (afterwards ordained Bishop for the nation of
the Angli, and thither sent by your venerable Holiness), and to the
Angli (whom we have long known to have been converted to the faith
through you), that persons related in the fourth degree of descent, if
married, should not be separated <span id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244)
.  Now this was not formerly the custom either in those or in these
parts, when I was brought up and taught together with you from infancy;
nor have I read of it in any decrees of your predecessors, or in the
institutes of other Fathers generally or specially, or learnt that it
had been allowed hitherto by any of the wise.  But I have found from
your holy predecessors, and from the rest of the holy Fathers, assembled
as well in the Nicene synod as in other holy councils, that this \[i.e.
*this prohibition of marriage*\] should be observed down to the seventh
degree of descent; and I know that this is carefully seen to by men who
live aright and fear the Lord.  While these things were being discussed
among us, other things also supervened, concerning which it seems
necessary for us to consult your authority.  For there came to us both
Benedict, bishop of the Syracusan Church, and also others of our
brethren, being bishops, weeping, and saying that they were greatly
disturbed and afflicted in mind on account of the immoderate proceedings
of secular and lay persons, in consequence of which some unjust things
were also being said against them.

<span id="ii.x.vii-p9"></span>There are also some churches in our
province about the consecration of which doubt is felt; and, because
both of their antiquity and of the carelessness of their custodians, it
is unknown whether they have been dedicated by bishops or not.  As to
all these things we beg to be instructed by your Holiness, and by the
authority of your holy see; and we ask to be informed by your letters
whether what, as we have before said, we have heard that you had written
to our aforesaid comrade Augustine and to the nation of the Angli was
written specially to them or generally to all; and we desire to be fully
informed both on this matter and on the others above written.

<span id="ii.x.vii-p10"></span>For we do not signify to you what we have
read, and what we know to be observed by the faithful, by way of finding
fault (which be far from us); but we seek to know what we may reasonably
and faithfully observe in this matter.  And, since no slight murmuring
is going on among us on this question, we seek an answer from you, as
from the head, as to what we should reply to our brethren and fellow
bishops; lest we should remain doubtful in the matter, and lest this
murmuring should remain among us both in your times and in times to
come, and your reputation, which has always been good and excellent,
should be lacerated or disparaged through detractions, or your name
(which God forbid) should be evil spoken of in succeeding times.  For
we, observing under God what is right with humble heart, being bound to
you in one bond of charity, and defending your religion in all things as
faithful pupils, seek knowledge of what is right from you.  For we know
that, as the apostles in the first place who were prelates of the holy
See, and their successors afterwards, have always done, so you also take
care of the universal Church, and especially of bishops, who on account
of their contemplation and speculation are called the eyes of the Lord;
and that you think continually about our religion and law, as it is
written, <span id="page_109">p. 109</span> <span
id="ii.x.vii-Page_109"></span>*Blessed is he who shall meditate in the
law of the Lard day and night* ([Ps. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#002)<span id="ii.x.vii-p10.1"></span>). 
Which meditation of yours is not only seen by reading, through the
outward expression of letters, but, by the grace of Christ abounding in
you, is known to be immoveably engrafted in your conscience; while the
most holy law of Christ the Lord in no wise departs from your heart; as
says the Prophet in the Psalms, *The mouth of the righteous will
meditate wisdom, and his tongue will be talking of judgments:  the law
of God is in his heart* ([Ps. xxxvi.
30](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#030)<span id="ii.x.vii-p10.2"></span>);
written not with ink, but in secret by the Spirit of the living God; not
therefore on tables of stone, but on the tables of the heart.  Let all
gloom of darkness, we pray you, be dispelled by your most wise replies
and assistance, that the morning star may shine upon us through you,
most holy Father, and a dogmatic definition causing joy to all
everywhere, because the glorious Fathers of holy Church are known to
have preached proper and most pious dogmas unto secure inheritance of
eternal life.

<span id="ii.x.vii-p11"></span>*Subscription*.  May the Lord keep you
safe and well-pleasing to God for ever, holy father of fathers, while
you pray for us.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_242"></span>[107:243](2130157.htm#fr_242) <span
id="ii.x.vii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vii-p3"></span> Messina in Sicily.  This Felix cannot be
identified with Felix, bishop of the same See, to whom previous letters
(viz. I. 66, together with two others, I. 40, and II. 5, which have not
been translated) had been addressed.  For he had been succeeded in the
see by Donus, probably in the 14th Indiction, i.e. <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x.vii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 595–6, (see VI.
9), when Gregory’s reply to Augustine’s interrogatories, which is the
main subject of the epistle before us, had not yet been sent.  Augustine
does not appear to have even arrived in Britain till <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.x.vii-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 597.  But there
seems to be no reason against the supposition that a second Felix had
succeeded Donus at Messina before the death of Gregory, the last mention
of Donus being in the superscription of Ep. XVIII. in Book XIII.,
assigned to the 16th Indiction, i.e. <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x.vii-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 602–3.

<span id="fn_243"></span>[108:244](2130157.htm#fr_243) <span
id="ii.x.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vii-p6"></span> See also below—“the apostles in the first
place who were prelates of the Apostolic See.”  It would seem from these
expressions that the Sicilian bishops went on the tradition of St. Paul
and St. Peter having been joint founders of the Roman Church and
throughout the epistle, though the supremacy of the See of Rome is
acknowledged, it is not spoken of as derived especially from St. Peter.

<span id="fn_244"></span>[108:245](2130157.htm#fr_244) <span
id="ii.x.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vii-p8"></span> See XI., 64 (*Responsio ad Interrog*.
vi.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Felix, Bishop of Messana.](2130158)
