[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130142)  [Next](2130144.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXI.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p2"></span>*To Phocas, Emperor* <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) .

<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p4"></span>Gregory to Phocas Augustus.

<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p5"></span>Glory to God in the highest who,
according as it is written, changes times, and transfers kingdoms,
seeing that He has made apparent to all what He vouchsafed to speak by
His prophet, *That the most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and
giveth it to whomsoever he will* ([Dan. iv.
17](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.ix.xiii-p5.1"></span>).  For in the incomprehensible dispensation
of Almighty God there are alternate controlments of mortal life; and
sometimes, when the sins of many are to be smitten, one is raised up
through whose hardness the necks of subjects may be bowed down under the
yoke of tribulation, as in our affliction we have long had proof.  But
sometimes, when the merciful God has decreed to refresh the mourning
hearts of many with His consolation, He advances one to the summit of
government, and through the bowels of His mercy infuses the grace of
exultation in Him into the minds of all.  In which abundance of
exultation we believe that we shall speedily be confirmed, who rejoice
that the Benignity of your Piety has arrived at imperial supremacy. 
*Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad* ([Ps. xcv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/psa095.htm#011)<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p5.2"></span>.md);
and let the whole people of the republic, hitherto afflicted
exceedingly, grow cheerful for your benignant deeds.  Let the proud
minds of enemies be subdued under the yoke of your domination.  Let the
crushed and depressed spirits of subjects be revived by your mercy:  let
the power of heavenly grace make you terrible to your enemies, your
piety kind to your subjects.  Let the whole republic have rest in your
most happy times, the pillage of peace under colour of processes at law
being exposed.  Let plottings about wills cease, and benevolences
exacted by force.  Let secure possession of their own return to all,
that they may rejoice in having without fear what they have acquired
without fraud.  Let every single person’s liberty be now at length
restored to him under the yoke of empire.  For there is this difference
between the kings of the nations and the emperors of the republic, that
the kings of the nations are lords of slaves, but the emperors of the
republic lords of freemen.  But we shall better speak of these things by
praying than by putting you in mind of them.  May Almighty God in every
thought and deed keep the heart of your Piety in the hand of His grace;
and whatever things should be done justly, whatever things with
clemency, may the Holy Spirit who dwells in your breast direct, that
your Clemency may both be exalted in a temporal kingdom, and after
courses of many years attain to heavenly kingdoms.  Given in the month
of June, Indiction 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[99:218](2130143.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="ii.ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xiii-p3"></span> Phocas succeeded Mauricius as Emperor
in November, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ix.xiii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 602.  With regard to Gregory’s
adulatory tone towards this sanguinary usurper and his consort Leontia,
see *Prolegomena*, p. xxvii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXIV](2130144.md)
