[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130168)  [Next](2130170.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>V.—Historical Criticism of Mediæval
Amplifications.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p2"></span>But along with the genuine and
trustworthy matter, the compiler has embodied much that is unattested
and in many cases inherently improbable, and even some things that are
demonstrably untrue.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p3"></span><span id="page_138">p. 138</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_138"></span>i.  *The Miraculous Details*.—To
the category of the improbable—the fiction of hagiology or the growth of
myth—belong the miracles so freely ascribed to Ephraim and the
miraculous events represented as attending on his career.  It is
noteworthy that Ephraim himself, though no doubt he believed that he was
the recipient of Divine intimations in dream or vision, never lays claim
to supernatural powers.  Nor does Gregory in the *Encomium* attribute to
him any such—except in the case of the rich friend who for his mistaken
zeal was given over to an evil spirit; and on his repentance relieved
through Ephraim’s intercession. <span id="fr_277"></span>[278](#fn_277.md)
  The voice that issued from his father’s idol foretelling his future
war against idolatry—the answer of the new-born babe that cleared him
from calumny—the crowned phantom on the walls of Nisibis that scared the
besiegers—the plague of insects that drove them into disastrous
flight—the Angel sent to call him back to Edessa when he had fled
thence—the storm hushed and the sea-monster slain by his word on the
voyage to Egypt—the monk whom he delivered at once from demoniacal
possession and from heresy—the sudden gift of tongues which enabled him
to speak Coptic with Bishoi and Greek with Basil—the restoration to life
of the youth who had died of a viper’s bite at Samosata—the paralytic
healed at the church door in Edessa—the disappearance of the record of
guilt from the scroll on which the penitent of Cæsarea had written her
confession—all these belong to the later growth of legend that springs
up naturally over the tomb of a saint.  Some of them may be safely set
aside as purely fictitious; others are probably due to metaphoric
expressions mistaken for literal assertions, or to rhetorical
amplification throwing a false coloring of the supernatural over
ordinary events.  Most of them, moreover, bear evident signs of having
been dressed by the compiler into spurious resemblance to the miraculous
narrations in the Old and New Testaments, of the Divine dealings with
Prophets and Apostles,—Elisha, Jonah, St. Peter, St. Paul, or even of
the works of power which attested the mission of our Lord Himself on
earth.  In reading these, one cannot fail to feel painfully—though the
narrator seems quite unconscious of—the irreverence of the travesty.  It
is noteworthy that some, even of the non-miraculous incidents of the
*Life* appear to have been similarly handled.  Thus the account of the
stoning of Ephraim outside of Edessa seems modelled after that of St.
Paul at Lystra, ([Acts 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019.md),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p4.1"></span>):  and the simulated madness by which he
evaded the call of the Episcopate is apparently borrowed from the
history of David’s behavior before Achish and his servants at Gath ([1
Sam. xxi. 13-15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#013.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p4.2"></span>).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p5"></span>ii.  *The Demonstrably Incorrect or
Contradictory Statements*.—Farther, even when we have laid aside all
that is seemingly exaggerated, invented or mythical in the *Life*, there
remains much in it that, when critically examined, proves to need
correction or to deserve rejection.  We proceed to deal with some
questions which arise affecting the historical credibility of its
narrative.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p6"></span>1.  *Ephraim’s Alleged Heathen
Parentage*.—The heathen parentage assigned to Ephraim, and consequently
the whole narrative of his conversion to Christianity and his consequent
troubles, may be without hesitation discredited.  They are
irreconcilable with his own words <span
id="fr_278"></span>[279](#fn_278) (*Adv. Hæreses*, XXVI..md), “I was born
in the way of truth:  though my boyhood understood not the greatness of
the benefit, I knew it when trial came.”  So again more explicitly (if
we may trust a *Confession* which is extant only in Greek), “I had been
early taught about Christ by my parents; they who begat me <span
id="page_139">p. 139</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_139"></span>after the flesh, had trained me in the
fear of the Lord.…My parents were confessors before the judge:  yea, I
am the kindred of martyrs.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p8"></span>2.  *The First and Third Sieges of
Nisibis*.—In the narrative of the siege of Nisibis, and especially of
the presence and intercession of St. Jacob the Bishop, there is
confusion and grave error.  It is certain that in the reign of
Constantius (337–361), Nisibis was three times besieged by Sapor. <span
id="fr_279"></span>[280](#fn_279.md)   The siege in which St. Jacob was
within the city took place in the year 338, and he died the same year. 
The attempt of Sapor to employ the intercepted waters of the Mygdonius
for the destruction of its walls, belongs to a later siege—the third, of
the year 350—twelve years after the death of Jacob.  These two sieges
are expressly recorded in the “*Paschal* (otherwise *Alexandrine
Chronicle*),” followed by Theophanes in his *Chronographia* (who also
mentions briefly the intervening siege of 346); and the account given by
the former of these chroniclers (who wrote in the seventh century) rests
on the authority of an Epistle written by Valgesh, Bishop of Nisibis in
350, who is eulogized by Ephraim in five of the *Nisibene Hymns*
contained in the present volume (XIII–XVII.).  Other contemporary
evidence, fuller, and at first hand, to the same effect, is forthcoming
from two widely different sources.—As already intimated, the Apostate is
here alone with the champion of the Faith.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p10"></span>In his second *Oration* <span
id="fr_280"></span>[281](#fn_280.md) (addressed, probably in the year 358,
to Constantius, then Emperor) Julian describes the siege with even more
circumstantial detail than our biographer, placing it after the death of
Constans, which took place in January 350, and thus confirming the date
assigned by the Paschal chronicler and by Theophanes.  According to
Julian’s account, the embankment formed by Sapor, the work of four
months, <span id="fr_281"></span>[282](#fn_281.md) was so constructed as to
encompass the whole circuit of Nisibis, so that the river intercepted by
it “formed a lake in the middle of which the city stood as an island,”
with “the battlements of its walls barely appearing above the
surrounding waters”; and on the surface of this encircling lake, he
launched armed vessels and floating war-engines.  By these the
fortifications were ceaselessly battered for several days,—till of a
sudden the river (then in flood) burst its barrier, and carried away not
only the embankment but a hundred cubits of the city wall.  Through the
breach thus made, Sapor pushed forward his cavalry to lead the advance
upon the city which lay thus seemingly at his mercy.  But they proved
unable to overcome the difficulties of the intervening ground—torn up
and flooded as it was by the torrent, and traversed moreover by an
ancient moat—while the Nisibenes in the energy inspired by their deadly
peril, showered missiles upon their assailants as they strove to
struggle onward.  The Persian next sent on his elephants; but their
unwieldly bulk served only to enhance the panic and confusion, and to
complete the disaster of his repulse.  And when, the next morning, he
prepared to renew the assault, he found himself confronted by a new
wall, hurriedly raised in the night, to fill the gap in the ramparts,
reaching already the height of six feet and manned by fresh and
well-armed defenders.  Despairing of success against a resistance so
obstinate, he raised the siege on which he had in vain expended so much
time, labour, treasure, and blood, and retired ignominiously.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p13"></span>It is needless to add that of the
miraculous incidents of the siege as related in the *Life*, no trace
appears in Julian’s account.  The only Providence he discerns in the
successful defence of Nisibis, is that which he attributes to his
imperial kinsman to whom his fulsome oratory is addressed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p14"></span><span id="page_140">p. 140</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_140"></span>Of the leading facts, as related
by Julian, ample corroboration will be found in the first three of the
*Nisibene Hymns* above referred to.  In the first, Ephraim makes Nisibis
herself tell the tale of her peril:  she compares herself to the Ark of
the Flood, compassed, not like it by waters merely, but by “mounds and
weapons and waves” (I., 3); but (*ib*., 6, 8) the wall had not yet given
way, for he still speaks of it as standing, and prays that it may
continue to stand.  This *Hymn* was therefore written while the siege
was still in progress.  In the second *Hymn* he celebrates her
deliverance and the manner of it,—the very breach of her walls turned
into triumph (II. 5, 7) by their reconstruction and the assault of the
besiegers with their elephants (*ib*., 17, 18, 19), repulsed in
disgrace, ending in immediate retreat. <span
id="fr_282"></span>[283](#fn_282.md)   In the third *Hymn*, he follows on
similar lines; and adds a point, significant in his apprehension, that
whereas the wall fell on the Sabbath, it was raised again on the Lord’s
day, the Day of the Resurrection (III. 6).  In all three *Hymns*, it is
again and again implied or asserted that this was the third siege of
Nisibis (I. 11; II. 5, 19; III. 11, 12)—and farther (as it seems) the
third time that a breach had been effected in her walls (I. 11; II.
19).  In later *Hymns* also (XI. 14, 15; XIII. 17) the embanked river,
bursting forth and breaking down the defences of the city, more than
once appears.  From one of these we learn incidentally that the
Mygdonius flowed past, not through, Nisibis (XIII. 18, 19); <span
id="fr_283"></span>[284](#fn_283.md) from which fact it follows that the
description in the *Life*, of the manner in which the Persian engineers
employed the river waters against the walls, is to be set aside in so
far as it differs from Julian’s account as confirmed by the *Hymns*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p17"></span>It is remarkable how closely these
two accounts, both contemporary with the facts they treat of, agree in
all essential points, though coming to us from sources not only
independent, but even adverse, *inter se*,—and in forms so little
favourable to exactness of statement as thanksgiving Hymns and
encomiastic Orations.  When from Ephraim’s strophes we omit his pious
ascriptions of praise to God, and from Julian’s periods, the fulsomeness
of his panegyric on the Emperor, the residuum of material fact is in
either case much the same; the main outlines of narrative (related or
implied) are identical in both writers, each unconsciously attests the
truthfulness of the other.  Both are farther confirmed in great measure
by the account of this siege embodied in the *Pascha Chronicle* above
referred to, which (as already stated) rests on information drawn from a
written record left by Valgesh who was Bishop of Nisibis at the time,
and to whose prayers Ephraim (*Hymn* XIII. 17) <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) attributed the speedy restoration of
the breach in the city wall.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p19"></span>In confusing this siege (of 350, in
the time of Valgesh), with the previous one (of 338, in the time of
Jacob), our biographer, with most subsequent writers down to the
eighteenth century, has been misled by following Theodoret’s narration
in his *Ecclesiastical History* (II. 30). <span
id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md)   The account of the siege given in
the *Life* is in fact a mere <span id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_141"></span>reproduction, somewhat abridged, and
slightly varied, of Theodoret’s, from which it derives also its
computation of the time occupied by the siege as but twenty days,—a
period obviously inadequate for the vast engineering works for which the
four months assigned by Julian are certainly not too much,—as well as
its description of the method and aim of those works.  In Theodoret
likewise are found the two supernatural incidents of Sapor’s
discomfiture, both repeated in the *Life*,—neither of which is affirmed
or even hinted at by Ephraim any more than by Julian; the appearance of
the Imperial Phantom on the wall, and the plague of insects sent in
answer to Jacob’s, or, as the *Life* has it, to Ephraim’s prayer.  Of
these, the former, but not the latter, finds place in the *Paschal
Chronicle*, and (in exaggerated form) in Theophanes.  Whether, in this
instance, the chronicler’s statement, which is guardedly
expressed, <span id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) or any nucleus of it,
was derived from the *Epistle* of Valgesh,—or whether he borrowed it
from Theodoret or some one of Theodoret’s sources, or some such
authority—is matter of conjecture. <span
id="fr_287"></span>[288](#fn_287.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p26"></span>3.  *Constantius and Constans*.—The
*Life* errs grossly (as already noticed) in making Constans, who died in
350, and never reigned in the East, the successor of his brother
Constantius, who survived till 361.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p27"></span>4.  *The Alleged Sojourn in
Egypt*.—The sojourn of Ephraim for eight years in Egypt, after he had
taken up his abode in Egypt, and before his visit to Cappadocia, is
impossible.  It was in July, 363, that Nisibis was surrendered to Persia
by Jovian, which court was the cause, as the *Life* (no doubt rightly)
states, of Ephraim’s final departure from that city to Beth-Garbaia,
thence to Amid, and finally, “at the end of the year,” to Edessa.  It
follows, therefore, that he did not reach Edessa till 364.  In Edessa,
or in his cell on the adjacent “Mount” according to the *Life*, he
lived, worked, wrote commentaries and polemical discourses, taught, and
formed a school of disciples, before his alleged journey to Egypt.  It
is therefore implied that he spent years in or near Edessa before he set
out on that journey, which cannot therefore be placed so early as 365. 
Even if we assign to it the improbably early date of 366, the eight
years in Egypt bring us to <span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_142"></span>374, or at earliest 373, for his visit
to the Cæsarean Cappadocia.  Now there is a prevailing weight of
testimony to the effect that Ephraim died in 373, which date, if
accepted, leaves no time for the incidents of his life after his return
to Edessa.  This, however, cannot be urged against our biographer, who
(as will be shown) assumes that he lived till 379.  But the *Life*
represents him as resident in or near Edessa during the persecution
which that city suffered from the Emperor Valens, which (as stated
above, p. 132) took place probably in 371; certainly not later than 372,
at which date (according to the biographer) he was still in Egypt.  In
fact, even without going into particulars, it is evident that between
Ephraim’s arrival in Edessa in 364 and the persecution of Valens in
370–2, the eight years’ sojourn in Egypt and the visit to Cappadocia
would so fill the interval as to leave no time for the prolonged Edessa
residence, before and after that sojourn, which the *Life*, in common
with all other authorities, attributes to Ephraim, and in virtue of
which his name is inseparably associated with the history of Edessa.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p28"></span>If, with the Vatican recension of the
*Life*, we read “Julian” for Valens, as the name of the persecutor of
Edessa, the impossibility becomes yet more absurdly glaring.  For Julian
died in 363, and before that year Ephraim had not migrated from Nisibis
to Edessa.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p29"></span>It is no doubt possible that Ephraim
may have visited Egypt, <span id="fr_288"></span>[289](#fn_288.md) as the
*Life* affirms, before proceeding to Cæsarea:  as an anchorite he would
naturally be drawn to the land where the anchorite life had its origin
and its greatest development.  Yet it is hardly probable that, eager as
he was to see Basil at Cæsarea, he would, when setting out on his
travels, have directed his course to Egypt first,—a country so distant,
and lying in a direction so different, from Cappadocia.  This
improbability would naturally fail to strike our biographer, who appears
to have supposed Basil’s Cæsarea (if indeed he had any definite idea of
its situation) to have been the maritime city of that name in
Palestine.  One can hardly avoid suspecting that this whole narrative of
the visit to Egypt—unknown as it is to all authorities save our *Life*
(in its twofold recension), and the shorter form of the same—may have
been invented by some compiler or reviser, writing in, or for, one of
the Egyptian monasteries of the Nitrian Desert, and seeking to gratify
the Syrian ascetics who were numerous in that region, by making it the
scene of an episode in the life of the most famous of Syrian ascetics. 
It certainly has the air of an interpolation, coming as it does between
the description of Ephraim’s longing desire to see Basil, and the
narrative of the fulfilment of that desire by his visit to Cæsarea. 
More particularly, as regards the story of the visit of Ephraim to the
Nitrian Saint Pesoës (or Bishoi), it is to be noted that it is
mentioned, not in the Parisian recension of the *Life*, but only in that
of the Vatican <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p30.1"></span>ms.</span>  It is a significant fact that
this <span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p30.2"></span>ms.</span>,
which is thus our only written authority for the alleged visit, was
written (probably) about the year 1100, in the Nitrian monastery of
“Amba Bishoi” (St. Pesoës). <span id="fr_289"></span>[290](#fn_289.md)   On
the other hand, it is to be added that a tradition of Ephraim’s sojourn
in Egypt, connecting him with Pesoës, lingered in quite recent times,
and may probably still linger, among the monks, Syrian and Coptic, of
the Nitrian region.  Travellers of the seventeenth, and even eighteenth,
century, tell of a tamarind tree which was shown to them within the
precincts of the Syrian monastery of the Theotokos in that region,
reputed to have grown from Ephraim’s staff which he set in the ground on
his arrival there, as <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_143"></span>he was about to enter the cell of
Pesoës. <span id="fr_290"></span>[291](#fn_290.md)   It is probable that
this legend of the staff (which reminds one of that of the staff of St.
Joseph of Arimathea and the Glastonbury thorn tree) may have grown out
of the belief that Ephraim once visited the monastery,—which belief
again may have been originated by the pious fiction of the compiler or
interpolator of the *Life* in its Vatican form.  It is easy to imagine
how gladly a community of Syrian monks in this Egyptian solitude would
listen to what professed to be a record of the greatest of Syrian monks,
a recluse like themselves, the author of the Sermons to Ascetics which
they had read or listened to, and of the many hymns which enriched their
offices and quickened their devotions;—and how ready they would be to
welcome as fact the story of his sojourn in their valley, and to imagine
that a memorial of it survived among the trees of their garden.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p34"></span>5.  *Interval between Visit to Basil
and Persecution by Valens*.—The interval of four years or more, which
the *Life* seems to place between Ephraim’s return from Cæsarea to
Edessa, and the persecution of the Edessenes by Valens, is likewise
impossible.  For at Cæsarea all agree that Ephraim found Basil
Archbishop.  But Basil was consecrated late in 370, and therefore
Ephraim’s first meeting with him, which was on the Feast of the
Epiphany, cannot be placed earlier than January, 371.  But the
persecution took place probably in 371, or at latest in 373—thus
reducing the possible length of interval to two years at most—probably
to a few months.  It may be said, however, that the biographer, though
he relates the persecution after mentioning the four years’ interval,
does not mean to imply that it was subsequent in time to that interval. 
But it will be shown farther on (under next head) that the four years’
interval is inadmissible, independently of the date of that persecution;
inasmuch as Ephraim survived only three years after his visit to Basil.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p35"></span>6.  *Death of Basil before that of
Ephraim*.—The story of the lady who was sent by Basil to Ephraim, and by
Ephraim back to Basil, only in time to see his corpse,—and of Ephraim’s
grief for Basil’s death, cannot be accepted unless we set aside the
consent of the chronologers, who agree that Ephraim died in 373, <span
id="fr_291"></span>[292](#fn_291.md) —whereas Basil survived to 1st
January, 379.  It is true that there is extant among the Greek works
ascribed to Ephraim, an encomium on Basil, <span
id="fr_292"></span>[293](#fn_292.md) which seems to be genuine.  This,
however, is not to be regarded as an eulogium pronounced after Basil’s
death; but rather as a panegyric in which the living man is
apostrophized. <span id="fr_293"></span>[294](#fn_293.md)   We may safely
conclude that the story, which rests on a basis of erroneous chronology,
is itself a fiction.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p39"></span>But the story of Ephraim’s helpful
intervention and activity in a time of famine, which is undated, having
early attestation, may well be accepted as true, and assigned to the
winter of 372–3.  The authorities who attest the date of his death as
373, place it in the month of Haziran (June); <span
id="fr_294"></span>[295](#fn_294.md) and we may reasonably conjecture that
the exer<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-Page_144"></span>tions and anxieties of the season of
famine had told too heavily on a frame already wasted by years and by
excessive austerities, and had thus hastened his end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_277"></span>[138:278](2130169.htm#fr_277.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p4"></span> This is related also in the Greek
version of the Testament, but is an evident interpolation.  It is not in
the Syriac.

<span id="fn_278"></span>[138:279](2130169.htm#fr_278.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p7"></span> This has been pointed out by Dr.
Payne Smith (*Dict. of Christian Biography*, Vol. II., p. 137), who
cites the passages here adduced, from *Opp. Syr*. II. 499; *Opp. Gr.* I.
129.

<span id="fn_279"></span>[139:280](2130169.htm#fr_279.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p9"></span> This was first clearly established by
Spanheim (*Observationes in Julianum*, pp. 183 *ff*.; 188 *ff*.; 1696)
in part anticipated by Petave (Petavius) and de Valois (Valesius).  He
has been followed in this by nearly all historians, including Gibbon
(*Decline and Fall*. chap. xviii).

<span id="fn_280"></span>[139:281](2130169.htm#fr_280.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p11"></span> *Juliani Orationes*, ed. Spanheim
(1666), *Orat*. II., pp. 62 *ff*.; see also pp. 26 *ff.* (*Orat.* I.).

<span id="fn_281"></span>[139:282](2130169.htm#fr_281.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p12"></span> The *Life* gives but seventy days as
the whole duration of the siege—a period quite insufficient for the
construction of the embankment.

<span id="fn_282"></span>[140:283](2130169.htm#fr_282.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p15"></span> Ephraim seems to convey that Sapor,
when repulsed, at once withdrew:  Julian represents his withdrawal as
gradual.  The former probably has in view the raising of the siege; the
latter, the retreat from the invaded territory.

<span id="fn_283"></span>[140:284](2130169.htm#fr_283.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p16"></span> Compare Sachau’s description,
*Reise*, pp. 390, 391.

<span id="fn_284"></span>[140:285](2130169.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p18"></span> That Valgesh is the “third” Bishop
here meant, appears by comparison with Hymn XVII. 2, where the three are
named, Jacob, Babu (not elsewhere mentioned), and Valgesh.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[140:286](2130169.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p20"></span> So (*e.g.*) Baronius, *Annales* (*s.
q*. 338); *Acta Sanctorum*, Febr. (I. p. 51).  A few quite recent
writers follow these.  This error of Theodoret thus ascribing to the
first siege the events which belong to the history of the third, is
easily accounted for.  His narrative of the siege and the breaching of
the walls, the apparition, and St. Jacob’s prayer answered by the plague
of mosquitoes, originally appeared in his earlier work, the *Religious
History*—a collection of lives of miracle-working saints of whom St.
Jacob stands first—from which (as he himself notes) he has transferred
it with little change, to his *Ecclesiastical History*.  As the
biographer of this, the greatest Bishop of Nisibis, Theodoret would
naturally associate with his name all that history or tradition reported
of Divine protection extended to the city in her perils—especially in
those of her last and most signal siege which ended in her most signal
deliverance.  He probably knew that a siege of Nisibis had occurred in
St. Jacob’s time, and would readily overlook the brief interval of
twelve years by which the saint’s death preceded the later siege.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p21"></span>One of the *Nisibene Hymns* (XIII.
18, 19, 21) suggests a further explanation how this third siege came to
be attached to the legend of St. Jacob.  His body was treasured
reverently in the city, and to its presence her deliverance was
attributed.  Thus, he was still (in Ephraim’s words) “the fountain
within her,” “the fruit in her bosom,” “the body laid within her that
became for her a wall without.”  The traditions of that dead presence in
the last siege, and of his living presence in the first, would soon
blend together; and the expression of pious gratitude for the protection
ascribed by the besieged of 350 to the virtue of his remains, would be
mistaken as evidence that the man himself was among them to help them by
his prayers and exhortations in the struggle by which the fall of their
city was so narrowly averted.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[141:287](2130169.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p22"></span> In the Chronicle, we read that Sapor
saw, in the daytime, “a *man* running to and fro on the walls,” in the
likeness of the Emperor; but again, we are told of “the *angel* that
appeared.”  In Theodoret’s narratives the apparition wears the royal
“purple and diadem,” and is described as “divine” (*Hist. Relig*.), and
“incorporeal” (*Hist. Eccles*.).  In the *Chronography*, “an angel
stands on the tower, in shining raiment, holding by the hand the Emperor
Constantius”; a duplication of the vision which seemingly arose from a
misunderstanding of the *Chronicle*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p23"></span>That Constantius was not in Nisibis
during this siege, is a point on which all authorities are agreed. 
Julian, while lavishing on the Emperor unmeasured praises for the
repulse of Sapor, attributes it not to his personal presence, but to his
foresight in previous preparations made a year before.  He is known,
however, to have sojourned in the city in May, 345,—see *Cod.
Theodosianus*, (XI. 7, 5) for a law issued thence by him on the 12th of
that month (Lex. 5 *de exactionibus*).

<span id="fn_287"></span>[141:288](2130169.htm#fr_287.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p24"></span> The *Nisibene Hymns*, only recovered
some fifty years ago from the Nitrian Monastery of the Theotokos, and
first printed in 1866, yielding as they do authoritative and
contemporary confirmation of the accounts of the siege given by Julian
and by Valgesh, come in as decisive evidence to prove that the
Chronicler of the seventh century and the Chronographer of the ninth had
better fortune or better judgment in their choice of authorities than
Theodoret in the fifth.  It is, moreover, a signal instance of the true
historical instinct that guided Gibbon in his great work, that in
relating this history (ch. xviii.), he followed Julian and the
*Chronicle*, and refused to be misled (as our biographer was) by
Theodoret—except as regards St. Jacob whom he supposed to have been
still Bishop in 350.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p25"></span>The first to point out this error as
to St. Jacob, was Valesius in his note on the passage in Theodoret (*H.
E.* II. 30), as above.  He remarked that “the *Alexandrine (Paschal)
Chronicle* makes Vologeses (Valgesh), not Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis in
350.”  It was replied (and with justice) that the *Chronicle*, though it
records the siege, and cites the *Epistle* of Valgesh, Bishop of the
city, does not say that he was Bishop at the time of the siege.  Another
Chronicle, the Edessene (a relic of the sixth century), first printed by
Assemani in 1719 (*Biblioth. Orient*. I., pp. 388 *ff*.) determines 338
as the date of Jacob’s death, and 361 as that of Valgesh.  Our *Nisibene
Hymns* (see above, note 4) make it plain that Valgesh was bishop in 350,
as Valesius rightly (though on insufficient grounds) laid down.

<span id="fn_288"></span>[142:289](2130169.htm#fr_288.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p30"></span> The shorter Syriac *Life* agrees in
affirming the fact of his visit to Egypt, but says nothing of its
duration.  No other authority, earlier or contemporary, hints at it.

<span id="fn_289"></span>[142:290](2130169.htm#fr_289.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p30.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p31"></span> Assemani, *Biblioth. Orient*., I.,
p. 46, note 1.

<span id="fn_290"></span>[143:291](2130169.htm#fr_290.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p31.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p32"></span> It is mentioned by Huntington
(afterwards Provost of Trinity College, Dublin, and finally Bishop of
Raphoe) who visited the place, 1678–9 (see his *Epistolæ*, XXXIX., p.
69):  again by J. S. Assemani in 1715 (see reference in note 6).  More
recent visitors (Lord de la Zouche in 1837, and Archdeacon Tattam in
1839) do not speak of it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p33"></span>Of the Nitrian monasteries (reputed
to have once numbered fifty, or even more), the principal one, that of
the Theotokos, whence the libraries of the Vatican and of the British
museum have derived their most precious acquisitions of Syriac <span
class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p33.1"></span>mss.</span>, belongs to
the Syrian Jacobites, whose Church has always been in full communion
with that of the Copts.  A second belongs to the Copts; a third to the
Greeks.  The fourth (that of St. Pesoës) does not appear to be specially
appropriated, but to be mainly Coptic, though (as appears above) not to
the exclusion of Syrians.

<span id="fn_291"></span>[143:292](2130169.htm#fr_291.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p35.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p36"></span> See Professor Lamy’s edition of
Ephraim, II., coll. 94*ff.*, for the authorities on this point,—of which
the chief are:—The *Edessene Chronicle* (sixth century) and Jacob of
Edessa (seventh century—cited by Elias of Nisibis), both of whom give
373 as the date, as does also the early Chronicle contained in the
“*Book of the Caliphs*.”  Jerome (*De Viris. Illustr*. cxv.) merely says
that Ephraim died in the reign of Valens,—*i.e.* not later than 378, and
therefore before Basil.

<span id="fn_292"></span>[143:293](2130169.htm#fr_292.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p37"></span> *Opp. Græc.,*II., 289 *ff.*

<span id="fn_293"></span>[143:294](2130169.htm#fr_293.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p38"></span> See Lamy as above, coll. 84 *ff*.

<span id="fn_294"></span>[143:295](2130169.htm#fr_294.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.v-p39.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.v-p40"></span> On the 9th, according to *Chron.
Edes*. and the shorter *Life*; the Vatican *Life* says the 15th; the
*Book of the Caliphs* (see Land’s *Anecdota*, Tom. I., p. 15 \[Syr.
text\]) and most other authorities, the 18th; Dionysius, in his
*Chronicle*, the 19th (ap. Assemani, *B. O.* II., p. 54).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Rectification of the Vatican Text of the Life.](2130170.md)
