[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130275)  [Next](2130277.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.viii.iv-p1.1"></span>On the Sinful Woman.</span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p2"></span>1.  Hear and be comforted, beloved, how
merciful is God.  To the sinful woman He forgave her offences; yea, He
upheld her when she was afflicted.  With clay He opened the eyes of the
blind, so that the eyeballs beheld the light. <span
id="fr_632"></span>[633](#fn_632.md)   To the palsied He granted healing,
who arose and walked and carried his bed. <span
id="fr_633"></span>[634](#fn_633.md)   And to us He has given the pearls;
His holy Body and Blood.  He brought His medicines secretly; and with
them He heals openly.  And He wandered round in the land of Judea, like
a physician, bearing his medicines.  Simon invited Him to the feast, to
eat bread in his house. <span id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md)   The
sinful woman rejoiced when she heard that He sat and was feasting in
Simon’s house; her thoughts gathered together like the sea, and like the
billows her love surged.  She beheld the Sea of Grace, how it had forced
itself into one place; and she resolved to go and drown all her
wickedness in its billows.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p6"></span>2.  She bound her heart, because it had
offended, with chains and tears of suffering; and she began weeping
(with herself):  “What avails me this fornication?  What avails this
lewdness?  I have defiled the innocent ones without shame; I have
corrupted the orphan; and without fear I have robbed the merchants of
merchandise, and my rapacity was not satisfied.  I have been as a bow in
war, and have slain the good and the bad.  I have been as a storm on the
sea, and have sunk the ships of many.  Why did I not win <span
id="page_337">p. 337</span> <span id="iii.viii.iv-Page_337"></span>me
one man, who might have corrected my lewdness?  For one man is of God,
but many are of Satan.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p7"></span>3.  These things she inwardly said;
then began she to do outwardly.  She washed and put away from her eyes
the dye that blinded them that saw it.  And tears gushed forth from her
eyes over that deadly eyepaint. <span id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md)
  She drew off and cast from her hands the enticing bracelets of her
youth.  She put off and cast away from her body the tunic of fine linen
of whoredom, and resolved to go and attire herself in the tunic the
garment of reconciliation.  She drew off and cast from her feet the
adorned sandals of lewdness; and directed the steps of her going in the
path of the heavenly Eagle.  She took up her gold in her palm and held
it up to the face of heaven, and began to cry secretly, to Him who hears
openly:  “This, O Lord, that I have gained from iniquity, with it will I
purchase to myself redemption.  This which was gathered from orphans,
with it will I win the Lord of orphans.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p9"></span>4.  These things she said secretly;
then began to do openly.  She took up the gold in her palm, and carried
the alabaster box in her hands.  Then hastily went she forth in sadness
to the perfumer.  The perfumer saw her and wondered, and fell into
questioning with her; and thus he began to say to the harlot in the
first words he spoke:  “Was it not enough for thee, harlot, that thou
hast corrupted all our town?  What means this fashion that thou showest
today to thy lovers—that thou hast put off thy wantonness and hast
clothed thyself in modesty?  Heretofore, when thou camest to me, thy
aspect was different from today’s.  Thou wast clothed in goodly raiment,
and didst bring little gold; and didst ask for precious ointment, to
make thy lewdness pleasant.  But lo! today thy vesture is mean, and thou
hast brought much gold.  Thy change I understand not; wherefore is this
fashion of thine?  Either clothe thee in raiment according to thy
ability, or buy ointment according to thy clothing.  For this ointment
becomes not or is suited to this attire.  Can it be that a merchant has
met thee, and brings great wealth; and thou hast seen that he loves it
not, the fashion of thy lewdness?  So thou hast put off thy lewdness and
hast clothed thyself in meekness, that by various fashions thou mayest
capture much wealth.  But if he loves this fashion because he is a
chaste man in truth, then woe to him!  Into what has he fallen?  Into a
gulf that has swallowed up his merchandise.  But I give thee advice, as
a man that desires thy welfare, that thou send away thy many lovers who
have helped thee nought from thy youth, and henceforth seek out one
husband who may correct thy lewdness.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p10"></span>5.  These things spake the perfumer,
in wisdom, to the harlot.  The sinful woman answered and said to him, to
the perfumer after his discourse, “Hinder me not, O man, and stop me not
by thy questioning.  I have asked of thee ointment, not freely, but I
will pay thee its value not grudgingly.  Take thee the gold, as much as
thou demandest, and give me the precious ointment; take thee that which
endures not and give me that which endures; and I will go to Him who
endures, and will buy that which endures.  And as to that thou saidst,
about a merchant; a Man has met me today Who bears riches in abundance. 
He has robbed me and I have robbed Him; He has robbed me of my
transgressions and sins, and I have robbed Him of His wealth.  And as to
that thou saidst of a husband; I have won me a Husband in heaven, Whose
dominion stands for ever, and His kingdom shall not be dissolved.”  She
took up the ointment and went forth.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p11"></span>6.  In haste went she forth; as Satan
saw her and was enraged; and was greatly grieved in his mind.  At one
time he rejoiced, and again at another he was grieved.  That she carried
the perfumed oil, he rejoiced in his inward mind; but that she was clad
in mean raiment—at this doing of hers <span id="page_338">p. 338</span>
<span id="iii.viii.iv-Page_338"></span>he was afraid.  He clave then to
her and followed her, as a robber follows a merchant.  He listened to
the murmurs of her lips, to hear the voice of her words.  He closely
watched her eyeballs (to mark) whither the glance of her eyes was
directed; and as he went he moved by her feet (to mark) whither her
goings were directed.  Very full of craft is Satan, from our words to
learn our aim.  Therefore our Lord has taught us not to raise our voice
when we pray, that the Devil may not hear our words and draw near and
become our adversary.  So then, when Satan saw that he could not change
her mind, he clothed himself in the fashion of a man, and drew to
himself a crowd of youths, like her lovers of former times; and then
began he thus to address her:  “By thy life, O woman, tell me whither
are thy footsteps directed?  What means this haste?  For thou hasteth
more than other days.  What means this thy meekness, for thy soul is
meek like a handmaid’s?  Instead of garments of fine linen, lo! thou art
clothed in sordid weeds; instead of bracelets of gold and silver, there
are not even rings on thy fingers; instead of goodly sandals for thy
feet, not even worn shoes are on thy feet.  Disclose to me all thy
doing, for I understand not thy change.  Is it that some one of thy
lovers has died, and thou goest to bury him?  We will go with thee to
the funeral, and with thee will (take part with thee) in sorrow.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p12"></span>7.  The sinful woman answered and said
to him, (even) to Satan, after his speech:  “Well hast thou said that I
go to inter the dead, one that has died to me.  The sin of my thoughts
has died, and I go to bury it.”  Satan answered and said to her, (even)
to the sinful woman after her words:  “Go to, O woman, I tell thee that
I am the first of thy lovers.  I am not such as thou, and I place my
hands upon thee.  I will give thee again more gold than before.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p13"></span>8.  The sinful woman answered and said
to him, even to Satan after his discourse:  “I am wearied of thee, O
man, and thou art no more my lover.  I have won me a husband in heaven,
Who is God, that is over all, and His dominion stands for ever, and His
kingdom shall not be dissolved.  For lo! in thy presence I say; I say it
again and I lie not.  I was a handmaid to Satan from my childhood unto
this day.  I was a bridge, and he trode upon me, and I destroyed
thousands of men.  The eyepaint blinded my eyes, and (I was) blind among
many whom I blinded.  I became sightless and knew not that there is One
Who gives light to the sightless.  Lo! I go to get light for mine eyes,
and by that light to give light to many.  I was fast bound, and knew not
that there is One Who overthrows idols.  Lo! I go to have my idols
destroyed, and so to destroy the follies of many.  I was wounded and
knew not that there is One Who binds up wounds; and lo! I go to have my
wounds bound.”  These things the harlot spake to Satan in her wisdom;
and he groaned and was grieved and wept; and he cried aloud and thus he
spake:—“I am conquered by thee, O woman, and what I shall do I know
not.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p14"></span>9.  As soon as Satan perceived that he
could not change her mind, he began to weep for himself and thus it was
that he spake:  “Henceforth is my boasting perished, and the pride of
all my days.  How shall I lay for her a snare, for her who is ascending
on high? how shall I shoot arrows at her, (even) at her whose wall is
unshaken?  Therefore I go into Jesus’ presence; lo! she is about to
enter His presence; and I shall say to Him thus:  “This woman is an
harlot.”  Perchance He may reject and not receive her.  And I shall say
to Him thus:  “This woman who comes into Thy presence is a woman that is
an harlot.  She has led captive men by her whoredom; she is polluted
from her youth.  But Thou, O Lord, art righteous; all men throng to see
Thee.  And if mankind see Thee that Thou hast speech with the harlot,
they all will flee from Thy presence, and no man will salute Thee.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p15"></span>10.  These things Satan spake within
him<span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iv-Page_339"></span>self, nor was he moved. <span
id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md)   Then he changed the course of his
thought, and thus it was that he spake.  “How shall I enter into Jesus’
presence, for to Him the secret things are manifest?  He knows me, who I
am, that no good office is my purpose.  If haply He rebuke me I am
undone, and all my wiles will be wasted.  I will go to the house of
Simon, for secret things are not manifest to him.  And into his heart I
will put it; perchance on that hook he may be caught.  And thus will I
say unto him:  By thy life, O Simon, tell me; this man that sojourns in
thy house is he a man that is righteous, or a friend of the doers of
wickedness?  I am a wealthy man, and a man that has possessions, and I
wish like thee to invite him that he may come in and bless my
possessions.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p17"></span>11.  Simon answered and thus he said
to the Evil One after his words:  “From the day that (first) I saw Him I
have seen no lewdness in Him, but rather quietness and peace, humility
and seemliness.  The sick He heals without reward, the diseased He
freely cures.  He approaches and stands by the grave, and calls, and the
dead arise.  Jairus <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637.md) called Him
to raise his daughter to life, trusting that He could raise her to
life.  And as He went with him in the way, He gave healing to the woman
diseased, who laid hold of the hem of His garment and stole healing from
Him, and her pain which was hard and bitter at once departed from her. 
He went forth to the desert and saw the hungry, <span
id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638.md) how they were fainting with famine. 
He made them sit down on the grass, and fed them in His mercy.  In the
ship He slept <span id="fr_639"></span>[640](#fn_639.md) as He willed, and
the sea swelled against the disciples.  He arose and rebuked the
billows, and there was a great calm.  The widow, <span
id="fr_640"></span>[641](#fn_640.md) the desolate one who was following her
only son, on the way to the grave He consoled her.  He gave him to her
and gladdened her heart.  To one man who was dumb and blind, <span
id="fr_641"></span>[642](#fn_641.md) by His voice He brought healing.  The
lepers He cleansed by His word; to the limbs of the palsied <span
id="fr_642"></span>[643](#fn_642.md)   He restored strength.  For the blind
man, <span id="fr_643"></span>[644](#fn_643.md) afflicted and weary, He
opened his eyes and he saw the light.  And for two others who besought
Him, <span id="fr_644"></span>[645](#fn_644.md) at once He opened their
eyes.  As for me, thus have I heard the fame of the man from afar; and I
called Him to bless my possessions, and to bless all my flocks and
herds.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p26"></span>12.  Satan answered and said to him,
to Simon after his words:  “Praise not a man at his beginning, until
thou learnest his end; hitherto this man is sober and his soul takes not
pleasure in wine.  If he shall go forth from thy house, and holds not
converse with an harlot, then he is a righteous man and no friend of
them that do wickedness.”  Such things did Satan speak in his craftiness
to Simon.  Then he approached and stood afar off, to see what should
come to pass.

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p27"></span>13.  The sinful woman full of
transgressions stood clinging by the door.  She clasped her arms in
prayer, and thus she spake beseeching:—“Blessed Son Who hast descended
to earth for the sake of man’s redemption, close not Thy door in my
face; for Thou hast called me and lo! I come.  I know that Thou hast not
rejected me; open for me the door of Thy mercy, that I may come in, O my
Lord, and find refuge in Thee, from the Evil One and his hosts!  I was a
sparrow, and the hawk pursued me, and I have fled and taken refuge in
Thy nest.  I was a heifer, and the yoke galled me, and I will turn back
my wanderings to Thee.  Lay upon me the shoulder of Thy yoke that I may
take it on me, and work with Thy oxen.”  Thus did the harlot speak at
the door with much weeping.  The master of the house looked and saw her,
and the colour of his visage was changed; and he began thus to address
her, (even) the harlot, in the opening of his words:—“Depart thou <span
id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iv-Page_340"></span>hence, O harlot, for this man who
abides in our house is a man that is righteous, and they that are of his
companions are blameless.  Is it not enough for thee, harlot, that thou
hast corrupted the whole town?  Thou hast corrupted the chaste without
shame; thou hast robbed the orphans, and hast not blushed, and hast
plundered the merchants’ wares, and thy countenance is not abashed. 
From him thy heart \[and soul\] labour \[to take\].  But from him thy
net takes no spoil. <span id="fr_645"></span>[646](#fn_645.md)   For this
man is righteous indeed, and they of his company are blameless.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p29"></span>14.  The sinful woman answered and
said to him, even to Simon when he had ceased:  “Thou surely art the
guardian of the door, O thou that knowest things that are secret!  I
will propose the matter in the feast, and thou shalt be free from
blame.  And if there be any that wills me to come in, he will bid me and
I will come in.”  Simon ran and closed the door, and approached and
stood afar off.  And he tarried a long time and proposed not the matter
in the feast.  But He, Who knows what is secret, beckoned to Simon and
said to him:—“Come hither, Simon, I bid thee; does any one stand at the
door?  Whosoever he be, open to him that he may come in; let him receive
what he needs, and go.  If he be hungry and hunger for bread, lo! in thy
house is the table of life; and if he be thirsty, and thirst for water,
lo! the blessed fountain is in thy dwelling.  And if he be sick and ask
for healing, lo! the great Physician is in thy house.  Suffer sinners to
look upon Me, for their sakes have I abased Myself.  I will not ascend
to heaven, to the dwelling whence I came down, until I bear back the
sheep that has wandered from its Father’s house, and lift it up on My
shoulders and bear it aloft to heaven.”  Simon answered and thus he said
to Jesus, when He had done speaking:—“My Lord, this woman that stands in
the doorway is a harlot:  she is lewd and not free-born, polluted from
her childhood.  And Thou, my Lord, art a righteous man, and all are
eager to see Thee; and if men see Thee having speech with the harlot,
all men will flee from beside Thee, and no man will salute Thee.”  Jesus
answered, and thus He said to Simon when he was done
speaking:—“Whosoever it be, open for him to come in, and thou shalt be
free from blame; and though his offences be many, without rebuke I bid
thee \[receive him\].”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p30"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p31"></span>15.  Simon approached and opened the
door, and began thus to speak:—“Come, enter, fulfil that thou willest,
to him who is even as thou.”  The sinful woman, full of transgressions,
passed forward and stood by His feet, and clasped her arms in prayer,
and with these words she spake:—“Mine eyes have become watercourses that
cease not from \[watering\] the fields, and to-day they wash the feet of
Him Who follows after sinners.  This hair, abundant in locks from my
childhood till this day, let it not grieve Thee that it should wipe this
holy body.  The mouth that has kissed the lewd, forbid it not to kiss
the body that remits transgressions and sins.”  These things the harlot
spake to Jesus, with much weeping.  And Simon stood afar off to see what
He would do to her.  But He Who knows the things that are secret,
beckoned to Simon and said to him:—“Lo! I will tell thee, O Simon, what
thy meditation is, concerning the harlot.  Within thy mind thou
imaginest and within thy soul thou saidst, ‘I have called this man
righteous, but lo! the harlot kisses Him. I have called Him to bless my
possessions, and lo! the harlot embraces Him.’  O Simon, there were two
debtors, whose creditor was one only; one owed him five-hundred
\[pence\], and the other owed fifty.  And when the creditor saw that
neither of these two had aught, the creditor pardoned and forgave them
both their debt.  Which of them ought to render the greater thanks?  He
who was forgiven five hundred, or he who was forgiven fifty?”  Simon
answered, and thus he said to Jesus, when He had <span id="page_341">p.
341</span> <span id="iii.viii.iv-Page_341"></span>done speaking:—“He who
was forgiven five hundred ought to render the greater thanks.”  Jesus
answered and thus He said:  “Thou art he that owes five hundred, and
this woman owes fifty.  Lo! I came into thy house, O Simon; and water
for My feet thou broughtest not; and this woman, of whom thou saidst
that she was an harlot, one from her childhood defiled, has washed My
feet with her tears, and with her hair she has wiped them.  Ought I to
send her away, O Simon, without receiving forgiveness?  Verily, verily,
I say unto thee, I will write of her in the Gospel.  Go, O woman, thy
sins are forgiven thee and all thy transgression is covered; henceforth
and to the end of the world.”

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p32"></span>May our Lord account us worthy of
hearing this word of His:—“Come, enter, ye blessed of My Father, inherit
the kingdom made ready for all who shall do My will, and observe all My
commandments.”  To Him be glory; on us be mercy; at all times.  Amen! 
Amen!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_632"></span>[336:633](2130276.htm#fr_632.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p3"></span> [John ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006.md)<span id="iii.viii.iv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[336:634](2130276.htm#fr_633.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p4"></span> [Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.viii.iv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_634"></span>[336:635](2130276.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p5"></span> [Luke vii.
36](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036.md)<span id="iii.viii.iv-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[337:636](2130276.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p8"></span> *Stibium.*

<span id="fn_636"></span>[339:637](2130276.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p16"></span> The text and rendering of these two
places are doubtful.

<span id="fn_637"></span>[339:638](2130276.htm#fr_637.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p18"></span> St. [Mark v.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[339:639](2130276.htm#fr_638.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p19"></span> St. [Matt. xiv.
15](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#015.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_639"></span>[339:640](2130276.htm#fr_639.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p20"></span> St. [Matt. xiv.
24](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#024.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[339:641](2130276.htm#fr_640.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p21"></span> St. [Luke vii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_641"></span>[339:642](2130276.htm#fr_641.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p22"></span> St. [Matt. xii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_642"></span>[339:643](2130276.htm#fr_642.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p23"></span> St. [Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002.md)<span id="iii.viii.iv-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[339:644](2130276.htm#fr_643.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p23.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p24"></span> St. [John ix.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001.md)<span id="iii.viii.iv-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[339:645](2130276.htm#fr_644.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p24.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p25"></span> St. [Matt. xx.
30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030.md)<span
id="iii.viii.iv-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[340:646](2130276.htm#fr_645.md) <span
id="iii.viii.iv-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iv-p28"></span> Text defective here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Aphrahat:  Select Demonstrations.](2130277.md)
