[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130051)  [Next](2130053) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle CVII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p2"></span>*To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum* <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66) .

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p4"></span>Gregory to Aregius, Bishop in Gaul.

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p5"></span>The affliction of your Fraternity, which
we have learnt that you have had for the loss of your people, has given
us such cause of grief that, since charity makes us two one, we feel our
heart to be especially in your tribulations.  But in the midst of this
we have been much consoled by your having brought your mind to discern
how it becomes <span id="page_27">p. 27</span> <span
id="ii.v.xlvi-Page_27"></span>you to bear sorrow patiently, and, in the
hope of another life, not to have long continued grief for death. 
Still, lest some tribulation should still maintain itself in your soul,
I exhort you to rest from sorrow, to cease to be sad.  For it is
unseemly to addict oneself to wearisomeness of affliction for those of
whom it is to be believed that they have attained to true life by
dying.  Those have perhaps just excuse for long continued grief who know
not of another life, and have no trust that there is a passing from this
world to a better.  We, however, who know this, who believe it and teach
it, ought not to be too much distressed for them that depart, lest what
in others has a show of affection, be to us rather a matter of blame. 
For it is, as it were, a kind of distrust to be tormented by sadness in
opposition to what everyone preaches, as the Apostle says, *But we would
not have you to be ignorant, brethren, concerning them that are asleep,
that ye sorrow not even as others which have no hope* ([1 Thess. iv.
12](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#012)<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p5.1"></span>).

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p6"></span>Having, therefore, this reason before us,
dearest brother, we should try, as we have said, not to afflict
ourselves about the dead, but bestow affection on the living, to whom
pity may be of advantage and love bear fruit.  Let us henceforth hasten,
by reproving, exhorting, persuading, soothing, comforting, to profit all
we can.  Let our tongue be an encouragement to the good, a goad to the
bad; let it beat down the puffed up, appease the angry, stir up the
slow, kindle the idle by exhortation, persuade the shrinkers back,
soothe the rough, comfort the despairing; that, as we are called
leaders, we may shew the way of salvation to them that are advancing
forward.  Let us be vigilant in keeping guard, let us defend all
approaches against the snares of the enemy.  And, if ever error should
have drawn aside a sheep of the flocks committed to us through devious
ways, let us strive with all our endeavours to recall it to the Lord’s
sheepfolds, so that from the name of shepherd which we bear we may reap
not punishment, but a reward.  Seeing, then, that in all this there is
need of the help of divine grace, let us implore the clemency of
Almighty God with continual prayers, to the end that for doing these
things He may give us the will and grant us the power, and, with the
fruit of good work, direct us in that way in which He has declared
Himself to be the Shepherd of shepherds; that so, through Him, without
whom we cannot rise to the doing of anything, we may be able to
accomplish all

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p7"></span>Furthermore, our common son, Peter the
deacon, has given us to understand that your Fraternity at the time when
you were here requested that we would grant to yourself and your
archdeacon license to use dalmatics <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67)
.  But, because compelled by the sickness of your people, you departed
in such haste that the very grief that weighed upon you did not suffer
you to press the matter any longer, as was fit and as the nature of your
request required; and because we had many engagements, and consideration
of ecclesiastical propriety did not allow us to concede a new thing
inconsiderately and suddenly; for these reasons the carrying into effect
of the thing demanded has been long postponed.  Now, however, recalling
to mind your Charity’s good deservings, by the tenor of this our
authority we grant you your request, and have granted to thee or to thy
archdeacon to be decorated by the use of dalmatics; and we have sent the
same dalmatics by the hands of our most beloved son, the abbot Cyriacus.

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p9"></span>Furthermore, at the synod which we have
decreed should be assembled through our brother and fellow-bishop
Syagrius against simoniacal heresy, we desire thee to be present; and we
have ordered the pallium which we have sent for our said brother to be
accordingly given him, on condition of his promising to remove from holy
Church, by a definition of the synod, the unlawful things which we have
prohibited.  Concerning which synod we desire thy Fraternity to report
to us fully by letter all its proceedings, that thou thyself, whose
holiness we are well acquainted with, mayest inform us about everything.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_66"></span>[26:67](2130052.htm#fr_66) <span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p3"></span> A see in Narbonensis Secunda under the
Metropolis of Aquæ (*Aix*); the modern *Gap*.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[27:68](2130052.htm#fr_67) <span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p8"></span> For the use of Dalmatics, see Dict. of
Christ. Ant. (*Smith and Cheetham*, 1875), under <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p8.1"></span>Dalmatic</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Syagrius, Bishop.](2130053)
