[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130217)  [Next](2130219) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xlii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xlii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LXII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlii-p2"></span>1. Lo! Death, the King of silence,
complains, my brethren:  that we have filled his abode with the wailing,
of Hope cut off.—2. *R., To Him be great praise Who comest down, to us
here below:  and suffered and rose again and in His Body, raises our
bodies!*—3. While we weep like madmen, at the gates of Sheol:  hearken
what Death says, reproaching us.—4. It shames me, says Death, that ye,
have overcome me:  the half of Sheol suffices not, to contain your
slain.—5. For alien corpses together, lie heaped in Sheol:  there are
two divisions there, the dead, the slain.—6. Whereas I should complain
that ye have wronged me, lo! ye are weeping:  ye have burst the gate of
Sheol, and done me hurt.—7. For ye are like unto an infant, which while
yet weeping:  laughs again as ye also, over your dead.—8. For there is
no discretion in your mourning, and no understanding:  in your
laughter—for to me ye seem like, to a weaned babe.—9. One hour weeping
and wailing, and after a little:  both jesting and <span
id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xlii-Page_215"></span>wantonness, as of children.—10. For ye
are unable to become, perfect men:  that weep not yea and laugh not, as
the discreet.—11. Touching your books we are grieved, that they have
toiled over them:  who should read them unto you, *even* the divine
Scriptures.—12. The readers are crying aloud, for ye are deaf:  this
*their* crying proves concerning you, that ye are *as* stocks.—13. For
since the reader and the interpreter, are crying aloud:  your ears
therefore are heavy, or else your hearts.—14. For if there were *with
you* an ear, *open* to persuasion:  it were meet to hear little, and to
do much.—15. But because *its* hearing is closed, whoso knocks at it: 
the voice returns back to him, who sent it forth.—16. There is no crying
with me of mine, I am not deaf:  none that reads or interprets *for me*,
I am not dull.—17. The breath that is from Him commands me, *sons* the
God of truth:  and with the command there follows, also the
fulfilment.—18. With me is no holding back, no turnings aside:  I wot no
arrow even, could outstrip me.—19. But your voices are scorned by me,
when ye are weeping:  over the graves of your departed, in the cutting
off of hope.—20. Were it possible or permitted, when ye are weeping:  I
would go forth and tell *you*, to your faces.—21. “I am endeavouring to
give, an account of the death:  and your voices disturb me, that I err
in my count.”—22. Ye nations, let not your understanding, become
childish:  like that nation whose intelligence, was never great.—23. In
which prudence bestows not itself, as in a fool:  for its thoughts are
darkness, without discernment.—24. For your infants and your sons, in
the resurrection:  they shall be foremost to come forth, as the first
fruits—25. Then after them *shall come* the just, as victorious:  last
shall come forth the sinner, as put to shame.—26. For although in the
twinkling of an eye, they be quickened:  yet is it in order that their
ranks, come forth from Sheol.—27. Prophets come forth and Apostles, and
*holy* Fathers:  following them in due array, according to command.—28.
Lo! that which now is sown, in random mixture:  is yielded back in great
order, as garden-herbs.—29. For though one in the sowing, should mix all
seeds:  that which is earlier than its fellow, prevents its fellow,—30.
And not as their going down was confused, so disordered shall be:  their
coming up from the earth, for its order is fixed.—31. Lo! I have been
against myself, in what I have said:  for secret things which ye
comprehended not, from me ye have learned.—32. Instead of the tears that
profit not, which are at the tomb:  pour them forth in *your* prayer, in
the midst of the Church.—33. For to the dead there is profit in these,
and likewise to the living:  weep not with a weeping that afflicts, both
dead and living!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LXIII.](2130219)
