[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130154)  [Next](2130156.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.v"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.v-p1.1"></span>Epistle XII.</span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p2"></span>To Theodelinda, Queen of the Lombards.

<span id="ii.x.v-p3"></span>Gregory to Queen Theodelinda.

<span id="ii.x.v-p4"></span>The letters which you sent us a little time
ago from the Genoese parts have made us partakers of your joy on account
of our learning that by the favour of Almighty God a son has been given
you, and, as is greatly to your Excellency’s credit, has been received
into the fellowship of the catholic faith <span
id="fr_237"></span>[238](#fn_237.md) .  Nor indeed was anything else to be
supposed of your Christianity but that you would fortify him whom you
have received by the gift of God with the aid of Catholic rectitude, so
that our Redeemer might both acknowledge thee as His familiar servant,
and also bring up prosperously in His fear a new king for the nation of
the Lombards.  Wherefore we pray Almighty God both to keep you in the
way of His commandments, and to cause our most excellent son,
Adulouvald <span id="fr_238"></span>[239](#fn_238.md) , to advance in His
love, to the end that, as he is in this world great among men, so also
he may be glorious for his good deeds before the eyes of our God.

<span id="ii.x.v-p7"></span>Now as to what your Excellency has requested
in your letter, that we should reply in full to what our most beloved
son, the abbot Secundus has written <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239.md) , who could think of putting off his
petition or your wishes, knowing how profitable they would be to many,
did not sickness stand in the way?  But so great an infirmity from gout
has held us fast as to render us hardly able to rise, not only for
dictating, but even for speaking, as also your ambassadors, the bearers
of these presents, are aware, who, when they arrived, found us weak, and
when they departed, left us in the utmost peril and danger of our life. 
But, if by the ordering of Almighty God I should recover, I will reply
in full to all that he has written.  I have, however, sent by the
bearers of these presents the Synod that was held in the time of
Justinian of pious memory, that my aforesaid most-beloved son may
acknowledge on reading it that all that he had heard against the
Apostolic See or the Catholic Church was false.  For far be it from us
to <span id="page_107">p. 107</span> <span
id="ii.x.v-Page_107"></span>accept the views of any heretic whatever, or
to deviate in any respect from the tome of our predecessor Leo, of holy
memory; but we receive whatever has been defined by the four holy
synods, and condemn whatever has been rejected by them.

<span id="ii.x.v-p9"></span>Further, to our son the King Adolouvald we
have taken thought to send some phylacteries; that is, a cross with wood
of the holy cross of the Lord, and a lection of the holy Gospel enclosed
in a Persian case.  Also to my daughter, his sister, I send three rings,
two of them with hyacinths, and one with an *albula* <span
id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240.md) , which I request may be given them
through you, that our charity towards them may be seasoned by your
Excellency.

<span id="ii.x.v-p11"></span>Furthermore, while paying you our duty of
greeting with fatherly charity, we beg you to return thanks in our
behalf to our most excellent son the King your consort for the peace
that has been made, and to move his mind to peace, as you have been
accustomed to do, in all ways for the future; that so, among your many
good deeds, you may be able in the sight of God to find reward in an
innocent people, which might have perished in offence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_237"></span>[106:238](2130155.htm#fr_237.md) <span
id="ii.x.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p5"></span> i.e. the child had been baptized a
catholic.  It would seem from Gregory’s way of speaking, and the absence
of allusion to the conversion of the father, that king Agilulph had not
yet announced his Arianism.  Paul Diaconus alleges that he did so
eventually through the influence of Theodelinda.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[106:239](2130155.htm#fr_238.md) <span
id="ii.x.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p6"></span> The child who had been baptized (*al*.
Adaloaldus, or Adoaldus).  He succeeded his father as king of the
Lombards, <span class="sc"><span id="ii.x.v-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>
616, being still a boy, reigning under his mother’s guardianship. 
According to Paul Diaconus, Gregory’s hopes were for a short time
fulfilled:—“Under them Churches were restored, and many endowments were
bestowed on venerable places;”—but before long he became insane, and
after ten years (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.x.v-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 626) was deposed, Arioald being
appointed to succeed him (*Hist. Longob*. iv. 43).

<span id="fn_239"></span>[106:240](2130155.htm#fr_239.md) <span
id="ii.x.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p8"></span> On the subject of the “Three Chapters,” as
appears from what follows.  It is evident that the able and
conscientious queen Theodelinda never found herself able to accept the
ruling of the See of Rome on this question (cf. IV. 2, note 3); and she
seems now to have employed the abbot Secundis to draw up a statement of
the arguments on her side, inviting Gregory to reply to them.  He did
not, however, on this account cease to address her cordially as a good
catholic.  He seems to have condoned in her what he so strongly
condemned in others as involving them in schism.  On the schism arising
from the matter of the “Three Chapters,” see I. 16, note 3; and
*Prolegom.*, p. x.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[107:241](2130155.htm#fr_240.md) <span
id="ii.x.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.v-p10"></span> Some precious stone, probably of a white
colour.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra.](2130156.md)
