[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130058)  [Next](2130060.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.liii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.liii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.liii-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.liii-p2"></span>To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings of the
Franks.

<span id="ii.v.liii-p3"></span>Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

<span id="ii.v.liii-p4"></span>It is the chief good in kings to
cultivate justice, and to preserve to every man his rights, and not to
suffer subjects to have done to them what there is power to do, but what
is equitable.  Our trust that you both love and altogether aim at this
invites us to indicate to your Excellency things that call for
amendment, that so we may be able by our letters both to succour the
oppressed and to acquire reward for you.

<span id="ii.v.liii-p5"></span>Now they say that our brother and
fellow-bishop Ursicinus, bishop of the city of Taurini (*Turin*),
suffers very serious prejudice in his parishes that are within the
limits of your kingdom, in such sort that, contrary to ecclesiastical
observance, contrary to priestly gravity, and contrary to the
definitions of the sacred canons, no crime of his requiring it, another
has not feared to be ordained bishop there.  And, it being thought not
enough unless unlawfulness were added to unlawfulness, even the property
of his church, as is said, has been taken away.  If the truth is so, it
being exceedingly intolerable that one should be oppressed by force whom
guilt has not harmed, we beg of you, addressing you in the first place
with a greeting of paternal charity, that what out of reverence for the
Church and regard to equity your Excellency might of your own accord
bestow, you would study to grant all the more kindly on our
intercession, and would cause justice to be observed towards him in all
<span id="page_33">p. 33</span> <span
id="ii.v.liii-Page_33"></span>respects according to the trust we have in
the goodness of your equity; and that, having ascertained the truth, you
would order what has been unlawfully done to be corrected, and the
property that has been wrongfully taken from him to be equitably
restored to him.  Nor should the fact of his church being detained for
the present by his enemies be at all to his disadvantage:  but this
ought to move more and more the disposition of your Christianity to
succour him, that, being consoled by the gifts of your bounty, he may
not feel the loss arising from the captivity which he has endured.  For
the good, then, of your soul let this our exhortation find place with
you, that to your own reward you may lift up again his dejection with
the outstretched hand of justice, to the end that from your observance
of equity towards priests you may ever flourish through their prayers
before the eyes of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.](2130060.md)
