[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130145)  [Next](2130147) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p2"></span>To Leontia, Empress.

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Leontia Augusta.

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p4"></span>What tongue may suffice to speak, what
mind to think, what great thanks we owe to Almighty God for the serenity
of your empire, in that such hard burdens of long duration have been
removed from our necks, and the gentle yoke of imperial supremacy has
returned, which subjects are glad to bear?  Glory, then, be given to the
Creator of all by the hymning choirs of angels, thanksgiving be paid by
men on earth, for that the whole republic, which has endured many wounds
of sorrow, has now at length found the balm of your consolation.  Hence
we must needs implore the more earnestly the mercy of Almighty God, that
He would keep the heart of your Piety ever in His right hand, and
dispose your thoughts by the aid of heavenly grace, to the end that your
Tranquillity may be able to rule those who <span id="page_101">p.
101</span> <span id="ii.ix.xvi-Page_101"></span>serve you the more
righteously as you know more truly how to serve the Sovereign of all. 
May He make you His champions in love of the catholic faith, having, of
His benign dealing, made you our emperors.  May He infuse into your
minds zeal together with gentleness, that you may always be able with
pious fervour not to leave unavenged whatever is done amiss with regard
to God, and in case of any delinquency against yourselves to bear and
spare.  May He give us in your Piety the clemency of Pulcheria Augusta,
who for her zeal for the catholic faith was called in the holy synod the
new Helena (*Act.* 1 *synodi Chalcedonensis*).  May the Almighty mercy
of God grant to you fuller length of days to live with our most pious
lord, that the longer your life is extended, the more strongly may the
consolation of your subjects be confirmed.

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p5"></span>I ought perhaps to have requested that
your Tranquillity should hold as especially commended to you the Church
of the blessed apostle Peter, which up to this time has laboured under
grievous plots against it.  But, knowing that you love Almighty God, I
ought not to ask what you will exhibit of your own accord out of the
benignity of your piety.  For the more you fear the Creator of all, the
more fully may you love the Church of him to whom it was said, *Thou art
Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church, and the gates of hell
shall not prevail against it; and to whom it is said, To thee I will
give the keys of the kingdom of heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt bind
on earth shall be bound in heaven; and whatsoever thou shalt loose on
earth shall be loosed in heaven* ([Matth. xv.
18](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#018)<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p5.1"></span>). 
Whence it is not doubtful to us with what strong love you will bind
yourself to him through whom you earnestly desire to be loosed from all
sins.  May he, then, be the guardian of your empire, may he be your
protector on earth, may he be an intercessor for you in heaven:  that
through your relieving your subjects from hard burdens, and causing them
to rejoice in your empire, you may, after many years, rejoice in the
heavenly kingdom.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Cyriacus, Patriarch of Constantinople.](2130147)
