[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130191)  [Next](2130193.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xvi-p1.1"></span>Hymn XV.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p2"></span>1.  If the head had not been
right,—haply the members had murmured:—for when because of a perverse
head—the course of the members is put astray,—they are wont to lay the
blame on the head.  *R.  Blessed be He who chose thee the pride of our
people!*

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p3"></span>2.  If now on one that is all goodly,—on
it we lay our hatred;—how much *more* if we were hateful!—Yea even God
though He is kind,—bitter men complain against Him.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p4"></span>3.  Be like the head O ye members!—Get
repose in his purity—and pleasantness in his tranquillity;—in his
sanctity renown,—and in his wisdom learning!

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p5"></span>4.  Get discernment in his mildness,—and
chastity in his gravity,—and bounty in his poverty!—As he is fully and
altogether fair,—let us be altogether fair with him!

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p6"></span><span id="page_184">p. 184</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xvi-Page_184"></span>5.  See ye how meted and weighed—are his
words and his actions!—Take heed how even his steps—keep the measure of
peace!—With all his might he holds the bridle of all himself.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p7"></span>6.  He was master over his youth;—he
bound it in the yoke of chastity:—his members were not enticed *by
lust*;—for they were kept under the rod:—his will he had in subjection.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p8"></span>7.  For he was ready beforehand for his
degree,—as he was ready beforehand in his conversation,—as he laid his
foundations securely.—He became Head in his youth,—when they made him
preacher to the people.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p9"></span>8.  Excellent was he among
preachers,—learned was he among scholars,—and understanding was he among
the wise:—chaste was he among his brethren,—and grave among his familiar
friends.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p10"></span>9.  In two abodes was he—a solitary
recluse from *his early* days;—for he was holy within his body,—and
solitary within his dwelling;—openly and secretly was he chaste.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p11"></span>10.  But although we my brethren—have
put astray those measures,—and we have lost that savour,—and have become
teachers to ourselves,—unto the perfection that called us.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p12"></span>11.  Yet that measure of
Truth—preserves itself in its vessel:—*Truth* chose it because she saw
it chose her;—she has preserved in it her fragrance and savour,—from the
beginning to the end.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p13"></span>12.  The Head both chaste and
grave,—that was not wrathful nor hard,—nor transgressed even as we
*did*,—set and kept his own measures,—and cast a bridle on his thoughts.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p14"></span>13.  He gave example in his
person,—that as he kept the measure of his time,—so was it meet that we
should know our time.—We have become strangers to our time,—for we have
been witless in the time of discernment.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p15"></span>14.  In the beginning the blast of the
wind—in its might chastens the fruit;—then in the meantime the might of
the sun:—but when its mightiness is passed,—its end gathers his
sweetness.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p16"></span>15.  But we—they that were first
chastened us;—and also they that came next rebuked us;—and they that
were last added sweetness to us:—then when the time of tasting us
arrives,—great was our savourlessness.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p17"></span>16.  For we came to maturity,—that we
might wean the children from wantonness,—and lead them to gravity:—*but*
our old age stood in need—that we should be rebuked as youths.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p18"></span>17.  Accordingly he in kindness
endured, nor did he make use of force,—that he might increase honour to
our old age:—and even if it knew not its degree,—let him be magnified
who knew its time!

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p19"></span>18.  And if one say that for the
multitude,—force and the rod should govern it;—even as for the thief
fear,—and for the spoiler threatening,—and for fools open shaming.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p20"></span>19.  Yet if with the head as first,—the
members had hasted *to move* as second,—they would have drawn that which
was third,—and the whole body from the end—would have followed after
them.

<span id="iii.iv.xvi-p21"></span>20.  They that *were* second despised
those that *were* first,—and that *were* third those that *were*
second:—the degrees were set at naught one by another.—While these
within despised one another,—they were trodden down likewise by those
without.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVI.](2130193.md)
