[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130171)  [Next](2130173.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>VIII.—His Writings:  Their
Characteristics.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p2"></span>Of the innumerable
writings—controversial, expository, hortatory, devotional—which were for
Ephraim the fulfilment of his dream in childhood, the fruit of the many
years of literary activity that exercised his full heart and busy brain,
enough remains to give an adequate idea of his powers and to amaze us by
its variety and abundance.  The exaggeration of Sozomen who reckons the
number of lines written by him at “three hundred myriads” (three
millions) is not to be taken as more than a rough guess at the probable
total; but it is evidence of the impression made on the men of the
generations to whom his works were transmitted by his fertility.  That
he himself was conscious of this gift appears in the fact that he
records the dream and claims for his hymns and sermons that in them is
to be found its interpretation.  His faculty of speech, as Gregory
informs us in a remarkable passage, though adequate to utter the
thoughts of any other mind, was sometimes overborne by the rapid rush
and abounding throng of the ideas with which his inspiration filled him,
in such measure that he was forced to pray for the intermission of its
flow, “Restrain, O Lord, the tide of Thy grace!” <span
id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300.md)   Copiousness is the characteristic,
and its excess is the chief fault, of Ephraim as an author.  The Syriac
language has great capacity for condensation; and the parallelism of
balanced clauses which Syriac literature affects, conduces to brevity. 
But on the other hand, the Syrian mind has a tendency to amplify;
amplification is the besetting sin of Syriac writers,—of Ephraim not
least.  And thus, while each sentence has the severe precision of an
epigram, the manifold reiteration of epigrammatic clauses amounts to
verbosity:  one and the same thought or fact is presented in a
long-drawn series of slightly varied aspects, with change of expression
or at most of illustration, till the recurrence becomes tedious.  This
criticism is meant primarily for his hymns; but it applies also to too
many of his metrical homilies (to be described presently).  In all his
writings, metrical or otherwise, this habit of amplification leads him,
in handling the narrations of Scripture, to fill out their simple
outline with elaborate detail that wrongs their beauty and dignity.  Of
such treatment, examples will be found in this volume, in some of the
hymns (such as the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>XIV</span>th and <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>XV</span>th *On the Epiphany*, and in
the *Discourse on the Woman who was a Sinner*).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p4"></span>His extant works (some of which are
known to us only in a Greek version), and those of his lost works of
which the titles are recorded, divide themselves into three
classes;—*Commentaries on Scripture, Homilies* (*mimre*), and *Hymns*
(*madrashe*).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p5"></span>1.  *Commentaries*.—His
*Commentaries* belonged (if we may trust the *Life*) to his later years,
after his migration to Edessa, when he was past middle life.  There he
is related to have begun his exposition (still extant) of Genesis, in
the preface to which he refers to the homilies and hymns which he had
previously produced (*Opp. Syr*. Tom. I., p. 1).  He seems to have
commented on almost all the canonical books of the Old Testament.  His
expositions of the Pentateuch, the chief historical books, <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) the Prophets (including Lamentations.md),
and Job, survive, and have been printed (in the Roman edition of
1732–43, <span id="page_147">p. 147</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-Page_147"></span>supplemented by that of Professor
Lamy, of Louvain, Tom. II., 1886); <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302.md) but those which he is recorded to have
written on the Psalms and Proverbs, the books which may be presumed to
have most influenced the religious spirit and literary form of his
works, have not been preserved.  None of the above, however, have
reached us in a complete form, but rather as a series of extracts,
apparently abridged, from the *Commentaries* as originally issued by
their author.  In commenting on the New Testament, he treated of the
Gospels, not in their separate form, but in the continuous narrative
known as the “Diatessaron” compiled from them by Tatian in the second
century.  This work, long lost, has been lately recovered in an Armenian
version.  His *Commentary on the Epistles of St. Paul* has likewise been
preserved for us in Armenian.  Both have been published by the
Mechetarist Fathers of St. Lazaro; first in Armenian, afterwards in a
Latin version. <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303.md)   In the present
volume it has been judged best to include none of the *Commentaries*,
inasmuch as the method and spirit of Ephraim’s treatment of Scripture
are shown adequately, and in a more interesting form, in his *Homilies
and Hymns*.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p9"></span>2.  *Homilies*.—The *Homilies* are
very varied in character.  Many are controversial,—directed against the
Jews, against heathenism in the person of the Emperor Julian, against
the heresies of Manes, of Marcion, of Bardesan, of the Anomœan followers
of Arius.  Others set forth articles of the Faith—the Creation, the
Fall, Redemption by the Passion and Crucifixion of Our Lord, His Descent
into Hades, His Resurrection, the Mission of the Holy Spirit, the Rest
of Paradise, the Second Coming, the End of the World.  Others are
expository, treating of narratives from the Old and the New Testaments,
such as the life of Joseph, the Repentance of Nineveh, or the story of
“the woman who was a sinner” of St. [Luke
vii](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#000.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>.—Others again are hortatory—calling to
repentance, warning against sin, threatening future retribution,
extolling virginity.  Of the *Homilies* two—one doctrinal, *of Our
Lord*; one expository, *of the sinful woman*, are given in this
selection.  It is to be noted that the *Homilies* are usually metrical
in form, being written in regular *stichoi* (lines of uniform length). 
And some of them—for example, a series of nine for the “Rogation
Days,” <span id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304.md) and another of eight for
the “Passion Week” (week before Easter), and the vigil of “New Sunday”
(first after Easter)—were and still are regularly read as lessons, as
part of the offices of the Church; <span
id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305.md) a singular mark of reverence—extended,
it seems, to the sermons of no other divine.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p12"></span>3.  *Hymns*.—But it is in his
*Hymns* that Ephraim lives,—for the Syrian Churches, and indirectly for
the Christian world, of the East if not of the West. <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306.md)   Throughout Syrian Christendom,
divided as it has been for ages—in the Malkite, Nestorian, Jacobite, and
Maronite communities, from the Mediterranean to the Tigris, and beyond,
even to the Malabar remnant of the Syro-Indian Church, all of which
retain Syriac as the language of their ritual,—the whole body of public
worship is shaped by his hymnody and animated with his spirit.  It is
literally the fact that the Hymns of Ephraim go with every member of
every one of these Churches from the first to the last of his Christian
<span id="page_148">p. 148</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-Page_148"></span>life, from the font to the grave. 
The *Epiphany Hymns* (included in the present selection) are interwoven
into the Baptismal Office; among the *Funeral Hymns* (which Dr. Burgess
has made accessible to English readers) <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307.md) are to be found dirges proper for the
obsequies of each and all, lay and cleric, young and old, male and
female.  Nor is it to be doubted that it was from these Syriac offices
that those of the Greek-speaking Churches derived this characteristic,
common to both, by which both are differentiated from those of the
West,—“hymns occupying in the Eastern Church” (as Dr. Neale
observes) <span id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308.md) “a space beyond all
comparison greater than they do in the Latin,” so that “the body of the
Eastern breviary is ecclesiastical poetry.”  That the Syrian Church, and
not the Greek, took the initiative in the development of ritual, appears
from the facts that, though there is evidence of the use of Psalms and
Canticles from Scripture throughout Christendom from the first, it is
only with Ephraim’s contemporary, Gregory Nazianzen, that Greek sacred
poetry can be said to have taken shape,—and that his verses failed to
gain a place in public worship.  He wrote in the metres of the heathen
classics; and it was not until a later day, and from the hands of other
writers, working on other lines, that the hymns appeared which won their
way into the Greek ritual,—hymns written in rhythmic prose, in what
seems to be conscious imitation of the Syriac model. <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p17"></span>The imitation, however, is by no
means complete; it is apparent in the general tone and manner, but does
not extend to the form:  just as the Greek version of Ephraim’s Hymns,
though faithfully reproducing his thoughts and literary method, makes no
attempt to retain his metrical system; but is a rendering into what in
form is prose of an original which is in verse.  That this should be so
is unavoidable, for Syriac metres are incapable of adaptation to the
Greek language.  Syriac literature, in all else imitative, here and here
only has found out for itself an independent course.  Elsewhere it leans
on one side to the Hebrew model to which it was drawn by affinity of
language and by the influence of the Old Testament; on the other to the
Greek, as found in the New Testament and in the writings of the great
Divines of the Alexandrian and Antiochian patriarchates, who were the
leaders of religious thought for Eastern Christendom.  In hymnody alone
it struck out a line of its own; it set an example for the
Greek-speaking Churches to follow, so far as was possible for them under
the conditions above indicated.  The Syriac Hymnody is constructed on
the Hebrew principle of parallelism, in which thought answers to thought
in clauses of repetitive or antithetical balance:  but, unlike the
Hebrew, its clauses are further regulated by strict equivalence of
syllabic measure.  But though in this latter respect it seems to
approach to the forms of Western verse, ancient or modern, yet the
resemblance is but superficial:  Syriac verse is not measured by
feet—whether determined by syllable quantity, as in Greek and Latin, or
by accent, as in English and other modern languages.  Thus the metre of
Syriac poetry is substantially the “thought-metre” (as it has been well
called) of Hebrew, reduced to regularity of form by the rule that each
of the lines into which the balanced clauses fall, shall consist of a
fixed number of syllables.  There is no systematic rhyme; but the nature
of the language which by reason of its uniformity of etymological
structure abounds in words of like terminations, often causes
correspond<span id="page_149">p. 149</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-Page_149"></span>ences of sound amounting to rhyme,
or at least to assonance.  The lines are very short; not exceeding
twelve syllables, sometimes confined to four.  Ephraim, though not the
actual inventor, was the first master of this metrical system, the first
to develop it into system and variety. <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310.md)   His favorite metres are the
five-syllabled and the seven-syllabled.  In his more elaborate poems,
such as the Nisibene series, which are rather Odes than Hymns, the
strophes or stanzas into which the lines are arranged are often long and
of complicated structure, each strophe consisting of many lines (ranging
from four up to fourteen or more) of various lengths according to a
fixed scheme rigidly adhered to throughout the poem—sometimes throughout
a group of cognate poems.  In other poems, especially in Hymns intended
for popular or ecclesiastical use, where simplicity of structure is
suitable, the lines which compose each strophe, whatever their number,
are of uniform length.  So easily do the Syriac tongue, and the genius
of Syriac literature, lend themselves to this scheme of short,
syllabically equal clauses, that (as has been already stated) many even
of the Homilies are metrical; arranged not indeed in strophes, but in
continuous succession of brief *stichoi*, all of one and the same
length—usually of seven syllables; a sort of blank verse, but a blank
verse with no animating accents, no varying pauses.  A Homily so
constructed would fatigue the ear of a modern audience by its monotony: 
but inasmuch as some portions of Ephraim’s Homilies were used in certain
ecclesiastical Offices, probably recited in a sort of chant, it may be
that in such use we have the explanation of their quasi-versified
structure.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p19"></span>In point of literary value as
poems, a high place cannot be claimed for these Hymns.  Some of them
indeed have much of the devotional fervor, and not a little of the human
pathos, of the Psalms of David:  others show something of the antithetic
point and epigrammatic terseness of the Proverbs of Solomon.  Yet the
devout aspirations and confessions of the poet are too often forced and
artificial in their utterance; in his funeral dirges we seem here and
there to detect the false note of the professional mourner in the effort
to exhaust all possible topics of grief; in all his poems he tends to
prolong the series of his parallelisms to a wearisome length and with an
iteration that, though laboriously varied, is tedious,—an iteration that
has no precedent in the poetry of the Old Testament, save in one or two
of the latest Psalms, such as the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p19.1"></span>CXXXVI</span>th with its recurring
burden “For His mercy endureth for ever,” or the <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p19.2"></span>CXIX</span>th with its artificial
arrangement (often emulated in Syriac Hymnody) by which each of the
twenty-two letters of the alphabet in turn is made to head each one of
eight consecutive verses in praise of the Law of the Lord.  On the
whole, it must be admitted that the greater qualities of poetry, such as
abound everywhere in nearly every writer of the Hebrew Scriptures,—of
truth in rendering the inmost feelings of man’s heart in words of
absolute simplicity, of aspiration that rises without effort to the
highest things of God—to these Ephraim’s Hymns have no claim.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p20"></span>For these shortcomings in his
poetry, two main causes may be assigned.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p21"></span>One is in the man himself,—or
rather, in his mode of life.  Naturally, he was prone to feel for and
with his fellow-men; for the sorrows of the bereaved, the cares of the
toiling poor whose lot (as he proved in the last and best episode of his
history) moved him to sympathy and active succour.  He can be simple
accordingly when he deals with the homely facts of life.  But the main
tenor of his course was ascetic; he looked on this life and the life
beyond—on man and to God—with a vision clouded by the gloom <span
id="page_150">p. 150</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-Page_150"></span>of unnatural solitude and
self-mortification.  An assiduous student of Scripture, he had an ear
for its threatenings rather than its promises and consolations; dread
and dismay entered into his heart more deeply than hope; the “Stand in
awe and sin not” of the Psalmist was more familiar to his spirit than
the “Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous.”  The perpetual proneness to
tears on which his biographers dwell with admiration, and which he seems
to have thought it right to foster, has its reflex in his writings, in
the hysterical overflow of his fears, his lamentations and his
self-reproach.  He had lived as an anchorite till his nature became
morbid, and its moral fibre was weakened.  But to reach the highest
levels in religious literature, whether in prose or in poetry, a man
must be sane, his mind healthy and strong,—with a health and strength
sustained and exercised by wholesome daily contact with the lives of
other men.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p22"></span>The second cause is to be found in
the method, above described as his—developed though not actually
invented by him, and made his own—which he chose as the vehicle of his
thoughts and emotions.  The “thought-metre” of the Hebrew poets was
regulated (as we have seen) by balance of sense, not of sound—member
answering to member, verse by verse, in equivalence or contrast of
substance merely, not of verbal form:  and in this metre, which has been
happily likened to the alternating beat of a bird’s wings as it mounts
aloft, they had shown it to be possible to attain the highest reach of
sublime expression of the utmost that man’s spirit can conceive of God
and Heaven.  The Syriac Hymnists had the unhappy idea of effecting a
compromise between their two contrasted models, the Hebrew and the
Greek; and to this end they compelled their verses into conformity by
syllabic measure, of sound, as well as of sense.  This artificial
structure has an effectiveness of its own, and is suited to the popular
ear; but it is incapable of the elevation which the earlier and simpler
method attained without effort.  As its Semitic parallelism of substance
excluded Syriac poetry from the variety in topic and largeness in
conception of the Greek, so this grecized regularity of form hampered
its efforts to rise to the upper regions where the Hebrew is at home. 
The wings are free and ample by whose regulated stroke Hebrew poetry is
borne, and they carry it to the supreme height:  in Syriac poetry the
flight is too commonly low and feeble, because its wings are clipped. 
In the former we are conscious of a uniformity as of the unconstrained
waves of the sea, following in a succession of endless change—a
uniformity that is majestic:  in the latter we detect the uniformity of
the water-wheel, that with artificial movement draws up and dispenses
the waters of the well in vessels of fixed measure—a uniformity that is
mechanical and monotonous.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_300"></span>[146:301](2130172.htm#fr_300.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p3"></span> This passage is mistranslated in
the Latin version of the *Encomium*, by P. F. Linus of Verona (in his
*Divina S. Ephraem Opera*, Dillingen, 1562), from whom it has been
borrowed by Gerard Voss for his Latin version of Ephraim (Cologne,
1603), and by the editors of Gregory’s Works.

<span id="fn_301"></span>[146:302](2130172.htm#fr_301.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p6"></span> Not including Ruth, Ezra,
Nehemiah, Esther.  It is not known whether he commented on Ecclesiastes
and Canticles, or on the deutero-canonical books (commonly called
“Apocrypha”).

<span id="fn_302"></span>[147:303](2130172.htm#fr_302.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p7"></span> Lamy has supplied the Commentaries
on Jonah, Nahum, Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai, with part of Isaiah
and Lamentation—which was wanting from the Roman edition.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[147:304](2130172.htm#fr_303.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p8"></span> Both in the Armenian edition of
Ephraim (Vol. II., *Diatessaron*; Vol. III., St. Paul), Venice, 1836: 
also in Latin,—the *Diatessaron*, in 1876; *St. Paul* 1893.

<span id="fn_304"></span>[147:305](2130172.htm#fr_304.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p10"></span> Of these the most complete copy
is in <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p10.1"></span>ms.</span> B. 5.18, Trinity College,
Dublin (formerly the property of Archbishop Ussher), which has been used
by Professor Lamy in his edition of three homilies (Tom. III. of his
*Ephraim*, 1889.).

<span id="fn_305"></span>[147:306](2130172.htm#fr_305.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p11"></span> This remarkable distinction dates
from the fourth century; it is noticed by St. Jerome (*De Viris Ill*.,
CXV.), writing within twenty years after Ephraim’s death.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[147:307](2130172.htm#fr_306.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p13"></span> St. Hilary of Poitiers (*d*. 368)
is reputed (see Isidore of Seville, *De Off. Eccl*.) the earliest writer
of Latin Hymns, and some extant Hymns are ascribed to him.  But St.
Augustine tells us (*Confess*. IX. 7) that at Milan hymns were first
used, “*after the manner of the Eastern Church*,” in the time when the
Empress Justina was persecuting St. Ambrose (386).

<span id="fn_307"></span>[148:308](2130172.htm#fr_307.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p14"></span> *Metrical Hymns of Ephraim*,
1853.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[148:309](2130172.htm#fr_308.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p15"></span> *Hymns of the Holy Eastern
Church*, pp. 34, 35, 49 (1870).  Note the contrast between the wide
acceptance of Ephraim’s Hymns, through the East, and the scanty survival
of those of his contemporary, in the West.

<span id="fn_309"></span>[148:310](2130172.htm#fr_309.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p16"></span> A few exceptional Greek hymns may
be pointed out of earlier date (*e.g.*, that mentioned by St. Basil, *De
Spiritu S*., XXIX; but the statement above made is in the main
accurate.  Anatolius, Patriarch of Constantinople (449–458) seems to
have been the first to devote himself to the composition of hymns of the
type above described.  See Neale (as above).

<span id="fn_310"></span>[149:311](2130172.htm#fr_310.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.viii-p18"></span> Probably the earliest extant
Syriac poem is the *Hymn of the Soul* (printed by Dr. Wright in
*Apocryphal Acts*, p. 174; also by Mr. Bevan in *Texts and Studies*, V.
3).  Its metre, though less regular, is substantially the
seven-syllabled of Ephraim.  Whether Bardesan (or Harmonius) wrote in
metres like those of Ephraim has been questioned; but if it is true that
Ephraim’s hymns were adapted by him to the tunes of Harmonius, it seems
to follow that his metres were those of the hymns to which those tunes
belonged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Selections Included in the Present Collection.](2130173.md)
