[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130104)  [Next](2130106) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LVII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p2"></span>*To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum* <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p4"></span>Gregory to Aregius, Bishop of Gaul.

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p5"></span>There being in brotherly love one
heart and one soul, as the mind rejoices in the prosperity of another,
so is it afflicted in his adversity, since in both it is bound to be
partaker by the law of charity.  And so the greater sorrow had come upon
us for your sadness, lest perchance the affliction of a prolonged grief
might batter your heart with continual pain, and burden your life with
groans.  But, having received the letters of your Charity, we have been
consoled with the joy we hoped for, and we give thanks to Almighty God,
for that we now know that your equanimity is unimpaired, and that your
mind has been restored to comfort.  Nor indeed was it otherwise to be
expected of you than that you would undoubtedly overcome with priestly
patience whatever adversity there might be.

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p6"></span>Further, we well recollect how the
zeal of your Fraternity flamed up of old in uprooting simoniacal
heresy.  Wherefore we exhort that you give your earnest attention to
this, and that, among other things that we wrote of, it be condemned by
the strict definition of a council; that so, the bent of our desire
being fulfilled by the help of your solicitude, you may both offer to
Almighty God a most acceptable oblation in the correction of vices, and
also shew, for the edification of others, how the care of the pastoral
office shines forth in you.  Moreover our experience of your life, which
we have known to be much superior to that of many, moves us to presume
on great assistance from you in this matter.  And so complete ye your
kindness as under God you have begun, that the good which with a right
aim has been begun in you may, by the help of God the Creator of all, be
brought to completion.

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p7"></span>Furthermore, let your Fraternity
bestow your accustomed charity on the monks whom we have sent to our
most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Augustine; and so endeavour to
succour them for proceeding on their way, as well personally as through
others as you can, that, while through your provision they have no
difficulties or delays in your parts, both we may feel that our
confidence in you was not in vain, and Almighty God may give you the
recompense of His grace for the conversion of the souls on whose behalf
they have been sent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_167"></span>[71:168](2130105.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.vii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiii-p3"></span> Cf. IX. 107, to the same Aregius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Divers Bishops of Gaul.](2130106)
