[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130031)  [Next](2130033.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p2"></span>To Fantinus, Guardian (Defensorem), of
Panormus (Palermo).

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p3"></span>Gregory to Fantinus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p4"></span>A little time ago we wrote to Victor, our
brother and fellow-bishop, that—inasmuch as certain of the Jews have
complained in a petition presented to us that synagogues with their
guest-chambers, situated in the city of Panormus, had by him been
unreasonably taken possession of—he should keep aloof from their
congregation until it could be ascertained whether this thing had been
justly done, lest perchance injury should appear to have been alleged by
them of their own mere will.  And indeed, having regard to his priestly
office, we could not easily believe that our aforesaid brother had done
anything unsuitably.  But, since we find from the report of Salarius,
our notary, who was afterwards there, that there had been no reasonable
cause for taking possession of those synagogues, and that they had been
unadvisedly and rashly consecrated, we therefore enjoin thy Experience,
since what has been once consecrated cannot any more be restored to the
Jews, that it be thy care to see that our aforesaid brother and
fellow-bishop pay the price at which our sons, the glorious Venantius
the Patrician, and Urbicus the Abbot, may value the synagogues
themselves with the guest-chambers that are under them or annexed to
their walls, and the gardens thereto adjoining; that so what he has
caused to be taken possession of may belong to the Church, and they may
in no wise be oppressed, or suffer any injustice.  Moreover, let books
or ornaments that have been abstracted be in like manner sought for. 
And, if any have been manifestly taken away, we desire them also to be
restored without any ambiguity.  For, as there ought to be no licence
for them, as we have ourselves already written, to do anything in their
synagogues beyond what is decreed by law, so neither damage nor any
<span id="page_15">p. 15</span> <span id="ii.v.xxvi-Page_15"></span>cost
ought to be brought upon them contrary to justice and equity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LVIII](2130033.md)
