[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130192)  [Next](2130194) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p1"></span> <span id="page_185">p. 185</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xvii-Page_185"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xvii-p1.1"></span>Hymn XVI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p2"></span>1.  Herein *is* a mirror to be
blamed,—if its clearness is darkened—because there are spots on its
substance;—for the foulness that is on it becomes—a covering before them
that look on it.  *R.  Blessed be He Who polished our mirror!*

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p3"></span>2.  For that comeliness is not adorned
in it,—and blemishes are not brought to view in it,—it is altogether a
damage to comely things;—seeing that their comeliness gain
not—adornments as *their* profit.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p4"></span>3.  Blemishes are not rooted out by
it,—likewise adornments are not multiplied by it.—A blemish that remains
is as a loss;—that there is no adornment is a defect:—loss is met
together with defect.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p5"></span>4.  If our mirror *be* darkness,—it is
altogether joy to the hateful;—because their blemishes *are* not
reproved:—but if polished and shining,—it is our freedom that is
adorned.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p6"></span>5.  Twofold is the loss in defect,—for
the hateful and for the goodly;—in that the goodly gain no crown,—and
likewise the hateful get no adorning:—the mirror divides the loss.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p7"></span>6.  Never does the mirror drive—by
compulsion him that looks therein:—*so* likewise grace which
followed—upon the righteousness of the Law,—does not possess the
compulsion of the Law.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p8"></span>7.  Righteousness was unto
childhood,—its adorner of compulsion;—for when mankind was in
childhood,—she adorned it by compulsion,—while she robbed it not of its
freedom.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p9"></span>8.  Righteousness used
blandishment,—and the rod *to deal* with childhood;—when she smote it
she roused it; her rod restrained frowardness, her blandishment softened
the minds.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p10"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p11"></span>9.  \[If one turn from the Gospel,\]
wherewith we are adorned to-day, my brethren,—to another gospel he is a
child:—in a time of greatness of understanding,—he is become without
understanding.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p12"></span>10.  For in the degree of full age,—he
has gone down to childhood;—and he loves the law of bondmen,—which when
he is confident smites him,—and when he rejoices buffets him.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p13"></span>11.  Whatsoever ornament *is*
compulsion,—is not true but is borrowed.—This is a great thing in God’s
eyes,—that a man should be adorned by himself:—therefore took He away
compulsion.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p14"></span>12.  For even as of *His* prudence—in
its *own* time He employed compulsion,—so *likewise* of His prudence,—He
took it away at a time—when gentleness was desired in its stead.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p15"></span>13.  For as it is befitting to
Youth,—that it should be made to haste under the rod;—*so* *is* it very
hateful that under the rod—Wisdom should be brought to serve,—that
compulsion should be lord over her.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p16"></span>14.  Behold therefore how likewise—God
has ordered my successions—in the pastors I have had,—and in the
teachers He has given me,—and in the fathers He has reckoned unto me!

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p17"></span>15.  For weighed out according to
their times—*were* the helps of their qualities;—namely in him in whom
it was needful, fear; and in whom it was profitable, heartening; and in
whom it was becoming, meekness.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p18"></span><span id="page_186">p. 186</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xvii-Page_186"></span>16.  By measure He made my steps
advance:—to my childhood He assigned terror; likewise to my youth,
fear;—to my *age of* wisdom and prudence,—He assigned and gave meekness.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p19"></span>17.  In the frowardness of the degree
of childhood,—*my* instructor was a fear to me:—his rod restrained me
from wantonness,—and from mischief the terror of him,—and from
indulgence the fear of him.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p20"></span>18.  Another father He gave to my
youth:—what there was in me of childishness,—that was there in him of
hardness; what there was in me of maturity,—that was in him *as*
meekness.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p21"></span>19.  When I rose from the degrees—of
childhood and of youth,—there passed away the terror *that was*
first,—there passed away the fear *that* *was* second;—He gave me a kind
pastor.

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p22"></span>20.  Lo! for my full age his food;—and
for my wisdom his interpretations;—and for my peace his meekness;—and
for my repose his kindness;—and for my chastity his gravity!

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p23"></span>21.  Blessed is He who as in a
balance—weighed out and gave me fathers:—for according to my times
*were* my helps;—and according to my sicknesses my medicines;—and
according to my comelinesses my adornments!

<span id="iii.iv.xvii-p24"></span>22.  We then *are* they that have
disturbed—the succession and fair order;—for in a time of mildness—lo!
we crave for hardness,—that Thou should rebuke us as though *we were*
children!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVII. Concerning Abraham, Bishop of Nisibis.](2130194)
