[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130182)  [Next](2130184.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.vii-p1.1"></span>Hymn VI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p2"></span>1.  I will run in my affections, to Him
who heals freely.  He who healed my sorrows, the first and the second,
*He* who cured the third, He will heal the fourth.  *R., Heal me, Thou
Son the First Born!*

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p3"></span>2.  My sons, O my Lord, drank and were
drunken, of the tidings which wrath had mixed; and they rushed on my
adornments, and spoiled and cast away my ornaments; they rent and spared
not, my garments and my crowns.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p4"></span>3.  They uncovered me and I was made
bare.  Because I was shamed a little, by means of that stripping, the
first and the second, because I was shamed a third time, lo! they have
stripped me a fourth time.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p5"></span>4.  For they have seized and taken away
my garments, my ornaments and my gardens.  On the sackcloth that girds
my altar, look Thou, O my Lord, and have pity on me!  Let the sackcloth
be to me, O my Lord, the breastplate of salvation!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p6"></span>5.  Lo! it is not by the hand of the
chaste, that Thou hast chastised me, O my Master!  For lo! his shame is
before him, and behind him his disgrace; for as to his marriage,
adultery is better than it.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p7"></span>6.  Lo! his daughter is his wife, and
his sister his consort; and his mother whence he came forth, he turns
again and takes her *to wife*!  The heavens are astonished that thus, he
provokes *Thee*, and lo! he prospers.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p8"></span>7.  And though, O my Lord, my crimes are
many, are my offences so heavy, that Thou shouldst make over a chaste
woman, mother of chaste *daughters*, to foul Assyria, mother of defiled
*daughters*?

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p9"></span>8.  Restrain him that he come not, and
wag at me his head, and stamp on me his heel, and rejoice that the voice
of his fame, thus troubles the world; and be uplifted yet a little!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p10"></span>9.  My sons, O my Lord, have seen my
nakedness, yea have uncovered me and wept.  Uncover Thou me before my
children, who are pained by my pain, and let <span id="page_175">p.
175</span> <span id="iii.iv.vii-Page_175"></span>not those mock at me,
the accursed that *have* no pity!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p11"></span>10.  My lands had brought forth fruits
and pleasant things; good things in the vineyard, abundance in the
fields.  But as I rested secure, of a sudden wrath overtook me.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p12"></span>11.  The husbandmen *were* plundered,
the spoilers heaped *the grain*; what thou had borrowed and sown these
destroyed.  With one’s debt his hunger, haply will also remain
unsatisfied, for his bread *is* snatched from him.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p13"></span>12.  The husbandman, O my Lord, *is*
plundered, for he lent to the earth; she has received the deposit, and
given it to a stranger; she has borrowed it of the husbandman; and paid
it to the spoiler.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p14"></span>13.  Be jealous over me who am Thine,
and to Thee, O my Lord:  am I betrothed!  The Apostle who betrothed me
to Thee, told me that Thou art jealous.  For as a wall to chaste *wives*
is the jealousy of their husbands.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p15"></span>14.  Samson stirred up seas, because he
was mightily jealous over his wife, though she was greatly defiled, and
was divided against him.  Keep Thy Church, for no other, has she beside
Thee!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p16"></span>15.  Whoso is not jealous, over his
spouse despises her.  Jealousy it is that can make known, the love that
is within.  Thou art called jealous, that thou mayest show me Thy love.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p17"></span>16.  The nature of woman is this; it is
weak and rash: it is jealousy keeps it, under fear every hour.  Thou
hast been named among the jealous, that Thou mightest make known Thy
solicitude.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p18"></span>17.  Every man has been master, of
something that *was* not his own; every man has gone forth gathering,
something that he scattered not.  The day of confusion, I have prepared
for myself by my crimes.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p19"></span>18.  How shall they bear the suffering,
the labourers and tillers?  In the face of the vinedresser, they have
cut down the vines and driven away the flocks of the husbandman; his
sowing they have reaped and carried off.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p20"></span>19.  They had yoked cattle sown and
harrowed, they had ploughed, planted, nurtured.  They stood afar and
wept; and they went away bereft of all.  The labour *was* for the
toilers, the increase for the spoilers.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p21"></span>20.  The rulers, O my Lord, maintained
not, order in the midst of *Thy* wrath.  If they had willed *it* they
might have kept order, but our iniquity suffered it not.  Though wrath
had greatly abated, wrath compelled *them* to spoil.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p22"></span>21.  To whom on any side, shall I look
for comfort, for my plantations that are laid low, and my possessions
that are laid waste?  Let the message of the voice of peace, drive away
my sadness from me!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p23"></span>22.  Give me not over; lest it be
thought that Thou, hast given me a writing of divorce, and sent me away
and driven me out!  Let them not call me, O my Lord, the forsaken and
the disgraced!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p24"></span>23.  I have not anything, to call to
mind before Thine eyes, for I am wholly despised.  Call Thou to mind for
me, O my God, this only that none other, have I set before me beside
Thee!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p25"></span>24.  Who would not weep for me, with
voice and wailing? for before the days of full *moon* I was chaste and
crowned; and after the days of full moon, I was uncovered and made bare.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p26"></span>25.  My chaste daughters of the
chambers, wander in the fields; for the wrath that makes all drunken,
has caused my honourable women to be despised.  Let Thy mercy which
gives peace to all, restore these beloved ones to honour!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p27"></span>26.  My elder *daughters* and my
younger, lo! they cry before Thee; the damsels with their voices, they
that are aged with their tears; my virgins with their fasts, my chaste
ones with their sackcloth!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p28"></span>27.  Mine eyes to all the streets, I
lift up and lo! they are deserted.  There are left of a hundred ten, and
a thousand of ten thousand.  Give Thou peace and fill my streets, with
the tumult of my dwellers!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p29"></span><span id="page_176">p. 176</span> <span
id="iii.iv.vii-Page_176"></span>28.  Bring back them that are without,
and make them glad that are within!  Mighty is Thy grace, that Thou
extendest it within and without.  Let the wings of Thy grace gather my
chickens together!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p30"></span>29.  Let the prayer of my just men,
save my fugitives!  The unbelievers have plundered me, and the believers
have sustained me.  In them that believe put Thou to shame them that
believe not!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p31"></span>30.  There came together on one day,
two festivals as one:  the Feast of Thine Ascension, and the Feast of
Thy Champions; the feast that wove Thy Crown, and the memorial of the
crowning of Thy servants.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p32"></span>31.  Have thou mercy because there were
doubled for us, *these* feasts on one day; and there were doubled for us
instead of them, *even* the two feasts in one, suffering from the voice
of *ill* tidings, and mourning from desolation!

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p33"></span>32.  Give peace to my festivals! for
both my feasts have ceased; and instead of rejoicing, *of* my remnants
in festivals, tremblings and desolations meet me in every place.

<span id="iii.iv.vii-p34"></span>33.  Bring home mine that are far off,
make glad mine that are nigh; and in the midst of our land shall be
preached, good tidings of joy; and I shall render in return for peace,
praise from every mouth!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn VII.](2130184.md)
