[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130166)  [Next](2130168.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>III.—The Life, as Amplified by Mediaeval
Biographers.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>1.  *His Early Years*.—Ephraim,
according to this biography, was a Syrian of Mesopotamia, by birth, and
by parentage on both sides.  His mother was of Amid (now Diarbekr) a
central city of that region; his father belonged to the older and more
famous City of Nisibis, not far from Amid but near the Persian frontier,
where he was priest of an idol named Abnil (or Abizal) in the days of
Constantine the Great (306–337).  This idol was afterwards destroyed by
Jovian (who became Emperor in 363 after the extinction of the Flavian
dynasty by the death of Julian).  In Nisibis, then included within the
Roman Empire, Ephraim was born.  The date of his birth is not stated,
but it cannot have been later than the earliest years of Constantine’s
reign.  Though the son of such a father, he was from his childhood
preserved, by Divine grace which “chose him like Jeremiah from his
mother’s womb,” from all taint of idolatrous worship and its attendant
impurities, to be, like St. Paul, a “chosen vessel” to spread the light
of truth and to quench heresy.  The biographer records farther on, but
without fixing its time, an intimation of his future work which Ephraim
himself relates in his “Testament” as belonging to the days “when his
mother carried him on her bosom.”  He saw in dream or vision a vine
springing from his mouth, which grew so high as to fill all that was
under the heavens, and produced clusters whereon the fowls of the air
<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_122"></span>fed, and which multiplied the more,
the more they were fed on.  These clusters (the Testament explains) were
his Sermons; the leaves of the vine, his Hymns.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p3"></span>But his entrance into the Christian
fold was not to be without hindrance and suffering.  His father, finding
the youth one day in converse with some Christians, was filled with
anger, chastised him with cruel and almost fatal severity, and repaired
to the shrine of his god to seek pardon for his son by sacrifice and
prayer.  A voice issuing from the idol rejected his intercession, warned
him that his son was destined to be the persecutor of his father’s gods,
and commanded his expulsion from home.  The father obeyed:  the son
received the sentence with joy, and went out from his father’s house,
carrying nothing with him and not knowing whither he went.  His way was
divinely directed to the famous and saintly Bishop, Jacob of Nisibis, to
whom he told his story and by whom he was affectionately welcomed and
admitted into the number of “Hearers,”—that is, Catechumens in the first
stage of preparatory instruction.  From the first he showed himself a
diligent disciple, in fasting and prayer, and in daily attendance on the
teaching of the Scriptures.  He frequented the Bishop’s abode, imitated
his virtues, attracted his special notice, and acquired a high place in
his love as well as in that of all the Church.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p4"></span>A slanderous charge, however, was
laid against him in his youthful manhood, which, but for supernatural
interposition granted to his prayer, would have ruined his good name.  A
damsel of noble birth had been seduced by an official (*Paramonarius,
i.e.*, sacristan, *or perhaps rather*, steward) of the church, named
likewise Ephraim.  When pregnancy ensued and her frailty was detected,
she at the instance of her paramour charged Ephraim the pious Catechumen
as being the author of her shame.  Her father laid the matter before the
Bishop, who in much grief and consternation summoned his disciple to
answer the accusation.  The youth received it at first in amazed
silence; but finally made answer, “Yea, I have sinned; but I entreat thy
Holiness to pardon me.”  Even after this seeming acknowledgment of
guilt, however, the Bishop was unconvinced, and prayed earnestly that
the truth might be revealed to him:  but in vain,—a more signal clearing
was in store for the humble and blameless youth.  When the child of
shame was born, and the father of the frail damsel required him to
undertake the charge of it, he repeated his seeming confession of guilt
to the Bishop; he received the infant into his arms:  he openly entered
the church carrying it; and he besought the congregation with tears,
saying, “Entreat for me, my brethren, that this sin be pardoned to me.” 
After thus bearing for some days the burden of unmerited reproach, he
perceived the great scandal caused to the people, and began to reflect
that his meek acceptance of calumny was doing harm.  On the following
Sunday, therefore, after the Eucharist had been administered, he
approached the Bishop in church in presence of the people, carrying the
infant under his mantle, and obtained his permission to enter the *bema*
(not the pulpit, but the raised sanctuary where the altar stood). 
Before the eyes of the astonished congregation, he produced the babe,
held it up in his right hand, facing the altar, and cried aloud, “Child,
I call on thee and adjure thee by the living God, who made heaven and
earth and all that therein is, that thou confess and tell me truly, who
is thy father?”  The infant opened its mouth and said, “Ephraim the
paramonarius.”  Having thus spoken, it died that same hour.  The people
and the Bishop received this miraculous vindication of the wrongfully
accused with amazement and tears; the father of the sinful mother fell
on his knees and cried for forgiveness; the true partner of her sin fled
and was seen in Nisibis no more; Satan was confounded; and Ephraim was
restored to more than all the favour and affection he enjoyed before.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p5"></span>Not long after, the young disciple
received a singular proof of the high esteem in <span id="page_123">p.
123</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_123"></span>which he was held
by his Bishop.  When summoned with the other prelates to the great
Council of Nicæa (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 325), Jacob took Ephraim
with him as his attendant or secretary, and brought him into that holy
Synod.  It is to be inferred that a youth so chosen must have shown
early maturity and zeal for the Faith.  His presence on this first great
battlefield of the Church’s war against heresy must have given a keen
stimulus to his polemic activity, and influenced his subsequent life as
a student and teacher of theology.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p6"></span>2.  *Siege of Nisibis*.—After some
years his course of assiduous study, obedience, and devout piety, was
rudely broken by the alarm of war.  Soon after the death of Constantine
(<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>
337), Sapor, king of Persia was moved to seize the opportunity offered
by the removal of the great Emperor and the inexperience of his sons,
and to attempt the recovery of the provinces on the Tigris which had
been ceded by Narses his predecessor to Diocletian (under the treaty of
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p6.2"></span>a.d.</span> 297),
so as to push his border westward in advance of the line which had for
forty years defined the eastern limits of the Roman Empire.  To this end
it was essential that he should obtain possession of Nisibis, <span
id="fr_250"></span>[251](#fn_250.md) the strength and situation of that
city marking it as a necessary safeguard for the frontier he sought to
attain; and to it accordingly he laid siege in great force.  After
seventy days’ successful resistance, he had recourse to a novel mode of
assault by which the city was wellnigh overpowered.  The river
(Mygdonius <span id="fr_251"></span>[252](#fn_251) .md) which flowed
through it was by his orders embanked and its waters intercepted, and
then let loose so as to bear with destructive rush against the city
wall.  It gave way; and Sapor prepared to enter and take possession.  To
his dismay he found his advance vigorously repelled; he saw the breach
filled by a fresh wall, manned and equipped with engines of war.  The
holy Bishop Jacob and the devout Ephraim, by their unceasing prayers
within the church and their exhortations, had stimulated the garrison
and the people to accomplish this work with incredible rapidity, and had
secured the divine blessing on its timely completion.  But a more
amazing sight than the newly-built wall awaited Sapor.  On the ramparts
there appeared a Figure in royal apparel of radiant brightness,—the
Emperor Constantius in outward semblance; though he was known to be far
off, in Antioch.  Sapor in blind fury assailed this majestic phantom
with missiles, but soon desisted when he perceived the futility of his
attack.  His final discomfiture was brought to pass by Ephraim.  Having
first sought and obtained the Bishop’s sanction, he ascended a tower
whence he could view the besieging host, and there he offered prayer to
God that He should send on them a plague of gnats and mosquitos, and
show by what puny agents Divine Power could effectually work the ruin of
its adversaries.  The prayer was instantly answered by a cloud of these
insects, tiny but irresistible assailants, descending on the Persian
host.  Maddened by this plague, the horses flung their riders; the
elephants broke loose and trampled down the men; the camp was thrown
into irretrievable confusion; a storm of wind, rain, and thunder (adds
another chronicler) enhanced the panic; and Sapor was forced to raise
the siege and retire with ignominy and heavy loss instead of success.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p9"></span>Soon after, the saintly Bishop Jacob
died, in the fulness of his virtues and his fame; and Ephraim in deep
affliction conducted his funeral.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p10"></span>3.  *Removal to Edessa*.—Our
biographer then, passing over the remaining years of Constantius, goes
on to the accession of Julian (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 361).  The troubles of the
intervening period he assigns to the reign of Constans, whom (though he
died before his <span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_124"></span>brother Constantius) he supposes to
have reigned after him and before Julian.  He records the persecutions
suffered by the Christians under the latter, the judgment that overtook
him in his defeat and death by the hands of the Persians, the succession
of Jovian, and the treaty concluded by him with Sapor, under which
Nisibis was surrendered to Persia and emptied of its Christian
inhabitants.  Of Ephraim he tells us only that he raised his voice
against Julian and his persecutions, and remained in Nisibis until its
surrender, and then retired to a place called Beth-Garbaia, <span
id="fr_252"></span>[253](#fn_252.md) where he had been baptized at the age
of eighteen and had received his first instruction in the Scriptures and
in psalmody.  Persecution having arisen there against the Church, he
fled to Amid, where he spent a year; and thence proceeded to Edessa (now
Urfa), which city, as soon as he came in sight of it, he fixed on as his
permanent and final abode.  As he was about to enter it, an incident
occurred which nearly all the narratives of his life relate with
variations, and which the historian Sozomen states to have been recorded
in one of the writings of Ephraim himself.  Beside the river Daisan
which surrounds the city, he saw some women washing clothes in its
waters.  As he stood and watched them, one of them fixed her eyes on him
and gazed at him so long as to move his anger.  “Woman,” he said, “art
thou not ashamed?”  She answered, “It is for thee to look on the ground,
for from thence thou art; but for me it is to look at thee, for from
thee was I taken.”  He marvelled at the reply and acknowledged the
woman’s wisdom; and left the spot saying to himself, “If the women of
this city are so wise, how much more exceedingly wise must its men be!”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p12"></span>Other authorities (including
Ephraim’s contemporary, Gregory of Nyssa, who professes to collect the
facts of his *Encomium* exclusively from Ephraim’s own written remains)
give a somewhat different turn to this story.  According to them,
Ephraim approached the city, praying and expecting to meet at his first
entrance there some holy and wise man by whose converse he might
profit.  The first person whom he encountered at the gate was a harlot. 
Shocked and bitterly disappointed, he eyed her, and was passing on; but
when he noticed that she eyed him, in turn, he asked the meaning of her
bold gaze.  In this version of the incident, her answer was, “It is meet
and fit that I gaze on thee, for from thee, as man, I was taken; but
look not thou on me, but rather on the ground whence thou wast taken.” 
Ephraim owned that he had learned something of value even from this
outcast woman; and praised God, who from the mouth of such an
unlooked-for teacher, had fulfilled his desire for edification.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p13"></span>Another woman of Edessa is related
by some of these authorities to have accosted the holy man, expecting
that, even if she failed to tempt him to unchastity, she might at least
move him to the sin, against which he strove no less sedulously to guard
himself, of anger.  He affected to yield to her solicitation; but when
she invited him to fix on a place of assignation, he proposed that it
should be in the open and frequented street.  When she objected to such
shameless publicity, he replied, “If we are ashamed in sight of men, how
much more ought we to be ashamed in the sight of God, who knows all
secret things and will bring all to His judgment!”  By this reply the
woman was moved to repentance and amendment, and gave up her sinful
life,—and finally (as some add) retired from the world into a convent.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p14"></span>In Edessa, Ephraim at first earned
a humble livelihood in the service of a bath-keeper, while giving his
free time to the task of making the Scriptures known to the heathen who
then formed a large part of the population of the city.  But before long
he was led, by the advice of a monk whom he casually met, to join
himself to one of <span id="page_125">p. 125</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_125"></span>the Solitaries (or anchorites) who
dwelt in the caves of the adjacent “Mount of Edessa” (a rocky range of
hills, now Nimrud Dagh).  There he passed his time in prayer, fasting,
and study of the Scriptures.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p15"></span>But a divine intimation was sent to
call him back from his retreat into active life in the city.  A vision
came to the Solitary under whom Ephraim had placed himself.  This man,
as he stood at midnight outside his cell after prayer and psalmody, saw
an angel descending from heaven and bearing in his hands a great roll
written on both sides, and heard him say to them that stood by, “To whom
shall I give this volume that is in my hands?”  They answered, “To
Eugenius <span id="fr_253"></span>[254](#fn_253.md) the Solitary of the
desert of Egypt.”  Again he asked, “Who is worthy of it?”  They
answered, “Julian the Solitary.”  The Angel rejoined, “None among men is
this day worthy of it, save Ephraim the Syrian of the Mount of Edessa.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p17"></span>He, to whom this vision came, at
first regarded it as a delusion; but he soon found reason to accept it
as from God.  Visiting Ephraim’s solitary cell, he found him engaged in
writing a commentary on the Book of Genesis, and was amazed at the
exegetical power shown in the work of a writer so untrained.  When this
was speedily followed by a Commentary on Exodus, the truth of the vision
became apparent, and the Solitary hastened to the “School” of Edessa and
showed the book to “the doctors and priests, and chief men of the
city.”  They were filled with admiration, and when they learned that
Ephraim of Nisibis was the author, and heard of the vision by which his
merit was revealed, they went at once to seek him out in his retreat. 
In his modesty he fled from their approach; but a second divine vision
constrained him to return.  In the valley where he had sought to hide,
an Angel met him and asked, “Ephraim, wherefore fleest thou?”  He
answered, “Lord, that I may sit in silence, and escape from the tumult
of the world.”  “Look to it,” rejoined the Angel, “that the word be not
spoken of thee, *Ephraim hath fled from me as an heifer whose shoulder
hath drawn back from the yoke*” ([Hos.
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016.md), [Hos.
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#011.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p17.1"></span>—quoted loosely).  Ephraim pleaded with
tears, “Lord, I am weak and unworthy;” but the Angel silenced his
excuses with the Saviour’s words, *No man lighteth a candle and putteth
it under a bushel, but on a candlestick that all may see the light*
([Matt. 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005.md), [Luke
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#033.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p17.2"></span>).  Accepting the rebuke, Ephraim
returned to Edessa, with much prayer for strength from on high, to
combat false doctrine.  There he was ill received, and taunted as one
who had fled in hypocritical affectation of reluctance, and was now
returning in vainglorious quest of applause.  This reproach he met with
the meek reply, “Pardon me, my brethren, for I am a humble man;” at
which they cried out the more against him, “Come, see the madman, the
fool!”  He held his ground notwithstanding, and taught many.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p18"></span>But this work which his adversaries
failed to put down, the over-zeal of an admirer brought to a sudden
close.  One of the recluses of the Mount, having occasion to visit the
city, saw him and followed him crying, “This is *the fan in the Lord’s
hand*, wherewith *He wilt purge all His floor*, and the tares of
heresy:  this is the fire whereof our Lord said, *I am come to send fire
on the earth*” ([Matt. 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md), [Luke
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p18.1"></span>).  Hearing this, certain chief men of
the city, heretics, heathens, and Jews, seized him and drew him outside
the gates, stoned him and left him wellnigh dead.  Next morning he fled
back to his cell on the Mount.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p19"></span>4.  *Work as a Teacher*.—There, he
gave himself to the work of refuting with his pen <span id="page_126">p.
126</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_126"></span>the heresies and
misbeliefs of his time, which he had thus been hindered by violence from
combating in speech.  Disciples gathered round him, and a school formed
itself under the teacher in his retirement.  The names are recorded by
our narrator of Zenobius, Simeon, Isaac, Asuna, and Julian.  Others add
those of Abraham, Abba, and Mara.  All these are named with favour in
his *Testament* (a document of which we shall treat hereafter) except
Isaac; but two others, Paulinus and Aurit (*or* Arnad) are denounced as
false to the Faith.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p20"></span>The biographer introduces into his
narrative of this stage of Ephraim’s life an account of his famous dream
of the vine (above referred to), which foreshowed his future fertility
as a writer, as related in his *Testament*.  It will be given farther
on, in his own words.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p21"></span>Remote and isolated as was his
abode, the fame of the illustrious Basil, Archbishop of Cæsarea in
Cappadocia, reached him there, and moved in him a desire to see and hear
so great a divine.  He prayed for divine guidance in the matter; and in
answer a vision was sent to him.  Before the Holy Table there seemed to
stand a pillar of fire, whereof the top reached unto heaven, and a voice
from heaven was heard to cry, “Such as thou seest this pillar of fire,
such is the great Basil.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p22"></span>5.  *Journey to Egypt, and Sojourn
There*.—Thus encouraged, Ephraim set out on his journey, taking with him
an interpreter, for he was unable to speak Greek.  In the first
instance, however (according to the *History*), he made his way, not to
Cappadocia, but to a seaport (not named by the writer—but probably
Alexandretta is meant) where he took ship for Egypt.  In the voyage the
ship encountered perils, first in a storm, and afterwards from a
sea-monster, but was delivered from both by his faith, which enabled him
with words of power and the sign of the cross to rebuke the winds and
waves into calm, and to slay the monster.  Arrived in Egypt, he made his
way to the city Antino (apparently Antinoë or Antinoopolis), <span
id="fr_254"></span>[255](#fn_254.md) and thence towards the famous desert
of Scete, in the Nitrian valley—then, and still, the place of many
monasteries.  Here he found an unoccupied cave, in which, as a cell, he
and his companion took up their abode for eight years.  His habits of
life in this retreat—and (as it appears) at Edessa—were of the most
austere.  His food was barley bread, varied only by parched corn, pulse,
or herbs; his drink, water; his clothing, squalid rags.  His flesh was
dried up like a potsherd, over his bones.  He is described as being of
short stature, bald, and beardless.  He never laughed, but was of sad
countenance.  Other authorities, Gregory especially, dwell much and with
admiration on his profuse and perpetual weeping. <span
id="fr_255"></span>[256](#fn_255.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p26"></span>In this Egyptian retreat he is
related to have proved himself a victorious adversary against the
Arians.  On his arrival he had sought out and found a monk named Bishoi,
to whom, because of his special sanctity, he had been divinely directed
before he quitted Edessa; and with him he had sojourned for a week,
communing with him by means of a miraculous gift which endowed each with
the language of the other.  By this gift <span id="page_127">p.
127</span> <span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_127"></span>he was enabled to
carry on controversy with Egyptian heretics, many of whom he reclaimed
to orthodoxy.  Over one of these, an aged monk who had been perverted to
heresy by the possession of a demon, he exercised a further miraculous
power for his restoration, by casting out the evil spirit and restoring
the old man at once to his right mind and to the right faith.  This gift
of language, and the intercourse of Ephraim with Bishoi, are told only
in the Vatican form of the History, which adds that he not only spoke
Egyptian, but wrote discourses in that tongue.  The other version of it
represents him as having learned to speak Egyptian in the ordinary way. 
It is to be noted that the name of Bishoi (in Greek, Pasoës) is known as
that of the founder (in the fourth century) of the monastery of Amba
Bishoi, still occupied by a community of monks, in the Nitrian Desert;
and that in those sequestered regions the tradition of Ephraim’s visit
to Bishoi was lingering even within the last century and probably still
lingers.  To this subject we shall have occasion to recur, further
on. <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p28"></span>6.  *Visit to St. Basil of
Cæsarea*.—This long sojourn ended, he resumed his purpose of visiting
Basil, and left Egypt for Cæsarea (which our narrator evidently supposes
to be a maritime city—probably confusing it with the Cæsarea which was
the metropolis of Palestine). <span id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md)  
He was anxious that his first sight of the great Archbishop should be on
the Feast of the Epiphany, and he succeeded in so timing his journey as
to arrive the day before that Feast.  On enquiry, he learned that Basil
would take his part in its celebration in the great church; and thither
accordingly on the morrow he and his interpreter repaired.  On the same
day (adds our historian) was the commemoration of St. Mamas. <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md)   At first, when he saw the great
Prelate in gorgeous vestments attended by his train of richly-robed
clergy, the heart of the humble ascetic failed him:  this man so
surrounded with state and splendor could not be (he thought) the pillar
of fire revealed to him in his vision.  But when Basil ascended the
*bema* to preach, Ephraim, though he could understand little if anything
of the orator’s eloquence, was speedily brought to another mind.  As he
listened he saw the Holy Ghost (in the form of a dove, says Gregory, as
also the Vatican *History*,—or, according to another account, <span
id="fr_259"></span>[260](#fn_259) of a tongue of fire.md), speaking from
his mouth, (Gregory says, hovering by his ear and inspiring his words);
and he joined in the applause which each period of the oration drew from
the audience,—so vehemently that while others were content to utter the
cry of approval (*ahâ*) but once, he reiterated it (*ahâ, ahâ*).  Basil
noticing this sent his Archdeacon to invite the stranger into the
Sanctuary; but the invitation was modestly declined.  Another version of
the story places this invitation before the sermon, attributing to Basil
a spiritual insight which discerned the holy man’s presence and
identified him.  Again the Archdeacon was sent to summon him—this time,
by name:  “Come, my lord Ephraim, before the *bema*; the Archbishop bids
thee.”  Amazed to find himself thus discovered, Ephraim yielded, and
praised God, saying, “Great art Thou in very truth; Basil is the pillar
of fire; through his mouth speaks the Holy Ghost.”  He begged, however,
to be excused from coming into the Archbishop’s presence publicly, and
asked to be allowed instead to salute him privately in the “Treasury,”
“after the Sacred Oblation.”  Accordingly, when “the Divine Mysteries”
had been completed, the Archbishop’s Syncellus repeated the invitation,
saying, “Draw near, Apostle of Christ, that we may enjoy thy presence.” 
He complied, and in his mean rags, silent, and with <span
id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_128"></span>downcast looks, stood before the
magnificent Prelate.  Basil rose from his seat, received him with the
kiss of brotherhood, then bowed his head, and even prostrated himself
before the humble monk, greeting him as the “Father of the Desert,” the
foe of unclean spirits; and asked the purpose of his journey,—“Art thou
come to visit one who is a sinner?  The Lord reward thy labor.”  He then
proceeded to give the Holy Eucharist to both the strangers.  In the
interchange of speech (through the interpreter) that ensued, Basil
enquired how it was that one who spoke no Greek had followed his
discourse with such applause.  When he heard, in reply, of the visible
manifestation of the Holy Ghost, he exclaimed, “I would I were Ephraim,
to be counted worthy by the Lord of such a boon!”  Ephraim then
entreated of him a boon; “I know, O holy man, that whatsoever thou shalt
ask of God, He will give it thee:  ask Him, therefore, to enable me to
speak Greek.”  Basil in reply disclaimed such intercessory power, but
proposed that they should join in prayer for the desired gift, reminding
him of the promise, “He will fulfil the desire of them that fear Him”
([Ps. cxlv. 19](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#019.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p31.1"></span>).  They prayed accordingly for a long
space; and when they had ceased, Basil enquired, “Why, my Lord Ephraim,
receivest thou not the Order of Priesthood, which befits thee?” 
“Because I am a sinner,” answered Ephraim (through the interpreter).  “I
would thy sins were mine!” exclaimed Basil.  He then desired Ephraim to
bow his head, laid his hand on him and recited over him the Prayer of
Ordination to the Diaconate, inviting him to respond.  Forthwith, to the
amazement of all, Ephraim answered in Greek, with the due form, “Save,
and lift me up, O God.”  And thenceforth he was able to speak Greek with
ease and correctness.  He persisted, however, in declining the higher
Order of the Priesthood; but his interpreter was admitted both Deacon
and Priest by Basil before they departed.  Their sojourn lasted about a
fortnight.  Other writers, however, call Ephraim a Priest; and there is
a passage where he himself seems to speak of himself, as holding the
Priesthood (*koh’ nîyô*); <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260.md) but
Palladius, Jerome, Sozomen, and others of the best-informed writers,
confirm our History.  He is in fact frequently styled Ephraim the
Deacon, as if to emphasize the fact that one so high in repute never
rose above that lowly rank.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p33"></span>Traces of Ephraim’s influence are
to be found in two places of Basil’s writings.  It can scarcely be
doubted that he points to Ephraim when (*De Spiritu Sancto*, xxix. 74),
in defending the familiar formula “Glory to the Father and to the Son
and to the Holy Ghost,”—and again (*Homil*. in *Hexaêm*. ii. 6), in
explaining the action of the Spirit on the waters ([Genesis i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p33.1"></span>)—he appeals to the authority of an
unnamed man of great knowledge and judgment, “as closely conversant with
the knowledge of all that is true, as he is far removed from worldly
wisdom,” a “Mesopotamian,” a “Syrian.”  From him he says he learned—in
the former instance, that “and” was to be inserted before the name of
the Holy Ghost as well as before that of the Son;—and, in the latter,
that the Spirit was not to be conceived as being “*carried* upon” the
waters (as the Septuagint represents); but (as the Peshitto more truly
represents the Hebrew), as “brooding upon” them, to cherish them into
life—as a bird on her nest.  The verb thus variously rendered is common
to the Hebrew with the cognate Syriac; and the explanation of it given
by Basil is in fact found in Ephraim’s extant *Commentary* on the
passage of Genesis: <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261.md)   but he
understands the “spirit” to be the wind—not (as Basil) the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p35"></span>7.  *Return to Edessa*.—Ephraim’s
return to Edessa was hastened by the tidings that in his absence no less
than nine new heresies had appeared there.  His way thither lay through
<span id="page_129">p. 129</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_129"></span>Samosata; and there he fell in with
a chief man of the city, a heretic, who was passing by with a train of
attendant youths.  As the holy man sat by the wayside to eat bread,
these followers mocked him, and one of them wantonly smote him on the
cheek.  The injury was borne in meek silence; but it was speedily
avenged on the smiter, by a viper which came out from under a stone
whereon he sat, and bit him so that he died on the spot.  His master and
companions hastened after Ephraim, and overlook him as he was begging
his food in a village beyond the city which he had just passed through. 
At their entreaty he turned back with them, and by his prayers restored
the dead youth to life.  The nobleman and his followers, seeing this
miracle, were converted to the orthodox faith.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p36"></span>8.  *Controversies*.—Arrived at
Edessa, he engaged at once in the conflict against the multiform
heresies of the place, old and new—Manichean and Marcionite, as well as
Arian.  Of all the forms of error he encountered, the one that gave him
most grief and trouble was that which had been originated about the year
200 by a Syrian, Bardesan. <span id="fr_262"></span>[263](#fn_262.md)   Of
this heresiarch he writes, in one of his *Nisibene Hymns* (the
51st; <span id="fr_263"></span>[264](#fn_263.md) not included in the
following selection):

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p39"></span>1.  I have chanced upon tares, my
brethren,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p40"></span>That wear the color of wheat,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p41"></span>To choke the good seed;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p42"></span>Concerning which the husbandmen are
commanded,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p43"></span>Take them not away nor root them
out;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p44"></span>And though the husbandmen heeded
not,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p45"></span>The seed waxed stronger than they,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p46"></span>Grew and multiplied and covered and
choked them.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p47"></span>2.  I have chanced upon a book of
Bardaisan,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p48"></span>And I was troubled for an hour’s
space;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p49"></span>It tainted my pure ears,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p50"></span>And made them a passage

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p51"></span>For words filled with blasphemy.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p52"></span>I hastened to purge them

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p53"></span>With the goodly and pure reading

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p54"></span>Of the Scriptures of truth.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p55"></span>3.  I heard as I read them

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p56"></span>How he blasphemes justice,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p57"></span>And grace her fellow-worker.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p58"></span>For if the body be not raised,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p59"></span>It were foul reproach for grace,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p60"></span>To have created it unto corruption;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p61"></span>And it were slander against
justice,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p62"></span>To send it unto destruction.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p63"></span>4.  This then that I read was
grievous

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p64"></span>For soul and for body alike;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p65"></span>And between these partners it casts

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p66"></span>The severance of despair.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p67"></span>The body it cuts off from its
resurrection,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p68"></span>And the soul from her comrade,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p69"></span>And the loss which the serpent
threw on us

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p70"></span>Bardaisan counts it for gain.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p71"></span>The controversy against the
disciples of this man gave to the literary work of Ephraim an impulse to
which his fame is largely due.  His polemic in the above instance took,
as we see, the form of a hymn; and his biographer informs us that it was
in this controversy he first was led to adopt hymnody as a vehicle for
teaching truth and confuting error.  Of his hymns we possess some which
can be confidently assigned to an earlier period—the first twenty-one of
the Nisibene collection (which are the Nisibene Hymns proper), belonging
to the epoch of the third siege (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p71.1"></span>a.d.</span> 350); but those are songs
of triumph and thanksgiving, or of personal eulogy and exhortation,—not
of controversy.  The idea of the controversial use of hymnody he
borrowed (we are told) <span id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_130"></span>from his adversaries.  It appears
that Harmodius, the son of Bardesan, had popularized the false teaching
of his father, as embodied in a series of a hundred and fifty hymns (in
profane rivalry with the Psalms of David), by setting them to attractive
tunes, which caught the ear of the multitude, and inclined them to
receive his doctrines.  So Ephraim himself tells us (attributing the
work, however, to Bardesan solely) in his *Homily* (metrical) LIII.,
“*Against Heretics*” (not included in our selection).  “He fashioned
hymns, and joined them with tunes; and composed psalms, and brought in
moods.  By weights and measures, he portioned language.  He blended for
the simple poison with sweetness.  The sick will not choose the food of
wholesomeness.  He would look to David, that he might be adorned with
his beauty, and commended by his likeness.  An hundred and fifty psalms,
he likewise composed.” <span id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p73"></span>To confute the heresies thus
circulated, Ephraim borrowed the tunes employed by Harmodius; and his
hymns, set to these tunes, soon carried the day in favor of orthodoxy,
partly by the force of their truth, partly by their superior literary
power, and partly by the help of a choir formed among the nuns whom he
employed to sing them, morning and evening, in the churches.  Thus the
rival hymnody of heresy was superseded, and the hymns of Ephraim gained
the place they have ever since held in the Church, wherever Syriac is
the ecclesiastical language,—even though it is no longer the vernacular.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p74"></span>He celebrated this victory in the
following strain of triumphant imprecation:—

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p75"></span>“Cursed be our trust \[if it be\]
on the Seven; <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265.md) the Æons which
Bardaisan confesses!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p77"></span>Anathema \[be he\] who says, as he
said:  that from them descend the rain and the dew!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p78"></span>Anathema who affirms, like him: 
that from them are the showers and the frosts!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p79"></span>Cursed be he who says, as he said: 
that from them are the snow and the ice!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p80"></span>\[Cursed be he who affirms, like
him\]:  that from them are the seeds for the husbandmen!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p81"></span>Anathema who confesses, as he
confessed:  that from them are the fruits for the labourer!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p82"></span>Anathema who believes, like him: 
that from them are famine and plenty!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p83"></span>Anathema who confesses, as he
taught:  that from them are summer and winter!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p84"></span>Anathema be on the man:  and on the
woman who thus speaks!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p85"></span>Anathema be on the house:  wherein
it is thus affirmed!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p86"></span>Anathema his doctrine which rests: 
its trust on the Sevenfold!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p87"></span>Cursed be he who reproaches his
Creator:  and ascribes dominion to the Seven!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p88"></span>Cursed be he who reads the
Scriptures:  and becomes a gainsayer of the Scriptures!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p89"></span>Cursed be he who reads the
Prophets:  and breaks the words of the Prophets!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p90"></span>Cursed be he who reads the
Apostles:  and abides not by their words!”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p91"></span>To this is subjoined a verse, the
response of Balai (Balæus) a disciple:—

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p92"></span>“The Lord exalt thy horn:  O Church
that art faithful!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p93"></span>For the King, and the King’s son: 
are established in thine ark.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p94"></span>Another demonstration of Ephraim’s
zeal against heresy, which the compiler of the *History* judiciously
omits, is (unhappily for the fame of both) attested, and with evident
approval, by Gregory of Nyssa.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p95"></span><span id="page_131">p. 131</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_131"></span>Apollinaris, who was his
contemporary, and whose erroneous teaching he held in abhorrence, had
committed his heresies to writing in two volumes which he gave into the
keeping of a woman, a follower of his sect.  Ephraim approached this
woman and persuaded her to lend him the books, pretending that he agreed
with the doctrine of their author and desired to use them in controversy
against its opponents.  At her instance he returned them in a short
time; but before so doing, he treated them with fish-glue in such
fashion that the leaves of each cohered into a solid mass, while to
outward appearance they were unharmed.  Soon after, he challenged
Apollinaris to meet him in a public disputation concerning the articles
of faith which the heretic had impugned.  The latter sought to decline
the controversy, pleading his old age <span
id="fr_266"></span>[267](#fn_266.md) and infirmities; but consented to
it,—only on condition, however, that he should be allowed to read from
these volumes the statement and defence of his tenets therein written by
him.  On these terms, the disputants met.  Apollinaris was called on to
maintain his thesis, and his writings were placed in his hands; but when
he went to open the books, it was in vain.  No part of either volume
would yield to his fingers; he was obliged to desist and to retire,
baffled and ashamed; in such dismay as to bring on an illness that
nearly proved fatal.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p97"></span>Another incident of this period,
related in the *History*, is a miracle (a genuine one this time, if
true) wrought by Ephraim on a paralytic.  Seeing him as he sat and
begged at the door of a church in Edessa, the holy man asked him:  “Wilt
thou be made whole?”  “Yea, my Lord; lay thy hand on me,” was the
reply.  With the words, “In the Name of Christ, arise and walk,” he was
cured instantly; and departed, glorifying God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p98"></span>At the end of four years,
messengers came to him from Basil, summoning him to come and receive
consecration to the Episcopate, for some see unnamed (to which, as
Sozomen relates, he had been elected;—*Hist. Eccles*. II. 16).  When he
learned their errand, he feigned madness, going to and fro in the
streets in unseemly fashion, in motley garb, eating bread as he went and
letting his spittle run down.  Thus he succeeded in evading the
undesired elevation:  the messengers, shocked at his behaviour, returned
without him, and reported that they found him a madman.  “O hidden pearl
of price” (cried Basil) “whom the world knows not!  Ye are the madmen,
and he the sane.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p99"></span>The city and the Mount of Edessa
suffered in these days from an invasion of the Huns, who plundered,
murdered, and ravished, without mercy,—not even sparing the cells and
convents.  This calamity Ephraim is said to have recorded, in writings
which have not reached us.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p100"></span>9.  *Persecution by Valens*.—From
another peril the Edessenes were saved by their faith and constancy.  In
the days of their Bishop Barses (361–378), the Arian Emperor Valens
(364–378), in the course of his persecution of the orthodox, approached
the city and summoned the inhabitants to wait upon him in his camp and
hear his pleasure there.  They disregarded the command, and gathered
into the great Church of St. Thomas, <span
id="fr_267"></span>[268](#fn_267.md) where they and their Bishop continued
unceasingly in prayer.  The historian <span id="page_132">p. 132</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_132"></span>Socrates, a trustworthy and
early (fifth century) authority, confirms our *History* here; and
explains that Valens had ordered their Church to be surrendered to the
Arians, and was enraged against them for resisting his decree, and
against his Prefect Modestus for failing to carry it out.  Valens then,
finding them contumacious, ordered one of his generals (this same
Modestus, according to Sozomen, who also relates the story) to enter the
city and put the people to the sword.  As Modestus, who was a humane
man, sought to persuade them to yield, he met a woman leading her two
sons to the Church.  He strove to stop her, warning her of the danger
she incurred; but her reply was, “I hear that they who fear God are to
be slain, and I am in haste to win the crown with the rest.”  “But what
of these boys?” he asked.  “Are they thy sons?”  “They are,” she
answered, “and we pray, both I and they, that we may be made an oblation
to the Lord.”  Amazed at her resolve, he reported the matter to Valens,
to convince him that the Edessenes were prepared to die rather than
submit.  The Emperor was moved to relent; the people and their Bishop
and priests came forth; he heard their plea, was ashamed of his cruel
purpose, pardoned their disobedience, and departed.  This well-attested
incident is to be assigned to 371, or to the preceding or ensuing
year. <span id="fr_268"></span>[269](#fn_268.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p103"></span>This victory of faith was
celebrated by Ephraim in the following verses:—

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p104"></span>“The doors of her homes Edessa

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p105"></span>Left open when she went forth

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p106"></span>With the pastor to the grave, to
die,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p107"></span>And not depart from her faith.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p108"></span>Let the city and fort and building

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p109"></span>And houses be yielded to the king;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p110"></span>Our goods and our gold let us
leave;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p111"></span>So we part not from our faith!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p112"></span>Edessa is full of chastity,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p113"></span>Full of prudence and
understanding.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p114"></span>She is clad in discernment of
soul;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p115"></span>Faith is the girdle of her loins;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p116"></span>Truth her armour all-prevailing;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p117"></span>Love her crown, all-exalting.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p118"></span>Christ bless them that dwell in
her,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p119"></span>Edessa, whose name is His glory,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p120"></span>And the name of her champion her
beauty!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p121"></span>City that is lady over her
fellows,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p122"></span>City that is the shadow

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p123"></span>Of the Jerusalem in heaven!”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p124"></span>After all was thus restored to
peace and orthodoxy, Ephraim withdrew to his retreat on the Mount, which
he is not recorded to have again quitted, save on one occasion, to be
presently related.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p125"></span>10.  *Penitent sent to Ephraim by
Basil:  Basil’s Death*.—The death of Basil (at the end of 378) is said
by our author to have caused great grief to Ephraim, and to have been
lamented by him in hymns.  But (as will be shown below) this is hardly
possible, even if the latest date for Ephraim’s death be accepted.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p126"></span>Another miraculous incident
connected with Ephraim’s biography, belongs to the year of Basil’s
death.  A woman of high rank, but of evil life, in Cæsarea, being moved
to penitence, wrote on a paper a full confession of her sins, and gave
it to Basil, who at her entreaty laid it with prayer before the Lord. 
Her repentance and his intercession prevailed so far, that the record of
all her guilt disappeared from the paper, save of one sin, more heinous
than the rest.  Disappointed thus of her hope of full pardon, she had
recourse again to Basil, supplicating that this sin too might be wiped
out.  He encouraged her to persevere in prayer, and advised her to
repair to the Mount of Edessa, to Ephraim, and through him obtain her
desire.  To Ephraim accordingly she made her way, and cried to him,
saying, “Have pity on me, thou holy one of God.”  When he heard Basil’s
advice and her petition, he disavowed all such power to prevail with
<span id="page_133">p. 133</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_133"></span>God as Basil had ascribed to him,
and advised her rather to hasten back and obtain her Archbishop’s
farther intercession.  She returned accordingly to Cæsarea; but, as it
seemed, too late:  Basil had died before her arrival, and she met his
corpse as it was carried to burial.  In despair, she prostrated herself
in the dust, proclaimed her story to all that stood by, and upbraided
the dead saint, “Woe is me, servant of God! why didst thou send me far
away that I should return too late and meet thee borne to the grave! 
The Lord judge betwixt me and thee, who hast sent me to another, when
thyself couldst have absolved me!”  One of the attendant clergy,
desiring to learn what was the sin for which pardon was so hard to win,
took from her the paper she held, and opening found it blank.  The last
and deadliest of her list had vanished like the rest:  and “thus, by the
prayers of Basil and of Ephraim, and by the woman’s faith and
perseverance, her sins were all of them blotted out.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p127"></span>After this occurrence, the
*History* places the following narrative of Ephraim’s last intervention
in earthly concerns.  It is related likewise by Palladius (Ephraim’s
younger contemporary) and by Sozomen.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p128"></span>11.  *Exertions in Relief of
Famine*.—In a season of severe famine, he ascertained that grain was
being hoarded in the stores of certain persons who gave nothing to the
starving poor.  When he rebuked their inhumanity, they excused
themselves on the plea that none was to be found of such probity as to
guarantee fairness and honesty in the distribution of relief.  Ephraim
at once offered his services, and was accepted as their agent throughout
the famine season, to dispense large sums as the treasurer and steward
of their bounty.  Among other things, he provided three hundred letters,
partly for removing the sick to stations where they were duly tended,
partly for carrying the dead for interment.  A body of helpers worked
with him in administering relief, and their care extended not merely
through the city, but to the country and villages adjacent.  The year of
dearth ended, a year of plenty ensued; Ephraim retired to his cell,—this
time to leave it no more.  He died a month after the close of the
charitable labours.  Of them his biographer, following for once the
better instinct which recognizes higher worth in services of love than
in ascetic practices or in miraculous pretensions, writes thus:—“God
gave him this occasion that therein he might win the crown in the close
of his life.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p129"></span>12.  *His Testament*.—In his
*Testament*, which professes to have been composed in immediate
anticipation of his end, he laid on his disciples a solemn charge that
his body should be buried humbly, covered with no garment save his tunic
(*cothênô*).  Gregory of Nyssa adds that a rich friend who, though
informed of his prohibition, had provided beforehand for this purpose a
costly robe, was punished by the possession of an evil spirit, which
tormented him until, on his confession, the dying saint relieved him,
casting out the demon by prayer and laying on of hands.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p130"></span>From the extant Syriac of this
document <span id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) (which is metrical.md),
the following have been selected as the most striking verses:

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p132"></span>“I Ephraim am at point to die: 
and I write my testament;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p133"></span>That I may leave for all men a
memorial:  of whatsoever is mine,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p134"></span>That though it be \[but\] for my
words:  they that know me may remember me.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p135"></span>Woe is me, for my times are
ended:  and the length of my years is fulfilled;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p136"></span>The spinning for me is shortened: 
the thread is nigh unto cutting;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p137"></span>The oil fails in the lamp:  my
days are spent, yea, mine hours;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p138"></span><span id="page_134">p. 134</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_134"></span>The hireling has finished his
year:  and the sojourner has fulfilled his season.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p139"></span>Around me are the summoners:  on
this side and that are they that lead me away.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p140"></span>I cry aloud, \[but\] none hears
me:  and I complain, \[but\] none delivers.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p141"></span>“Woe to thee, Ephraim, for the
judgment: when thou shalt stand before the Son’s judgment-seat,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p142"></span>And around thee they that know
thee:  on the right hand and the left,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p143"></span>Lo! there shalt thou be
confounded:  woe to him who is put to shame there!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p144"></span>Jesu, do Thou judge Ephraim:  nor
give his judgment to another;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p145"></span>For whoso has God for his Judge: 
he finds mercy in judgment;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p146"></span>For I have heard from the wise: 
yea, I have heard from men of knowledge,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p147"></span>That whoso sees the face of the
King:  though he has offended, he shall not die.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p148"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p149"></span>“By him who came down on Mount
Sinai:  and by him who spake on the rock,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p150"></span>By that Mouth which spake the
“*Eli*”: <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270.md)   and made the bowels
of creation tremble,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p152"></span>By him who was sold in Judah:  and
by him who was scourged in Jerusalem,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p153"></span>By the Might which was smitten on
the cheek:  and by the Glory which endured spitting,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p154"></span>By the threefold Names of fire: 
and by the one Assent and will,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p155"></span>I have not rebelled against the
Church:  nor against the might of God.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p156"></span>If in my thought I have magnified
the Father:  above the Son, let Him have no mercy on me!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p157"></span>And if I have accounted the Holy
Spirit less:  than God, let mine eyes be darkened!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p158"></span>If as I have said, I confessed
not:  let me go into outer darkness!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p159"></span>And if I speak in hypocrisy:  let
me burn with the wicked in fire!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p160"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p161"></span>“I adjure you my disciples:  with
adjurations that may not be loosed,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p162"></span>That my words be not set aside: 
that ye loose not my commandments.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p163"></span>Whoso lays me beneath the altar: 
he shall not see the Altar of heaven;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p164"></span>For it is not meet that foul
stench:  should be laid in the Holy Place;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p165"></span>Whoso has laid me within the
temple:  he shall not see the temple of the Kingdom.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p166"></span>          \*          \* 
        \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p167"></span>“Take nought from me as
memorial: <span id="fr_271"></span>[272](#fn_271.md)   my beloved, my
brothers, my sons,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p169"></span>For as much as ye have a
memorial:  that which ye have heard of Jesus.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p170"></span>For if ye take aught from
Ephraim:  into reproach will Ephraim come;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p171"></span>For He, my Lord, will say unto
me:  ‘More than in Me they have trusted in thee,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p172"></span>For if they had relied on Me: 
they had not sought a memorial from thee.’

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p173"></span>“Lay me not with the martyrs:  for
I am a sinner and unworthy,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p174"></span>And because of my unworthiness I
fear:  to be brought beside their bones;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p175"></span>For if stubble comes near to
fire:  it will scorch it, yea, devour it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p176"></span>It is not that I hate their
neigbourhood:  because of mine unworthiness, I fear it.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p177"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p178"></span>“Whoso carries me on his fingers: 
may his hands be leprous as Gehazi!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p179"></span><span id="page_135">p. 135</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_135"></span>On your shoulders carry me: 
and in haste conduct me \[to the grave\],

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p180"></span>And as a mean man bury me:  for I
have worn out my days in sadness.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p181"></span>Why glorify ye me, O men:  who
before our Lord am ashamed?

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p182"></span>And why give ye me \[the name of\]
‘Blessed’:  who am disclosed in my works?

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p183"></span>Should one show you my
transgressions:  ye would all of you spit in my face.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p184"></span>For if the stench of the sinner: 
could strike one that stood by him,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p185"></span>Ye would all of you flee away: 
from the loathsome stench of Ephraim.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p186"></span>“Whoso lays with me a pall:  may
he go forth into outer darkness!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p187"></span>And whoso has laid with me a
shroud:  may he be cast into Gehenna of fire!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p188"></span>In my coat and cowl shall ye bury
me:  for ornament beseems not the hateful,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p189"></span>Nor does praise profit the dead: 
who is laid and cast into the tomb.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p190"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p191"></span>“Arise, my brethren of Edessa:  my
lords and my sons and my fathers!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p192"></span>Bring whatsoever ye have vowed: 
to lay along with your brother,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p193"></span>Bring and set it before me: 
whatsoever ye my brethren have vowed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p194"></span>While I have yet a little memory: 
let me set on it a price;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p195"></span>And let there be bought pure
vessels:  and let there be hired workmen therewith,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p196"></span>And distribution be made among the
poor:  the needy and them that are in want.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p197"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p198"></span>“Blessed is the city wherein ye
dwell:  Edessa, mother of the wise,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p199"></span>Which from the living mouth of the
Son:  was blessed by His Disciple. <span
id="fr_272"></span>[273](#fn_272.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p201"></span>This blessing shall abide in her: 
until the Holy One shall be revealed.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p202"></span>“Whoso withholds from me aught
that he has vowed:  shall die the death of Ananias,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p203"></span>Who sought to deceive the
Apostles:  and was stretched \[dead\] before their feet.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p204"></span>“Whoso carries before me a taper: 
may his fire be kindled beside him!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p205"></span>For to what end avails fire:  for
him whose fire is from himself?

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p206"></span>For when the visible fire is
kindled:  in it is consumed the secret fire.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p207"></span>Sufficient for me is the pain
without:  add ye not to me that which is within.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p208"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p209"></span>“Lay me not with sweet spices: 
for this honour avails me not;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p210"></span>Nor yet incense and perfumes:  for
the honour benefits me not.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p211"></span>Burn sweet spices in the Holy
Place:  and me, even me, conduct to the grave with prayer.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p212"></span>Give ye incense to God:  and over
me send up hymns.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p213"></span>Instead of perfumes of spices:  in
prayer make remembrance of me.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p214"></span>What can goodly odour profit:  to
the dead who cannot perceive it?

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p215"></span>Bring them in and burn them in the
Holy Place:  that they which enter in may smell the savour.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p216"></span>Wrap thou not the fetid dung:  in
silk that profits it not.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p217"></span>Cast it down upon the dunghill: 
for it cannot perceive honour \[done to it\].

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p218"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p219"></span><span id="page_136">p. 136</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_136"></span>“Lay me not in your
sepulchres:  for your magnificence profits me not;

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p220"></span>For I have a covenant with God: 
that I shall be buried with strangers.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p221"></span>I am a stranger, as they were: 
with them, O my brethren, lay me!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p222"></span>For every bird loves its kind: 
and man loves him that is like himself.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p223"></span>In the cemetery lay me:  where are
the broken of heart,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p224"></span>That when the Son of God comes: 
He may embrace me <span id="fr_273"></span>[274](#fn_273.md) and raise me
among them.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p226"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p227"></span>\[After blessing by name the five
faithful disciples above mentioned (page 126), he leaves an anathema on
the two, Paulinus and Urit, who had erred from the faith; and against\]

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p228"></span>“Arians and Anomœans:  Cathari and
those of the Serpent, <span id="fr_274"></span>[275](#fn_274.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p230"></span>Marcionites and Manichœans: 
Bardesanites and Kukites,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p231"></span>Paulites and Vitalianites: 
Sabbatarians and Borborites,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p232"></span>With all the other doctrines:  of
superstitious that are unseemly.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p233"></span>          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*          \*          \*          \*         
\*          \*          \*

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p234"></span>\[The dying Saint recalls in the
following lines the vision of his childhood, and praises God for its
fulfilment.\]

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p235"></span>“I swear by your lives I lie not: 
in this thing that I tell.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p236"></span>For when I was a little child: 
and lay in my mother’s bosom,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p237"></span>I saw (I was as in a dream):  a
thing which has come to pass in truth.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p238"></span>There grew a vine-shoot on my
tongue:  and increased and reached unto heaven,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p239"></span>And it yielded fruit without
measure:  leaves likewise without number.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p240"></span>It spread, it stretched wide, it
bore fruit:  all creation drew near,

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p241"></span>And the more they were that
gathered:  the more its clusters abounded.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p242"></span>These clusters were the Homilies;
and these leaves the Hymns.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p243"></span>God was the giver of them:  glory
to Him for His grace!

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p244"></span>For He gave to me of His good
pleasure:  from the storehouse of His treasures.”

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p245"></span>This farewell strain has no doubt
suffered interpolation, but the main part of what is above translated is
confirmed as genuine by the references to it of Gregory, who had
undoubtedly read it in a Greek version. <span
id="fr_275"></span>[276](#fn_275.md)   As it has reached us, it ends with a
narrative, which at most can only claim to be an appendix added by a
disciple, of the lamentations uttered at his deathbed by a maiden named
Lamprotate, daughter of a man of rank in Edessa, who entreated
permission to make a tomb for him and another at his feet for herself. 
The narrative concludes with his consent to this petition, his parting
commands to her, and her promise of obedience.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p247"></span>His body was followed to the grave
by all the people of the city and neighborhood, and by the Bishops,
priests, and deacons of the province, with the monks, whether
“anchorites, stylites, or cœnobites”—solitary, or living in
communities.  It was laid (as he had desired) in the strangers’
burial-ground; but not long after, the citizens removed it thence, and
made a grave for him, deacon as he was, among those of their
Bishops,—probably in the monastery (now belonging to the Armenians) of
St. Sergius <span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-Page_137"></span>on the Mount of Edessa, where his
tomb is shown to this day, as we learn from the *Reise in Syr. u
Mesopot.* of Dr. Sachau (p. 202).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p248"></span>13.  *Death and Burial*.—His death
occurred in Haziran (June), on the 15th according to our History (Vat.),
but other authorities differ, assigning it to the 9th, 18th, or 19th. 
The shorter Syriac *Life* gives the year as 372,—thus contradicting the
*History* which represents him as living in the year of Basil’s death
(378).

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p249"></span>Even in the time of Gregory of
Nyssa, an annual commemoration of Ephraim had become customary in the
Church, which gave occasion for the Encomium above referred to.  In the
East, it was held on the 28th of January; but in the Roman Martyrology
his name is recorded on the 1st of February.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_250"></span>[123:251](2130167.htm#fr_250.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p7"></span> The strong and ancient city…which,
since the time of Lucullus had been deservedly esteemed the bulwark of
the East.  Gibbon, *Decline and Fall*, ch. xviii.

<span id="fn_251"></span>[123:252](2130167.htm#fr_251.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p8"></span> Now called Jaghjagh,—an affluent of
the Khabur (Chaboras) which joins the Euphrates at Circesium.

<span id="fn_252"></span>[124:253](2130167.htm#fr_252.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p11"></span> Not elsewhere named:  perhaps we
ought to read Beth-Garme; for which see *B. O.* II., *De Monophysitis,
s.v.*

<span id="fn_253"></span>[125:254](2130167.htm#fr_253.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p16"></span> So the Paris text:  the Vatican
has “Origen.”  The person meant is probably the Eugenius who came from
Egypt with 70 disciples to Nisibis, to introduce the ascetic life into
that region, and lived there from the time of the consecration of St.
Jacob till the surrender in 363.  His life is related in the inedited
<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>ms.</span> Ad’d.
12174 (Lives of Saints), of the British Museum.

<span id="fn_254"></span>[126:255](2130167.htm#fr_254.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p23"></span> This city lay quite out of the
region of the Nitrian monasteries.  Possibly in the original form of
this biography, the “Enaton” (*i.e.* the Ninth District) of Alexandria
was named as the place of Ephraim’s sojourn and subsequent transcribers
changed the word into Antino.

<span id="fn_255"></span>[126:256](2130167.htm#fr_255.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p24"></span> As represented by Gregory Ephraim
was a very Democritus among saints:

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p25"></span>“As with all men to breathe is a
natural function unceasing in exercise, so with Ephraim was it to weep. 
There was no day, no night, no hour, no moment however brief, in which
his eyes were not wakeful and filled with tears, while he bewailed the
faults and follies, now of his own life, now of mankind.  By groans he
made a channel for the streams of his eyes or rather, by the outflow of
the eyes he looked his groans.…There was no interval of time between
them, groans succeeding to tears and they again to groans, as in a sort
of circle; so that it was impossible to distinguish which made the
beginning and which was the cause of the other.  Any one who makes
acquaintance with his writings will perceive this characteristic; for he
will be found lamenting not only in his treatises on penitence, or
morals, or right conduct, but even in his panegyrics, in which it is the
habit of most writers to show an aspect of rejoicing.  But he was every
where the same, and abounded perpetually in this gift of compunction.”

<span id="fn_256"></span>[127:257](2130167.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p27"></span> For this monastery, see below, p.
143, note 1.  For the history of Pesoës, see Palladius, *Hist.
Lausiaca*, XV.

<span id="fn_257"></span>[127:258](2130167.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p29"></span> Cæsarea, the see of Basil, lay far
from the sea, in the heart of the inland province of Cappadocia.  The
Cæsarea of the Acts of the Apostles (Stratonis), the metropolis of
Palestine was a seaport.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[127:259](2130167.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p30"></span> The feast of St. Mamas (a
Cappadocian martyr) falls in August, not in January.  A sermon of St.
Basil for that feast is extant (Hom. XXIII.).  Probably the author of
this *History* knew that sermon, and was thus led to mention the
commemoration here, carelessly disregarding the time of year.

<span id="fn_259"></span>[127:260](2130167.htm#fr_259.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p31"></span> To the pseudo-Amphilochius.

<span id="fn_260"></span>[128:261](2130167.htm#fr_260.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p32"></span> *Parœnesis*xxvi. 11 (*Opera
Syr*.), Tom. III. p. 467.  The word, however, is perhaps not to be taken
literally.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[128:262](2130167.htm#fr_261.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p34"></span> *Opera Syriaca*, Tom. I., p. 8.

<span id="fn_262"></span>[129:263](2130167.htm#fr_262.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p37"></span> In Syriac, Bardaisan (*son of
Daisan*), so called from his birthplace beside the river above
mentioned.

<span id="fn_263"></span>[129:264](2130167.htm#fr_263.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p38"></span> See Bickell, *Carmina Nisibena*,
p. 101.

<span id="fn_264"></span>[130:265](2130167.htm#fr_264.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p71.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p72"></span> *Opera Syriaca*, Tom. II., p. 554,
see also Homily I.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[130:266](2130167.htm#fr_265.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p75.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p76"></span> The Seven *Æons* (or Beings) of
Bardesan’s heresy; see *Opp. Syr.* II., p. 550.

<span id="fn_266"></span>[131:267](2130167.htm#fr_266.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p95.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p96"></span> The heretic Apollinaris seems to
have been a younger man than Ephraim, whom he survived by some years. 
Possibly his father, the elder Apollinaris, is here intended.  But he is
not recorded as having taught heresy.

<span id="fn_267"></span>[131:268](2130167.htm#fr_267.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p100.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p101"></span> To this church were translated
the bones of St. Thomas the Apostle, from his burial place in India, in
the time of Eulogius the successor of Barses (378–387),—as we learn from
Barhebræus, *Chronicon Eccles*. I. 21 (p. 65 of Abbeloos and Lamy’s
edition).  But the above narrative, as confirmed by Socrates (IV. 18),
shows that it had been built and was held in special reverence before
that.  It is the church at which our *History* places the healing of the
paralytic (above).  Sozomen’s account (VI. 17) in the main agrees; also
Theodoret’s (IV. 17).

<span id="fn_268"></span>[132:269](2130167.htm#fr_268.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p101.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p102"></span> Baronius, *Annales*, IV. p. 308. 
The Vatican *Life* reads *Julian* for *Valens* in this narrative, thus
introducing inexplicable perplexity into the chronology.  Julian died
before Ephraim became a resident of Edessa.

<span id="fn_269"></span>[133:270](2130167.htm#fr_269.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p130.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p131"></span> Printed in Overbeck’s *Ephræmi S.
Opera Selecta*, p. 137; also in the (Roman) *Opera Græca*, at the end of
Tom. II., p. 395.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[134:271](2130167.htm#fr_270.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p150.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p151"></span> St. [Matth. xxvii.
46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md)<span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p151.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_271"></span>[134:272](2130167.htm#fr_271.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p167.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p168"></span> *i.e*., as a relic.

<span id="fn_272"></span>[135:273](2130167.htm#fr_272.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p199.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p200"></span> The allusion is to the legend
that Abgar, King of Edessa, hearing the fame of the Lord Jesus, sent a
letter inviting him to his city, and received in reply a letter from Him
conveying His blessing, and a promise to send a disciple to teach him
and his people.  This promise was afterwards fulfilled by the mission of
Thaddeus (Addae) to Edessa.  (Eusebius, *Hist. Eccles*. I. 13.)

<span id="fn_273"></span>[136:274](2130167.htm#fr_273.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p224.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p225"></span> The Greek version has “may
heal.”  The Syriac may be brought to agree with this, by changing *t*
into *r* in the verb used.

<span id="fn_274"></span>[136:275](2130167.htm#fr_274.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p228.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p229"></span> The sect of Ophites.

<span id="fn_275"></span>[136:276](2130167.htm#fr_275.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p245.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.iii-p246"></span> The Greek version that has
reached us is paraphrastic, and interpolated; but on the whole
represents the original with no great divergence.  See *Opera Græca*,
Tom. II., p. 230; *Ephraim Syr. Græce*, p. 365 (Oxford edition).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Recapitulation of Authentic Facts of Life.](2130168.md)
