[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130014)  [Next](2130016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle IX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p2"></span>*To Callinicus, Exarch of Italy* <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md) .

<span id="ii.v.ix-p4"></span>Gregory to Callinicus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.ix-p5"></span>In the midst of what you have announced to
me of your victories over the Sclaves, know that I have been refreshed
with great joy that the bearers of these presents, hastening to be
joined to the unity of holy Church from the island of Capritana <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) , have been sent by your Excellency to
the blessed Peter, Prince of the Apostles.  For hereby you will the more
prevail over your enemies, if you recall under the yoke of the true Lord
those whom you know to be the enemies of God; and you will prosecute
your causes among men with all the more effect as with sincere and
devout mind you maintain the causes of God.

<span id="ii.v.ix-p7"></span>Now as to your having desired that a copy
should be shewn me of the order <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md)
that has been sent to you for the defence of the schismatic, your to me
most sweet Excellency ought to have considered carefully how that,
although that order has been elicited, you are still not therein
enjoined to repel those who come to the unity of the Church, but only,
at this unsettled time, not to compel those who are unwilling to come. 
Whence it is necessary for you with all speed to inform our most pious
Emperors of these things, to the end that they may be aware how that in
their times, through the succour of Almighty God and your exertions,
schismatics are hastening to return of their own accord.  What I have
decided as to the ordering of things in the island of Caritana, your
Excellency will learn through our most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Marinianus <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md) .  But I
would have you know that this has caused me no slight distress; that
your Majordomo, who took charge of the petition of the bishop who was
wishing to return, declared that he had lost it, and that afterwards he
was got hold of by the adversaries of the Church:  which proceeding, in
my opinion, was due not to his neglect but to his venality.  Wherefore I
wonder that your Excellency has not in any way visited his fault in
him.  And yet I soon blamed myself for wondering at this, for where the
lord Justinus gives advice, there heretics cannot be arraigned.

<span id="ii.v.ix-p10"></span>Moreover you tell us that you wish to keep
the anniversary of Peter, Prince of the apostles, in the city of Rome. 
And we pray Almighty God to protect you with His mercy, and grant you a
fulfilment of your desires.  But I beg that the aforesaid most eloquent
man may come with you, or that, if he does not come, he may retire from
attendance on you.  Or certainly, if your Excellency should be unable to
come owing to business that may arise, let him either communicate with
the unity of holy Church, or I beg that he may not be a sharer of your
counsels.  For I hear of him as a good man, were he not in most
mischievous error.  As to the cause of Maximus, inasmuch as we can no
longer stand against the importunity of your Sweetness, you will learn
from Castorius, the notary, what we have determined.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_10"></span>[5:11](2130015.htm#fr_10.md) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p3"></span> Callinicus had recently succeeded Romanus
at Ravenna as Exarch of Italy.  The main purport of this letter to him
is to secure his hoped-for co-operation in bringing back the Istrian and
Venetian schismatics to Catholic communion.  See I. 16, note 3; also II.
46, 51.  The predecessor of Callinicus, viz. Romanus, had given great
dissatisfaction to Gregory by his conduct with regard to the schismatics
(see II. 46); but better things are expected from the new Exarch.  See
also below, Ep. XCIII., &c.  As to the case of Maximus of Salona,
briefly referred to at the end of the letter, see III. 47, note 2.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[5:12](2130015.htm#fr_11.md) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p6"></span> Capritana was a small island in the
Adriatic, not far from the shore of Venetia, containing the episcopal
see of Capsula, or Cahorla.  More about the desire of the church of this
island to return to communion with Rome will be found in the letter
which follows to Marinianus, bishop of Ravenna.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[5:13](2130015.htm#fr_12.md) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p8"></span> Mention of a previous order from the
emperors, during the exarchate of Romanus, to Gregory himself, bidding
him refrain from compelling the Istrians to return to communion, will be
found in II. 46.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[5:14](2130015.htm#fr_13.md) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p9"></span> See the letter following.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.](2130016.md)
