[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130253)  [Next](2130255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Hymn VII.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Blessed is He Who atoned your
sins, that ye might receive His Body worthily!*)

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p3"></span>1.  The flock of Jacob came down—and
stood round the well of water.—In the water they put on the similitude
of the wood that was covered *by it*.—Mysteries *these* and types of the
Cross,—wherein the parables are interpreted.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p4"></span>2.  There are shown in *these* rods
similitudes,—and in the sheep, parables.—The Cross in the rods is
figured, and in the sheep the souls *of men*.—His wood was a mystery of
our Wood;—likewise his sheep a mystery of our flock.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p5"></span>3.  The sheep of Christ rejoice,—and
stand round the laver of baptism;—in the water they put on the
likeness—of the living and goodly Cross—whereon gaze all things
created,—and all of it is stamped on them all.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p6"></span><span id="page_275">p. 275</span> <span
id="iii.vi.viii-Page_275"></span>4.  At the well Rebecca received—in her
ears and hands the jewels.—The Spouse of Christ has put on—precious
things that are from the water:—on her hand the living Body,—and in her
ears the promises.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p7"></span>5.  Moses drew *water* and watered the
sheep—of Jethro the priest of sin.—But our Shepherd has baptized His
sheep—Who is the high priest of truth.—At the well the flocks were
dumb,—but here the sheep have speech.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p8"></span>6.  The People passed through the water
and were baptized:—the People came up on dry land and became *as*
heathen.—The Commandment was savourless in their ears;—the manna
corrupted in their vessels.—Eat ye the living Body,—the medicine of life
that gives life to all!

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p9"></span>7.  To the sons of Lot Moses
said,—“Give us water for money,—let us only pass by through your
border.”—They refused the way, and the temporal water.—Lo! the living
water freely <span id="fr_511"></span>[512](#fn_511) *given*,—and the
path that leads to Eden!

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p11"></span>8.  From the water Gideon chose for
himself—the men who were victorious in the battle.—Ye have gone down to
the victorious waters:—come ye up and triumph in the fight!—receive from
the water atonement,—and from the fight the crowning!

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p12"></span>9.  Ye baptized, receive your
lamps,—like the lamps of the house of Gideon;—conquer the darkness by
your lamps,—and the silence by your hosannas!—Gideon likewise in the
battle—triumphed by the shout and the flame.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p13"></span>10.  David the King longed after—the
water of the well, and they brought it him;—but he drank it not, for he
saw that with blood of men it was bought.—In the midst of the water ye
have revelled—that was bought with the blood of God.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p14"></span>11.  Out of Edom the prophet saw—God
*coming* as one that *presses the grapes*.—He made ready the winepress
of wrath,—He trod down the peoples and delivered the People.—He has
turned and ordained Baptism;—the peoples live, the People is come to
nought.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p15"></span>12.  In the river Jeremiah buried—the
linen girdle that was marred;—and \[the People\] waxed old and
decayed.—…—The peoples that were decayed and marred,—by the waters have
been clad in newness.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p16"></span>13.  In Siloam, <span
id="fr_512"></span>[513](#fn_512) the blessed stream—the priests
anointed Solomon.—His youth was had in honour;—his old age was
despised.—Through the pure waters ye have been clad—in the purity of
Heaven.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p18"></span>14.  The fleece that was dry from the
dew,—Jerusalem was figured in it:—the bason that was filled with
water,—Baptism was figured in it.—That was dry after the manner of its
type;—this was full after the manner of its symbol.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p19"></span>15.  The wearied body in water—washes
and is refreshed from its toil.—Lo! the laver in which are
hidden—refreshing and life and delights.—In it wearied Adam had rest—who
brought labour into the creation.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p20"></span>16.  The fountain of sweat in the
body—is set *to protect* against fever:—the fountain of Baptism—is set
*to protect* against the Flame.—This is the water that avails—for the
quenching of Gehenna.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p21"></span>17.  He who journeys through the
desert,—as armour takes to himself water—against all-conquering
thirst.—Go ye down to the fountain of Christ,—receive life in your
members,—as armour against death.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p22"></span>18.  Again, the diver brings up—out of
the sea the pearl.—Be baptized and bring up from the water—purity that
therein is hidden,—the pearl that is set as a jewel—in the crown of the
Godhead.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p23"></span><span id="page_276">p. 276</span>
<span id="iii.vi.viii-Page_276"></span>19.  Sweet water in his
vessel—the seaman lays up as a store;—in the midst of the sea he lays up
and keeps it, the sweet in the midst of the bitter.—So amidst the floods
of sin,—keep ye the water of Baptism.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p24"></span>20.  The woman of Samaria said to our
Lord,—“Lo! verily the well is deep.”—Baptism *though it be* high,—in its
mercy has stooped down with us:—for the atonement is from above—that has
come down unto sinners.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p25"></span>21.  “He that drinks the water that I
shall give him,—verily never again shall he thirst.”—For this holy
Baptism,—for it be ye athirst, my beloved;—never again shall ye be
athirst,—so that ye should come to another baptism.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p26"></span>22.  In the baptism of Siloam—the
blind man washed, and his eyeballs—were opened and enlightened by the
water;—he cast off the darkness that *was* on them.—The hidden darkness
ye have cast off;—from the water ye have been clad in light.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p27"></span>23.  His hands Pilate washed—that he
might not be of them that slew.—Ye have bathed your bodies,—your hands
together with your mouths.—Go in and be of them that eat,—for this
medicine of life gives life to all.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p28"></span>24.  “Come after Me and verily I will
make you—fishers of men.”—For instead of a draught of that which
perishes,—they fished for the draught that *is* forever.—They who had
taken fishes for death,—baptized and gave life to them that were to die.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p29"></span>25.  An hundred and fifty fishes were
taken—by Simon’s net from the water;—but there were taken by his
preaching,—out of the bosom of Baptism,—ten thousands and thousands of
men,—a draught of the sons of the Kingdom.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p30"></span>26.  Lo! our priest as a fisher—over
the scanty water is standing;—he has taken thence a great draught—of
every shape and of every kind;—he has drawn up the draught to bring *it*
near—to the King of kings, most high.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p31"></span>27.  Simon took the fishes and drew
them up,—and they were brought near before our Lord:—Our priest has
taken from out of the water,—by the Hand which he received from
Simon,—virgins and chaste men who are brought near—in the festival of
the Lord of feasts.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p32"></span>28.  In Thy mercy I adjure Thee pardon
me,—for in mercy Thou too hast sworn,—Rabboni, “In the death of him that
dieth,—I have no pleasure, but in his life.”—Thou hast sworn and I have
adjured:—O Thou Who hast sworn, pardon him who has adjured!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_511"></span>[275:512](2130254.htm#fr_511) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p10"></span> [Rev.
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#006), [Rev.
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#017)<span
id="iii.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_512"></span>[275:513](2130254.htm#fr_512) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p17"></span> So in Peshitto, <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>1 Kin. i. 38; but *Gihon* in the Hebrew.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn VIII.](2130255)
