[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130211)  [Next](2130213.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Hymn LVI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvi-p2"></span>1. With Freedom is thy struggle, O
Evil One:  it can cast on thee a muzzle, if it so please.—2. *R*., *To
Thee be glory in whose* <span id="page_210">p. 210</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxxvi-Page_210"></span>*victory we have gained strength:  and
in whose resurrection we defy even Death itself!—*3. Lo! again these two
exposed each other, how weak both are:  Death reminded the Evil One of
thy mightiness (*O Freedom*).—4. Thy fire is in thy nest, O Death, and
thou perceivest not:  the fate of the departed, to thee is overthrow.—5.
Lo! Death and the Evil One proclaim thy mightiness (*O Freedom*):  yea,
the Evil One calls to mind thy faith.—6. If then these that were against
thee are on thy side:  this is a great thing that thy persecutors have
become thy heralds,—7. *D*., I confess, O Evil One, that as usury:  I
lay up the King’s treasures, till His Coming.—8. *S*., I, O Death,
rather deny that this belongs to God:  this treasure of subtlety, which
I have stored.—9. *D*., Thy coinage is fraudulent, then, O Satan:  that
into the treasuries of God, is not received.—10. *S*., A new coinage do
I coin, in kingly wise:  lo! my merchantmen bring loss, into the
world.—11. God created everything out of nothing:  and I created great
sin out of nothing—12. *D*., Closed and bound be thy mouth, Evil One,
who art thus bold:  to set thyself, lo! in comparison with the
Creator.—13. *S*., To me, O Death, it is lawful to dare and speak:  thy
tongue, even thine, is a slave, and under fear.—14. *D*., A gulf is
henceforth between us, O Satan:  for madly against thy Lord, lo! thou
assailest.—15. *S*., Wherefore doubtest thou, O Death, of our concord? 
Be to us comrade and member:  and lo! we reign.—16. Come, draw we our
pair of swords, against mankind:  I secretly, thou openly, and lo! we
end them.—17. Sin and Sheol they too gave counsel to those two:  saying
“If ye be divided, ye are undone.”—18. See the waters how if dispersed,
they run low:  but if gathered they gain strength, and thus ye
likewise.—19. If divided ye perish, as the feeble:  but yoked together
ye reign, as the mighty.—20. Love melts down many, as in a furnace:  and
makes one powerful mass, that overcomes all.—21. In it are wisdom and
cunning, and force and power:  it is greater far than an image of sixty
cubits.—22. Be reconciled, let us assemble and go, against that party: 
which if it be at one can never be defeated.—23. These things the
troublers discoursed, and gathered and came:  Thy day, Lord, will gather
them, into Gehenna.—24. Through Thy mercy, Lord, will I worship Thee,
when I have risen:  at Thy trumpet I will praise Thy Son, when I am
purged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LVII.](2130213.md)
