[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130223)  [Next](2130225) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xlviii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LXVIII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xlviii-p2"></span>1. *Man.,* O, Death, be not thou
boastful, over the just:  the sons of thy Lord who at His command, come
to *dwell with thee*.—2. *R., To thee be glory that by Thy command,
Death has reigned:  and by Thy Resurrection has been humbled to low
estate!*—3. *Death.,* Herein am I exceeding great, according to thy
saying:  that though I be bond-man I trample on them that are free.—4.
*M*., Adam was chosen and ruler, and under his yoke:  thou, Death, and
the Evil One, thy fellow, became bondmen.—5. *D*., This is our pride
that lo! the slaves have become lords:  Death, and Satan, his fellow,
have trampled on Adam.—6. *M*., Lo! the humbling of thee and thy fellow,
accurst servants! how Enoch trampled on you both, <span id="page_219">p.
219</span> <span id="iii.iv.xlviii-Page_219"></span>and rose aloft and
reigned.—7. *D*., If so be Enoch made me grieve, yet have I comfort for
on Noah’s dust in Sheol, lo! I trample.—8. *M*., Tremble, O Death,
before man, for though a servant, the yoke of his dominion reigns on all
creatures.—9. *D*., I rejoice then that they are no mean *foes* that I
have overcome:  for according to the greatness of the vanquished, he is
great that overcomes.—10. *M*., Well does thy voice sing triumph, O
Death, over the just:  for Enoch and Elijah have broken thy pair of
wings.—11. *D*., I know *how* to weigh my sorrows with my comforts:  in
place of two, lo! many are come and coming.—12. *M*., All that are come
and coming to thee dwell as sojourners, and depart from thy abode as
Lazarus.—13. *D*., This thy saying hurts me not, rather it heals me: 
for Lazarus who rebelled against me, I again subdued.—14. *M*., Make
answer, O Death, and argue what constrained him, to be raised unless it
were a mystery, showing forth his resurrection.—15. *D*., Ye are famous
in arguing as idle ones, while I labour in my task to discern and
perform—16. *M*., Thou wast well prepared for argument, what has checked
thee?  The truth of our resurrection has constrained thee by its
reputations.—17. *D*., Ye have made me hated by you, though I be not
hateful:  I am he that gives rest to your aged, and your afflicted.—18.
Ye have made me as one that troubles, O ye mortals:  Adam brought death
upon you, and I bear the blame.—19. Gently will I expose you, for I am a
slave, and ye are they that by your sins have made me king.—20. The will
of Adam roused me for I was at rest:  I was dead and ye quickened me,
that ye might die by me.—21. I accuse the lying ones, who slew and
denied it:  for Adam slew himself and charges me.—22. The beginning of
strife was the accursed serpent which has rightly been crippled:  which
crept, entered, and set enmity between me and you.—23. Satan is passed
by and it is against me that ye are roused:  go, strive with the Evil
One who made you transgress.—24. He is my comrade and I deny *it* not,
but though he be much hated, what need that I be blamed for him.  I deny
him henceforth.—25. Hearken to my words, O mortals, and I will console
you:  I have afflicted you and I confess the life from the dead.—26. For
there begins to steal into my ears a voice of preparation:  of the
trumpet that holds itself ready to sound.—27. Hear my words and put much
oil into your lamps:  for hindrance from my part there is none for
you.—28. *Yet*, Know ye that even although I have said these things,
dear is the sound of your voice in the solitude of Sheol.—29. For man
has been weighed by me, and great is his peace:  for snakes and fishes
and birds come to meet him.—30. But it is a marvel that to the Watchers,
too, his converse is dear:  yea, the Evil One in Gehenna, desires his
presence.—31. Ye shall have life from the dead, O ye mortals, and I who
am bereft shall be bereft in the midst of Sheol.—32. Let praise ascend
from all to Thee Who quickenest all, and from every quarter gatherest
the dust of Adam!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephraim Syrus:  Nineteen Hymns on the Nativity of Christ in the
Flesh.](2130225)
