[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130087)  [Next](2130089.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.vi-p2"></span>*To Bertha, Queen of the Angli* <span
id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136.md) .

<span id="ii.vii.vi-p4"></span>Gregory to Bertha, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.vi-p5"></span>They who desire, after earthly dominion,
to obtain the glory of a heavenly kingdom ought to labour earnestly to
bring in gain to their Creator, that they may be able to rise by the
steps of their operation to the things they long <span id="page_57">p.
57</span> <span id="ii.vii.vi-Page_57"></span>for; as we are glad to
know you do.  For indeed our most beloved son Laurentius the presbyter,
and Peter the monk, have brought us word on their return to us how your
Glory has exhibited itself towards our most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Augustine, and how great succour and what charity you have
bestowed upon him.  And we bless Almighty God, who has been mercifully
pleased to reserve the conversion of the nation of the Angli for your
reward.  For, as through Helena of illustrious memory, the mother of the
most pious Emperor Constantine, He kindled the hearts of the Romans into
Christian faith, so we trust that He works in the nation of the Angli
through the zeal of your Glory.  And indeed you ought before now, as
being truly a Christian, to have inclined the heart of our glorious son,
your husband, by the good influence of your prudence, to follow, for the
weal of his kingdom and of his own soul, the faith which you profess, to
the end that for him, and for the conversion of the whole nation through
him, fit retribution might accrue to you in the joys of heaven.  For
seeing, as we have said, that your Glory is both fortified by a right
faith and instructed in letters, this should have been to you neither
slow of accomplishment nor difficult.  And since, by the will of God,
now is a suitable time, so proceed, with the co-operation of divine
grace, as to be able to make reparation with increase for what has been
neglected.  Wherefore strengthen by continual hortation the mind of your
glorious husband in love of the Christian faith; let your solicitude
infuse into him increase of love for God, and so kindle his heart even
for the fullest conversion of the nation subject to him that both he may
offer, out of the zeal of your devotion, a great sacrifice to the
Almighty Lord, and that the things related of you may both grow and be
in all ways proved to be true:  for your good deeds are known not only
among the Romans, who have prayed earnestly for your life, but also
through divers places, and have come even to the ears of the most serene
prince at Constantinople.  Hence, as great joy has been caused us by the
consolations of your Christianity, so also may there be joy in heaven
for your perfected work.  So acquit yourselves devotedly and with all
your might in aid of our above-named most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop, and of the servants of God whom we have sent to you, in
the conversion of your nation that you may both reign happily here with
our glorious son your husband, and after long courses of years may also
attain the joys of the future life, which know no end.  Now we pray
Almighty God that He would both kindle the heart of your Glory with the
fire of His grace to perform what we have spoken of, and grant you the
fruit of an eternal reward for work well-pleasing to Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_136"></span>[56:137](2130088.htm#fr_136.md) <span
id="ii.vii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.vi-p3"></span> As to the apparent inference from this
letter that King Ethelbert of Kent had not been converted when it was
written, and as to when it may have been sent to queen Bertha, see
*Prolegom*., p. xxvi., note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Venantius, Ex-Monk, Patrician of Syracuse.](2130089.md)
