[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130023)  [Next](2130025) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p2"></span>To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p3"></span>Gregory to Romanus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p4"></span>Although the law with reason allows not
things that come into possession of the Church to be alienated, yet
sometimes the strictness of the rule should be moderated, where regard
to mercy invites to it, especially when there is so great a quantity
that the giver is not burdened, and the poverty of the receiver is
considerably relieved.  And so, inasmuch as Stephania, the bearer of
these presents, having come hither with her little son Calixenus (whom
she asserts that she bare to her late husband Peter, saying also that
she has laboured under extreme poverty), demanded of us with
supplication and tears that we should cause to be restored to the same
Calixenus the possession of a house in the city of Catana, which
Ammonia, her late mother-in-law, the grandmother of Calixenus, had
offered by title of gift to our Church; asserting that the said Ammonia
had not power to alienate it, and that it belonged altogether to the
aforesaid Calixenus, her son; which assertion our most beloved son
Cyprian, the deacon, who was acquainted with the case, contradicted,
saying that the complaint of the aforesaid woman had not justice to go
on, and that she could not reasonably claim or seek to recover that
house in the name of her son; but, lest we should seem to leave the
tears of the above named woman without effect, and to follow the way of
rigour rather than embrace the plea of pity, we command thee by this
precept to restore the said house to the above-named Calixenus, together
with Ammonia’s deed of gift with respect to this same house, which is
known to be there in Sicily;—since, as we have said, it is better in
doubtful cases not to execute strictness, but rather to be inclined to
the side of benignity, especially when by the cession of a small matter
the Church is not burdened, and succour is mercifully given to a poor
orphan.

<span id="ii.v.xviii-p5"></span>Given in the month of November,
Indiction 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).](2130025)
