[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130116)  [Next](2130118.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXIX.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxv-p2"></span>To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxv-p3"></span>Gregory to Brunichild, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxv-p4"></span>Since it is written, *Righteousness
exalteth a nation; but sin maketh peoples miserable* ([Prov. xiv.
34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034.md)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxv-p4.1"></span>), a kingdom is then believed to be stable
when a fault that is known of is quickly amended.  Now it has come to
our ears by the report of many, what we cannot mention without exceeding
affliction of heart, that certain priests in those parts live so
immodestly and wickedly that it is a shame for us to hear of it and
lamentable to tell it.  Lest, then, now that the rumour of this iniquity
has extended as far as here, the wrong doing of others should smite
either our soul or your kingdom with the dart of its sin, we ought to
arise with ardour to avenge these things, lest the wickedness of a few
should be the perdition of many.  For bad priests are the cause of the
ruin of a people.  For who may offer himself as an intercessor for a
people’s sins, if the priest who ought to have prayed for it commits
more grievous offences?  But, since those whose place it is to prosecute
these things are stirred neither by care to enquire into them nor by
zeal to punish them, let letters from you be addressed to us, and let us
send over, if you order it, a person with the assent of your authority,
who together with other priests may search into these things thoroughly,
and amend them according to the will of God.  For indeed what we speak
of is not a thing to be winked at, since one who can amend a fault and
neglects to do so without doubt makes himself partaker in it.  See
therefore to your own soul, see to your grandsons, whom you wish to
reign happily, see to the provinces; and, before our Creator stretches
out His hand to smite, take most earnest thought for the correction of
this wickedness, lest He afterwards smite by so much the more sharply as
He now waits longer and more mercifully.  Know moreover that you will
offer a great sacrifice of expiation to our God, if you cut off speedily
from your territories the infection of so great a sin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle LXXVI](2130118.md)
