[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130216)  [Next](2130218.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xli"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xli-p1.1"></span>Hymn LXI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xli-p2"></span>1. In wisdom let us hearken to Death, O
my beloved:  how he accuses us for our weeping, and for our mourning.—2.
*R., To thee be praise Who cameth down, to follow Adam:  and foundest
Adam and also in the children of Adam.*—3. And rightly per<span
id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span id="iii.iv.xli-Page_214"></span>haps
he says, “Ye slay:  without mercy and lo! ye weep, as though
merciful.”—4. Ye have made me as a cruel one, O ye murderers:  for ye
slay one another, without my help!—5. While Death was *but* desiring to
come, the sword came before him:  let us see then against whom cries
out, the blood of the slain.—6. Against you cry out the strangled, who
were suffocated:  for it shames me of the rope, of their
strangulations.—7. They take away from me even my rest, for without me: 
how could the strangled and the slain, enter Sheol?—8. Lo! your infants
are cast out, as those in Egypt:  your sons have ye sacrificed to
demons, O demoniacs!—9. While Death was *but* desiring to taste, of your
corpses:  Cain refreshed me beforehand, with blood of man.—10. While I
was but desiring to wait patiently, till Adam should die:  before I had
power ye gave me power, over your bodies.—11. Cain with his sword
overthrew, the gate of Sheol:  for it was closed and before the time, he
first opened it.—12. He by treading made the way of Sheol, without my
help:  for in the way ye have trodden out for me, lo! I walk
*therein*.—13. Nine hundred years I sat and waited, for Adam to die: 
but Cain not even a day, endured his brother.—14. Robbers upon the
highways, are worse than I:  I am slumbering while they, are watching to
slay.—15. Lo! your slaughtered in the graves, and your murdered in your
ways; and your strangled upon your stakes!—16. “If I rebelled against my
lord, yea and slew him:  who was he that slew these here,” said
Jehu.—17. And if I Death have taken, your departed:  the strangled, the
slain, and the slaughtered, who was it slew them?—18. Ye are Satan to
each other, and the Evil One is abhorred:  ye are pestilence to each
other, and Death is blamed!—19. Your *own* will to you is Satan, yea and
a murderer:  but of Death and of Satan, all men complain.—20. Poison of
Death ye give also to drink, each to other:  lo! how many Deaths have
ye, beside me.—21. Wiles, stratagems, yea and snares, sword and poison: 
how many Deaths from you and in you, lo! are there born.—22. The judge
in the judgment-hall, is a second Death:  he slays for secret reward,
but I for naught.—23. I have seen bribery and marvelled at it, that ran
and outran me:  how many slain does bribery, slay, and none
perceives!—24. I am ashamed that *so* unskilfully, I conduct myself:  if
I take even one corpse, all men perceive *it*.—25. In the houses weeping
and in the streets, also wailing:  and even unto the gates of Sheol,
they groan over me.—26. Groan over yourselves that ye are thus hateful,
and ye hate me:  Sheol henceforth shall groan over you, O murderers!—27.
With torture, scourging and fire, yea with stoning:  ye put to death the
sons of men, and ye are proud!—28. I am more modest than you and
merciful, also reverent:  for with reverence I bear away, your
departed.—29. On the bed I deal gently, with him that is sick:  and
quietly I lay him to sleep, for *but* a while.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LXII.](2130218.md)
