[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130164)  [Next](2130166.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p1"></span> <span class="c14"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>First Part</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p2"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p2.1"></span>Ephraim the Syrian.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>I.—Summary of the Authenticated Facts of
His Life.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4.1"></span>All</span> that is known, on early and
trustworthy evidence, of the person and life of Ephraim may be briefly
summed up.  He was born within the Roman pale, in the ancient and famous
city of Nisibis in Mesopotamia, in, or before, the earliest days of the
reign (<span class="sc"><span id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span>
306–337) of Constantine the Great:  he was a disciple of St. Jacob,
Bishop of that city, who died <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4.3"></span>a.d.</span> 338:  and he lived in it,
under Jacob and the three Bishops who successively followed him, through
three unsuccessful sieges laid to it by Sapor, King of Persia, down to
its final surrender under the terms of the ignominious peace concluded
with Sapor by the Emperor Jovian after the defeat and death of his
predecessor Julian (<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-p4.4"></span>a.d.</span> 363).  Nisibis was then
abandoned by its Christian inhabitants; and Ephraim finally settled at
Edessa, and took up his abode as a “Solitary” in a cell on the “Mount of
Edessa”—a rocky hill close to the city, where many anchorites sought
retreat.  Here he rose into repute as a teacher, and a champion against
heresy; and no less as an ascetic and saint.  The fame of St. Basil,
metropolitan of Cæsarea in Cappadocia (370–379), drew him from his
solitude to visit that great prelate and doctor, and from him he
received the diaconate; but (though some affirm that he was advanced to
the priesthood) it is agreed that he never became a Bishop.  He died at
an advanced age, in his retreat, in the year 373 according to most
authorities, but some suppose him to have lived to 378.  He was a most
copious writer, and left an immense quantity of writings of which a
large part is extant,—Sermons, Commentaries, and Hymns.  These
constitute such a body of instruction in the substance of Scripture and
the faith of the church, that they have justly earned for him the title
of *malpono*, or *teacher*.  And not only have his Hymns done much to
shape the ritual of the Syrian Churches, in which large portions of them
are embodied, but to his <span id="page_121">p. 121</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.i-Page_121"></span>Sermons this singular honour is paid,
that lessons selected from them were appointed, and are still read, in
the regular course of public worship.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Materials for His Biography.](2130166.md)
