[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130212)  [Next](2130214) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Hymn LVII.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxxvii-p2"></span>1. Listen, my brethren, to Death,
mocking the Evil One:  that caused the head of our race to sin, and its
mother.—2. *R., To Thee be glory that by Thy humiliation, Satan is
subdued:  and that Thy abasement has exalted Adam, who was abased.*—3.
*D*., Thy great nakedness shall be seen, by the sons of Adam; as thou
mockedst his nakedness, when thou madest him sin.—4. Eve will cease from
that serpent, and rail at thee:  for thou, O Dragon, wast he that
beguiled her simpleness.—5. Abel will see him, even, Cain, who has come
to thee:  the disciple of his wrath will blame his cursed master.—6.
*S*., Noah who conquered the flood, as it were death:  by the mouth of
Ham I laughed at, when wine overcame him.—7. *D*., Noah was not harmed,
but thy garment, wherewith thou clothedst him:  even cursings, he put
on, and became a slave.—8. *S*., Lot who overcame anger which is, thy
likeness, Death:  to his daughters I gave such counsels, as were
pleasing to me.—9. *D*., And Lot’s wife who was thy vessel hearkened, to
thy counsel:  may half of thee be dried up, as thy whole vessel was
dried up!—10. Gehenna be overturned, upon thy head:  as thy malice
overturned Sodom, its dwellers!—11. Floods of fire be stirred against
thee, in the resurrection:  who against Moses and Elijah, didst stir the
people!—12. Let the just mock thee at the last, and Joseph rejoice!
whose brethren mocked him, set on by thee!—13. Let vapour of smoke come
in, and choke thy senses:  as the waters of the sea choked, the senses
of the wicked! —14. Let chaste women also mock thee, by whose counsel: 
the daughters of Midian <span id="page_211">p. 211</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxxvii-Page_211"></span>mocked, the foolish people!—15. Flame
be kindled on thy head, for Samson’s sake:  for by a woman thou shavedst
his locks, that lion of strength!—16. *S*., Saul whom I conquered by
envy, by witchcraft conquered thee:  for he asked for and brought up
Samuel, out of his grave.—17. *D*., Slander not the living dead, for he
came not up:  thou wast he that came up in the phantom for thou wast
worthy.—18. Let the commandment hang thee over the flame, thou Evil One!
for by thee they hanged Absalom, upon a tree.—19. In the fire mayst thou
see thyself humbled, among vile women! for Solomon by thee was degraded,
among profane women.—20. Justice be measured to thee, as thou didst
inflame her! even Jezebel who devoured the prophets, thou kindledst
her.—21. In fire mayst thou justly burn, who madest them drunken! the
two whom Elijah burnt up, when they went up and assailed *him*.—22. On
thee also be coals heaped! may he see and rejoice:  that Naboth in whom
thou heapedst, a pile of stones!—23. Be thou clad in scorn in the day of
judgment, before all beholders! who clothedst Gehasi in a leprosy, by
means of thy theft.—24. With lightning for a dart be thou pierced, O
Satan! who in the heart of Josiah, didst fix *thy* darts.—25. Sink thou
in the dregs of Gehenna, O Satan! who didst sink Jeremiah in the mire of
the pit.—26. Daniel escaped from the pit, whither thou didst cast him: 
may he have comfort in seeing thee, in the furnace for ever!—27. Be thy
wickedness returned on thy head, Hater of man:  as his wickedness was
returned on the head, of Haman thy fellow! —28. May the King’s Bride
mock thee, as did Esther:  when thou beseechest her in the judgment-day,
to plead for thee!—29. Fire released the righteous ones, whom thou hadst
bound:  a mighty bond be to thee, the flame of fire!—30. Be thou torn in
sunder, and may the seven brothers, see thy defeat:  the sons of Shemuni
who by thy wolves, were torn in sunder!—31. May fire triumph over thy
pate, as thou didst mock:  the two heads of Nazarites, sons of the
barren!—32. May fire make mock of thy head, for mother and daughter: 
triumphed over John’s head, when thou didst madden them!—33. Flame
triumphed over thy head, O Evil One:  for on the charges thou didst
triumph, over John’s head!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn LVIII.](2130214)
