[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130247)  [Next](2130249) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.ii"></span> <span id="page_265">p. 265</span> <span
id="iii.vi.ii-Page_265"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iii.vi.ii-p1.1"></span>Hymns for the Feast of the Epiphany.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p3"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.ii-p3.1"></span>Hymn I.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.ii-p4.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*To Thee be praise from Thy
flock in the day of Thy Epiphany!*

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p5"></span>1.  The heavens He has renewed, for that
fools worshipped all the luminaries:—He has renewed the earth, for that
in Adam it was wasted. <span id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) —That
which He fashioned has become new by His spittle:—and the All-Sufficing
has restored bodies with souls.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p7"></span>2.  Gather yourselves again ye—sheep and
without labour receive cleansing!—for one needs not as Elisha—to bathe
seven times in the river, nor again to be wearied as the priests are
wearied with sprinklings.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p8"></span>3.  Seven times Elisha purified himself
in a mystery of the seven spirits;—and the hyssop and blood are a mighty
symbol.—There is no room for division;—*He* is not divided from the Lord
of all Who is Son of the Lord of all.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p9"></span>4.  Moses sweetened in Marah the waters
that were bitter,—because the People complained and murmured:—*Thus* he
gave a sign of baptism,—wherein the Lord of life makes sweet them that
were bitter.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p10"></span>5.  The cloud overshadowed and kept off
the burning heat from the camp;—it showed a symbol of the Holy Spirit,
which overshadows you in baptism—tempering the flaming fire *that it
harm not* your bodies.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p11"></span>6.  Through the sea the People then
passed, and showed a symbol—of the baptism wherein ye were washed.  The
People passed through that and believed not:—the Gentiles were baptized
in this and believed and received the Holy Ghost.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p12"></span>7.  The Word sent the Voice to proclaim
before His Coming,—to prepare for Him the way by which He came,—and to
betroth the Bride till He should come,—that she might be ready when He
should come and take her from the water.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p13"></span>8.  The voice of prophecy stirred the
son of the barren woman,—and he went forth wandering in the desert and
crying,—“Lo! the Son of the Kingdom comes!—prepare ye the way that He
may enter and abide in your dwellings!”

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p14"></span>9.  John cried, “Who comes after me, He
is before me:—I am the Voice but not the Word;—I am the torch but not
the Light;—the Star that rises before the Sun of Righteousness.”

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p15"></span>10.  In the wilderness this John had
cried and had said,—“Repent ye sinners of your evils,—and offer the
fruits of repentance;—for lo! He comes that winnows the wheat from the
tares.”

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p16"></span>11.  The Lightgiver has prevailed and
marked a mystery, by the degrees he ascended:—Lo! there are twelve days
since he ascended,—and to-day this is the thirteenth:—a perfect mystery
of Him, the Son, and His twelve!

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p17"></span><span id="page_266">p. 266</span> <span
id="iii.vi.ii-Page_266"></span>12.  Darkness was overcome to make it
manifest that Satan was overcome;—and the Light prevailed that he should
proclaim—that the Firstborn triumphs:  darkness was overcome—with the
Dark Spirit, and our Light prevailed with the Lightgiver.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p18"></span>13.  In the Height and the Depth the Son
had two heralds.—The star of light proclaimed Him from above;—John
likewise preached Him from beneath:—two heralds, the earthly and the
heavenly.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p19"></span>14.  The star of light, contrary to
nature, shone forth of a sudden;—less than the sun yet greater than the
sun.—Less was it than he in manifest light;—and greater than he in
secret might because of its mystery.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p20"></span>15.  The star of light shed its rays
among them that were in darkness,—and guided them as though they were
blind;—so that they came and met the great Light:—they gave offerings
and received life and adored and departed.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p21"></span>16.  The *herald* from above showed His
Nature to be from the Most High;—likewise he *that was* from beneath
showed His Body to be from humankind, mighty marvel!—that His Godhead
and His Manhood by them were proclaimed!

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p22"></span>17.  Thus whoso reckons Him as of earth,
the star of light—will convince him that He is of Heaven:  and whoso
reckons Him as of spirit,—this John will convince him that He is also
bodily.

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p23"></span>18.  John drew near with his parents and
worshipped the Sun,—and brightness rested on His Face.—He was not moved
as when in the womb.—Mighty marvel! that here he worships and there he
leaped!

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p24"></span>19.  The whole creation became for Him
as one mouth and cried out concerning Him.—The Magi cry out in their
gifts;—the barren cry out with their children;—the star of light, lo! it
cries out in the air, “Behold the Son of the King!”

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p25"></span>20.  The heavens are opened, the waters
break forth, the dove is in glory!—The voice of the Father is stronger
than thunder,—as it utters the word, “This *is* My Beloved”;—the
Watchers brought the tidings, the children acclaimed *Him* in their
Hosannas.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_508"></span>[265:509](2130248.htm#fr_508) <span
id="iii.vi.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ii-p6"></span> See p. 177.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn II.](2130249)
