[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130011)  [Next](2130013.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle VI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).

<span id="ii.v.vi-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.vi-p4"></span>The Jews who have come hither from your
city have complained to us that Peter, who has been brought by the will
of God from their superstition to the worship of Christian faith, having
taken with him certain disorderly persons, on the day after his baptism,
that is on the Lord’s day of the very Paschal festival, with grave
scandal and without your consent, had taken possession of their
synagogue in Caralis, and placed there the image of the mother of our
God and Lord, the venerable cross, and the white vestment (*birrum*)
with which he had been clothed when he rose from the font.  Concerning
which thing also the letters of our sons, the glorious *Magister
militum* Eupaterius, and the magnificent governor, pious in the Lord,
concur in attesting the same.  And they add also that this had been
foreseen by you, and that the aforesaid Peter had been prohibited from
venturing on it.  On learning this we altogether commended you, since,
as became a truly good priest, you wished nothing to be done whence just
blame might arise.  But, since by not having at all mixed yourself up in
these wrong doings you shew that what was done displeases you, we,
considering the bent of your will in this matter, and still more your
judgment, hereby exhort you that, having removed thence with fitting
reverence the image and the cross, you should restore what has been
violently taken away; seeing that, as legal enactment does not suffer
Jews to erect new synagogues, so also it allows them to keep their old
ones without disturbance.  Lest, then, the above-named Peter, or others
who have afforded him assistance or connivance in the wrongfulness of
this disorderly proceeding, should reply that they had done it in zeal
for the faith, in order that a necessity of being converted might
thereby be imposed on the Jews, they should be admonished, and ought to
know, that moderation should rather be used towards them; that so the
will not to resist may be elicited from them, and not that they should
be brought in against their will:  for it is written, *I will sacrifice
to thee willingly* ([Ps. lviii. 8](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#008.md)<span
id="ii.v.vi-p4.1"></span>); and, *Of my own will I will confess to him*
([Ps. xxvii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.v.vi-p4.2"></span>).  Let, then, your Holiness, taking with you
your sons who with you disapprove of these things, try to induce good
feeling among the inhabitants of your city, since at this time
especially, when there is alarm from the enemy, you ought not to have a
divided people.  But, being anxious with regard to ourselves no less
than with regard to you, we think it right to give you to understand
that when the present truce is over, the king Agilulph will not make
peace with us <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md) .  <span id="page_4">p.
4</span> <span id="ii.v.vi-Page_4"></span>Whence it is necessary for
your Fraternity to see to fortifying your city or other places more
securely, and to give earnest attention to providing stores of
provisions therein, that, when the enemy, with God incensed against him,
shall come thither, he may find no harm that he can do, but may retire
discomfited.  But we also take thought for you as far as we can, and
press upon those whose concern it is that they should prepare themselves
for resistance, since, as you regard our tribulations as yours, so we in
like manner count your afflictions as our own.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[3:8](2130012.htm#fr_7.md) <span
id="ii.v.vi-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p5"></span> For references to the truce now in course
of negotiation (<span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.vi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9), with the Lombard King
Agilulph, cf. IX. 4, 42, 43, 98.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).](2130013.md)
