[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130152)  [Next](2130154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle VII.</span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p2"></span>To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra.

<span id="ii.x.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

<span id="ii.x.iii-p4"></span>Not undeservedly does the ambition of an
elated heart require to be quelled, when, disregarding the force of the
sacred canons, the excess of rash presumption in coveting unlawfully
what belongs to others is shewn to be not only harmful in causing
expense, but also opposed to the peace of the Church.  Having, then,
perused thy Fraternity’s epistles, we have learnt what has been done
formerly or of late by the bishop of the City of Euria with regard to
the camp of Cassiopus <span id="fr_233"></span>[234](#fn_233.md) , which is
situated in thy diocese, and we are distressed that those who should
have been debtors to thy Church for charity bestowed upon them, should
rather become its enemies, no shame restraining them; and at last that,
in a way contrary to ecclesiastical arrangement, contrary to priestly
moderation, contrary to the ordinances of the sacred canons, they should
attempt to withdraw the aforesaid camp from thy jurisdiction and subject
it to their own power, so as to become as it were masters where they had
before been received as strangers.  Concerning which matter, seeing that
Andrew, our brother of venerable memory, Metropolitan of Nicopolis, with
the support also of an imperial order whereby the cognizance of this
case had been enjoined on him, is known to have determined in a sentence
promulged by him, as has been made manifest to us, that the aforesaid
camp of <span id="page_105">p. 105</span> <span
id="ii.x.iii-Page_105"></span>Cassiopus should remain under the
jurisdiction of thy Church as it always has been, we, approving of the
form of that sentence, confirm it, as justice approves, by the authority
of the Apostolic See, and decree that it remain firm in all respects. 
For no reason of equity, no canonical order, sanctions that one person
should in any way occupy the parish <span
id="fr_234"></span>[235](#fn_234.md) of another.  Wherefore, though the
guilt of this contentiousness seems to require no slight strictness of
treatment, in that they have returned evil for good, nevertheless care
should be taken that kindness be not overcome by excess, nor that what
is due to strange brethren, when they are suffering constraint too, be
denied them, lest charity should be judged to have no operation in the
minds of bishops, if those to whom great compassion is due should be
left without the remedy of consolation.  It is right, then, that the
priests and clergy of the city of Euria be not repelled from habitation
of the aforesaid camp of Cassiopus, but that they should have leave also
to deposit with due reverence the holy and venerable body of the blessed
Donatus, which they have brought with them, in one of the churches of
the aforesaid place such as they may choose.  Yet so that protection be
procured for thy Love, in whose diocese this camp is situate, by the
issue of a security whereby the bishop of Euria shall promise not to
claim for himself any power therein, or any privilege, or any
jurisdiction, or any authority in future, as though he were cardinal
bishop; but that, peace being restored by the favour of God, they shall
return by all means to their own places, taking away with them, if they
will, the venerable body of Saint Donatus.  So, this promise being kept
in mind, neither may they dare on any pretext whatever to claim further
to themselves any right of rule there, but acknowledge themselves guests
there at all times, nor may the Church of thy Fraternity in any degree
incur prejudice to its rights and privileges.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_233"></span>[104:234](2130153.htm#fr_233.md) <span
id="ii.x.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p5"></span> *Castrum Cassiopi*, which appears to have
been a fortress in the isle of Corcyra, to which refugees from the
mainland of Epirus had resorted in time of war.  Euria was one of the
sees in Epirus Vetus under the jurisdiction of which these refugees had
been; and it seems that the bishop of Euria had been complained of by
Alcyson, bishop of Corcyra, for asserting jurisdiction over them in
their new abode.  See also Ep. VIII., which follows, and Ep. XIII.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[105:235](2130153.htm#fr_234.md) <span
id="ii.x.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.iii-p6"></span> *Parochiam*, in the then usual sense of
what is now called a *diocese*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Boniface, Deacon.](2130154.md)
