[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130133)  [Next](2130135.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle VII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p2"></span>*To Theoderic, King of the Franks* <span
id="fr_205"></span>[206](#fn_205.md) .

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p4"></span>Gregory to Theoderic, &c.

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p5"></span>We have received with joy your written
address to us indicating your health and safety, <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> <span id="ii.ix.iv-Page_95"></span>and we thereby perceive
that you so transcend your age in prudence as to make it evident that it
is for the happiness of the nation of the Franks that the government of
royal dominion has been committed by the favour of heavenly grace to
your Excellency.  And this in you among other things is enough to call
for praise and admiration, that in such things as you know that our
daughter your most excellent grandmother desires for the love of
Almighty God, in these you make haste most earnestly to lend your aid,
so that thereby you may reign both happily here, and in a future life
with the angels <span id="fr_206"></span>[207](#fn_206.md) .  Seeing, then,
that this comes, by the gift of God, from great discreetness of
judgment, we have so speedily and gladly fulfilled what your Excellency
desires as to show by the celerity of our execution how much your good
deeds have pleased us.

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p7"></span>Furthermore, greeting you with paternal
sweetness, we inform you that all the matters which you enjoined on the
illustrious men your servants Burgoaldus and Varmaricarius, our sons, to
be transacted with us have been disclosed to us in a private interview. 
And we praised you greatly, that you both attend wisely, as becomes you,
to the present, and also make haste so to provide for security in the
future by means of a lasting peace between you and the Republic that,
being made one, you may extend the stability of your kingdom salutarily
to all time.  With regard to this we will announce to you in time to
come what it may please God to order.  For, as to us, whatever is proved
to be advantageous and conducive to peace, we desire and strive that it
should be brought to pass.  The one thing is that, as our will is with
regard to what is expedient, so should be the will of God, without whom
we can do nothing.  May the Holy Trinity make you to advance always in
His fear, and so dispose your heart in moderation well-pleasing to Him
as both to grant to your subjects now joy from you, and to you from
Himself joy without end hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_205"></span>[94:206](2130134.htm#fr_205.md) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p3"></span> See preceding epistle, note 2.

<span id="fn_206"></span>[95:207](2130134.htm#fr_206.md) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p6"></span> If the accounts given by the Frankish
historians be true, Brunechild’s influence over her grandson was not in
all respects such as to prepare him for life with the angels.  She is
said to have encouraged him in licentious living for fear of her own
power being undermined by the introduction into his court of a lawful
queen.  (*Greg. Turon., Hist. Franc.* XI. 36; *Fredegar.* XXX.,
XXXVII.).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Senator, Abbot.](2130135.md)
