[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130130)  [Next](2130132) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span
id="ii.ix.i-Page_92"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Book XIII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>In the Sixth Indiction, and the Thirteenth Year
from his Ordination.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p3"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p3.1"></span>Epistle I.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p4"></span>To the Roman Citizens.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p5"></span>Gregory, servant of the servants of God, to
his most beloved sons the Roman citizens.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p6"></span>It has come to my ears that certain men of
perverse spirit have sown among you some things that are wrong and
opposed to the holy faith, so as to forbid any work being done on the
Sabbath day.  What else can I call these but preachers of Antichrist,
who, when he comes, will cause the Sabbath day as well as the Lord’s day
to be kept free from all work.  For, because he pretends to die and rise
again, he wishes the Lord’s day to be had in reverence; and, because he
compels the people to judaize that he may bring back the outward rite of
the law, and subject the perfidy of the Jews to himself, he wishes the
Sabbath to be observed.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p7"></span>For this which is said by the prophet, *Ye
shall bring in no burden through your gates on the Sabbath day* ([Jerem.
xvii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024)<span
id="ii.ix.i-p7.1"></span>), could be held to as long as it was lawful
for the law to be observed according to the letter.  But after that the
grace of Almighty God, our Lord Jesus Christ has appeared, the
commandments of the law which were spoken figuratively cannot be kept
according to the letter.  For, if any one says that this about the
Sabbath is to be kept, he must needs say that carnal sacrifices are to
be offered:  he must say too that the commandment about the circumcision
of the body is still to be retained.  But let him hear the Apostle Paul
saying in opposition to him, *If ye be circumcised, Christ profiteth you
nothing* ([Galat. v. 2](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#002)<span
id="ii.ix.i-p7.2"></span>).

<span id="ii.ix.i-p8"></span>We therefore accept spiritually, and hold
spiritually, this which is written about the Sabbath.  For the Sabbath
means rest.  But we have the true Sabbath in our Redeemer Himself, the
Lord Jesus Christ.  And whoso acknowledges the light of faith in Him, if
he draws the sins of concupiscence through his eyes into his soul, he
introduces burdens through the gates on the Sabbath day.  We introduce,
then, no burden through the gates on the Sabbath day if we draw no
weights of sin through the bodily senses to the soul.  For we read that
the same our Lord and Redeemer did many works on the Sabbath day, so
that he reproved the Jews, saying, *Which of you doth not loose his ox
or his ass on the Sabbath day, and lead him away to watering* ([Luke
xiii. 15](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#015)<span
id="ii.ix.i-p8.1"></span>)?  If, then, the very Truth in person
commanded that the Sabbath should not be kept according to the letter,
whoso keeps the rest of the Sabbath according to the letter of the law,
whom else does he contradict but the Truth himself?

<span id="ii.ix.i-p9"></span>Another thing also has been brought to my
knowledge; namely that it has been preached to you by perverse men that
no one ought to wash on the Lord’s day.  And indeed if any one craves to
wash for luxury and pleasure, neither on any other day do we allow this
to be done.  But if it is for bodily need, neither on the Lord’s day do
we forbid it.  For it is written, *No man ever hated his own flesh, but
nourisheth it and cherisheth it* ([Ephes. v.
29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029)<span id="ii.ix.i-p9.1"></span>). 
And again it is written, *Make not provision for the flesh to fulfil the
lusts thereof* ([Rom. xiii. 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#014)<span
id="ii.ix.i-p9.2"></span>).  He, then, who forbids provision for the
flesh in the lusts thereof certainly allows it in the needs thereof. 
For, if it is sin to wash the body on the Lord’s day, neither ought the
face to be washed on that day.  But if this is allowed for a part of the
body, why is it denied for the whole body when need requires?  On the
Lord’s day, however, there should be a cessation of earthly labour, and
attention given in every way to prayers, so that if anything is done
negligently during the six days, it may be expiated by supplications on
the day of the Lord’s resurrection.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p10"></span>These things, most dear sons, being
endowed with sure constancy and right faith, observe; despise the words
of foolish men, and give not easy belief to all that you hear of having
been said by them; but <span id="page_93">p. 93</span> <span
id="ii.ix.i-Page_93"></span>weigh it in the scale of reason, so that,
while in firm stability you resist the wind of error you may be able to
attain to the solid joys of the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p11"></span>\[In two <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p11.1"></span>mss.</span>, one *Colbert*, and *Vatic.* F.,
“mense Septembri, indict. 6.”\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle V](2130132)
