[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130035)  [Next](2130037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p2"></span>Here begins the epistle of Rechared, King
of the Goths, addressed to the blessed Gregory, Bishop of Rome <span
id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41) .

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p4"></span>Rechared to the holy lord and most blessed
pope, the bishop Gregory.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p5"></span>At the time when the Lord in His
compassion caused us to be dissociated from the impious Arian heresy,
and the holy Catholic Church gathered us into her bosom ameliorated in
the path of faith, it was then the desire of our mind to seek with
delight and with the whole bent of our mind so very reverend a man; thee
who art powerful above all other bishops, that he might commend in all
ways a thing so worthy and acceptable to God for us men.  But, whereas
we are engaged in many cares of government, being occupied by divers
occasions, three years passed without the desire of our mind being
satisfied.  And after this we chose, for the purpose of sending them to
thee, some abbots of monasteries, who should proceed to thy presence,
and offer gifts sent by us to Saint Peter, and bring us word more
distinctly of thy holy reverence’s health.  But, as they hastened on
their way, and were almost in sight of the shores of Italy, it befell
them that they struck on certain rocks near Marseilles, and were
scarcely able to deliver their own souls.  And now we have entreated a
presbyter whom thy Glory had sent as far as the city of Malaca
(*civitatem Malicitanam*) to come into our sight.  But he, detained by
bodily infirmity, has in no wise been able to reach the soil of our
kingdom.  But, as we know most certainly that he was sent by thy
Holiness, we have sent a golden cup ornamented on the outside with gems
for thy Holiness (as I trust thou wilt vouchsafe to do) to offer as
worthy of the apostle who shines the first in dignity.  For I also beg
thy Highness, when an opportunity is found, to seek us out by thy sacred
golden letters.  For how much I truly love thee I believe is not hidden,
the Lord inspiring thee, from the fecundity of thine own breast.  It is
sometimes the case that those whom tracts of land or sea divide the
grace of Christ glues together as if visibly.  For to those who do not
see thee at all in person fame discloses thy goodness.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p6"></span><span id="page_17">p. 17</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxx-Page_17"></span>Further, I commend with all veneration to
thy Holiness in Christ, Leander, the priest of the church of Hispalis,
since through him thy benevolence has been made clearly manifest to us;
and when we talk of thy life with this same bishop, we reckon ourselves
as your inferiors in regard to your good deeds.  I am delighted to hear
of thy health, most reverend and most holy man; and I beg of thy
Christian prudence that thou wouldest commend frequently in thy prayers
to our common Lord us and our people, who are ruled after God under our
government, and have been acquired by Christ in your times; that hereby
true charity to God-ward may establish in well-being those whom the
breadth of the world separates.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[16:42](2130036.htm#fr_41) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p3"></span> The genuineness of this letter is
considered doubtful.  It may have been a forgery founded on Epistle
CXXII. in this book from Gregory to Reccared.  The Latin in the original
is in many parts incorrect and ungrammatical; being such indeed
Reccared’s was not unlikely to be.  Other letters relating to the
conversion of Reccared are I. 43; IX. 121, 122.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).](2130037)
