[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130112)  [Next](2130114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXV.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p2"></span>*To Augustine, Bishop of the
Angli* <span id="fr_180"></span>[181](#fn_180) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p4"></span>Gregory to Augustine, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p5"></span>Though it is certain that for those who
labour for Almighty God ineffable rewards of an eternal kingdom are
reserved, yet we must needs bestow honours upon them, that by reason of
remuneration they may apply themselves the more manifoldly in devotion
to spiritual work.  And, since the new Church of the Angli has been
brought to the grace of Almighty God through the bountifulness of the
same Lord and thy labours, we grant to thee the use of the pallium
therein for the solemnization of mass only, so that thou mayest ordain
bishops in twelve several places, to be subject to thy jurisdiction,
with the view of a bishop of the city of London being always consecrated
in future by his own synod, and receiving the dignity of the pallium
from this holy and Apostolical See which by the grace of God I serve. 
Further, to the city of York we desire thee to send a bishop whom thou
mayest judge fit to be ordained; so that, if this same city with the
neighbouring places should receive the word of God, he also may ordain
twelve bishops, so as to enjoy the dignity of a metropolitan:  for to
him also, if our life is continued, we propose, with the favour of God,
to send a pallium; but yet we desire to subject him to the control of
thy Fraternity.  But after thy death let him be over the bishops whom he
shall have ordained, so as to be in no wise subject to the jurisdiction
of the bishop of London.  Further, between the bishops of London and
York in the future let there be this distinction of dignity, that he be
accounted first who has been first ordained.  But let them arrange by
council in common, and with concordant action, whatever things may have
to be done in zeal for Christ; let them be of one mind in what is right,
and accomplish what they are minded to do without disagreement with each
other.

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p6"></span>But let thy Fraternity have subject to
thyself under our God not only those bishops whom thou shalt ordain, and
those whom the bishop of York may ordain, but also all the priests of
Britain, to the end that they may learn the form of right belief and
good living from the tongue and life of thy Holiness, and, executing
their office well in their faith and manners, may attain to heavenly
kingdoms when it may please the Lord.  God keep thee safe, most reverend
brother.  Given on the tenth day of the Kalends of July, in the 19th
year of the empire of our lord Mauricius Tiberius, the 18th year after
the consulship of the same lord, Indiction 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[81:181](2130113.htm#fr_180) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p3"></span> In the scheme, sketched in this
letter, for the constitution of the Church in England which Gregory
seems to have contemplated being carried out in Augustine’s own day, he
shews serious ignorance of the state of things in England at the time,
and consequently of possibilities.  Among other things he appears to
have known little of the ancient British Church or of the independent
position which its bishops would be likely to assume.  Still it is
interesting to observe that the scheme in its main features—that of two
independent Metropolitans in the North and in the South, each with his
suffragan bishops under them—was after all eventually realized, and that
the present constitution of the English Church may be traced to this
letter; only that Canterbury never yielded its primitive dignity, as had
been proposed, to London.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Edilbert, King of the Angli.](2130114)
