[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130282)  [Next](2130284) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p1"></span> *<span class="c1"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Demonstration VIII.</span>*<span
class="c1"><span id="iii.ix.vi-p1.2"></span>—<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.3"></span>Of</span> <span class="sc"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.4"></span>the Resurrection of the Dead</span>.</span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p2"></span>1.  At all times controversies arise on
this matter, *how the dead shall rise and with what body they shall
come*? <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957)   For lo! the body wears
out and is corrupted; and the bones also, no doubt, as time lengthens
out over them, waste away and are not to be recognised.  And when thou
enterest a tomb in which a hundred dead men are buried, thou findest not
there an handful of dust.  And thus say those that reflect on these
things:—“We know of course that the dead shall rise; but they will be
clothed in a heavenly body and spiritual forms.  And if it is not so,
these hundred dead that were buried in one tomb, of whom after a long
time elapses there remains nothing at all there, when the dead shall be
quickened, and shall be clothed in a body and rise, unless they shall be
clothed in a heavenly body, from whence shall their body come?  For lo!
there is nothing in the tomb.”

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p4"></span>2.  Whosoever reflects thus is foolish,
and without knowledge.  When the dead were brought in, they were
something; and when they were there for a long time, they became
nothing.  And, when the time shall have come that the dead shall rise,
that nothing shall become something according to its former nature, and
a change shall be added to its nature.  O thou unwise who reflectest
thus, hear that which the blessed Apostle said when he was instructing a
foolish man like thee; for he said:—*Thou fool, the seed which thou
sowest unless it die is not quickened; and that which thou sowest is not
like that which grows up into blade, but one bare grain of wheat or
barley or some other seedling.  And to each one of the seeds is given
its own body.  But God clothes thy seed with its body as He
wills.* <span id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p6"></span>3.  Therefore, O fool, be instructed by
this, that each of the seeds is clothed in its own body.  Never dost
thou sow wheat and yet reap barley, and never dost thou plant a vine and
yet it produced figs; but everything grows according to its nature. 
Thus also the body that was laid in the earth is that which shall rise
again.  And as to this, that the body is corrupted and wastes away, thou
oughtest to be instructed by the parable of the seed; that as the seed,
when it is cast into the earth, decays and is corrupted, and from its
decay it produces and buds and bears fruit.  For the land that is
ploughed, into which seed is not cast, produces not fruit, even if that
land drinks in all the rain.  So the grave in which the dead are not
buried, from it men shall not issue forth in the quickening of the dead,
though the full voice of the trumpet should <span id="page_376">p.
376</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_376"></span>sound within it.  And
if, as they say, the spirit of the just shall ascend into heaven and put
on a heavenly body, they are in heaven.  And He Who raises the dead
dwells in heaven.  Then when our Saviour shall come, whom shall He raise
up from the earth?  And why did He write for us:—*The hour shall come,
and now is, that the dead also shall hear the voice of the Son of Man,
and they shall live and come forth from their tombs*? <span
id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959)   For the heavenly body will not come
and enter into the tomb, and again go forth from it.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p8"></span>4.  For thus say those who are stubborn
in folly:—Why did the Apostle say,—*Different is the body which is in
heaven from that which is on earth*? <span
id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960)   But he that hears this, let him hear
also the other thing that the Apostle said:—*There is an animal body,
and there is a spiritual body*. <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961)
  And again he said:—*We shall all sleep, but we shall not all be
changed*. <span id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962)   And again he
said:—*This that shall die must clothe itself with that that shall not
die, and this which is corruptible must clothe itself with that which is
incorruptible.* <span id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963)   Again he
said:—*We must all stand before the judgment-seat of Christ, that every
man may be rewarded in his body for everything that before time was done
by him, whether good or evil.* <span id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964)
* *Again he said:—*What shall those do that are baptized for the dead? 
For if the dead rise not, why are they baptized for them?* <span
id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965)   Again he said:—*If there is no
resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not risen, and if Christ is not
risen then your faith is vain, and our preaching.  And if so we are
found false witnesses in that we testified of God, that He raised up
Christ, Whom He raised not up*. <span id="fr_966"></span>[967](#fn_966)
  Therefore, if the dead rise not, there is no judgment.  And if there
is no judgment, then *let us eat and drink, for to-morrow we shall die. 
Be not deceived; evil communications corrupt good purposes.* <span
id="fr_967"></span>[968](#fn_967)   Now as to this that the Apostle
said:—*The body that is in heaven is different from that which is on the
earth*, let this word be thus understood by thee.  When the body of the
just shall arise and be changed, it is called heavenly.  And that which
is not changed is called earthly, according to its earthly nature.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p17"></span>5.  But hear, my beloved, another word
like this, which the Apostle has spoken.  For he said:—*The spiritual
man judgeth everything, and he is judged by no one*. <span
id="fr_968"></span>[969](#fn_968)   And again he said:—*They that are
spiritual are spiritually minded, and they that are carnal are carnally
minded*. <span id="fr_969"></span>[970](#fn_969)   And again he
said:—*When we were in the flesh, the weaknesses of sins were working in
our members that we might become fruit for death*. <span
id="fr_970"></span>[971](#fn_970)   Again he said:—*If the Spirit of
Christ is in you, ye are spiritual*. <span
id="fr_971"></span>[972](#fn_971)   All these things the Apostle said,
while he was clothed in the flesh but was doing the works of the
Spirit.  Thus also in the Resurrection of the dead, the righteous shall
be changed, and the earthly form shall be swallowed up in the heavenly,
and it shall be called a heavenly body.  And that which shall not be
changed, shall be called earthly.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p22"></span>6.  Concerning then this Resurrection of
the dead, my beloved, according to my power I will instruct thee.  For
from the beginning God created Adam; moulded him from the dust of the
earth, and raised him up.  For if, while Adam was not, He made him from
nothing, how much easier now is it for Him to raise him up; for lo! as a
seed he is sown in the earth.  For if God should do those things that
are easy for us, His works would not appear mighty to us.  For lo! there
are amongst men artificers who make wonderful things, and those who are
not artificers of the works stand and wonder how they were done; and the
work of their fellows is difficult in their eyes.  How much more should
not the works of God be as a marvel!  But for God this was no great
thing, that the dead should be quickened.  Before seed was sown in the
earth, the earth produced that which had not been cast <span
id="page_377">p. 377</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_377"></span>into
it.  Before it had conceived, it bore in its virginity.  How then is
this difficult, that the earth should cause to spring up again what had
been cast into it, and after conception should bear?  And lo! her
travail-pains are near; as Isaiah said, *Who hath seen anything like
this and who hath heard such things as these? that the earth should
travail in one day, and a people should be born in one hour*? <span
id="fr_972"></span>[973](#fn_972)   For Adam unsown sprang up;
unconceived he was born.  But lo! now his offspring are sown, and wait
for the rain, and shall spring up.  And lo! the earth teems with many,
and the time of her bringing forth is at hand.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p24"></span>7.  For all our fathers, in hope of the
Resurrection and the quickening of the dead, were looking forward and
hastening; as the blessed Apostle said, *If the righteous had been
looking forward to that city from which Abraham went forth, they would
have had an opportunity of again turning back and to it; but they showed
that they were looking forward to one better than it, namely that which
is in heaven*. <span id="fr_973"></span>[974](#fn_973)   They were
looking forward to be released and to go speedily thither.  And from
that which I am writing unto thee, understand and observe that they were
looking forward to the Resurrection.  For Jacob our father, when he was
dying, bound Joseph his son with an oath, and said to him, *Bury me in
the tomb of my fathers, with Abraham and Sarah and Isaac and
Rebecca.* <span id="fr_974"></span>[975](#fn_974)   And why, my beloved,
did Jacob not wish to be buried in Egypt, but with his fathers?  He
showed beforehand, that he was looking forward to the quickening of the
dead; that, when the Resurrection shout should be raised and the sound
of the trumpet (heard), he might rise up near to his fathers, and might
not at the time of the Resurrection be mingled with the wicked who shall
return to Sheol and to punishment.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p27"></span>8.  Thus also Joseph bound his brethren
by an oath, <span id="fr_975"></span>[976](#fn_975) and said to
them:—*When God shall remember you, take up my bones from hence with
you.*  And according to the word of Joseph his brethren did, and kept
the oath a hundred and twenty-five years.  At that time when the hosts
of the Lord went out from the land of Egypt, then Moses took up the
bones of Joseph when he went forth. <span
id="fr_976"></span>[977](#fn_976)   And the bones of the righteous man
were more precious and better in his estimation than the gold and the
silver that the children of Israel took from Egypt when they spoiled
them.  And the bones of Joseph were forty years in the wilderness; and
at that time when Moses fell asleep, he gave them in inheritance to
Joshua the son of Nun.  The bones of Joseph his father were better in
his estimation than all the spoil of that land which he subdued.  And
why did Moses give the bones of Joseph to Joshua?  Clearly, because he
was of the tribe of Ephraim the son of Joseph.  And he buried them in
the land of promise, that there might be in that land a treasure, (even)
that of the bones of Joseph (that were) buried therein.  And also at the
time that Jacob was dying, he blessed his tribes, and showed them what
would happen to them *in the latter days*, and said to Reuben:—*Reuben,
thou art my firstborn, might and the beginning of my strength.  Thou
hast gone astray; as water, thou shalt not abide, because thou wentest
up father’s bed.  Truly thou defilest my couch and wentest up*. <span
id="fr_977"></span>[978](#fn_977)   From the time that Jacob fell asleep
until the time that Moses fell asleep two hundred and thirty-three years
elapsed.  Then Moses wished by his priestly power to absolve Reuben from
his transgression and sin, in that he had lain with Bilhah, his father’s
concubine; that when his brethren should rise, he might not be cut off
from their number.  So he said in the beginning of his blessing:—*Reuben
shall live and not die, and shall be in the number.* <span
id="fr_978"></span>[979](#fn_978)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p32"></span>9.  And also when the time came that
Moses should sleep with his fathers, he was grieved and distressed, and
he sought of his Lord and entreated that he might pass over <span
id="page_378">p. 378</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_378"></span>to the
land of promise.  And why, my beloved, was the righteous Moses grieved
because he did not enter into the land of promise?  Clearly, because he
wished to go and be buried with his fathers, and not be buried in the
land of his adversaries, in the land of Moab.  For the Moabites hired
Balaam the son of Beor to curse Israel.  Therefore Moses wished not to
be buried in that land, lest the Moabites should come and take vengeance
on him by taking up and casting forth the bones of that righteous man. 
And the Lord performed an act of grace towards Moses.  For He brought
him forth to Mount Nebo, and showed him all the land, making it pass
before him.  And as Moses gazed upon all the land, and gazed upon the
mountain of the Jebusites where the Tabernacle was to dwell, he was
grieved and wept when he saw the tomb in Hebron where his fathers
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were buried, that he should not be buried with
them, nor his bones cast upon their bones, that he might rise along with
them in the Resurrection.  But when he had seen all the land, his Lord
encouraged him and said to him, “I myself will bury thee and hide thee,
and none shall know thy tomb.”  *So Moses died according to the word of
the mouth of the Lord, and He buried him in a valley in the land of Moab
over against Beth-Peor, where Israel had sinned, and no man has known
his sepulchre unto this day*. <span id="fr_979"></span>[980](#fn_979)  
Two goodly benefits did his Lord accomplish for Moses in not making
known his tomb to the children of Israel.  He rejoiced that his
adversaries should not know it, and cast forth his bones from his tomb;
and in the second place, that the children of his people should not know
it, and make his tomb a place of worship, for he was accounted as God in
the eyes of the children of his people.  And understand this, my
beloved, from hence, that when he left them and went up to the mountain,
they said: <span id="fr_980"></span>[981](#fn_980) —*As for this Moses
who brought us up from the land of Egypt we know not what has become of
him.*  So they made them a calf and worshipped it, and they remembered
not God Who brought them up from Egypt by means of Moses *with a mighty
hand and an uplifted arm*. <span id="fr_981"></span>[982](#fn_981)  
Because of this, God had respect unto Moses, and did not make known his
tomb; lest, if He should make known his tomb, the children of his people
might go astray, and make them an image, and worship it and sacrifice to
it, and so by their sins disquiet the bones of the righteous man.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p36"></span>10.  And Moses again proclaimed clearly
the Resurrection of the dead, for he said as from the mouth of his
God:—*It is I that cause to die and it is I that make alive.* <span
id="fr_982"></span>[983](#fn_982) * *Again also Hannah said thus in her
prayer:—*The Lord causeth to die and quickeneth; He bringeth down to
Sheol and bringeth up (therefrom).* <span
id="fr_983"></span>[984](#fn_983)   The Prophet Isaiah also said
thus:—*Thy dead shall live, O Lord, and their bodies shall rise, and
they that sleep in the dust shall awake and praise thee.* <span
id="fr_984"></span>[985](#fn_984) * *David also proclaimed, saying:—*For
lo! for the dead Thou workest wonderful things, and the mighty ones
shall rise and make confession unto Thee, and those that are in the
tombs shall recount Thy grace.* <span id="fr_985"></span>[986](#fn_985)
  And how *in the tombs* shall they *recount the grace* of God? 
Clearly, when they shall hear the sound of trumpet summoning them, and
the cornet sounding forth from on high, and the earthquake that shall
be, and the tombs that shall be opened, then the mighty ones shall arise
in glory, and recount one to another in the tombs, saying, “Great is the
grace that is performed towards us.  For our hope was cut off; yet
(another) hope has arisen for us.  We were imprisoned in darkness, and
have come forth to the light.  We were sown in corruption, and have
risen in glory.  We were buried naturally, and we have risen
spiritually.  Again we were sown in weakness, and have risen in power.” 
This is the grace that they shall tell of in the tombs.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p41"></span>11.  And it was not only in words, my
<span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iii.ix.vi-Page_379"></span>beloved, that God said:—“I quicken the
dead,” but also in deeds He showed it to us by many testimonies; that we
might have no hesitation (concerning it).  He showed it beforehand
plainly; for through Elijah a wonder was manifested, (in proof) that the
dead shall live and that they that sleep in the dust shall arise.  For
when the son of the widow died, Elijah raised him up and gave him to his
mother.  And Elisha again, his disciple, raised up the son of the
Shunamite; that the testimony of two might be established and confirmed
for us.  And also again when the children of Israel cast a dead man on
the bones of Elisha, that dead man revived and arose.  And the witness
of three is certain.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p42"></span>12.  And also through the Prophet
Ezekiel, the Resurrection of the dead was manifestly shown, when God
brought him forth to the valley and showed him many bones, and made him
pass by them round about them, and said to him:—*Son of Man, will these
bones live?*  And Ezekiel said to Him: <span
id="fr_986"></span>[987](#fn_986) —*Thou knowest, O Lord of lords.*  And
the Lord said to him:—*Prophesy, O Son Man, over these bones; prophesy
and say to the dry bones, Hear the word of the Lord of lords.*  And when
he had caused them to hear those words, there was a shaking and a noise,
and the bones were gathered together, even those that were crushed into
pieces and broken.  And when the Prophet saw them, he was astonished,
for they came together from all sides, and each bone received its
fellow, and each joint approached its fellow-joint, and they ordered
themselves, one on another.  And their dryness was made moist, and the
joints were united by the ligatures, and the blood grew warm in the
arteries, and skin was stretched over the flesh, and hair grew up
according to its nature.  But they lay prostrate and there was no breath
in them.  Then again He commanded the Prophet, and said to
him:—*Prophesy unto the spirit and say to it, Come, O spirit, from the
four winds, and breathe upon these slain men that they may live.*  And
when he caused them to hear this second word, *the spirit entered into
them, and they revived and stood up upon their feet, a very great host.*

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p44"></span>13.  But why, my beloved, was it that
those dead did not rise because of the one word (spoken) through
Ezekiel, and why was not their resurrection, both of bones and spirit,
accomplished (through that one word)?  For lo! by one word the bones
were fitted together, and by another the spirit came.  It was in order
that full perfection might be left for our Lord Jesus Christ, Who with
one utterance and one word will raise up at the last day every body of
man.  For it was not the word that was insufficient, but its bearer was
inferior.  And with regard to this, understand and observe that when
Elijah also, and Elisha his disciple, raised the dead, it was not with
one word that they raised them up, but after they had prayed and made
intercession and delayed no little time, then they arose.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p45"></span>14.  And our Lord Himself, in that His
first Coming raised up three that were dead, that the testimony of three
might be made sure.  And He raised up each one of them with two words
each.  For when He raised up the widow’s son, He called him twice,
saying to him, *Young man, young man, arise.* <span
id="fr_987"></span>[988](#fn_987)   And he revived and arose.  And
again, He twice called the daughter of the chief of the synagogue,
saying to her, *Damsel, damsel, arise*. <span
id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988)   And her spirit returned and she
arose.  And after Lazarus died, when He came to the place of burial.  He
prayed earnestly and cried with a loud voice and said, *Lazarus, come
forth.* <span id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989)   And he revived and
came out of his tomb.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p49"></span>15.  And concerning all this that I have
explained to thee, that those dead persons were raised with two words
each, it was because for them two resurrections take place; that former
one, and the second, that which is to come.  For in that resurrection in
which all men shall rise, none shall fall again; and by one word of God,
sent forth <span id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iii.ix.vi-Page_380"></span>through Christ, all *the dead shall rise
in the twinkling of an eye, speedily*.  For He Who brings it to pass is
not feeble or insufficient.  For with one word of summons He will cause
all the ends (of the world) to hear, and all that are laid (in the
grave) shall leap forth and rise up; and no word shall return void to
Him that sent it forth, but as it is written in the Prophet
Isaiah, <span id="fr_990"></span>[991](#fn_990) who compares the word to
rain and snow; for he said:—*As the rain and the snow come down from
heaven and return not thither, but fertilize the earth and cause it to
bring forth and give seed to the sower and bread for food, so shall the
word be that goes forth from My mouth, and it shall not return to Me
void, but shall accomplish whatsoever I desire and shall accomplish that
for which I shall have sent it.*  For the rain and the snow do not
return to heaven, but accomplish in the earth the will of Him that sends
them.  So the word that He shall send through His Christ, Who is Himself
the Word and the Message, shall return to Him with great power.  For
when He shall come and bring it, He shall come down like rain and snow,
and through Him all that is sown shall spring up and bear righteous
fruit, and the word shall return to His sender; but not in vain shall
His going have been, but thus shall He say in the presence of His
sender:—*Behold, I and the children that the Lord has given Me.* <span
id="fr_991"></span>[992](#fn_991)   And this is the voice through which
the dead shall live.  Concerning it our Redeemer testifies, saying:—*The
hour shall come when even the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of
Man and shall come forth from their tombs*; <span
id="fr_992"></span>[993](#fn_992) as it is written, *In the beginning
was* the voice, that is *the Word*. <span
id="fr_993"></span>[994](#fn_993)   Again He said, *The Word became a
body and dwelt amongst us.* <span id="fr_994"></span>[995](#fn_994)  
And this is that voice of God which shall sound from on high and raise
up all the dead.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p55"></span>16.  Again, our Lord explained to the
Sadducees with regard to the resurrection of the dead, when they brought
forth to Him the parable of the woman who was married to seven husbands,
and said to Him:—*Lo! the woman was wife of them all; in the
Resurrection of the dead, to which of them shall she be wife?* <span
id="fr_995"></span>[996](#fn_995) * *Then our Lord said to them:—*Ye do
greatly err, and ye know not the Scriptures nor the power of God.  For
they who are worthy of that world and of that Resurrection from the
dead, they that are men do not take wives, nor are the women married to
husbands, for they cannot die, for they are as the angels of God and
children of the Resurrection.  But concerning the Resurrection, that the
dead shall rise, have ye not read in the Scripture that God said to
Moses out of the bush, “I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of
Jacob.”  And lo! He is not God of the dead, for they all are alive unto
Him.* <span id="fr_996"></span>[997](#fn_996)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p58"></span>17.  And there are those who even while
they live are dead unto God.  For He laid a commandment on Adam and said
to him, *In the day that thou shalt eat of the tree, thou shalt surely
die*. <span id="fr_997"></span>[998](#fn_997)   And after he had
transgressed the commandment, and had eaten, he lived nine hundred and
thirty years; but he was accounted dead unto God because of his sins. 
But that it may be made certain for thee that a sinner is called dead
even when he lives, I will make it clear to thee.  For thus it is
written in Ezekiel the Prophet, *As I live, saith the Lord of lords, I
desire not the death of the dead sinner.* <span
id="fr_998"></span>[999](#fn_998)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p61"></span>18.  Moreover our Lord said to that man
who said to Him:—*Let me go and bury my father, and I will come to
Thee*. <span id="fr_999"></span>[1000](#fn_999)   And our Lord said to
him, *Let the dead bury their dead, but go thou, preach the Kingdom of
God.*  But how is this word understood by thee, my beloved?  Didst thou
ever see the dead burying their dead?  Or how shall a dead man arise to
bury another dead man?  But receive this explanation from me, that a
sinner, while he is living, is dead unto God; and a righteous man,
though dead, is alive unto God.  For such death is a sleep, as <span
id="page_381">p. 381</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_381"></span>David
said, *I lay down and slept, and awoke*. <span
id="fr_1000"></span>[1001](#fn_1000)   Again Isaiah said, *They that
sleep in the dust shall awake*. <span
id="fr_1001"></span>[1002](#fn_1001)   And our Lord said concerning the
daughter of the chief of the synagogue, *The damsel is not dead, but
sleeping a slumber*. <span id="fr_1002"></span>[1003](#fn_1002)   And
concerning Lazarus, He said to His disciples:—*Our friend Lazarus has
fallen asleep; but I go to waken him*. <span
id="fr_1003"></span>[1004](#fn_1003)   And the Apostle said:—*We shall
all sleep, but we shall not all be changed*. <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[1005](#fn_1004)   And again he said:—*Concerning
those that sleep, be ye not grieved.* <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[1006](#fn_1005)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p69"></span>19.  But it is right for us to be afraid
of the second death, <span id="fr_1006"></span>[1007](#fn_1006) that
which is full of weeping and gnashing of teeth, and of groanings and
miseries, that which is situated in outer darkness.  But blessed shall
be the faithful and the righteous in that Resurrection, in which they
expect to be awakened and to receive the good promises made them.  But
as for the wicked who are not faithful, in the Resurrection woe to them,
because of that which is laid up for them!  It would be better for them
according to the faith which they possess, were they not to arise.  For
the servant, for whom his Lord is preparing stripes and bonds, while he
is sleeping desires not to awake, for he knows that when the dawn shall
have come and he shall awake, his Lord will scourge and bind him.  But
the good servant, to whom his Lord has promised gifts, looks expectantly
for the time when dawn shall come and he shall receive presents from his
Lord.  And even though he is soundly sleeping, in his dream he sees
something like what his Lord is about to give him, whatsoever He has
promised him, and he rejoices in his dream, and exults, and is
gladdened.  As for the wicked, his sleep is not pleasant to him, for he
imagines that lo! the dawn has come for him, and his heart is broken in
his dream.  But the righteous sleep, and their slumber is pleasant to
them, in the day-time and the night-time, and they take no thought of
all that long night, and like one hour is it accounted in their eyes. 
Then in the watch of the dawn they awake with joy.  But as for the
wicked, their sleep lies heavy upon them, and they are like a man who is
laid low by a great and deep fever, and tosses on his couch hither and
thither, and he is terrified the whole night long, which lengthens
itself out for him, and he fears the dawn when his Lord will condemn
him.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p71"></span>20.  But our faith thus teaches, that
when men fall asleep, they sleep this slumber without knowing good from
evil.  And the righteous look not forward to their promises, nor do the
wicked look forward to their sentence of punishment, until the Judge
come and separate those whose place is at His right hand from those
whose place is at His left.  And be thou instructed by that which is
written, that when the Judge shall sit, and the books be opened before
Him and the good and evil deeds recited, then they that have wrought
good works shall receive good rewards from Him Who is good; and they
that have done evil deeds shall receive evil penalties from the just
Judge.  For towards the good, He changes not His nature; and He proves
Himself just because He justly condemns many.  But towards the evil He
changes His nature, in that world where grace is lost in justice; and He
proves Himself just to all.  And grace will not be joined with justice
towards them.  Like as grace avails not (to remedy) detriment, so
justice (avails not to assist) grace.  For grace is far from the judge,
but justice urges the judge.  If grace be nigh to any one, let him turn
himself towards it, and not deliver himself into the hands of justice,
lest it condemn him, exacting for his shortcomings the penalty at his
hands.  And if grace be far from any one, justice will bring him to the
trial, and by it he will be condemned, and go away to the torment.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p72"></span>21.  But hear, my beloved, this proof
that retribution shall take place at the end.  For when the Shepherd
divides His flock and sets some on His right hand and some on His <span
id="page_382">p. 382</span> <span
id="iii.ix.vi-Page_382"></span>left, <span
id="fr_1007"></span>[1008](#fn_1007) until He shall have acknowledged
the service of the good, then He will cause them to inherit the kingdom;
and until He shall have rebuked the evil and they are condemned, then He
will send them to the torment.  And as to them that sent messengers
after the King, saying, *This man shall not be king over us*, <span
id="fr_1008"></span>[1009](#fn_1008) when He shall receive the kingdom
and return, then His adversaries shall be slain before Him.  And the
labourers who hastened and were wearied in the vineyard, shall not
receive the reward till the labour shall cease.  And the traders who
received the money, when the Lord of the money shall come, then shall He
exact the usury.  And the virgins who, while waiting for the bridegroom,
slumbered and slept because He delayed to come, when they shall hear the
cry, then they shall awake and trim their lamps; and they that are wise
shall enter in; and the foolish shall be shut out.  And they who were
before us in entering the faith, without us *shall not be made
perfect*. <span id="fr_1009"></span>[1010](#fn_1009)

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p76"></span>22.  From all these things, understand
thou, my beloved, as it has been made certain for thee, that as yet no
one has received his reward.  For the righteous have not inherited the
kingdom, nor have the wicked gone into torment.  The Shepherd has not as
yet divided His flock.  And lo! the workmen enter into the vineyard, and
as yet have not received the reward.  And lo! the merchants are trading
with the money.  And as yet their Lord has not come to take the
account.  And the King has gone to receive the Kingdom, but as yet He
has not returned the second time.  And those virgins that are waiting
the bridegroom are sleeping up to the present time, and are awaiting the
cry when they will awake.  And the former men who toiled in the faith
until the last men shall come, shall not be made perfect.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p77"></span>23.  But they who are babes in
understanding say:—“If no one has received his reward, why did the
Apostle say, *When we shall depart from the body, we shall be present
with the Lord?*” <span id="fr_1010"></span>[1011](#fn_1010)   But
recollect, my beloved, that I instructed thee concerning this matter in
the *Demonstration concerning Solitaries*, <span
id="fr_1011"></span>[1012](#fn_1011) that the spirit which the righteous
receive, according to its heavenly nature, goes to our Lord until the
time of the Resurrection, when it shall come to put on the body in which
it dwelt.  And at every time it has the memory of this in the presence
of God, and looks eagerly for the Resurrection of that body in which it
dwelt, as the Prophet Isaiah said about the Church of the
Gentiles:—*They that make mention of thee shall be faithful and stand
before the Lord, and thou shalt not give them rest*. <span
id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012)   But as to the wicked, they have
none to make mention of them before the Lord, because the Holy Spirit is
far removed from them, because they are animal, and are buried after the
manner of animals.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p81"></span>24.  And again, (the followers of)
doctrines, which are instruments of the Evil One, are offended by the
word which our Lord spake, *No one has ascended up to heaven but He Who
came down from heaven, the Son of Man, Who was in heaven*. <span
id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013)   And they say, “Lo! our Lord
testified that no earthly body has ascended to heaven.”  In their
ignorance they cannot apprehend the force of this.  For when our Lord
instructed Nicodemus, he did not apprehend the force of the saying. 
Then our Lord said to him:—*No one has ascended into heaven, so as to
come down and* relate to you whatsoever is there.  For *if I have spoken
unto you of those things that are in the earth, and ye believe not, how
shall ye believe if I shall speak unto you of those things which are in
heaven*? <span id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014)   For lo! no other
witness besides Me has come down from thence, to bear witness concerning
those things which are in heaven, so that ye should believe.  <span
id="page_383">p. 383</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_383"></span>For
Elijah went up thither, but he came not down along with Me to bear
witness, that the testimony of two might be sure.”

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p84"></span>25.  But as for thee, my beloved, have
no doubt as to the Resurrection of the dead.  For the living mouth (of
God) testifies:—*I cause to die and I make alive*. <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[1016](#fn_1015)   And both of them proceeded out of
one mouth.  And as we are sure that He causes to die, and we see it; so
also it is sure and worthy of belief, that He makes alive.  And from all
that I have explained to thee, receive and believe that in the day of
the Resurrection thy body shall arise in its entirety, and thou shalt
receive from our Lord the reward of thy faith, and in all that thou hast
believed, thou shalt rejoice and be made glad.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_957"></span>[375:958](2130283.htm#fr_957) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p3"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
35](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#035)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_958"></span>[375:959](2130283.htm#fr_958) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p5"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
36-38](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#036)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_959"></span>[376:960](2130283.htm#fr_959) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p7"></span> [John
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028),
[29](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_960"></span>[376:961](2130283.htm#fr_960) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p9"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
40](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#040)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[376:962](2130283.htm#fr_961) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p10"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_962"></span>[376:963](2130283.htm#fr_962) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p11"></span> [1 Cor.
15.51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[376:964](2130283.htm#fr_963) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p12"></span> [1 Cor.
15.53](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#053)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[376:965](2130283.htm#fr_964) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p13"></span> [2 Cor. v.
10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[376:966](2130283.htm#fr_965) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p14"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
29](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#029)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_966"></span>[376:967](2130283.htm#fr_966) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p15"></span> [1 Cor.
15.13-15](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#013)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_967"></span>[376:968](2130283.htm#fr_967) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p16"></span> [1 Cor.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_968"></span>[376:969](2130283.htm#fr_968) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p18"></span> [1 Cor. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_969"></span>[376:970](2130283.htm#fr_969) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p19"></span> [Rom. viii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_970"></span>[376:971](2130283.htm#fr_970) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p20"></span> [Rom. vii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_971"></span>[376:972](2130283.htm#fr_971) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p21"></span> [Rom. viii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[377:973](2130283.htm#fr_972) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p23"></span> [Is. lxvi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[377:974](2130283.htm#fr_973) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p25"></span> [Heb.
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#015),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#016)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[377:975](2130283.htm#fr_974) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p26"></span> [Gen.
49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029),
[31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[377:976](2130283.htm#fr_975) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p28"></span> [Gen. l.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#024)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[377:977](2130283.htm#fr_976) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p28.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p29"></span> [Exod. xiii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[377:978](2130283.htm#fr_977) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p29.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p30"></span> [Gen.
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p30.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[377:979](2130283.htm#fr_978) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p30.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p31"></span> [Deut. xxxiii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[378:980](2130283.htm#fr_979) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p33"></span> [Deut.
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p33.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[378:981](2130283.htm#fr_980) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p33.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p34"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p34.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[378:982](2130283.htm#fr_981) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p34.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p35"></span> [Deut. v.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#015)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p35.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[378:983](2130283.htm#fr_982) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p37"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[378:984](2130283.htm#fr_983) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p37.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p38"></span> [1 Sam. ii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#006)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p38.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[378:985](2130283.htm#fr_984) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p38.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p39"></span> [Is. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[378:986](2130283.htm#fr_985) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p39.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p40"></span> [Ps.
88:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p40.1"></span>.
(Pesh.)

<span id="fn_986"></span>[379:987](2130283.htm#fr_986) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p42.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p43"></span> [Ez. xxxvii.
1-10](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p43.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[379:988](2130283.htm#fr_987) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p45.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p46"></span> [Luke vii.
14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p46.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[379:989](2130283.htm#fr_988) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p46.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p47"></span> [Mark v.
47](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#047)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_989"></span>[379:990](2130283.htm#fr_989) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p47.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p48"></span> [John xi.
43](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#043)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p48.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[380:991](2130283.htm#fr_990) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p49.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p50"></span> [Isa.
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[380:992](2130283.htm#fr_991) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p51"></span> [Is. viii.
18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_992"></span>[380:993](2130283.htm#fr_992) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p51.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p52"></span> [John v.
25](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#025)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p52.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[380:994](2130283.htm#fr_993) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p52.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p53"></span> [John i.
1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p53.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_994"></span>[380:995](2130283.htm#fr_994) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p53.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p54"></span> [John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p54.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[380:996](2130283.htm#fr_995) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p55.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p56"></span> [Matt. xxii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#028)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[380:997](2130283.htm#fr_996) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p56.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p57"></span> [Matt. xxiii.
29-32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#029)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p57.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[380:998](2130283.htm#fr_997) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p58.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p59"></span> [Gen. ii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#017)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_998"></span>[380:999](2130283.htm#fr_998) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p59.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p60"></span> [Ezek.
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#023),
[32](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#032), [Ezek.
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#011)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p60.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[380:1000](2130283.htm#fr_999) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p61.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p62"></span> [Luke
9:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#059),
[60](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#060)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[381:1001](2130283.htm#fr_1000) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p62.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p63"></span> [Ps. iii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#004)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p63.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[381:1002](2130283.htm#fr_1001) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p63.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p64"></span> [Is. xxvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[381:1003](2130283.htm#fr_1002) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p65"></span> [Matt. ix.
26](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#026)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p65.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[381:1004](2130283.htm#fr_1003) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p66"></span> [John xi.
11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[381:1005](2130283.htm#fr_1004) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p67"></span> [1 Cor. xv.
51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[381:1006](2130283.htm#fr_1005) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p67.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p68"></span> [1 Thess. iv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p68.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[381:1007](2130283.htm#fr_1006) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p69.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p70"></span> [Rev.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011), [Rev.
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014), [Rev.
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ix.vi-p70.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[382:1008](2130283.htm#fr_1007) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p73"></span> [Matt. xxv.
32](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#032)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p73.1"></span>
*ff*.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[382:1009](2130283.htm#fr_1008) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p74"></span> [Luke xx.
9](../../../bib/kjv/luk020.htm#009)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p74.1"></span>
*ff*.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[382:1010](2130283.htm#fr_1009) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p75"></span> [Hebr. xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[382:1011](2130283.htm#fr_1010) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p77.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p78"></span> [2 Cor. v.
8](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#008)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p78.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[382:1012](2130283.htm#fr_1011) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p78.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p79"></span> See *Dem*. VI. 14.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[382:1013](2130283.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p80"></span> [Isa.
62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#007)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p80.1"></span>. 
This quotation differs widely from the Peshitto, as well as from the
Hebrew and the Septuagint.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[382:1014](2130283.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p81.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p82"></span> [John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p82.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[382:1015](2130283.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p82.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p83"></span> [John iii.
12](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#012)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p83.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[383:1016](2130283.htm#fr_1015) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p84.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p85"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039)<span id="iii.ix.vi-p85.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Demonstration X](2130284)
