[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130138)  [Next](2130140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.ix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p2"></span>To certain Bishops of Sicily.

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p3"></span>Gregory to Leo, Secundinus, John, Donus,
Lucidus, Trajan, bishops of Sicily.

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p4"></span>Even as we are admonished through the
speech of the apostles to impart one to another spiritual aids,—so, in
matters that by God’s ordering we may have to settle in virtue of the
government imposed on us for administration of the affairs of the poor,
it is fit that priestly succour be not wanting.  Accordingly in sending
the bearer of these presents, Adrian our *Chartularius* <span
id="fr_208"></span>[209](#fn_208) , to govern the patrimony of our
Church, to wit in the Syracusan district, we have thought it necessary
to commend him to your Fraternity, that, wherein custom may demand it,
you may afford him your succour, to the end that, while he is supported
by you with bodily aid for doing his work, and with the spiritual aid of
your prayers for carrying out with facility whatever he may undertake,
he may be able, God also working with him, to accomplish prosperously
what has been by us enjoined on him.  But, as for yourselves, you should
so acquit yourselves in good works before the face of Almighty God that
there be not found in your doings anything that may be smitten by the
judgment of God, or for which you may be accused by any man whatever
lying in wait against you.  For we have charged our aforesaid
*Chartularius* that, if he should come to know of any inordinate doings
on the part of our most reverend brethren the bishops, he should first
himself take them to task by private and modest admonition; and, that,
if such things are not amended, he should inform us of them speedily.

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p6"></span>Furthermore, it has been reported to us
that in the times of our predecessor of holy memory it was arranged by
the deacon Servusdei, who then had charge of the ecclesiastical
patrimony, that the priests <span id="fr_209"></span>[210](#fn_209) of
your several dioceses, when you go forth to seal infants <span
id="fr_210"></span>[211](#fn_210) , should not be immoderately
burdened.  For a certain sum had been fixed, and this, as I hear, with
your consent, to be given by the same priests for the services of the
clerks (*clericorum*).  And this, which was then approved of, is said to
be by no means kept to now.  Wherefore I admonish your Fraternity to
endeavour not to be burdensome to your subjects, and, if they have any
grievances, to abate them, seeing also that you ought not to have
departed from what had once been determined.  For you will be seeing to
your own interest both in the future and the present life, if you keep
those who have been committed to you free from grievance.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_208"></span>[97:209](2130139.htm#fr_208) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p5"></span> Adrian, who had already been commissioned
as *notarius Siciliæ* (X. 23), had now been made *rector patrimonii*,
being succeeded as notary by Pantaleo (XIII. 34).

<span id="fn_209"></span>[97:210](2130139.htm#fr_209) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p7"></span> *Sacerdotes*, meaning here apparently
parish priests, though more commonly, in Gregory’s epistles, denoting
bishops.  The abuse complained of seems to have been that of charging
priests of parishes unreasonably for the remuneration of the *clerici*
who attended the bishops on their confirmation progresses.

<span id="fn_210"></span>[97:211](2130139.htm#fr_210) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p8"></span> *Ad consignandos infantes*; i.e. for
confirmation, cf. IV. 26, note 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXII](2130140)
