[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130254)  [Next](2130256) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>Hymn VIII.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Happy are ye whose bodies have
been made to shine!*)

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p3"></span>1.  God in His mercy stooped and came
down,—to mingle His compassion with the water,—and to blend the nature
of His majesty—with the wretched bodies of men.—He made occasion by the
water—to come down and to dwell in us:—like to the occasion of
mercy—when He came down and dwelt in the womb:—O the mercies of God—Who
seeks for Himself all occasions to dwell in us!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p4"></span>2.  To the cave in Horeb He stooped and
came down,—and on Moses He caused His majesty to dwell;—He imparted His
glorious splendour to mortals.—There was therein a figure of Baptism:—He
Who came down and dwelt in it,—tempers within the water—the might of His
majesty,—that He may dwell in the feeble.—On Moses dwelt the Breath,—and
on you the Perfecting of Christ.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p5"></span>3.  That might then none could
endure;—not Moses chief of deliverers,—nor Elijah chief of zealots;—and
the Seraphin too vail their faces,—for it is the might that subdues
all.—His mercy mingled gentleness—in the water and by the oil;—that
mankind in <span id="page_277">p. 277</span> <span
id="iii.vi.ix-Page_277"></span>its weakness—might be able to stand
before Him—when covered by the water and the oil.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p6"></span>4.  The captive priests again in the
well—hid and concealed the fire of the sanctuary, <span
id="fr_513"></span>[514](#fn_513) —a mystery of that glorified
fire—which the Highpriest mingles in Baptism.—The priests took up of the
mire,—and on the altar they sprinkled it;—for its fire, the *fire* of
that well,—with the mire had been mingled;—a mystery of our bodies which
in the water—with the fire of the Holy Spirit have been mingled.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p8"></span>5.  The famous Three in Babylon—in the
furnace of fire were baptized, and came forth;—they went in and bathed
in the flood of flame, they were buffeted by the blazing billows.—There
was sprinkled on them there—the dew that *fell* from heaven;—it loosed
from off them there—the bonds of the earthly *king*.—Lo! the famous
Three went in and found a fourth in the furnace.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p9"></span>6.  That visible fire that triumphed
outwardly,—pointed to the fire of the Holy Ghost,—which is mingled, lo!
and hidden in the water.—In the flame Baptism is figured,—in that blaze
*of the furnace*.—Come, enter, be baptized, my brethren,—for lo! it
looses the bonds;—for in it there dwells and is hidden—the Daysman of
God,—Who in the furnace was the fourth.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p10"></span>7.  Two words again our Lord spake—which
in one voice agree in unison:—He said, “I am come to send fire,”—and
again, “I have a baptism to be baptized with.”—By the fire *of Baptism*
is quenched the fire,—that which the Evil One had kindled:—and the water
*of Baptism* has overcome—those waters of contention—by which he had
made trial—of Joseph who conquered and was crowned.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p11"></span>8.  Lo! the pure fire of our
Redeemer—which he kindled in mankind of His mercy!—Through His fire He
quenched that fire—which had been kindled in the defiled and
sinful.—This is the fire wherein the thorns—are burnt up and the
tares.—But happy are your bodies—that have been baptized in the
fire—which has consumed your thickets,—and by it your seeds have sprung
up to heaven!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p12"></span>9.  Jeremiah in the womb He sanctified
and taught.—But if the lowly bosom of wedlock—was sanctified in
conceiving and bringing him forth,—how much more shall Baptism
sanctify—its conception and its bringing forth—of them that are pure and
spiritual!—For there, within the womb—is the conception of all men;—but
here, out of the water,—is the birth whereof the spiritual are worthy.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p13"></span>10.  For Jeremiah though sanctified in
the womb,—they took up nails and cast him into the pit.—Holy was the
prophet in his befoulment,—for clean was his heart though he was in the
mire.—Be ye afraid, my brethren—for lo! to-day is washed away—your
secret befoulment,—and the abomination of your sins.—Turn not again to
uncleanness,—for there is *but* one cleansing of your bodies!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p14"></span>11.  The presumptuous who is baptized
and again sins,—is as the serpent that casts *its slough* and again puts
it on, that is renewed and made young, and turns again——putting on anew
*its skin* of old;—for the serpent does not—cast off its nature.—Cast ye
off the tempter—the corrupter of souls,—even the old man;—let it not
make old—the newness ye have put on!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p15"></span>12.  Elisha cast the wood into the
water, and made the heavy float and the light sink:—their natures were
exchanged in the water.—There a new thing came to pass not according to
nature.—How much easier then, O Lord,—is this for Thy grace; that in the
water should sink—transgression which is heavy,—but that the soul which
is light—should be drawn forth and raised up on high!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p16"></span>13.  Joshua, son of Nun, on Jericho—laid
a curse on its walls and a doom on its <span id="page_278">p. 278</span>
<span id="iii.vi.ix-Page_278"></span>fountains.—They whom Joshua cursed
to their destruction,—again in the mystery of Jesus have been
blessed.—There was cast into them salt,—and they were healed and
sweetened:—a mystery of this salt,—the sweet *salt* that came from
Mary,—that was mingled in the water,—whereby was healed the noisomeness
of our plagues.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p17"></span>14.  Lo! quiet waters *are* before
you,—holy and tranquil and pleasant;—for they are not the waters of
contention—that cast Joseph into the dungeon;—nor yet are they the
waters,—those *waters* of strife,—beside which the people strove,—and
gainsaid in the wilderness.—*There* are waters whereby—there is
reconciliation made with Heaven.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p18"></span>15.  Hagar saw the spring of water,—and
from it she gave drink to *her* forward *son*, him who became *as* a
wild ass in the wilderness.—Instead of that fountain of water *is*
Baptism.—In it are baptized the sons of Hagar,—and are become gentle and
peaceful.  Who has seen rams <span id="fr_514"></span>[515](#fn_514)
*like these*,—that are yoked, lo! and labour—along with tame
bullocks,—and the seed *of* their *tillage* is reaped an hundredfold!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p20"></span>16.  In the beginning the Spirit that
brooded—moved on the waters; they conceived and gave birth—to serpents
and fishes and birds.—The Holy Spirit has brooded in Baptism,—and in
mystery has given birth to eagles,—Virgins and Prelates;—and in mystery
has given birth to fishes,—celibates and intercessors; and in mystery of
serpents,—lo! the subtle have become simple as doves!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p21"></span>17.  Lo! the sword of our Lord in the
waters!—that which divides sons and fathers:—for it is the living sword
that makes—division, lo! of the living from the dying.—Lo! they are
baptized and they become—Virgins and saints,—who have gone down, been
baptized, and put on—the One Only begotten.—Lo! many have come boldly to
Him!

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p22"></span>18.  For whoso have been baptized and
put on Him—the Only begotten the Lord of the many,—has filled thereby
the place of many,—for to him Christ has become a great treasure:—for He
became in the wilderness—a table of good meats,—and He became at the
marriage feast—a fountain of choice wines.—He has become *such* to all
in all things,—by helps and healings and promises.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p23"></span>19.  Elisha was the equal of the
Watchers—in his doings, glorious and holy.—The camp of the Watchers was
round about him;—thus let Baptism be unto you,—a camp of guardians,—for
by means of it there dwells in the heart—the hope of them that are
below—and the Lord of them that are above.—Sanctify for Him your
bodies,—for where He abides, corruption comes not near.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p24"></span>20.  They are no more, the waters of
that sea—which by its billows preserved the People,—and by its billows
laid low the peoples.—Of contrary effect are the waters in Baptism.—In
them, lo! the people have life;—in them, lo! the People perishes:—for
all that are not baptized,—in the waters that give life to all,—they are
dead invisibly.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p25"></span>21.  They are no more, the waters of
that sea—which were tempestuous, and boiled against Jonah,—and plunged
into the depths the Son of Amittai.—Though he fled he was bound in the
prison-house;—*God* cast him in and bound him—in dungeon within
dungeon;—for he bound him in the sea.—and He bound him in the fish.—For
him Grace stood surety,—and she opened the prison and brought forth the
preacher.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p26"></span>22.  The Prophets have called the Most
High a fire,—“a devouring fire,” and “who can dwell with it?” <span
id="fr_515"></span>[516](#fn_515) —The People were not able to dwell in
it;—its might crushed the peoples and they were confounded.—In it, with
the unction ye have been anointed;—ye have put Him on in the water;—in
the bread ye have eaten Him;—in the wine ye have drunk Him;—in the voice
ye have heard Him;—and in the eye of the mind ye have seen Him!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_513"></span>[277:514](2130255.htm#fr_513) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p7"></span> [1 Maccab. i.
19](../../../bib/apo/ma1001.htm#019)<span id="iii.vi.ix-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_514"></span>[278:515](2130255.htm#fr_514) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p19"></span> ’Arbo=ram; ’Arboyo=Arab.

<span id="fn_515"></span>[278:516](2130255.htm#fr_515) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p27"></span> [Isa.
1:0](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#000), [Isa.
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#027)<span
id="iii.vi.ix-p27.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn IX.](2130256)
