[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130252)  [Next](2130254.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.vii-p1.1"></span>Hymn VI.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.vii-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Blessed be He Who was baptized
that He might baptize you, that ye should be absolved from your
offences.*)

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p3"></span>1.  The Spirit came down from on
high,—and hallowed the waters by His brooding.—In the baptism of
John,—*He* passed by the rest and abode on One:—but now He has descended
and abode,—on all that are born of the water.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p4"></span>2.  Out of all that John baptized,—on
One it was that the Spirit dwelt:—but now He has flown and come
down,—that He may dwell on the many;—and as each after each comes up,—He
loves him and abides on him.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p5"></span>3.  A marvel *it* is that surpasses
all!—To the water He went down and was baptized.—The seas declared it
blessed,—that river wherein Thou wast baptized:—even the waters that
were in heaven envied,—because they were not worthy to be Thy bath.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p6"></span>4.  A marvel *it* is, O my Lord, now
also,—that while the fountains are full of water,—it is the water of
baptism,—that alone is able to atone.—Mighty is the water in the
seas,—yet is it too weak for atonement.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p7"></span>5.  Thy might, O my Lord, if it
abides,—within the humble it exalts him;—like as royalty if it
abide—within the desert gives it peace.—Water by Thy might has
triumphed—over sin, for Life has encompassed it.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p8"></span>6.  The sheep exulted when they saw—the
hand draw nigh to baptize them.—Receive, O ye sheep, your sealing; enter
and be mingled in the flock!—for more than over all the flock,—over you
rejoice the Watchers to-day.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p9"></span>7.  The Angels and the Watchers
rejoice—over that which is born of the Spirit and of water:—they rejoice
that *by* fire and *by* the Spirit,—the corporeal have become
spiritual.—The Seraphins who sing “Holy” rejoice,—that they who are made
holy have been increased.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p10"></span>8.  For lo! the Angels rejoice—over one
sinner if he repent:—how much more do they now rejoice—that in all
churches and congregations,—lo! Baptism is bringing forth—the heavenly
from the earthly!

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p11"></span>9.  The baptized when they come up are
sanctified;—the sealed when they go down are pardoned.—They who come up
have put on glory;—they who go down <span id="page_274">p. 274</span>
<span id="iii.vi.vii-Page_274"></span>have cast off sin.—Adam put off
his glory in a moment;—ye have been clothed with glory in a moment.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p12"></span>10.  A house that is of dust when it
has fallen,—by means of water can be renewed:—the body of Adam that was
of dust,—which had fallen by water has been renewed.—Lo! the priests as
builders—afresh renew your bodies.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p13"></span>11.  A great marvel is this of the
wool,—that it can take every dye,—as the mind *takes* every
discourse.—By the name of its dye it is called;—as ye who were—baptized
*when* “Hearers,”—have gained the name of “Recipients.”

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p14"></span>12.  The common waters he
sanctified—*even* Elisha through the Name that is secret.—In them washed
the leper openly,—and was cleansed by the Power that is secret:—the
leprosy was done away in the water, as transgressions in Baptism.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p15"></span>13.  To-day, lo! your offences are
blotted out,—and your names are written down.—The priest blots out in
the water;—and Christ writes down in Heaven.—By the blotting out and the
writing down—lo! doubled is your rejoicing.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p16"></span>14.  Lo! mercy has dawned to-day;—and
from bound to bound it stretches:—the sun has sunk and mercy has
dawned.—Justice has drawn in her wrath; Grace has spread forth her
love,—lo! she pardons and quickens freely.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p17"></span>15.  The sheep that beforetime were in
*the fold*—lo! they hasten forth to greet—the new lambs that have been
added *to it*.—*They are* white *and* are clad in white;—within and
without white *are* your bodies as your vestments.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p18"></span>16.  From every mouth “Blessed *are*
ye,”—on every side “Blessed *are* ye.”—Sin from you is driven out,—and
the Holy Spirit on you is dwelling.—The Evil One is become sad of
countenance;—the Good *God* makes glad your countenance.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p19"></span>17.  The gift that ye have received
freely,—cease not from watching over it:—this pearl if it shall be
lost—cannot again be sought out,—for it is like to virginity—which if it
be lost is not to be found.

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p20"></span>18. May ye from all defilement—be kept
by the power of your white robes!—and he whose freedom has defiled
itself—may it be able to wash itself clean by his weeping!—For me who am
servant of the community—may the supplication of the community win
pardon!

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p21"></span>19.  To the author who has toiled in
words,—be reconciliation in rest!—to the teacher who has toiled with
voice,—be forgiveness through grace!—to the priest who has toiled in
baptizing,—let there come the crown of righteousness!

<span id="iii.vi.vii-p22"></span>20.  From every mouth with one
consent,—of those beneath and those above,—Watchers, Cherubin, and
Seraphin,—the baptized, the sealed, and the hearers,—let each of us cry
aloud and say,—“Glory to the Lord of our feasts!”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn VII.](2130254.md)
