[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130148)  [Next](2130150) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.xix-p1.1"></span>Epistle XLII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p4"></span>We return great thanks to Almighty God,
that in the mouth of the heart a sweet savour of charity is experienced,
when that which is written is fulfilled, *As cold water to a thirsty
soul, so is good news from a far country* ([Prov. xxv.
25](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#025)<span id="ii.ix.xix-p4.1"></span>). 
For I had previously been greatly disturbed by a letter from Boniface
the *Chartularius*, my *responsalis*, who dwells in the royal city,
saying that your to me most sweet and pleasant Holiness had suffered
from failure of bodily sight.  From this letter I was smitten by heavy
sorrow.  But suddenly, by the prospering grace of our Creator and
Redeemer, I received the epistle of your Blessedness, and, learning that
the bodily trouble of which I had heard was cured, I rejoiced
exceedingly, since gladness of heart succeeded which was as great as the
bitterness of the sadness which had come before.  For we know that, with
the help of Almighty God, your life is the health of many.  For sailors
sail secure through the waves when an instructed and skilful steersman
sits at the helm.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p5"></span>Moreover in my joy for your health I have
this additional cause for exultation, that I have learnt how through
your mouth the enemies of the Church are decreased in number, and the
flocks of the Lord multiplied.  For through the ploughshare of your
tongue heavenly corn increases daily, and is multiplied in the garners
on high; so that in you we rejoice that what is written is fulfilled,
*Where there is much increase, there is manifest the strength of the
oxen* ([Prov. xiv. 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004)<span
id="ii.ix.xix-p5.1"></span>).  Whence we gather plainly that the more
you bring back fugitives to the service of Almighty God, the more merit
you have with Him.  And by how much the more merit you receive, the more
fully can you obtain what you ask for.  I beseech you therefore to pray
the more earnestly for me a sinner, since both pain of body, and
bitterness of heart, and immense ravages of mortality among the swords
of so many barbarians, afflict me exceedingly.  In the midst of all
these things it is not temporal but eternal consolation that I require,
which of myself I am not able to win by prayer, but which I trust that I
shall obtain by the intercessions of your Blessedness.  Last year I
received no letters from your Holiness, and I was much distressed.  It
is true that your blessing, which you sent without a letter, was both
given and received.  But, since your tongue delights me more than your
gifts, I was less gratified than I might have been by what was given. 
But I directed our common son, the deacon Epiphanius, to write to
Alexander and Isidore, deacons of your most holy Church, to acknowledge
the receipt of what had been sent.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p6"></span>I wrote to you, further, that I had got
ready large pieces of timber for making masts and rudders, but that the
small ship which had come could not carry them; and you have since
written nothing in reply.  Wherefore, if you need them, write to our
common son Boniface, whom we are now sending as our representative
(*responsalem*) to the royal city, that he may send me word that they
may be prepared, and that they may be found ready when your Blessedness
shall send for them.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p7"></span>Furthermore, we have sent you a small
cross, in which is inserted a blessing from the chains of your lovers
the apostles Saint Peter and Saint Paul; and let this be continually
applied to your eyes, seeing that many miracles have been wont to be
wrought through this same blessing.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p8"></span>May Almighty God inspire the heart of
your Blessedness to be careful to pray for me continually, and may He
protect you and all yours with His right hand, and after many courses of
years bring you to the heavenly kingdom.

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p9"></span>We have received, corresponding with your
description of them, the blessings <span
id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) of Saint Mark, sent to us by your most
blessed Fraternity, and we return thanks for your kindness, since from
these outward things we learn what you are towards us inwardly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_227"></span>[102:228](2130149.htm#fr_227) <span
id="ii.ix.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xix-p10"></span> *Eulogias*, apparently in the same
sense as *benedictiones*, used elsewhere as denoting presents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XIV](2130150)
