[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130083)  [Next](2130085) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.ii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p2"></span>To Conon, Abbot of Lirinus (Lerins).

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p3"></span>Gregory to Conon, Abbot of the Monastery
of Lirinus <span id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) .

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p5"></span>The carefulness of persons in authority
is the safeguard of subjects, since one who watches over what is
entrusted to him avoids the snares of the enemy.  But how skilful thou
art in ruling the brethren, and how earnestly watchful in keeping guard
over them, we have learnt from the report of our most reverend brother
and fellow-bishop Mennas <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) .  And
as our hearing of the unwary remissness of thy predecessor often
saddened us, so the carefulness of thy foresight gladdens us, since
there is no doubt that the safeguard of thy earnestness is of profit for
reward to thee, and for example to do good to others.

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p7"></span>But, since the more our adversary knows
himself to be guarded against on all sides, the more he seeks to break
in by hidden ways, and strives with cunning art to overthrow his
opponent, let the watchfulness of thy Love ever kindle itself to more
ardent care; and so, with God’s help, fortify all beforehand, that the
ravening wolf, running about hither and thither, may have no place for
entering among the Lord’s sheep.  Be it then thine earnest endeavour,
the grace of our Redeemer aiding thee, to prohibit and in all ways guard
those who are committed to thee from gluttony, from pride, from avarice,
from idle speaking, and from all uncleanness; that by so much the
greater reward may accrue to thee from the government committed to thee
as thy subjects, through thy vigilance, shall be conquerors against the
iniquities of the adversary.

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p8"></span><span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.vii.ii-Page_53"></span>Wherefore let the good feel thee sweet,
the bad a corrector.  And even in correction know thou that this order
should be observed, that thou shouldest love persons and visit faults;
lest, if thou shouldest perchance be disposed to act otherwise,
correction should pass into cruelty, and thou shouldest destroy those
whom thou desirest to amend.  For thou oughtest so to cut away a sore as
not to run the risk of ulcerating what is sound; lest, if thou press in
the steel more than the case requires, thou injure him whom thou art in
haste to benefit.  For let thy very sweetness be wary, not remiss; and
let thy correction be loving, not severe.  But let the one be so
seasoned by the other that both the good may have, in loving, something
to beware of, and the bad, in fearing, something to love.

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p9"></span>Attend carefully to these things, most
beloved son; earnestly observe them; that, when through such management
thou shalt have given back safe to God those whom thou hast received
from Him, thou mayest be counted worthy in the day of eternal
retribution to hear Him say, *Well done, thou good and faithful
servant:  because thou hast been faithful in a few things, I will set
thee over many things:  enter into the joy of thy Lord* ([Luke xix.
17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017)<span id="ii.vii.ii-p9.1"></span>). 
Further, we desire that our son Columbus the presbyter, who is commended
to thy Charity by his own merits, may advance in thy love from our
commendation also.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_125"></span>[52:126](2130084.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.vii.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p4"></span> See VI. 56, note 7.  The abbot Stephen,
addressed in that letter, was probably the predecessor of Conon.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[52:127](2130084.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.vii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.ii-p6"></span> He was bishop of Telona (*Toulon*).  See
XI. 58.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Serenus, Bishop of Massilia (Marseilles).](2130085)
