[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130084)  [Next](2130086.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIII.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p2"></span>*To Serenus, Bishop of Massilia
(Marseilles)* <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127.md) .

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p4"></span>Gregory to Serenus, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p5"></span>The beginning of thy letter so showed
thee to have in thee the good will that befits a priest as to cause us
increased joy in thy Fraternity.  But its conclusion was so at variance
with its commencement that such an epistle might be attributed, not to
one, but to different, minds.  Nay, from thy very doubts about the
epistle which we sent to thee it appears how inconsiderate thou art. 
For, hadst thou paid diligent attention to the admonition which in
brotherly love we gave thee, not only wouldest thou not have doubted,
but have perceived what in priestly seriousness it was thy duty to do. 
For Cyriacus <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128.md) formerly abbot, who
was the bearer of our letter, was not a man of such training and
erudition as to dare, as thou supposest, to make up another, nor for
thee to entertain this suspicion of falseness against his character. 
But, while putting aside consideration of our wholesome admonitions,
thou hast come to be culpable, not only in thy deeds, but in thy
questionings also.  For indeed it had been reported to us that, inflamed
with inconsiderate zeal, thou hadst broken images of saints, as though
under the plea that they ought not to be adored <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129.md) .  And indeed in that thou forbadest
them to be adored, we altogether praise thee; but we blame thee for
having broken them.  Say, brother, what priest has ever been heard of as
doing what thou hast done?  If nothing else, should not even this
thought have restrained thee, so as not to despise other brethren,
supposing thyself only to be holy and wise?  For to adore a picture is
one thing, but to learn through the story of a picture what is to be
adored is another.  For what writing presents to readers, this a picture
presents to the unlearned who behold, since in it even the ignorant see
what they ought to follow; in it the illiterate read.  Hence, and
chiefly to the nations <span id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130.md) , a
picture is instead of reading.  And this ought to have been attended to
especially by thee who livest among the nations, lest, while inflamed
inconsiderately by a right zeal, thou shouldest breed offence to savage
minds.  And, seeing that antiquity has not without reason admitted the
histories of saints to be painted in venerable places, if thou hadst
seasoned zeal with discretion, thou mightest undoubtedly have obtained
what thou wert aiming at, and not scattered the collected flock, but
rather gathered together a scattered one; that so the deserved renown of
a shepherd might have distinguished thee, instead of the blame of being
a scatterer lying upon thee.  But from having acted inconsiderately on
the impulse of thy feelings thou art said to have so offended thy
children that the greatest part of them have suspended themselves from
thy communion.  When, then, wilt thou bring wandering sheep to the
Lord’s fold, not being able to retain those thou hast?  Henceforth we
exhort thee that thou study even now to be careful, and restrain thyself
from this presumption, and make haste, with fatherly sweetness, with all
endeavour, with all earnestness, to recall to thyself the minds of those
whom thou findest to be disjoined from thee.

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p9"></span>For the dispersed children of the Church
<span id="page_54">p. 54</span> <span
id="ii.vii.iii-Page_54"></span>must be called together, and it must be
shewn then by testimonies of sacred Scripture that it is not lawful for
anything made with hands to be adored, since it is written, *Thou shalt
adore the Lord thy God, and him only shalt serve* ([Luke iv.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#008)<span id="ii.vii.iii-p9.1"></span>.md). 
And then, with regard to the pictorial representations which had been
made for the edification of an unlearned people in order that, though
ignorant of letters, they might by turning their eyes to the story
itself learn what had been done, it must be added that, because thou
hadst seen these come to be adored, thou hadst been so moved as to order
them to be broken.  And it must be said to them, If for this instruction
for which images were anciently made you wish to have them in the
church, I permit them by all means both to be made and to be had.  And
explain to them that it was not the sight itself of the story which the
picture was hanging to attest that displeased thee, but the adoration
which had been improperly paid to the pictures.  And with such words
appease thou their minds; recall them to agreement with thee.  And if
any one should wish to make images, by no means prohibit him, but by all
means forbid the adoration of images.  But let thy Fraternity carefully
admonish them that from the sight of the event portrayed they should
catch the ardour of compunction, and bow themselves down in adoration of
the One Almighty Holy Trinity.

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p10"></span>Now we say all this in our love of Holy
Church, and of thy Fraternity.  Be not then shaken, in consequence of my
rebuke, in the zeal of uprightness, but rather be helped in the
earnestness of thy pious administration.

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p11"></span>Furthermore, it has come to our ears
that thy Love gladly receives bad men into its society; so much so as to
have as a familiar friend a certain presbyter who, after having fallen,
is said to live still in the pollution of his iniquity <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131.md) .  This indeed we do not entirely
believe, since he that receives such a one does not correct wickedness,
but rather appears to give licence to others to perpetrate the like
things.  But, lest haply by any subornation or dissimulation he should
prevail on thee to receive him and keep him still in favour, it becomes
thee not only to drive him further from thee, but also in all ways to
cut away his excesses with priestly zeal.  But as to others who are
reported to be bad, study to restrain them from their badness by
fatherly exhortation, and to recall them to the way of rectitude.  But,
if (which God forbid) you seem not to profit them at all by salutary
admonition, these also thou wilt take care to cast off far from thee,
lest, from their being received, their evil doings should seem not at
all to displease thee, and lest not only they themselves should remain
unamended, but others also should be corrupted in consequence of thy
reception of them.  And consider how execrable it is before men, and how
perilous before the eyes of God, if vices should seem to be nurtured
through him whose duty it is to punish crimes.  Attend therefore to
these things diligently, most beloved brother; and study so to act as
both wholesomely to correct the bad and to avoid breeding offence in the
minds of thy children by associating with evil men.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_127"></span>[53:128](2130085.htm#fr_127.md) <span
id="ii.vii.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p3"></span> Other epistles to Serenus of Marseilles
are VI. 52, IX. 105, XI. 58.  In IX. 105 he had already been reproved
for his inconsiderate zeal in breaking pictures of saints, which is the
main subject of the present letter.  His reply to the former letter, of
which he had affected to suspect the genuineness, seems to have called
forth this longer and severer admonition.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[53:129](2130085.htm#fr_128.md) <span
id="ii.vii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p6"></span> Cyriacus, once abbot of Gregory’s own
monastery of St. Andrew on the Cœlian at Rome, is named in the former
epistle to Serenus (IX. 105) as its bearer.  As to the cause of his
being sent at that time into Gaul, see notes to IX. 105, and IX. 109.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[53:130](2130085.htm#fr_129.md) <span
id="ii.vii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p7"></span> See IX. 105.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[53:131](2130085.htm#fr_130.md) <span
id="ii.vii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p8"></span> *Gentibus*.  The term *gentes* was used
not only to denote Gentiles as usually understood, and pagan races as
distinct from Christians, but also nations outside the Roman republic.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[54:132](2130085.htm#fr_131.md) <span
id="ii.vii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iii-p12"></span> Cf. Ep. LV. in this book to Virgilius
of Arles, the metropolitan of Serenus, in which this laxity on the part
of the latter is alluded to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXV](2130086.md)
