[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130197)  [Next](2130199.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxii-p1.1"></span>Hymn XXI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p2"></span>1.  John who was a torch, laid bare and
rebuked the wanton ones:  they made haste and quenched the torch, that
they might let loose the desire of their lust.  Be thou a lamp in
brightness, and make the works of darkness cease, that whensoever thy
doctrine shines, no man may dare at its rising, to give ear to the lusts
of darkness.  *R., Blessed be He Who made thee our lamp!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p3"></span>2.  A great blessing was hidden in it,
even in the reproof of Elijah.  Elisha ministered unto him and sought, a
twofold reward of his ministration.  Twofold glory it gave to him, for
in double measure was he clad with his virtues.  Thou who hast loved the
reproof of Valgesh thy master rich in gifts, mayest thou inherit the
treasure of his wisdom!  *R., Blessed be He Who makes thy Doctrine
rich!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p4"></span>3.  May greediness be overcome by thy
fasting even as by the fasting of Daniel!  May lust be confounded before
thy body, like as it was confounded before Joseph!  May lust of money be
overcome by thee! like as it was overcome before Simeon, Mayest thou
bind on earth even as he, and loose on high after his likeness; for thy
faith *is* even as his!  *R., Blessed is He Who committed to thee His
ministry!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p5"></span>4.  Thy chastity be as Elisha’s, and
thy celibacy Elijah’s, the covenant with thine eyes as Job’s, thy tender
mercies as David’s; without envy as Jonathan, thy firmness *as*
Jeremiah’s, thy gentleness the Apostles’!  Thine be the ancient things
of the prophets, thine the new things of the Apostles.  *R., Blessed be
He Who filled thee with their treasures!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p6"></span>5.  Be a crown to the priesthood, and
in thee be the ministry made to shine!  Be a brother to the elders,
likewise an overseer to the deacons; be a master to youth, a staff and a
hand to old age; be a wall to the consecrated virgins.  In thy
conversation may the covenant prevail, and the Church in thy comeliness
be adorned.  *R., Blessed be He Who chose thee to be priest!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p7"></span>6.  In thy poverty be brought to
nought, the hateful custom of the house of Gehazi; in thy sanctity be
abolished, the abominable custom of the house of Eli; in thy unity be
done away, the treacherous greeting of the lips of Iscariot the
deceiver!  Pour forth all our thought, and form it anew from the
beginning!  *R., Blessed be He Who in thy crucible refines us!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p8"></span>7.  In thy conversation let Mammon be
put to shame, who has been lord over our freedom!  Let the disease be
done away from us, which is customary with us and pleasant to us;
abolish the causes that have maintained, customs that are full of harm! 
Evil things have possessed us through custom:  let good things possess
us through custom!  Be thou, O Lord, the cause of help to us.  *R.,
Blessed be He Who chose Thee in order to our life!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p9"></span>8.  Let evil customs be cut off:  let
not the Church possess wealth; that she be sufficed let her possess
souls, and if thus she be sufficed *let it* be in marvellous measure! 
And let not her deceased be buried in the cutting off of hope
heathenishly, with vestments and wailing and lamentation; for the living
is clothed in raiment, but the deceased his all is a coffin.  *R.,
Blessed be He Who to our dust turns us again!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p10"></span>9.  A cause of evil is the lust, also
the <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-Page_192"></span>greediness of the house of Eli, and the
thievishness of the house of Gehazi, and the reviling of Nabal.  These
hateful well-springs close thou up, lest there be a great outpouring,
and there come from it defilement, and even thou be reached by its
overflow.  The Lord restrain their outpourings!  *R., Blessed be He Who
dried up their over-flowings!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p11"></span>10.  For the old man commit speech to
him; for the young enjoin silence on him; for the stranger who comes in
unto thee, learns of thee from thy discipline, namely who speaks first,
and who second and third:  and if every man keeps his mouth, and every
man knows his degree, they will call thee happy.  *R., Our Lord perform
thy desire!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p12"></span>11.  Let the voice of thy truth be
single and thy assumed voices without number; the image of truthfulness
on thy heart, and on thy face all aspects, sadness, gladness, and
feebleness.  To him that errs show that thou art wrathful, to him that
is chaste show that thou art glad.  Be single towards the Godhead, and
to mankind be manifold.  *R., Blessed be He Who with all men is all
things!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p13"></span>12.  If thou hearest an evil report,
from truthful men that deceive not, pour forth tears that thou mayst
quench the fire that burns in others; let them that are wise pray with
thee, and appoint thou a fast for them that have knowledge, and let thy
dwelling be in mourning, for him who is lost in sin, that he may turn
back in repentance.  *R., Blessed be He Who found the sheep that was
lost!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p14"></span>13.  To every man give not thy ear,
lest liars overwhelm thee; to every man lend not thy foot, lest vile
ones misguide thee; to every man give not thy soul, lest the insolent
trample thee.  Keep thy hand from the false man, lest he gather thorns
into thy hand.  Be far off and near at hand.  *R., Blessed be He Who is
near though far!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p15"></span>14.  Lo the fame of the new king,
resounds and comes into the world!  To the spoiled he is a comfort, and
to the spoilers a terror.  On the covetous vomiting has come, that they
may render up all that they have swallowed.  Let them be put to fear
from before thee also, that between a priest and a righteous king, the
former customs may be done away.  *R., Blessed be He Who was angry, and
turns and has mercy!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p16"></span>15.  There is that finds opportunity
and ventures, and there is that forces and compels his will.  One thinks
that judgment is reserved, and another that it is not to be at all. 
There is that steals and quenches his thirst, and there is that steals
and thirsts to steal.  The rich steal and the poor; but the hungry steal
by measure, and the full steal without measure.  *R., Blessed be He Who
has searched out all wills!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p17"></span>16.  But now has He given opportunity,
and every man has shown his will, of what kind it is and to what it is
like, and what he has chosen for himself rather than what.  He has
removed temptation from every man, lest even he who is not hateful
should deny him.  He has given us opportunity that we may understand,
that better think this power *is* chastisement which profits much.  *R.,
Blessed is He Who for our profit rebukes us!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p18"></span>17.  For He wills not by compulsion,
to cast his yoke on our neck; He gave us opportunity and we waxed proud,
that so when we rebelled and were punished, we might love His light
yoke, might choose His pleasant staff.  Our rest is very wearisome to
us, for in His compulsion is restfulness, and in His yoke is
lightening.  *R., Blessed be He Whose labour is pleasantness!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p19"></span>18.  The whole world like a body, had
fallen into a heavy sickness; for in the fever of heathenism, it burned
and pined and fell.  The right hand of tender mercy touched it, and
dealt with its soul in pity; and cut off speedily its heathenism, for
that was the cause of its sickness, and it was purged and sweated and
restored.  *R., Glory be to the Hand that has healed!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p20"></span>19.  The land shall have peace in thy
days, for it has seen thee that thou art full of peace.  In thee shall
the churches be <span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxii-Page_193"></span>built, and shall be clothed with their
ornaments, and their books shall be opened in them, and their tables
shall be spread, and their ministers shall be adorned; from them shall
go up thanksgiving, *as* first fruits to the Lord of peace.  *R.,
Blessed is He Who revives our Churches!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p21"></span>20.  Let thy prayer go up to heaven,
with it let reconciliation go up!  May the Lord of Heaven rain down His
blessings upon our \[   \], and His consolations upon our afflictions,
and His gathering upon our dispersion:  may He waken His jealousy with
His love; may His righteousness avenge our disgrace, may His grace blot
out our iniquity!  *R., Blessed is He Who blesses His flock!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p22"></span>21.  The *first* priest and first
king, even as if depicted each in the other, were balanced as if in
scales.  So too Valgesh and so too the son of that king, for they were
gentle and calm.  May these latter be like each to other; the priests be
shining lights, the king be glowing lights, likewise illustrious
judges!  *R., Blessed be He Who has enlightened our souls!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p23"></span>22.  From the king’s office laws, and
from the priest’s office propitiations.  That both should be mild is
hateful; that both should be strong is grievous.  Let one be strong and
one be tender; in prudence and in discretion, let fear with mercy be
mingled.  Let our priesthood be tender, likewise our king strong.  *R.,
Blessed be He Who has mingled our helps!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxii-p24"></span>23.  Let the priests pray for the
kings, that they may be a wall to mankind!  From beside the kings be
victory; and from beside the priests faith!  May victory save *our*
bodies, and faith *our* souls!  May kings put an end to war; priests put
an end to strife!  May disputing and quarrelling cease!  *R., Blessed be
the Son of Him Who gives peace to all!  Praise to Thee for Thy gift!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XXII-XXXIV](2130199.md)
