[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130012)  [Next](2130014.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.vii-p1.1"></span>Epistle VII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.vii-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
(Cagliari).

<span id="ii.v.vii-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.vii-p4"></span>It has been laid down by the plain
definition of the law that those who go into a monastery for the purpose
of entering on monastic life are no longer at liberty to make wills, but
that their property passes into possession of the same monastery <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) .  This being known to almost all, we have
been greatly surprised by the notification of Gavinia, abbess of the
monastery of Saints Gavinus and Luxorius, to the effect that Sirica,
abbess of her monastery, after receiving the office of government, had
made a will leaving certain legacies.  And when we enquired of the
Solicitude of your Holiness why you endured that property belonging to
the monastery should be detained by others, our common son Epiphanius,
your archpresbyter, being present before us, replied that the said
abbess had up to the day of her death refused to wear the monastic
dress, but had continued in the use of such dresses as are used by the
presbyteresses <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md) of that place.  To
this the aforesaid Gavinia replied that the practice had come to be
almost lawful from custom, alleging that the abbess who had been before
the above-written Sirica had used such dresses.  When, then, we had
begun to feel no small doubt with regard to the character of the
dresses, it appeared necessary for us to consider with our legal
advisers, as well as with other learned men of this city, what was to be
done with regard to law.  And they, having considered the matter,
answered that, after an abbess had been solemnly ordained by the bishop,
and had presided in the government of a monastery for many years until
the end of her life, the character of her dress might attach blame to
the bishop for having allowed it so to be, but still could not prejudice
the monastery, but that her property of manifest right belongs to the
same place from the time of her entering it and being constituted
abbess.  And so since she \[*i.e. the abbess Gavinia*\] asserts that a
guest-house (*xenodochium*) retains possession unduly of the property
unlawfully devised, we hereby exhort you, both the monastery and the
guest-house itself being situate in your city, to make provision with
all care and diligence, to the end that, if this possession is derived
from no previous contract, but from the bequest of the said Sirica, it
be restored to the said monastery without dispute or evasion.  But, if
by any chance it is said to have accrued from another contract, either
let your Fraternity, having ascertained the truth between the parties,
determine as legal order may seem to demand, or let them by mutual
consent choose arbitrators, who may be able to decide between their
allegations.  And whatever be appointed by them, let it be so observed
under your care that no grudge may remain between the venerable places,
which ought by all means to be cherished in mutual peace and concord. 
Wherefore all other things which are detained under the will of the
above-named Sirica, seeing that none of them is permitted by legal
sanction, must needs be carefully restored to the possession of the
monastery through the priestly care of your Fraternity:  for it is
plainly laid down by the imperial constitutions that what has been done
contrary to the laws should not only be inoperative, but also be held as
not having been done at all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[4:9](2130013.htm#fr_8.md) <span
id="ii.v.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vii-p5"></span> Cf. I. 44, p. 92, note 2.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[4:10](2130013.htm#fr_9.md) <span
id="ii.v.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vii-p6"></span> *Presbyteræ*.  So the wives of presbyters
who had been married before their ordination were called.  So in Canon
XIX. of the second council of Tours, “Si inventus fuerit presbyter cum
sua presbytera,” and Canon XXI. of Council of Auxerre, “Non licet
presbytero, post acceptam benedictionem, in uno lecto cum presbytera sua
dormire.”  Or deaconesses may possibly be meant, one designation of whom
in Greek was <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.vii-p6.1"></span>πρεσβύτιδες</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To the Bishops of Sardinia.](2130014.md)
