[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130052)  [Next](2130054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xlvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle CVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p2"></span>To Syagrius, Bishop.

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Syagrius, Bishop of
Augustodunum (*Autun*).

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p4"></span>Mistress of all good things is charity,
which savours of nothing extraneous, nothing rough, nothing confused;
which so exercises and strengthens hearts that nothing is heavy, nothing
difficult, but all that is done becomes sweet.  Since, then, it is its
peculiar quality to foster things that are concordant, to preserve
things that are united, to join together things that are dissociated, to
set right things that are wrong, and to consolidate all other virtues by
the bulwark of its own perfection, whosoever grafts himself into its
roots neither falls away from greenness, nor becomes empty of fruits,
because effective work loses not the moisture of fecundity.  And so I am
much <span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span
id="ii.v.xlvii-Page_28"></span>delighted with thee, and rejoice with
thee in the Lord, most beloved brother, for that I find thee, by the
testimony of many, so endowed with this same charity that thou both
thyself becomingly exhibitest what befits a priest, and laudably shewest
an example for imitation to others.

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p5"></span>Inasmuch, then, as in the work of
preaching (which after long thought I have taken care to supply to the
nation of the Angli through Augustine, then provost (*præpositum*) of my
monastery, and now our brother and fellow-bishop), I have found thee to
be, as was right, so solicitous, devoted, and in all ways helpful, as to
lay me under a great debt to thee in this matter, therefore moved by the
consideration of so great an obligation, I cannot bear to put aside thy
Fraternity’s petition, lest I should appear towards thee unprofitable. 
Consequently, according to the tenor of thy request, we have provided
under God for thy being dignified by the use of the pallium <span
id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68) , to be worn within thy church, in the
celebration of mass only.  Nevertheless we have decided that it should
be given thee only on condition of thy first promising to amend by the
definition of a synod the things that we have ordered to be corrected;
for we certainly deem it fit that, with the gravity of mind in which by
the mercy of God we have learnt that thou excellest, a more
distinguished adornment of outward apparel should accrue to thee;
especially as we think that thou hast asked for it, not with a view to
the pomp of needless elation but with regard to the character and
dignity of thy Church.  And, lest in this vestment we should seem to be
bestowing as it were a bare bounty, we have taken thought at the same
time for the granting of this also;—that, while the Metropolitan has in
all respects his place and dignity preserved to him, the Church of
Augustodunum should be next after the Church of Lugdunum (*Lyons*), and
should claim to itself this place and rank by the indulgence of our
authority.  But as to the other bishops, we decree that they shall take
their places according to the date of their ordination, whether for
sitting in council, or for subscribing, or in any other matter, and
shall claim to themselves the prerogative of their several ranks:  for
it seems to us consonant to reason that with the use of the pallium we
should together with it, as we have said, bestow some privileges.

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p7"></span>But, since with augmentation of dignity
the sense of responsibility ought also to increase, that the adornments
of action may agree with the decoration of vestments, your Fraternity
should exercise yourself the more earnestly in all your pursuits.  Be
vigilant with regard to the doings of those who are under you; let your
example be their instruction, and your life their teacher.  By the
exhortation of your tongue let them learn what to fear, and be taught
what to love; that, when thou givest up the talents entrusted to thee
with multiplied gain, in the day of retribution thou mayest be counted
worthy to hear, *Well done, good and faithful servant:  enter thou into
the joy of thy lord* ([Matth. xxv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023)<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p7.1"></span>).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[28:69](2130053.htm#fr_68) <span
id="ii.v.xlvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvii-p6"></span> Cf. IX. 11, 109.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Brunichild, Queen of the Franks.](2130054)
