[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130274)  [Next](2130276) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.viii.iii-p1.1"></span>On Admonition and Repentance.</span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p2"></span>1.  Not of compulsion is the doctrine;
of free-will is the word of life.  Whoso is willing to hear the
doctrine, let him cleanse the field of his will that the good seed fall
not among the thorns of vain enquirings.  If thou wouldst heed the word
of life, cut thyself off from evil things; the hearing of the word
profits nothing to the man that is busied with sins.  If thou willest to
be good, love not dissolute customs.  First of all, trust in God, and
then hearken thou to His law.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p3"></span>2.  Thou canst not hear His words,
while thou dost not know thyself; and if thou keepest His judgments
while thy understanding is aloof from Him, who will give thee thy
reward?  Who will keep for thee thy recompense?  Thou wast baptised in
His Name; confess His Name!  In the Persons and in the naming, Father
and Son and Holy Spirit, three Names and Persons, these three shall be a
wall to thee, against divisions and wranglings.  Doubt not thou of the
truth, lest thou perish through the truth.  Thou wast baptised from the
water; thou hast put on Christ in His naming; the seat of the Lord is on
thy person and His stamp on thy forehead.  See that thou become not
another’s, for other Lord hast thou none.  One is He Who formed us in
His mercy; one is He Who redeemed us on His cross.  He it is Who guides
our life; He it is Who has power over our feebleness; He it is Who
brings to pass our Resurrection.  He rewards us according to our works. 
Blessed is he that confesses Him, and hears and keeps His commandments! 
Thou, O man, art a son of God Who is high over all.  See that thou vex
not by thy works the Father Who is good and gracious.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p4"></span>3.  If thou art wroth against thy
neighbour, thou art wroth against God; and if thou bearest anger in thy
heart, against thy Lord is thy boldness uplifted.  If in envy thou
rebukest, wicked is all thy reproof.  But if charity dwell in thee, thou
hast on earth no enemy.  And if thou art a true son of peace, thou wilt
stir up wrath in no man.  If thou art just and upright, thou wilt not do
wrong to thy fellow.  And if thou lovest to be angry, be angry with the
wicked and it will become thee; if to wage war thou seekest, lo! Satan
is thy adversary; if thou desirest to revile, against the demons display
thy curses.  If thou shouldst insult the King’s image, thou shalt pay
the penalty of murder; and if thou revilest a man, thou revilest the
image of God.  Do honour to thy neighbour, and lo! thou hast honoured
God.  But if thou wouldst dishonour Him, in wrath assail thy neighbour!

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p5"></span>4.  *This is the first
Commandment,—Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart and thy
soul, and with thy might* according as thou art able.  The sign that
thou lovest God, is this, that thou lovest thy fellow; and if thou
hatest thy fellow, thy hatred is towards God.  For it is blasphemy if
thou <span id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iii-Page_331"></span>prayest before God while thou art
wroth.  For thy heart also convicts thee, that in vain thou multipliest
words:  thy conscience rightly judges that in thy prayers thou profitest
nought.  Christ as He hung on the height of the tree, interceded for His
murderers; and thou (who art) dust, son of the clay, rage fills thee at
its will.  Thou keepest anger against thy brother; and dost thou yet
dare to pray?  Even he that stands on thy side, though he be not
neighbour to thy sins, the taint of iniquity reaches unto him, and his
petition is not heard.  Leave off rage and then pray; and unless thou
wouldst further provoke, restrain anger and so shalt thou supplicate. 
And if he (the other) is not to encounter thee in fury, banish rage from
that body, because it is holden with lusts.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p6"></span>5.  Thou hast a spiritual nature; the
soul is the image of the Creator; honour the image of God, by being in
agreement with all men.  Remember death, and be not angry, that thy
peace be not of constraint.  As long as thy life remains to thee,
cleanse thy soul from wrath; for if it should go to Sheol with thee, thy
road will be straight to Gehenna.  Keep not anger in thy heart; hold not
fury in thy soul; thou hast not power over thy soul, save to do that
which is good.  Thou art bought with the blood of God; <span
id="fr_620"></span>[621](#fn_620) thou art redeemed by the passion of
Christ; for thy sake He suffered death, that thou mightest die to thy
sins.  His face endured spitting, that thou mightest not shrink from
scorn.  Vinegar and gall did He drink, that thou mightest be set apart
from wrath.  He received stripes on His body, that thou mightest not
fear suffering.  If thou art in truth His servant, fear thy holy Lord;
if thou art His true disciple, walk in thy Master’s footsteps.  Endure
scorn from thy brother, that thou mayest be the companion of Christ. 
Display not anger against man, that thou be not set apart from thy
Redeemer.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p8"></span>6.  Thou art a man, the dust of the
earth, clay, kinsman of the clod; thou art the son of the race of
beasts.  If thou knowest not thy honour; separate thy soul from animals,
by works and not by words.  If thou lovest derision, thou art altogether
as Satan; and if thou mockest at thy fellow, thou art the mouth of the
Devil; if against defects and flaws, in (injurious) names thou
delightest, Satan is not in creation but his place thou hast seized by
force.  Get thee far, O man, from this; for it is altogether hurtful;
and if thou desirest to live well, sit not with the scorner, lest thou
become the partner of his sin and of his punishment.  Hate mockery which
is altogether (the cause of weeping), and mirth which is (the cause of)
cleansing.  And if thou shouldst hear a mocker by chance, when thou art
not desiring it, sign thyself with the cross of light, and hasten from
thence like an antelope.  Where Satan lodges, Christ will in nowise
dwell; a spacious dwelling for Satan is the man that mocks at his
neighbour; a palace of the Enemy is the heart of the mocker.  Satan does
not desire to add any other evil to it.  Mockery is sufficient for him
to supply the place of all.  Neither his belly nor yet his purse can
(the sinner) fill with that sin of his.  By his laughter is the wretch
despoiled, and he knows not nor does he perceive it.  For his wound,
there is no cure; for his sickness, there is no healing; his pain,
admits no remedy; and his sore, endures no medicine.  I desire not with
such a one to put forth my tongue to reprove him:  enough for him is his
own shame; sufficient for him is his boldness.  Blessed is he that has
not heard him; and blessed is he that has not known him.  Be it far from
thee, O Church, that he should enter thee, that evil leaven of Satan!

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p9"></span>7.  Narrow is the way of life, and
broad the way of torment; prayer is able to bring a man to the house of
the kingdom.  This is the perfect work; prayer that is pure from
iniquity.  The righteousness of man is as nothing accounted.  The work
of men, what is it?  His labour is altogether vanity. <span
id="fr_621"></span>[622](#fn_621)   <span id="page_332">p. 332</span>
<span id="iii.viii.iii-Page_332"></span>Of Thee, O Lord, of Thy grace it
is that in our nature we should become good.  Of Thee is righteousness,
that we from men should become righteous.  Of Thee is the mercy and
favour, that we from the dust should become Thy image.  Give power to
our will, that we be not sunk in sin!  Pour into our heart memory, that
at every hour we may know Thy honour!  Plant Thou truth in our minds,
that we perish not among doubts!  Occupy our understanding with Thy law,
that it wander not in vain thoughts!  Order the motions of our members,
that they bring no hurt upon us!  Draw thou near to God, that Satan may
flee from thee.  Cast out passions from thy heart, and lo! thou hast put
to flight the enemy.  Hate thou sins and wickedness, and Satan at once
will have fled.  Whatsoever sins thou servest, thou art worshipping
secret idols.  Whatsoever transgressions thou lovest, thou art serving
demons in thy soul.  Whensoever thou strivest with thy brother, Satan
abides in peace.  Whensoever thou enviest thy fellow, thou givest rest
to Devils.  Whensoever thou tellest the shortcoming of others who are
not present, thy tongue has made a harp for the music of the devil. 
Whensoever hatred is in thy soul, great is the peace of the Deceiver. 
Whensoever thou lovest incantations, thy labour is altogether of the
left hand. <span id="fr_622"></span>[623](#fn_622)   If thou lovest
unseemly discourse, thou preparest a feast for demons.  For this is the
worship of idols, the working of the lusts (of the flesh).

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p12"></span>8.  If so be thou givest a gift in
pride, this is not of God.  If thou art lifted up by reason of thy
knowledge, thou hast denied the grace of God.  If thou art poor and
proud, lo! thy end is in thy torment.  If thou art haughty and needy,
lo! thy need is toward thy destruction.  If thou art sick and criest
out, lo! thy trouble is full of harm.  If thou art in need of food, yet
thy mind longs for riches; thy distress is with the poor, but thy
torment with the rich.  If thou shalt look unchastely, and shalt desire
thy neighbour’s wife, lo! thy portion shall be with the adulterers, and
thy hell with the fornicators.  *Let thine own fountain be for thyself,
and drink waters from thy well.  Let thy fountains be for thyself alone,
and let not another drink with thee*. <span
id="fr_623"></span>[624](#fn_623)   Require purity of thy body as thou
requirest of thy yoke-fellow.  Thou wouldst not have her commit
lewdness, the wife of thy youth, with another man; commit not thou
lewdness with another woman, the wife of a different husband.  Let the
defilement of her be hateful in thine eyes; keep aloof from it
altogether.  Chastity beseems the wife; purity is as her adornment; law
becomes the husband; justice is the crown for his head.  Desire not thou
the bed of thy neighbour lest another desire thy bed.  Preserve purity
in thy marriage, that thy marriage may be holy.  His conscience reproves
the man, who corrupts the wife of his neighbour.  He fears, and deceives
through terror, whoso has engaged in fornication.  Darkness is dearer to
him than light, whose manner of life is not pure.  Every hour he stands
in dread, who commits adultery secretly.  The adulterer is also a thief
who breaks into houses in darkness.  The very place reproves him, where
he does the evil and wickedness.  He enters the chamber and sins; in the
darkness he does his will.  The time will come when it shall be
disclosed, when his secret deeds shall be manifested.  With what eyes
dost thou look towards God in prayer?  What hands dost thou raise when
thou askest pardon?  Be ashamed and dismayed for thyself, that thou art
void of understanding.  If when thy neighbour see thee, thou art ashamed
and dismayed, how much more shouldst thou be ashamed before God Who sees
all?  Thou art like the sow, <span id="fr_624"></span>[625](#fn_624) thy
companion, that wallows altogether in mire.  Even in seeing, thou mayest
sin, if thy mind is not watchful; and in hearing thou mayest transgress,
if thou dost not guard thy hearing.  The fornicator’s heart waxes wanton
through speech that is full of uncleanness.  <span id="page_333">p.
333</span> <span id="iii.viii.iii-Page_333"></span>The passion hidden in
the mind, sight and hearing awaken it.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p15"></span>9.  He puts on garments of shame who
desires to commit fornication, that from the lust of raiment, lewdness
may enter and dwell in his heart.  Make thou not snares of thy garments
for that which is openly wanton.  Speak not a word in craftiness, nor
dig thy neighbour’s well.  Look not after the harlot; be not snared by
the beauty of her face.  She is even as the dog that is mad, yea, much
more bold than it.  Modesty is removed from her face, she knows not what
shame is.  With spitting accept her person; with reviling meet herself;
with a rod pursue her like a dog, for she is like one, and to be
compared with such.  Reject the sweetness of her words lest thou fall
into her net.  She empties purses and wallets, and her gains are without
number.  Flee from her, for she is the daughter of vipers, that she tear
not in pieces thy whole body.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p16"></span>10.  Thou shalt not slander any man,
lest they call thee Satan.  If thou hatest the name, go not near to the
act; but if thou lovest the act, be not angry at the name.  Count
thyself rebuked first of all by the beasts and birds, how that every
kind cleaves to its kind; and so agree thou with thy yokefellow. 
Rejoice not in men’s dishonour, that thou become not a Satan thyself. 
If evil should happen to him that hates thee, see thou rejoice not, lest
thou sin.  If thine adversary should fall, be thou in pain and
mourning.  Keep thy heart with all diligence, <span
id="fr_625"></span>[626](#fn_625) that it sin not in secret; for there
is to be a laying bare of thoughts and of actions.  Employ thy hands in
labour, and let thy heart meditate in prayer.  Love not vain discourse,
for discourse that shall be profitable alike to the soul and the body
lightens the burden of thy labour.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p18"></span>11.  Does the poor man cry at thy
door?  Arise and open for him gladly:  refresh him when he is wearied;
sustain his heart, for it is sad.  Thou knowest by experience the
affliction of poverty:  receive not others in thy house, and drive not
out the beggar.  Have thou also a law, a comely law for thy household. 
Establish an order that is wise, that the abjects laugh not at thee.  Be
careful in all thy doings, that thou be not a sport for fools; be
upright and prudent, and both simple and wise. <span
id="fr_626"></span>[627](#fn_626)   Let thy body be quiet and cheerful,
thy greeting seemly and simple; thy discourse without fault, thy speech
brief and savoury; thy words few and sound, full of savour and
understanding.  Speak not overmuch, not even words that are wise; <span
id="fr_627"></span>[628](#fn_627) for all things that are over many,
though they be wise are wearisome.—To them of thy household be as a
father.  Amongst thy brethren esteem thyself least, and inferior amongst
thy fellows, and of little account with all men.  With thy friend keep a
secret; to those that love thee be true.  See that there be no
wrangling; the secrets of thy friends reveal not, lest all that hear
thee hate thee and esteem thee a mischiefmaker.  With those that hate
thee wrangle not, neither face to face nor yet in thy heart.  No enemy
shalt thou have but Satan his very self.  Give counsel to the wife thou
hast wedded; give heed to her doings; as stronger thou art answerable
that thou shouldst sustain her weakness.  For weak is womankind, and
very ready to fall.  Be thou as a hawk, when kindled (to anger), but
when wrath departs from thee, be gladsome and also firm, in the blending
of diverse qualities.  Keep silence among the aged; to the elders give
due honour.  Honour the priests with diligence, as good stewards of the
household.  Give due honour to their degree, and search not out their
doings.  In his degree the priest is an angel, but in his doings a man. 
By mercy he is made a mediator, between God and mankind.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p21"></span>12.  Search not out the faults of
men; reveal not the sin of thy fellow; the shortcomings of thy
neighbours, in speech of the mouth repeat not.  Thou art not judge in
<span id="page_334">p. 334</span> <span
id="iii.viii.iii-Page_334"></span>creation, thou hast not dominion over
the earth.  If thou lovest righteousness, reprove thy soul and thyself. 
Be thou judge unto thine own sins, and chastener of thy own
transgressions.  Make thou not inquiry maliciously, into the misdeeds of
men.  For if thou doest this, injuries will not be lacking to thee. 
Trust not the hearing of the ear, for many are the deceivers.  Vain
reports believe thou not, for false rumours are not few.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p22"></span>13.  Regard not spells and
divinations, for that is communion with Satan.  Love not idle prating,
not even in behalf of righteousness.  Discourse concerning thyself begin
thou not, even in behalf of what is becoming.  Flee and hide thyself
from wrangling, as from a violent robber.  See that thou be not a surety
in a loan, lest thou sin.  According as thou hast, assist him, (even)
the man that is poorer than thou.  Mock not the foolish man; pray that
thou be not even as he.  Him that sins blame not, lest thou also be put
to confusion.  To him that repents of his sins be a helper and
counsellor, and encourage him that is able to rise.  Let him hold fast
hope in God, and his sin shall be burned as stubble.  Visit the sick and
be not wearied, that thou mayest be beloved of men.  Be familiar with
the house of mourning, but a stranger to the house of feasting.  Be not
constant in drinking wine, lest thy shortcomings multiply.  Cast a wall
round thy lips, and set a guard upon thy mouth; endure suffering with
thy neighbour and share also in his tribulation.  A good friend in
tribulation is made known to him that loves him.  In charity follow the
deceased, with sorrow and with offerings, and pray that he may have rest
in the hidden place whither he is going.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p23"></span>14.  When thou standest in prayer,
cry in thy soul:  Have mercy on me, I am a sinner and weak; be gracious,
O God, to my weakness, and grant strength to me to pray a prayer that
shall be pleasing to Thy Will.  “Punish Thou not mine enemies, take not
vengeance on them that hate me; but grant them in Thy grace that they
may become doers of Thy Will.”  At the time of prayer and petition, in
contemplations such as these continue thou.  Bow thy head before the
Mighty One.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p24"></span>15.  Do not thou resist evil, for he
is evil from the Evil One, whoso resists evil. <span
id="fr_628"></span>[629](#fn_628)   Keep not back aught from any man,
that if he perishes thou mayest not be blamed.  Change not thy respect
for a man’s person, according to goods and possessions.  Make all things
as though they were not and God alone were in being.  If thou shalt ask
of thy neighbour and he shall not give thee according to thy wish, see
that thou say not in anger a word that is full of bitterness.  Oppose
not thou \[fit\] seasons, for many are the changes.  Put sorrow far from
thy flesh, <span id="fr_629"></span>[630](#fn_629) and sadness from thy
thoughts; save only that for thy sins thou shouldst be constant in
sadness.  Cease not from labour, not even though thou be rich, for the
slothful man gains manifold guilt by his idleness.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p27"></span>16.  Be thou a lover of poverty, and
be desirous of neediness.  If thou hast them both for thy portion, thou
art an inheritor on high.  Despise not the voice of the poor and give
him not cause to curse thee.  For if he curse whose palate is bitter,
the Lord will hear his petition.  If his garments are foul, wash them in
water, which freely is bought.  Has a poor man entered into thy house? 
God has entered into thy house; God dwells within thy abode.  He, whom
thou hast refreshed from his troubles, from troubles will deliver thee. 
Hast thou washed the feet of the stranger?  Thou hast washed away the
filth of thy sins.  Hast thou prepared a table before him?  Behold God
eating \[at it\], and Christ likewise drinking \[at it\], and the Holy
Spirit resting \[on it\]:  Is the poor satisfied at thy table and
refreshed?  Thou hast satisfied Christ thy Lord.  He is ready to be thy
rewarder; in presence of angels and men He will confess thou hast fed
His hunger; He will give thanks unto thee that thou didst give Him
drink, and quench His thirst.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p28"></span><span id="page_335">p. 335</span>
<span id="iii.viii.iii-Page_335"></span>17.  O how gracious is the
Lord!  O how measureless are His mercies!  Happy the race of mortals
when God confesses it!  Woe to the soul which He denies!  Fire is stored
up for its punishment.  Be of good cheer, my son, in hope; sow good
\[seed\] <span id="fr_630"></span>[631](#fn_630) and faint not.  The
husbandman sows in hope, and the merchant journeys in hope, thou also
lovest good \[seed\]; in the hope look for the reward.  Do not thou
aught at all without the beginning of prayer.  With the sign of the
living cross, seal all thy doings, my son.  Go not forth from the door
of thy house till thou hast signed the cross.  Whether in eating or in
drinking, whether in sleeping or in waking, whether in thy house or on
the road, or again in the season of leisure, neglect not this sign; for
there is no guardian like it.  It shall be unto thee as a wall, in the
forefront of all thy doings.  And teach this to thy children, that
heedfully they be conformed to it.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p30"></span>18.  Yoke thyself under the law, that
thou mayest be a freeman in very truth.  Work not the desire of thy soul
apart from the law of God.  How many commandments must I write, and how
many laws must I engrave; which, if thou desirest thy freedom, thou
canst learn all from thyself?  And if thou lovest purity, thou wilt
teach it to others also.  Let nature be thy book, and all creation thy
tables; and learn from them the laws, and meditate things unwritten. 
The sun in his course teaches thee that thou rest from labour.  The
night in her silence cries to thee that a limit is set to thy works. 
The earth and the fruit of the tree cry that there is a season for all
things.  The seed thou sowest in the winter, in the summer thou
gatherest its harvest.  Thus in the world sow seeds of righteousness,
and in the Resurrection gather them in.  The bird in its daily gleaning
reproves the covetous and his greed, and rebukes the extortion that
grasps the store of others.  Death, the limit of all things, is itself
the reprover of all things.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p31"></span>19.  Take thou refuge in God Who
passes not away nor is changed.  Restrain laughter by suffering, and
mirthfulness by sorrow.  Console suffering by hope, and sadness by
expectation.  Believe and trust, thou that art wise, for God is He Who
guides thee; and if His care leaves thee not, there is nothing that can
harm thee.  If one man by another man, the lowly by the great, can be
saved, how much more shall the refuge of God preserve the man that
believes?  Fear not because of adversaries who with violence come upon
thee.  He will watchfully guard thy soul, and hurtful things become
profitable.  No one shall lead thee by compulsion, save only where there
is freedom.  No one falls into temptation, that passes the measure of
his strength.  There is no evil in chastisement, if so be that freedom
is willing.  The doings are not perverse of freedom, its will is
perverted.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p32"></span>20.  To men that are just and
upright, temptations become helps.  Job, a man of discernment, was
victorious in temptations.  Sickness came upon him, and he complained
not; disease afflicted him and he murmured not; his body failed and his
strength departed, but his will was not weakened.  He proved perfect in
all by sufferings, for as much as temptations crushed him not.  Abraham
was a stranger, from his place, his race \[and his kindred\].  But by
this he was not harmed; nay rather he triumphed greatly.  So Joseph from
the house of bondage was made to rule as king of Egypt.  They of the
company of Ananias and Daniel delivered others from bondage.  See then,
O thou that art wise, the power that freedom possesses; that nothing can
injure it unless the will is weakened.  Israel with sumptuous living
waxed fat, and kicked, <span id="fr_631"></span>[632](#fn_631) and
forgot his covenant.  He worshipped vain gods, and forgot the nature of
his creation.  The bondage that was in Egypt he forgat in the repose of
the desert.  As often as he was afflicted, he acknowledged the Lord
alone; but when he was dwelling in repose, <span id="page_336">p.
336</span> <span id="iii.viii.iii-Page_336"></span>he forgot God his
Redeemer.  Seek thou not here repose, for this is a world of toil.  And
if thou canst wisely discern, change thou not time for time; that which
abides for that which abides not; that which ceases not for that which
ceases; nor truth for lying; nor body for shadow; nor watching for
slumber; nor that which is in season for that which is out of season;
nor the Time for the times.  Collect thy mind, let it not wander among
varieties which profit not.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p34"></span>21.  No one in creation is rich but
he that fears God; no one is truly poor but he that lacks the truth. 
How needy is he, and not rich, whose need witnesses against him that
even from the abject and the beggars he needs to receive a gift.  He is
truly a bondman, and many are his masters:  he renders service to money,
to riches, and possessions.  His lords are void of mercy, for they grant
him no repose.  Flee, and live in poverty; (as) a mother she pities her
beloved.  Seek thou refuge in indigence, who nourishes her children with
choice things; her yoke is light and pleasant, and sweet to the palate
her memory.  The sick in conscience alone abhors the draught of poverty;
the fainthearted dreads the yoke of indigence that is honourable.  Who
has granted to Thee, Son of man, in the world to find repose?  Who has
granted to thee, thing of dust, to be rich amidst poverty?  Be not thou
through desires needy and looking to others.  Sufficient for thee is thy
daily bread, that comes of the sweat of thy face.  Let this be (the
measure of thy need, that which the day gives thee; and if thou findest
for thyself a feast, take of it that which thou needest.  Thou shalt not
take in a day (the provision) of days, for the belly keeps no treasure. 
Praise and give thanks when thou art satisfied, that therein thou
provoke not the Giver to anger.  In purity strengthen thyself, that thou
mayest gain from it profit.  In everything give thanks and praise unto
God as the Redeemer, that He may grant thee by His grace, that we may
hear and do His Will.

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p35"></span>Thou to whom I have given the counsel
of life, be not thou negligent in it.  From that which is other men’s
(doctrine) have I written to thee; see thou despise not their words. 
And if I depart before thee, in thy prayer make mention of me.  In every
season pray and beseech that our love may continue true.  But as for us,
on behalf of these things let us offer up praise and honour to Father,
to Son, and to Holy Spirit, now and for ever.  Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_620"></span>[331:621](2130275.htm#fr_620) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p7"></span> [Acts xx.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_621"></span>[331:622](2130275.htm#fr_621) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p10"></span> [Eccles. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[332:623](2130275.htm#fr_622) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p11"></span> *I.e.*, such as fits for a place on
Christ’s left hand, at the Judgment.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[332:624](2130275.htm#fr_623) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p13"></span> [Prov. v.
15-17](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[332:625](2130275.htm#fr_624) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p14"></span> [2 Pet. ii.
22](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#022)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_625"></span>[333:626](2130275.htm#fr_625) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p17"></span> [Prov. iv.
23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[333:627](2130275.htm#fr_626) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p19"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[333:628](2130275.htm#fr_627) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p20"></span> [Matt. x.
16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_628"></span>[334:629](2130275.htm#fr_628) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p25"></span> [Matt. v.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_629"></span>[334:630](2130275.htm#fr_629) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p26"></span> [Eccles. xi.
10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc011.htm#010)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_630"></span>[335:631](2130275.htm#fr_630) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p29"></span> [Gal. vi.
9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p29.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[335:632](2130275.htm#fr_631) <span
id="iii.viii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.iii-p33"></span> [Deut. xxxii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015)<span
id="iii.viii.iii-p33.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Sinful Woman.](2130276)
