[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130150)  [Next](2130152.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.i"></span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span> <span
id="ii.x.i-Page_103"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ii.x.i-p1.1"></span>Book XIV.</span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.i-p2.1"></span>Epistle II.</span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p3"></span>To Vitalis, Guardian (Defensorem) of
Sardinia.

<span id="ii.x.i-p4"></span>Gregory to Vitalis, &c.

<span id="ii.x.i-p5"></span>From the information given us by thy
Experience we find that the hospitals \[or guest-houses, *xenodochia*\]
founded in Sardinia are suffering from grievous neglect.  Hence our most
reverend brother and fellow-bishop Januarius <span
id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228.md) would have had to be most strongly
reprehended, did not his old age and simplicity, and the sickness which
thou hast told us of coming on besides, keep us in check.

<span id="ii.x.i-p7"></span>Seeing, then, that he is so situated that he
cannot be fit to order anything, do thou warn the steward of that
Church, and Epiphanius the archpresbyter, under our strict authority,
that they themselves at their own peril endeavour themselves carefully
and profitably to set those same hospitals (*xenodochia*) in order. 
For, if there should be any neglect there hereafter, let them know that
they will not be able in any manner, or to any extent, to excuse
themselves before us.

<span id="ii.x.i-p8"></span>Further, since the proprietors of Sardinia
have petitioned us that, seeing that they are afflicted by diverse
burdens, thou mightest go to Constantinople for their redress, we grant
thee leave to go.  And we have also written to our most beloved son
Boniface, desiring him to do his best to lend thee his aid in obtaining
redress for that province.

<span id="ii.x.i-p9"></span>Moreover, with regard to the Churches which
thou hast informed us are without priests <span
id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229.md) , we have written to our aforesaid
most reverend brother and fellow-bishop Januarius, that he should supply
them; yet so that all be not chosen for the episcopate from his own
Church.  For it becomes him so to supply other Churches as not to cause
want in his own of persons who may be of advantage to it.

<span id="ii.x.i-p11"></span>As to what thou hast told us of persons
having been preferred to the government of certain monasteries who,
while they were in a lower monastic order, had fallen into sin, they
ought not indeed to have undertaken the office of abbot except after
entire reformation of life and after due preceding penance.  But since,
as thou sayest, they have undertaken the office of abbots, heed must be
given to their life, manners, and attention to duty.  And, if their
conduct should not be found inconsistent with their office, let them
persevere in the order in which they are.  Otherwise let them be
removed, and others ordained who may profit the souls committed to them.

<span id="ii.x.i-p12"></span>Furthermore, in the case of the monastery
of Saint Hermas, which was founded by our brother in the house of the
religious lady Pomponiana, inasmuch as it should be treated with
tenderness rather than with strictness, let thy Experience endeavour to
deal sweetly with the said lady, to the end that neither may she, to her
own sin, disregard the will of the founder, nor thou fail to provide
salubriously for the advantage of the monastery.  Further, as to the
girls of whom the aforesaid Pomponiana had formerly changed the
religious dress, and converted them in the monastery <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230.md) , thou must by no means suffer them to
be withdrawn from her, or disquieted; but let them continue, God
protecting them, in the state of life in which they are.

<span id="ii.x.i-p14"></span>With regard to the recovery of the property
of Churches, or of monasteries, or any other devoted to pious uses,
about which thou hast written, those who are interested must be
admonished that it is for them to seek in all ways to recover it with
thy support and aid.  But, if they should haply prove negligent, or in
any case if such as ought to recover it should not be found, then do
thou search it all out and so get it back, when discovered, as not to
appear to take legal action against any one with a high hand.  As to
what thou hast told us with respect to the hospitals (*xenodochia*) of
Hortulanus and Thomas, we so far have no knowledge.  Wherefore let thy
Experience look diligently into the order of the Emperor so far given,
and arrange all according to its tenour, and make known to us whatever
thou hast done.

<span id="ii.x.i-p15"></span>Concerning what thou hast written about our
brother and fellow-bishop Januarius at the time when he celebrates the
sacrifice often suffering such distress that he can hardly after long
intervals return to the place in the canon <span id="page_104">p.
104</span> <span id="ii.x.i-Page_104"></span>where he has left off, and
as to many doubting whether they should receive the Communion from his
consecration, they are to be admonished to be in no alarm at all, but
communicate with full faith and security, since a person’s sickness
neither alters nor defiles the benediction of the sacred mystery. 
Nevertheless our said brother should by all means be exhorted privately,
that, as often as he feels any trouble coming on, he should not proceed
to celebration, lest he thus expose himself to contempt, and cause
offence to the minds of the weak.

<span id="ii.x.i-p16"></span>Furthermore, the religious lady
Pomponiana <span id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231.md) has complained to us
that the inheritance of her late son-in-law Epiphanius—of which the said
Epiphanius had appointed his wife Matrona, daughter of the aforesaid
Pomponiana, to be usufructuary for the benefit of the monastery which he
had directed to be founded in his house, and for its benefit also in all
ways after the extinction of the usufruct—together with other things
which are proved to belong to the same Matrona by right of possession,
have been unjustly taken away by thy Experience and by our most reverend
brother and fellow-bishop Januarius, and that nothing therefore has so
far been paid to her daughter, or been of profit to the monastery.  Now
if the truth is so, and thou art aware of having done anything
unbecomingly, without any delay restore what has been taken away; or at
any rate, if thou thinkest it to be otherwise lest the opposite party
should seem to be aggrieved prejudicially, by no means defer submitting
the case to arbitrators chosen with her concurrence, that it may be
declared by a definite decision whether her complaint be true and just.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_228"></span>[103:229](2130151.htm#fr_228.md) <span
id="ii.x.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p6"></span> See I. 62, note 9.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[103:230](2130151.htm#fr_229.md) <span
id="ii.x.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p10"></span> *Sacerdotes*, here as elsewhere meaning
bishops.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[103:231](2130151.htm#fr_230.md) <span
id="ii.x.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p13"></span> “Convertit in monasterio.”  *Conversio*,
as usually, means here monastic profession.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[104:232](2130151.htm#fr_231.md) <span
id="ii.x.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.i-p17"></span> As to this Pomponiana (*al*. Pompeiana),
cf. I. 48; XI. 25.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle IV](2130152.md)
