[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130146)  [Next](2130148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XL.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p2"></span>To Cyriacus, Patriarch of
Constantinople.

<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Cyriacus, &c.

<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p4"></span>Observing diligently, most dear brother,
how great is the virtue of peace from the Lord’s voice, which says, *My
peace I give unto you* ([Joh. xiv.
27](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#027)<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p4.1"></span>),
it becomes us so to abide in the love thereof as in no wise to give
place to discord.  But, since we cannot otherwise live in its root
except by retaining in mind and in deed the humility which the very
author of peace has taught, we entreat you with befitting charity, that,
treading down with the foot of your heart the profane elation which is
always hostile to souls, you make haste to remove from the midst of the
Church the offence of a perverse and proud title, lest you should
possibly be found divided from the society of our peace.  But let there
be in us one spirit, one mind, one charity, one bond in Christ, who has
willed us to be his members.  For let your Holiness consider how hard it
is, how indecent, how cruel, how alien from the aim of a priest, not to
have that peace which you preach to others, and so abstain from
offending your brethren out of pride.  But study this rather, how you
may prostrate with the sword of humility the author of vain and
profitless elation, to the end that in such a victory the grace of the
Holy Spirit may claim you as a habitation for Himself, so that what is
written may be plainly fulfilled in you; *the temple of God is holy,
which temple ye are* ([2 Cor. vi.
17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017)<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p4.2"></span>.)

<span id="ii.ix.xvii-p5"></span>We commend to you in all things the
bearer of these presents, our most beloved common son, the deacon
Boniface, that in whatsoever may be needful he may find, as is becoming,
the succour of your Holiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.](2130148)
