[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130111)  [Next](2130113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p2"></span>*To Augustine, Bishop of the
Angli* <span id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p4"></span>Here begins the epistle of the blessed
Gregory pope of the city of Rome, in exposition of various matters,
which he sent into transmarine Saxony to Augustine, whom he had himself
sent in his own stead to preach.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p5"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p5.1"></span>Preface</span>.—Through my most beloved son
Laurentius, the presbyter, and Peter the monk, I received thy
Fraternity’s letter, in which thou hast been at pains to question me on
many points.  But, inasmuch as my aforesaid sons found me afflicted with
the pains of gout, and on their urging me to dismiss them speedily were
allowed to go, leaving me under the same painful affliction; I have not
been able to reply, as I ought to have done, at greater length on every
single point.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p6"></span>Augustine’s first question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p7"></span>I ask, most blessed father, concerning
bishops, how they should live with their clergy:  And concerning the
offerings of the faithful which are received at the altars, both into
what portions they should be divided, and how the bishop ought to deal
with them in the Church.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p8"></span>Answer of Saint Gregory, pope of the
city of Rome.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p9"></span>Holy Scripture, which no doubt thou
knowest well, bears witness, and especially the epistles of the blessed
Paul to Timothy, in which he studied to instruct him how he ought to
behave himself in the house of God.  Now it is the custom of the
Apostolic See to deliver an injunction to bishops when ordained, that of
all emoluments that come in <span id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_75"></span>four divisions should be made:  to wit,
one for the bishop and his household on account of hospitality and
entertainment; another for the clergy; a third for the poor; and a
fourth for the reparation of Churches.  But, inasmuch as thy Fraternity,
having been trained in the rules of a monastery, ought not to live apart
from thy clergy in the Church of the Angli, which by the guidance of God
has lately been brought to the faith, it will be right to institute that
manner of life which in the beginning of the infant Church was that of
our Fathers, among whom none said that aught of the things which he
possessed was his own, but they had all things common ([Acts
iv](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p9.1"></span>.).

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p10"></span>*Augustine’s second question* <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p12"></span>I wish to be taught whether clerics who
cannot contain may marry; and, if they marry, whether they should return
to the world.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p13"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p14"></span>If, however, there are any clerics, not
in sacred orders, who cannot contain themselves, they ought to take to
themselves wives, and receive their stipends separately, since we know
that it is written of those same Fathers whom we have before mentioned,
that distribution was made unto every man according as he had need. 
Wherefore thought should be taken and provision made for their stipends,
and they should be kept under ecclesiastical rule, that they may lead
good lives, and give attention to the singing of psalms, and by the help
of God preserve their heart and tongue and body from all that is
unlawful.  But as to those who live in community, what is there more for
us to say with regard to assigning portions, or shewing hospitality, or
executing mercy, seeing that what remains over and above their needs is
to be expended for pious and religious uses, as the Lord and Master of
us all says, *Of what is over give alms, and behold all things are clean
unto you* ([Luke xi. 41](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#041)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p14.1"></span>)?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p15"></span>Augustine’s third question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p16"></span>Since there is but one faith, why are
the uses of Churches so different, one use of Mass being observed in the
Roman Church, and another in the Churches of Gaul?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p17"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p18"></span>Thy Fraternity knows the use of the
Roman Church, in which thou hast been nurtured.  But I approve of thy
selecting carefully anything thou hast found that may be more pleasing
to Almighty God, whether in the Roman Church or that of Gaul, or in any
Church whatever, and introducing in the Church of the Angli, which is as
yet new in the faith, by a special institution, what thou hast been able
to collect from many Churches.  For we ought not to love things for
places, but places for things.  Wherefore choose from each several
Church such things as are pious, religious, and right, and, collecting
them as it were into a bundle, plant them in the minds of the Angli for
their use.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p19"></span>Augustine’s fourth question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p20"></span>Pray tell me what any one ought to
suffer who may have abstracted anything from a church by theft?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p21"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p22"></span>In this case thy Fraternity can
consider, with regard to the person of the thief, how he may be best
corrected.  For there are some who commit theft though they have
resources, and there are others who transgress in this matter out of
want.  Hence it is needful that some should be corrected by fines, but
some by stripes, and some more severely, but some more lightly.  And,
when any one is somewhat severely dealt with, he should be dealt with in
charity, and not in anger; since to the man himself who is corrected the
punishment is assigned lest he should be given up to the fires of hell. 
For we ought so to maintain discipline towards believers as good fathers
are wont to do towards their sons, whom they both smite with blows for
their faults, and yet seek to have as their heirs the very persons on
whom they inflict pain, and keep what they possess for the very same
whom they seem to assail in anger.  This charity, then, should be
retained in the mind, so that nothing at all be done beyond the rule of
reason.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p23"></span>Thou askest also how they ought to
restore what they have abstracted by theft from churches.  But far be it
from us that the Church should receive back with increase what it seems
to lose of its earthly things, and seek gain out of losses.  \[*al*.,
for *de damnis*, de vanis.  So Bede.\]

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p24"></span>Augustine’s fifth question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p25"></span>I beg to know whether two brothers may
marry two sisters, who are far removed from them in descent.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p26"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p27"></span>This by all means may be done.  For
nothing at all is found in Holy Writ which seems to be opposed to it.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p28"></span><span id="page_76">p. 76</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_76"></span>*Augustine’s sixth question.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p29"></span>As far as what generation believers
ought to be joined in marriage with their kin, and whether it is lawful
to be joined in marriage with stepmothers and brothers’ wives?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p30"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p31"></span>A certain earthly law in the Roman
republic allows the son and daughter, whether of a brother and sister,
or of two brothers, or of two sisters, to marry together.  But we have
learnt by experience that progeny cannot ensue from such marriages.  And
the sacred law forbids to uncover the nakedness of kindred.  Whence it
follows that only the third or fourth generations of believers may be
lawfully joined together <span id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) .  For
the second which we have spoken of, ought by all means to abstain from
each other.  But to have intercourse with a stepmother is a grave
offence, seeing that is also written in the law, *thou shalt not uncover
the nakedness of thy father* ([Lev. xviii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p32.1"></span>).  Not indeed that a son can uncover his
father’s nakedness; but, since it is written in the law, *They too shall
be one flesh* ([Gen. ii. 24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p32.2"></span>), he who has presumed to uncover the
nakedness of his stepmother, who has been one flesh with his father, has
in truth uncovered his father’s nakedness.  It is also forbidden to have
intercourse with a brother’s wife, who, through her former conjunction,
has become the flesh of the brother.  For which thing also John the
Baptist was beheaded, and crowned with holy martyrdom.  He was not
bidden to deny Christ; and yet for confessing Christ he was slain;
because the same our Lord Jesus Christ had said, *I am the truth* ([John
xiv. 6](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#006)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p32.3"></span>); and because John was slain for the
truth, he shed his blood for Christ.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p33"></span>*Augustine’s seventh question* <span
id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p35"></span>I request to have it declared whether
to such as are thus foully joined together separation should be
enjoined, and the oblation of sacred communion denied them?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p36"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p37"></span>But, since there are many in the nation
of the Angli who while they were yet in unbelief are said to have been
associated in such unholy marriages, they should be admonished, when
they come to the faith, to abstain from each other, and be made to
understand that this is a grievous sin.  Let them fear God’s tremendous
judgment, lest for carnal delight they incur the pains of eternal
torment.  Yet they should not on this account be deprived of the
communion of the Lord’s body and blood, lest we should seem to punish
them for what they had bound themselves in through ignorance before the
laver of baptism.  For at this time holy Church corrects some things
with fervour, tolerates some things with gentleness, connives at and
bears some things with consideration, so as often to repress what she
opposes by bearing and conniving.  But all who come to the faith are to
be warned not to dare to perpetrate any such thing:  and if any should
perpetrate it, they must be deprived of the communion of the Lord’s body
and blood, since, as in those who have done it in ignorance the fault
should be to a certain extent tolerated, so it should be severely
visited in those who are not afraid to sin in spite of knowledge.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p38"></span>Augustine’s eighth question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p39"></span>I ask whether, if length of way
intervenes, and bishops are not able to assemble easily, a bishop should
be ordained without the presence of other bishops.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p40"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p41"></span>Indeed in the Church of the Angli,
wherein thou art so far the only bishop, thou canst not ordain a bishop
otherwise than without bishops.  For, when bishops shall come from Gaul
they will attend thee as witnesses for the ordination of a bishop <span
id="fr_177"></span>[178](#fn_177) .  But we desire thy Fraternity so to
ordain bishops in England that the bishops themselves be not separated
from one another by long distances, to the end that there be no
necessary cause why they should not come together in the case of the
ordination of any bishop.  For the presence of some other pastors also
is exceedingly advantageous; and hence they ought to be able to come
together as easily as possible.  When therefore, God granting it,
bishops shall have been ordained in places not far from each other, an
ordination of bishops should in no case take place without three or four
bishops being assembled.  For in spiritual things themselves, <span
id="page_77">p. 77</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_77"></span>that they
may be ordered wisely and maturely, we may draw an example even from
carnal things.  For assuredly, when marriages are celebrated in the
world, some married persons are called together, that those who have
gone before in the way of marriage may be associated also in the ensuing
joy.  Why then, in this spiritual ordination too, wherein man is joined
to God through a sacred mystery, should not such come together as may
both rejoice in the advancement of him who is ordained bishop and pour
forth prayers to the Almighty Lord for His protection?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p43"></span>Augustine’s ninth question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p44"></span>I ask also how we should deal with the
bishops of Gaul and of the Britons.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p45"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p46"></span>Over the bishops of Gaul we give thee
no authority, since from the ancient times of my predecessors the bishop
of Arelate (*Arles*) has received the pallium, and we ought by no means
to deprive him of the authority that he has acquired.  If therefore it
should happen that thy Fraternity should pass into the provinces of
Gaul, thou shouldest act with the same bishop of Arelate in such a way
that vices in bishops, if any, may be corrected.  And, if he should by
chance be lukewarm in the vigour of discipline, he must be stirred up by
the zeal of thy Fraternity.  To him we have also written letters <span
id="fr_178"></span>[179](#fn_178) , bidding him aid thee with his whole
soul, whenever thy Holiness may be present in Gaul, that you may
together repress in the manners of bishops all that is contrary to the
command of our Creator.  But thou thyself wilt not have power to judge
the bishops of Gaul by authority of thine own; but by persuading,
alluring, and also exhibiting thine own good works for their imitation,
and so moulding the dispositions of the vicious to concern for holiness;
seeing that it is written in the law, *One passing through the standing
corn of another must not put in a sickle, but rub the ears with his hand
and eat* ([Deut. xxxii. 25](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#025)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p47.1"></span>).  Thou canst not, then, put in the sickle
of judgment into the crop that is seen to be committed to another; but
by kindly good offices thou canst strip the corn of the Lord from the
chaff of its defects, and by admonishing and persuading, convert it, as
it were by chewing, into the body of the Church.  But whatever is to be
done authoritatively, let it be done with the aforesaid bishop of
Arelate, lest there should be any disregard of what the ancient
institution of the Fathers has provided.  But of all British bishops we
commit the charge to thy Fraternity, that the unlearned may be taught,
the weak strengthened by persuasion, the perverse corrected by
authority.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p48"></span>Augustine’s request.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p49"></span>I request that the relics of Saint
Sixtus the martyr may be sent to us <span
id="fr_179"></span>[180](#fn_179) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p51"></span>The grant of Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p52"></span>We have done what thou hast requested,
to the end that the people who formerly said that they venerated in a
certain place the body of Saint Sixtus the martyr, which seems to thy
Fraternity to be neither the true body nor truly holy, may receive
certain benefits from the most holy and approved martyr, and not
reverence what is uncertain.  Yet it seems to me that, if the body which
is believed by the people to be that of some martyr is distinguished
among them by no miracles, and if further there are none of the more
aged who declare that they had heard the order of his passion from
progenitors, the relics which thou hast asked for should be so deposited
apart that the place in which the aforesaid body lies, be entirely
blocked up, and that the people be not allowed to desert what is
certain, and venerate what is uncertain.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p53"></span>Augustine’s tenth question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p54"></span>Whether a pregnant woman should be
baptized, or, when she has brought forth, after what length of time she
should be allowed to enter the church.  Or, to guard also against her
issue being surprised by death, after how many days it may receive the
sacrament of holy baptism.  Or after what length of time her husband may
have carnal intercourse with her.  Or, if she is in her sickness after
the manner of women, whether she may enter the church, or receive the
sacrament of sacred communion.  Or whether a man after intercourse with
his wife, before he has been washed with water, may enter the church, or
even go to the ministry (*ministerium*:  in Bede, *mysterium*) of sacred
communion.  All these things it is right we should have made known to us
for the rude nation of the Angli.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p55"></span>Answer of the blessed pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p56"></span>I doubt not that thy Fraternity has
been asked these questions, and I think that I have supplied thee with
answers to them.  But I believe that thou wishest what thou art able of
thyself to say and think to be confirmed by my reply.  For why should
not a pregnant woman be baptized, fecundity of the flesh <span
id="page_78">p. 78</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_78"></span>being no
fault before the eyes of Almighty God?  For, when our first parents had
transgressed in Paradise, they lost by the just judgment of God the
immortality which they had received.  Therefore, because Almighty God
would not utterly extinguish the human race for their fault, He took
away immortality from man for his sin, and yet, in the kindness of His
pity, reserved to him fruitfulness in offspring.  With what reason then
can what has been preserved to the human race by the gift of Almighty
God be debarred from the grace of holy baptism?  For indeed it is very
foolish to suppose that a gift of grace can possibly be inconsistent
with that mystery wherein all human sin is entirely extinguished.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p57"></span>But as to how many days after her
delivery a woman may enter the church, thou hast learnt that by the
direction of the Old Testament she ought to keep away xxxiii. days for a
male child, but lxvi. for a female.  It should be known, however, that
this is understood mystically.  For, if in the same hour in which she
has been delivered she enters the church, she subjects herself to no
burden of sin.  For it is the pleasure of the flesh, not the pain, that
is in fault.  But it is in the carnal intercourse that the pleasure
lies; for in bringing forth of offspring there is pain and groaning. 
Whence even to the first mother of all it is said, *In sorrow thou shalt
bring forth children* ([Gen. iii.
16](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#016)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p57.1"></span>).  If, therefore, we forbid a woman after
her delivery to enter the church, we reckon her very penalty to her for
a fault.  Moreover, it is by no means forbidden that either a woman
after delivery or that which she has brought forth should be baptized
without delay, if in peril of death; she even in the same hour in which
she is delivered, or it in the same hour in which it is born.  For, as
in the case of those who live and have discretion the grace of the holy
mystery should be seen to with great discernment, so to those who are in
imminent danger of death it should be offered without any delay, lest,
while time is being sought for administering the mystery of redemption,
death should shortly intervene, and no way be found of redeeming the
time that has been lost.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p58"></span>Further, her husband ought not to
cohabit with her till that which is brought forth be weaned.  But an
evil custom has arisen in the ways of married persons, that women scorn
to nurse the children whom they bring forth, and deliver them to other
women to be nursed.  Which custom appears to have been devised for the
sole cause of incontinency, in that, being unwilling to contain
themselves, they think scorn to suckle their offspring.  Those women
therefore who, after an evil custom, deliver their children to others to
be nursed ought not to have intercourse with their husbands unless the
time of their purification has passed, seeing that, even without the
reason of childbirth, they are forbidden to have intercourse with their
husbands while held of their accustomed sicknesses; so much so that the
sacred law smites with death any man who shall go into a woman having
her sickness ([Lev. xx. 18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p58.1"></span>).  Yet still a woman, while suffering from
her accustomed sickness, ought not to be prohibited from entering the
church, since the superfluity of nature cannot be imputed to her for
guilt, and it is not just that she should be deprived of entrance into
the church on account of what she suffers unwillingly.  For we know that
the woman who suffered from an issue of blood, coming humbly behind the
Lord, touched the hem of his garment, and immediately her infirmity
departed from her ([Luke viii](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p58.2"></span>.).  If then one who had an issue of blood
could laudably touch the Lord’s garment, why should it be unlawful for
one who suffers from a menstruum of blood to enter in the Lord’s Church?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p59"></span>But that woman, thou wilt say, was
compelled by infirmity; but these are held of their accustomed
sicknesses.  Yet consider, dearest brother, how all that we suffer in
this mortal flesh is of infirmity of nature, ordained after guilt by the
fitting judgment of God.  For to hunger and to thirst, to be hot, to be
cold, to be weary, is of infirmity of nature.  And to seek food against
hunger, and drink against thirst, and cool air against heat, and
clothing against cold, and rest against weariness, what is it but to
search out certain healing appliances against sicknesses?  For in
females also the menstruous flow of their blood is a sickness.  If
therefore she presumed well who in her state of feebleness touched the
Lord’s garment, why should not what is granted to one person in
infirmity be granted to all women who through defect of their nature are
in infirmity?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p60"></span>Further, she ought not to be prohibited
during these same days from receiving the mystery of holy communion. 
If, however, out of great reverence, she does not presume to receive,
she is to be commended; but, if she should receive, she is not to be
judged.  For it is the part of good dispositions in some way to
acknowledge their sins, even where there is no sin, since often without
sin a thing is done which comes of sin.  Whence also, when we hunger, we
eat without sin, though it has come of the sin of the first man that we
do hunger.  For the menstruous habit in women is no sin, seeing that it
occurs naturally; yet still that nature itself has been so <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_79"></span>vitiated
as to be seen to be polluted even without the intention of the will is a
defect that comes of sin, whereby human nature may perceive what through
judgment it has come to be, so that man who voluntarily committed sin
may bear the guilt of sin involuntarily.  And so females, when they
consider themselves as being in their habit of sickness, if they presume
not to approach the sacrament of the body and blood of the Lord, are to
be commended for their right consideration.  But when, out of the habit
of a religious life, they are seized with a love of the same mystery,
they are not to be restrained, as we have said.  For, as in the old
Testament outward acts were attended to, so in the New Testament it is
not so much what is done outwardly as what is thought inwardly that is
regarded with close attention, that it may be punished with searching
judgment.  For while the law forbids the eating of many things as being
unclean, the Lord nevertheless says in the Gospel, *Not that which goeth
into the mouth defileth a man, but the things which come forth from the
heart, these are they which defile a man* ([Matth. xv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#011)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p60.1"></span>).  And soon after He added in explanation,
*Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts* ([Matt.
15.19](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#019)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p60.2"></span>).  Hence it is abundantly indicated that
what is shewn by Almighty God to be polluted in act is that which is
engendered of the root of polluted thought.  Whence also Paul the
Apostle says, *All things are pure to the pure; but unto them that are
defiled and unbelieving is nothing pure* ([Tit. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p60.3"></span>).  And immediately, to declare the cause
of this defilement, he subjoins, *For their mind and conscience is
defiled.*  If, then, food is not impure to one whose mind is not impure,
why should what with a pure mind a woman suffers from nature be reckoned
to her for impurity?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p61"></span>Further, a man after sleeping with his
own wife ought not to enter the church unless washed with water, nor,
even when washed, enter immediately.  Now the law enjoined on the
ancient people that a man after intercourse with a woman should both be
washed with water and not enter the church before sunset.  Which may be
understood spiritually as meaning that a man has intercourse with a
woman when his mind is joined with delight in thought to illicit
concupiscence, and that, unless the fire of concupiscence in his mind
should cool, he ought not to think himself worthy of the congregation of
his brethren, seeing himself to be burdened with by lewdness of wrong
desire.  For, although in this matter different nations of men have
different notions, and some are seen to observe one practice and some
another, yet the usage of the Romans from ancient times has always been
for a man after intercourse with his own wife both to seek the
purification of the bath and to refrain reverently for a while from
entering the church.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p62"></span>Nor do we, in saying these things,
account wedlock as sin.  But, since even the lawful intercourse of the
wedded cannot take place without pleasure of the flesh, entrance into a
sacred place should be abstained from, because the pleasure itself can
by no means be without sin.  For he had not been born of adultery or
fornication, but of lawful wedlock, who said, *Behold I was conceived in
iniquities, and in sin my mother brought me forth* ([Ps. l.
7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p62.1"></span>).  For, knowing himself to have been
conceived in iniquities, he groaned for having been born in sin, because
the tree bears in its branch the vicious humour which it has drawn from
its root.  Yet in these words he does not call the intercourse of the
wedded iniquity in itself, but in truth only the pleasure of the
intercourse.  For there are many things which are allowed and
legitimate, and yet we are to some extent defiled in the doing of them;
as often we attack faults with anger, and disturb the tranquillity of
our own mind.  And, though what is done is right, yet it is not to be
approved that the mind is therein disturbed.  For instance, he had been
angry against the vices of transgressors who said, *Mine eye is
disturbed because of anger* ([Ps. vi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#008)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p62.2"></span>).  For, since the mind cannot, unless it
be tranquil, lift itself up to the light of contemplation, he grieved
that his eye was disturbed in anger, because, though assailing evil
doings from above, he still could not help being confused and disturbed
from contemplation of the highest things.  And therefore his anger
against vice is laudable, and yet it troubles him, because he felt that
he had incurred some guilt in being disturbed.  Lawful copulation of the
flesh ought therefore to be for the purpose of offspring, not of
pleasure; and intercourse of the flesh should be for the sake of
producing children, and not a satisfaction of frailties.  If, then, any
one makes use of his wife not as seized by the desire of pleasure, but
only for the sake of producing children, he certainly, with regard to
entering the church or taking the mystery of the body and blood of the
Lord, is to be left to his own judgment, since by us he ought not to be
prohibited from receiving it who knows no burning though in the midst of
fire.  But, when not the love of producing offspring but pleasure
dominates in the act of intercourse, married persons have something to
mourn over in their intercourse.  For holy preaching concedes them this,
and yet in the very concession shakes the mind with fear.  <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_80"></span>For, when
the Apostle Paul said, *Who cannot contain let him have his own wife,*
he straightway took care to add, *But I speak this by way of indulgence,
not by way of command* ([1 Cor. vii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p62.3"></span>).  For what is just and right is not
indulged:  what he spoke of as indulged he shewed to be a fault.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p63"></span>Furthermore it is to be attentively
considered that the Lord in mount Sinai, when about to speak to the
people, first charged the same people to abstain from women.  And if
there, where the Lord spoke to men through a subject creature, purity of
body was required with such careful provision that they who were to hear
the words of God might not have intercourse with women, how much more
ought those who receive the Body of the Almighty Lord to keep purity of
the flesh in themselves, lest they be weighed down by the greatness of
the inestimable mystery!  Hence also it is said through the priest to
David concerning his servants, that if they were pure from women they
might eat the shew bread; which they might not receive at all unless
David first declared them to be pure from women.  Still a man who after
intercourse with his wife has been washed with water may receive even
the mystery of sacred communion, since according to the opinion above
expressed it was allowable for him to enter the church.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p64"></span>Augustine’s eleventh question.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p65"></span>I ask also whether after an illusion,
such is accustomed to occur in dreams, any one may receive the body of
the Lord, or, if he be a priest, celebrate the sacred mysteries?

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p66"></span>Answer of the blessed Pope Gregory.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p67"></span>Such a one the Testament of the old
law, as we have already said in the last section, declares indeed to be
polluted, and does not allow to enter the church until the evening, or
without being washed with water.  But one who understands this not only
with special reference to that people at that time, but also
spiritually, will regard it under the same intellectual conception that
we have spoken of before; namely, that he has, as it were, an illusion
in a dream who, being tempted by uncleanness, is defiled in thought by
true images.  But he is to be washed with water in the sense of washing
away the sins of thought with tears.  And, unless the fire of temptation
has passed away, he should feel himself to be guilty, as it were, until
the evening.

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p68"></span>But in this same illusion
discrimination is very necessary, since it ought to be nicely considered
from what cause it occurs to the mind of the sleeper.  For sometimes it
happens from surfeit, sometimes from superfluity or infirmity of nature,
sometimes from cogitation.  And indeed when it has come to pass from
superfluity or infirmity of nature, it is by no means to be viewed with
alarm, since the mind is to be commiserated as having endured it
unwittingly rather than as having done it.  But when the appetite of
gluttony in taking food is carried beyond measure, and consequently the
receptacles of the humours are loaded, the mind has therefore some
guilt, yet not to the extent of prohibition from receiving the sacred
mystery, or celebrating the solemnities of mass, when perchance a
festival day demands it, or necessity itself requires the mystery to be
exhibited by reason of there being no other priest in the place.  For,
if others competent to execute the mystery are present, an illusion
caused by surfeit ought not to debar from receiving the sacred mystery,
though immolation of the sacred mystery ought, as I think, to be humbly
abstained from; provided only that foul imagination has not shaken the
soul of the sleeper.  For there are some to whom the illusion for the
most part so arises that their mind, though in the body which sleeps, is
not defiled by foul imaginations.  With regard to this, there is one
case in which it is shewn that the soul itself is guilty, not being free
even from its own judgment; that is where, while it remembers having
seen nothing when the body was asleep, it still remembers having fallen
into lewdness when the body was awake.  But, if the illusion arises in
the soul of the sleeper from foul cogitation while he was awake, the
mind’s guilt is patent to itself.  For a man sees from what root that
defilement proceeded, if he has endured unwittingly what he wittingly
cogitated.  But it is to be considered whether the cogitation ensued
from suggestion, or delight, or sinful consent.  For there are three
ways in which all sin is accomplished; to wit, by suggestion, by
delight, and by consent.  Suggestion is through the devil, delight
through the flesh, consent through the spirit; since, in the case of the
first sin, the serpent suggested it, Eve, as the flesh, delighted in it,
but Adam, as the spirit, consented to it.  And great discernment is
needed, that the mind may sit as judge of itself to distinguish between
suggestion and delight, between delight and consent.  For, when the evil
spirit suggests sin in the soul, if no delight in sin should follow, no
sin is in any wise committed.  But, when the flesh has begun to take
delight, then sin has its commencement.  But, if it sinks to deliberate
consent, then sin is known to be completed.  In suggestion therefore is
the seed of sin, in delight its nutriment, in consent its completion. 
And it often hap<span id="page_81">p. 81</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-Page_81"></span>pens that what the evil spirit sows in
the thought the flesh draws into delight, and yet the mind does not
consent to this delight.  And, while the flesh cannot be delighted
without the soul, still the mind, though struggling against the
pleasures of the flesh, is in some way bound against its will in carnal
delight, so as by force of reason to protest against it and not consent
to it, and yet to be bound by the delight, but still to groan
exceedingly for being bound.  Whence even that chief soldier of the
heavenly army groaned, saying, *I see another law in my members fighting
against the law of my mind, and bringing me into captivity to the law of
sin which is in my members* ([Rom. vii.
23](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#023)<span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p68.1"></span>).  Yet, if he was a captive, he did not
fight.  But he did fight too, and therefore he was not a captive.  And
therefore he fought by the law of the mind, which the law which is in
the members fought against.  If he thus fought, he was not a captive. 
Behold then man is, so to speak, both a captive and free:  free with
regard to the righteousness which he loves; a captive with regard to the
delight which he endures unwillingly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_173"></span>[74:174](2130112.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p3"></span> This important epistle is given below
as published in the Benedictine edition, with notes pointing out its
main variations from Bede (*H. E.* i. 27), and with addition of the
Preface, first published by Mansi (*Supplem. ad Concil. tom.* vi., p.
385) from a <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p3.1"></span>ms.</span> Codex of the eighth century
(*Cod. Lucen.*).  Bede’s copy may be regarded as the most authentic,
having been brought to him from Rome by Nothelm, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 715–731 (Bede *H. E. Præf.*). 
However, he does not give the Preface, which has internal evidence of
authenticity.  Subsequently to Nothelm’s visit to Rome, it would seem
that the whole epistle had been mislaid there, not having been kept
among the rest of Gregory’s letters.  For St. Boniface, <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.vii.xxx-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 736 (*Epist.
XL. ad Nothelm. Episc Cantuar.*) requests Nothelm to send him a copy of
these Questions and Answers from England, saying that no copy of them
could at that time be found at Rome.  They were, we may conclude,
discovered subsequently.  Internal evidence, as well as historic
probability, supports the superior genuineness of Bede’s copy (Cf.
*Councils, &c., relating to Great Britain and Ireland,* Oxf., 1871. 
Vol. III., p. 32.)  The edition of the Epistle (*Cod. Lucen.*) above
referred to as published by Mansi, though containing several variations,
agrees in many respects with that of Bede, and especially in the absence
of “the request of Augustine” (*obsecratio Augustini*) and “the grant of
Gregory” (*Concessio Gregorii*) after the answer to the ninth question. 
See note there.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[75:175](2130112.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p11"></span> In Bede, and *Cod. Luc* , this
question does not appear, what follows as a reply to it being in
continuation of the answer to Question I.  The form of the beginning of
the reply, “Si qui vero sunt clerici,” favors it having been so.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[76:176](2130112.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p32"></span> This allowance of marriage between
second cousins seems to have caused surprise in some quarters.  Cf.
Epistle of Felix of Messana to Gregory (XIV. 16).  The motive of St.
Boniface in his letter to Nothelm, referred to above under note 1, in
which he asked for a copy of these Questions and Answers, seems to have
been a desire to ascertain whether Gregory had really allowed such
marriages.  He writes, “in qua inter cætera capitula continetur quod in
tertia generatione propinquitatis fidelibus liceat matrimonia copulare.”

<span id="fn_176"></span>[76:177](2130112.htm#fr_176) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p34"></span> This question is not in Bede, or in
*Cod. Lucens*., what follows being given as a continuation of the
preceding answer.  It begins with “Quia vero.”  Cf. note 2.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[76:178](2130112.htm#fr_177) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p42"></span> It is to be observed that Gregory,
though aware of the existence of British bishops, as his answer to the
following questions shews, does not contemplate their taking part in
ordinations.  He may have been unwilling to invite their co-operation
till assured of their orthodoxy and submission to the Roman See.  The
failure of Augustine’s negotiations with them has been attributed to his
own imperious attitude towards them.  But it is at least a question
whether his instructions did not justify the position he assumed (see
Bede, *H. E.* II. 2.).

<span id="fn_178"></span>[77:179](2130112.htm#fr_178) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p47"></span> Cf. XI. 68.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[77:180](2130112.htm#fr_179) <span
id="ii.vii.xxx-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxx-p50"></span> This question, with the answer to it,
is absent from Bede, and *Cod. Lucens* , and may be regarded as an
interpolation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Augustine, Bishop of the Angli.](2130113)
