[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130249)  [Next](2130251.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p1"></span> <span id="page_269">p. 269</span> <span
id="iii.vi.iv-Page_269"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.iv-p1.1"></span>Hymn III.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.iv-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Christ with chrism, lo! He is
sealing the newborn lambs in His flock!*)

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p3"></span>1.  Christ and chrism are conjoined; the
secret with the visible is mingled:  the chrism anoints visibly,—Christ
seals secretly, the lambs newborn and spiritual, the prize of His
twofold victory; for He engendered it of the chrism, and He gave it
birth of the water.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p4"></span>2.  How exalted are your Orders!  For she
that was a sinner anointed, as a handmaid, the feet of her Lord.  *But*
for you, as though *His* minister, Christ by the hand of His servants,
seals and anoints your bodies.  It befits Him the Lord of the flock,
that in His own person He seal His sheep.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p5"></span>3.  Since then she, that sinner, stood in
need of forgiveness, the anointing was for her an offering, and by it
her love reconciled her Lord.  But you who are the flock, among the
profane and unbelievers, the Truth by the chrism is your seal, to
separate you from the strayed.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p6"></span>4.  From the peoples he separated the
People, by the former seal of circumcision; but by the seal of
anointing, the peoples He separates from the People.  When the peoples
were in error, the People He separated from the peoples; now when the
People has erred from Him, He separates the peoples from thence.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p7"></span>5.  Of the dust of the pure soil, Naaman
bore away and returned to his place; that he by this holy dust, might be
separated and known from the unclean.  The chrism of Christ separates,
the sons of the mystery from strangers:  and by it they that are within
are separated, and known from them that are without.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p8"></span>6.  The oil which Elijah multiplied,
might be tasted with the mouth; for the cruse was that of the widow, it
was not that of the chrism.  The oil of our Lord that is in the cruse,
it is not food for the mouth:  the sinner *that was* a wolf without, it
makes him a lamb in the flock.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p9"></span>7.  The chrism of the meek and lowly One,
changes the stubborn *to be* like its Lord.  The Gentiles were wolves
and feared, the severe rod of Moses.  Lo! the chrism seals *them* and
makes, a flock of sheep out of the wolves!  And the wolves that had fled
from the rod, lo! they have taken refuge in the Cross!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p10"></span>8.  The leaf of olive arrived, brought
as a figure of the anointing; the sons of the Ark rejoiced to greet it,
for it bore good tidings of deliverance.  Thus also ye rejoiced to greet
it, even this holy anointing.  The bodies of sinners were glad in it,
for it brought good tidings of deliverance.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p11"></span>9.  The oil again that Jacob poured,
upon the stone when he sealed it, that it should be between him and God,
and that he might offer there his tithes; lo! in it is a symbol of your
bodies, *how* by chrism they are sealed *as* holy, and become temples
for God, where He shall be served by your sacrifices.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p12"></span>10.  When Moses had sealed and anointed,
the sons of Aaron the Levite, the fire consumed their bodies; the fire
spared their vestments.  But ye my brethren blessed are ye, for the fire
of grace has come down, has consumed utterly your offences, and cleansed
and hallowed your bodies!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p13"></span>11.  As for the anointing of Aaron my
brethren, it was the vile blood of beasts, *that* it sprinkled in the
horns of the altar.  The anointing of truth is this; wherein the living
and all-lifegiving Blood, is sprinkled inwardly in your bodies, is
mingled in your understandings, is infused through your inmost chambers.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p14"></span>12.  The anointed priests used to offer,
the slain bodies of beasts; Ye, O anointed <span id="page_270">p.
270</span> <span id="iii.vi.iv-Page_270"></span>and excelling, your
offerings *are* your *own* bodies.  The anointed Levites offered, the
inward parts *taken*, from beasts:  ye have excelled the Levites, for
your hearts ye have Consecrated.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p15"></span>13.  The anointing of the People was—a
foreshadowing of Christ; their rod a mystery of the Cross; their lamb a
type of the Only begotten; their tabernacle a mystery of your Churches;
their circumcision a sign of your sealing.  Under the shadow of your
goodly thing, sat the People of old.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p16"></span>14.  Thus the truth is likened, to a
great shadowing tree:  it cast its shade on the People; it struck its
root among the peoples.  The People abode under its shadows, whose
shadows were its mysteries; but the Gentiles lodged on its bough, and
plucked and ate of its fruits.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p17"></span>15.  As *for* the anointing of Saul to
be king; the sweeter was its savour, so much fouler was the savour of
his heart.  The Spirit struck him and fled.  Your anointing which ye
have is greater; for your minds are censers, in your temples the Spirit
exults, a chamber forever shall ye be unto Him.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p18"></span>16.  As *for* the anointing of David my
brethren; the Spirit came down and made sweet savour, in the heart of
the man wherein He delighted; the savour of his heart *was* as the
savour of his action.  The Spirit dwelt in him and made song in him. 
Your anointing which ye have is greater, for Father and Son and Holy
Ghost, have moved and come down to dwell in you.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p19"></span>17.  When the leper of old was cleansed,
the priest used to seal him with oil, and to lead him to the
waterspring.  The type has passed and the truth is come; lo! with chrism
have ye been sealed, in baptism ye are perfected, in the flock ye are
intermixed, from the Body ye are nourished.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p20"></span>18.  What leper when he has been
cleansed, turns again and desires his leprosy?  Ye have put off
transgressions—forsake it!  None puts on the leprosy he had put off.  It
has fallen and sunk—let it not be drawn out!  It is wasted and worn—let
it not be renewed!  Let not corruption come out upon you, whom the
chrism of Christ has anointed!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p21"></span>19.  The vessel moulded of clay, gains
beauty from the water, receives strength from the fire; *but* if it
slips it is ruined, it cannot be afresh renewed.  Ye are vessels of
grace; be ye ware of it, even of justice, for it grants not two
renewals.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p22"></span>20.  How like are ye in comparison, with
the Prophet whom the fish yielded up!  The Devourer has given you back
for he was constrained, by the Power Which constrained the fish.  Jonah
was for you *as* a mirror, since not again did the fish swallow him, let
not again the Devourer swallow you:  being yielded up be ye like Jonah!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p23"></span>21.  Goodly ointment on the head of our
Lord did Mary pour; its savour was fragrant through all the house. 
Likewise the savour of your anointing, has been fragrant and perfumed
the heavens, to the Watchers on high; doing pleasure to Satan its savour
*is* overpowering; to God its odour *is* sweet.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p24"></span>22.  The crowds in the desert were like
unto sheep that have no shepherd.  The Merciful became their shepherd,
and multiplied to them the pasture of bread.  Yea, blessed *are* ye that
are perfect, that are sealed *as* lambs of Christ, that of His Body and
Blood are made worthy; the Pastor Himself is become pasture for you!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p25"></span>23.  Out of water He made the wine, He
gave *it* for drink to the youths in the feast.  For you who are keeping
the fast, better is the unction than drink.  In His wine the betrothed
are wedded, by His oil the wedded are sanctified.  By His wine *is*
union; by His oil sanctification.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p26"></span>24.  The sheep of Christ leaped for joy,
to receive the seal of life, that ensign of <span id="page_271">p.
271</span> <span id="iii.vi.iv-Page_271"></span>kings which has ever put
sin to flight.  The Wicked by Thy ensign is routed, iniquities by Thy
sign are scattered.  Come, ye sheep, receive your seal, which puts to
flight them that devour you!

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p27"></span>25.  Come, ye lambs, receive your seal,
for it is truth that is your seal!  This is the seal that separates,
them of the household from strangers.  The steel circumcised alike, the
gainsayers and the sons of Hagar.  If circumcision *be* the sign of the
sheep, lo! by it the goats are signed.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p28"></span>26.  But ye, *who are* the new flock,
have put off the doings of wolves, and *as* lambs are made like to the
Lamb.  One by changing has changed all; the Lamb to the wolves gave
Himself to be slain; *the wolves* rushed and devoured Him and became
lambs; for the Shepherd was changed into a Lamb; likewise the wolf
forgot his nature.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p29"></span>27.  Look on me also in Thy mercy! be
not branded on me the seal, of the goats the sons of the left hand! let
not Thy sheep become a goat!  For though to justify myself I sufficed
not, yet to be a sinner I willed not.  Turn *thine eyes*, O my Lord,
from what I have done, and seek not only what I have willed.

<span id="iii.vi.iv-p30"></span>28.  From them that write and them that
preach, from them that hear and them that are sealed, let glory go up to
Christ, and through Him to His Father *be* exaltation!  He Who gives
words to them that speak, and gives voice to them that preach, has given
understanding to them that hear, and consecrates chrism for him that is
sealed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn IV.](2130251.md)
