[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130205)  [Next](2130207) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xxx-p1.1"></span>Hymn XLI.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p2"></span>1.  The Evil One said, “I fear Him, even
Jesus, lest He destroy my arts.  For lo! I am thousands of years old,
and never have I had repose.  I have seen nothing established, that I
have turned from and left.  There has come One making the unchaste
pure:  there is sorrow since He has destroyed all that I had built. 
Many have been my labours and my teachings, that I might cover all
creation with all evils.  *R., Blessed is He Who came and laid bare the
wiles of the Crafty One!*

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p3"></span>2.  I matched my speed with the swift,
and I outstripped them:  I waged war; the tumult of multitudes was
armour to me.  In the tumult of the people I rejoiced, because it gave
me ready room, for grievous is the <span id="page_204">p. 204</span>
<span id="iii.iv.xxx-Page_204"></span>onslaught of multitudes.  By the
strength of multitudes I raised a great mountain, a tower I stretched
unto heaven.  If they waged war with the Height, how *much more* shall
they conquer Him whose warfare is on earth?

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p4"></span>3.  As time serves and as help offers, I
wage war, but cautiously.  The people used to hear that God is one; they
made for themselves a multitude of gods.  And when they saw the Son of
God, they made haste to the One God, that as though confessing God they
might deny Him, and as though in zeal might flee from Him; so that they
in all times perverse shall be found to be without God.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p5"></span>4.  Lo! I am ancient of many years, and
no infant have I ever rejected.  The burden of children have I ofttimes
borne, so that from the beginning I might make them acquire habits that
are not goodly, that their faults might grow up with them.  But there
are foolish fathers, who do not crush the seed that I have sown in their
sons; and there are *some* who like good husbandmen, root up faults from
the mind of their children.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p6"></span>5.  As with a chain I have bound men
with sloth, and they sat in idleness.  I have drawn away their senses
from all good things; their eyes from reading, their mouths from singing
praise, their understanding from doctrine.  For hurtful and vain fables
how eager *are they*; for empty talk *how* ready!  If the word of life
fell among them, they either thrust it from them, or rose and went forth
from its presence.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p7"></span>6.  How many Satans are there among men!
and me even me alone every man curses.  For lo! the anger of men—it is a
devil that grinds him every day.  Demons are like wayfarers, who depart
if they are compelled:  but against anger though all righteous men
adjure, it is not rooted out from its place.  Instead of pernicious
envy, every one hates a weak and wretched demon.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p8"></span>7.  The enchanter is put to shame with
the wizard, who every day tames serpents.  The viper that is within him
is out of his power; for the lust that is within him he tames not. 
Secret sin like an asp, when it breathes on him he is scorched.  Even
when he takes the viper through his cunning, delusion smites him
secretly.  He lulls the snake by his incantations:  he wakens against
himself mighty wrath by his incantations.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p9"></span>8.  I set *my* stings and I sat and
waited:  who is long-enduring *as I* with all?  Beside the
patient-spirited I sat, and step by step I bewitched him, so that he
came unto despair.  Him who was ashamed of his transgressions, habits
subdued him:  little by little I mastered him, till he became under the
yoke, till he came in to it and was used to it and did not even wish to
go forth.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p10"></span>9.  I perceived and saw that the
long-enduring is he that can subdue all.  At the time when I conquered
Adam, he was *but* one.  I left him till he had begotten *children*, and
I sought for myself another task, for idleness is not to my taste.  I
counted the sands of the sea, that thereby I might make my spirit
patient, and might prove my memory whether it would suffice, for the
sons of men when they were multiplied.  Before they were multiplied, I
proved them in many things.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p11"></span>10.  The servants of the Evil One
disputed with him, and they refuted his words with their rejoinder. 
“But lo! Elisha brought the dead to life, and conquered death in the
upper chamber, and brought to life the widow’s son.  Lo! now is he in
bondage in Sheol.”  But because the reasoning of the Evil One was very
powerful, with their own words he refuted their words.  “How has Elisha
been overcome?  Lo! in Sheol he brought the dead to life by his bones.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p12"></span>11.  “If Elisha, who was *of* small
*power*, was great in might in the midst of Sheol, and if so be he
brought one dead to life therein, how many dead then will be raised
therein, by the death of Jesus the mighty!  Hence even from this
consider ye, how much greater therefore is Jesus, than we my comrades. 
For lo! by His craftiness He de<span id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xxx-Page_205"></span>ceived you, and ye sufficed not to
determine His greatness when ye compared Him to the prophets.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p13"></span>12.  “Your consolations are *of* small
power,” said the Evil One to them of his company.  “For He Who brought
Lazarus to life though dead, how can Death suffice against Him?  And if
Death conquers Him, it is that He wills to be subdued unto him; and if
so be He wills to be subdued, fear ye greatly, for He dies not in vain. 
He has wrought in us great terror, lest when dying He may enter in to
raise Adam to life.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p14"></span>13.  Death looked forth from within his
den, and marvelled when he saw our Lord crucified, and he said “O raiser
of the dead to life where *art* thou!  Thou shalt be to me *for* meat,
instead of the sweet Lazarus, whose savour lo! it is still in my mouth. 
Jairus’ daughter shall come and see this Thy cross.  The widow’s son
gazes on Thee.  A tree caught Adam for me:  blessed be the Cross which
has caught for me the Son of David!”

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p15"></span>14.  Death opened his mouth and said,
“Hast Thou not heard, O Son of Mary, how Moses was great and excellent
above all? became a God and wrought *the works* of God? slew the
first-born and saved the first-born? turned aside the pestilence from
the living?  To the mount I went up with Moses, and He Whose glory be
blessed gave him to me from hand to hand.  For however great the son of
Adam becomes, dust he is and to his dust returns, because he is of the
ground.”

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p16"></span>15.  Satan came with his servants, that
he might see our Lord cast into Sheol, and might rejoice with Death his
Counsellor; and he saw Him sorrowful and mourning, because of the dead
who at the voice of the Firstborn, lived and came forth thence even from
Sheol.  The Evil One arose to console Death his kinsman. “Thou hast not
destroyed as much as thou wast able.  Even as Jesus is in thy midst, to
thy hand shall come they that have lived and that live.

<span id="iii.iv.xxx-p17"></span>16.  “Open for us to see Him, yea and
mock Him:  let us answer and say, ‘Where is Thy power?  For lo! three
days have passed for Him, and let us say to Him, O Thou of three days,
Who didst raise Lazarus, when he had lain four days, raise Thine own
self.’”  Death opened the gates of Sheol, and there shone from it the
splendour of the face of our Lord; and like the men of Sodom they were
smitten; they groped and sought the gate of Sheol, which they had lost.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XLII.](2130207)
