[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130065)  [Next](2130067.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lx"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p2"></span>*From S. Columbanus to Pope Gregory* <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) .

<span id="ii.v.lx-p8"></span>To the holy lord, and father in Christ, the
<span id="page_39">p. 39</span> <span id="ii.v.lx-Page_39"></span>Roman
\[*pope*\], most fair ornament of the Church, a certain most august
flower, as it were, of the whole of withering Europe, distinguished
speculator, as enjoying a divine contemplation of purity (?) <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md) .  I, Bargoma <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) , poor dove in Christ, send greeting.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p11"></span>Grace to thee and peace from God the
Father \[*and*\] our \[*Lord*\] Jesus Christ.  I am pleased to think, O
holy pope, that it will seem to thee nothing extravagant to be
interrogated about Easter, according to that canticle, *Ask thy father,
and he will shew thee; thine elders and they will tell thee* ([Deut.
xxxii. 7](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#007.md)<span
id="ii.v.lx-p11.1"></span>).  For, though on me, who am indeed a trifler
(*micrologo*) may be branded that excellent expression of a certain wise
man, who is reported to have said, on seeing a certain woman,
*contupictam* <span id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) , *I do not admire
the art, but I admire the brow*, in that I who am vile write to thee
that art illustrious; yet, relying on my confidence in shy evangelical
humility, I presume to write to thee, and impose on thee the matter of
my grief.  For writing is not in vain, when necessity compels one to
write, though it be to one’s betters.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p13"></span>What, then, dost thou say concerning
Easter on the 21st or 22nd day of the moon, which (with thy peace be it
said) is proved by many calculators not to be Easter, but in truth a
time of darkness?  For it is not unknown, as I believe, to thy
Efficiency, how Anatolius <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) (a man of
wonderful learning, as says Saint Hieronymus, extracts from whose
writings Eusebius, bishop of Cæsarea, inserted in his Ecclesiastical
History, and Saint Hieronymus praised this same work about Easter in his
catalogue) disputes with strong disapprobation about this age of the
moon.  For against the Gallican *Rimarii* <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) , who erred, as he says, about Easter, he
introduced an awful sentence, saying, *Certainly, if the rising of the
moon be delayed till the end of two watches, which indicates midnight,
light does not overcome darkness, but darkness light; which thing is
certainly not allowable in the Easter Festival, namely, that any part of
the darkness should dominate over the light, since the solemnity of the
Lord’s Resurrection is light, and there is no communion of light with
darkness.  And, if the moon has not shone forth till the third watch,
there is no doubt that the moon has risen on its 21st or 22nd day, in
which it is not possible for a true Paschal offering to be made.  For
those who lay down that it is possible for a true Easter to be
celebrated at this age of the moon, not only are unable to affirm this
by authority of divine Scripture, but also incur the guilt of sacrilege
and contumacy and peril of their souls, while affirming that the true
Light, which dominates over all darkness, can be offered while there is
any domination of darkness.  Also in the book of holy dogma we read,
Easter, that is, the solemnity of the Lord’s Resurrection, cannot be
celebrated before the beginning of the vernal equinox is past, to wit,
that it may not come before the vernal equinox* <span
id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) :  which rule assuredly <span
id="page_40">p. 40</span> <span
id="ii.v.lx-Page_40"></span>Victorius <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md) has gone beyond in his cycle, and hereby
has already introduced error into Gaul, or to speak less boldly, has
confirmed one of old standing.  For indeed how can either of these
things stand with reason; either that the Lord’s Resurrection should be
celebrated before His Passion (the thought of which is absurd), or that
the seven days sanctioned by the Lord’s command in the Law, during which
only it is enjoined that the Lord’s Passover could lawfully be eaten
(which are to be numbered from the 14th day of the moon to the 20th),
should against law and right be exceeded?  For a moon in its 21st or
22nd day is out of the dominion of light, as having risen at that time
after midnight; and, when darkness overcomes light, it is said to be
impious to keep the solemnity of light.  Why then dost thou, who art so
wise, the brilliant lights indeed of whose sacred genius are diffused,
as in ancient times, through the world,—why dost thou keep a dark
Easter?  I wonder, I confess, that this error of Gaul, *ac si*
*Schynteneum* <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md) , has not long ago
been swept away by thee; unless I should perchance suppose, what I can
hardly believe, that, as it is evident that thou hast not corrected it,
it has thy approval.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p19"></span>In another way, however, may thy
Expertness be more honourably excused, if, fearing to subject thyself to
the mark of Hermagoric <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) novelty,
thou art content with the authority of thy predecessors, and especially
of pope Leo.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p21"></span>Do not, I pray thee, in such a question
trust to humility only or to gravity, which are often deceived, *Better*
by far *is a living dog* in this problem *than a dead lion* ([Eccles.
ix. 4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#004.md)<span
id="ii.v.lx-p21.1"></span>).  For a living saint may correct what had
not been corrected by another who came before him.  For know thou that
by our masters and the Irish ancients, who were philosophers and most
wise computists in constructing calculations, Victorius was not
received, but held rather worthy of ridicule or of excuse than as
carrying authority.  Wherefore to me, as a timid stranger rather than as
a sciolist, afford the support of thy judgment, and disdain not to send
us speedily the suffrage of thy Placability for assuaging this tempest
which surrounds us; since, after so many authors whom I have read, I am
not satisfied with that one sentence of those bishops who say only, *We
ought not to keep the Passover with the Jews.*  For this is what the
bishop Victor formerly said; but none of the Easterns accepted his
figment <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) .  But this the benumbing
(*numb*?) backbone of Dagon; this the dotage of error drinks in <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) .  Of what worth, I ask, is this
sentence, so frivolous and so rude and resting, as it does, on no
testimonies of sacred Scripture; *We ought not to keep the Passover with
the Jews?*  What has it to do with the question?  Are the reprobate Jews
to be supposed to keep the Passover now, seeing that they are without a
temple, outside Jerusalem, and Christ, who was formerly prefigured,
having been crucified by them?  Or, can it be rightly supposed that the
14th day of the moon for the Passover was of their own appointment, and
is it not rather to be acknowledged to be of God’s, who alone knew
clearly with what mysterious meaning the 14th day of the moon was chosen
for the passage \[*out of Egypt*\].  Perhaps to wise men and the like of
thee this may be in some degree clearer than to others.  As to those who
make this objection, although without authority, let them upbraid God
for that He did not then beforehand guard against the contumacy of the
Jews by enjoining on them in the Law nine days of unleavened bread, if
He would not have us keep the Passover with them, so that the beginning
of our solemnity should not exceed the end of theirs.  For, if Easter is
to be celebrated on the 21st <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> <span
id="ii.v.lx-Page_41"></span>or 22nd day, from the 14th to the 22nd nine
days will be reckoned, that is, seven ordered by God, and two added by
men.  But, if it is allowed for men to add anything of their own accord
to divine decree, I ask whether this may not seem opposed to that
sentence of Deuteronomy, *Lo* (he saith), *the word which I give unto
thee, thou shalt not add unto it nor take from it* ([Deut. iv.
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.lx-p23.5"></span>.md).

<span id="ii.v.lx-p24"></span>But in writing all this more forwardly
than humbly, I know that I have involved myself in an Euripus of
presumption attended with great difficulty, being perchance unskilled to
steer out of it.  Nor does it befit our place or rank that anything
should be suggested in the way of discussion to thy great authority, and
that my Western letters should ridiculously solicit thee, who sittest
legitimately on the seat of the apostle and key-bearer Peter, on the
subject of Easter.  But thou oughtest to consider not so much worthless
me in this matter as many masters, both departed and now living, who
confirm what I have pointed out, and suppose thyself to be holding a
colloquy with them:  for know that I open my thick-lipped month
dutifully though it may be incoherently and extravagantly.  It is for
thee, therefore, either to excuse or to condemn Victorius, knowing that,
if thou approvest him, it will be a question of faith between thee and
the aforesaid Hieronymus, seeing that he approved Anatolius, who is
opposed to Victorius; so that whoso follows the one cannot receive the
other.  Let, then, thy Vigilance take thought that, in approving the
faith of one of the two authors aforesaid who are mutually opposed to
each other, there be no dissonance, when thou pronouncest thy opinion,
between thee and Hieronymus, lest we should be on all sides in a strait,
as to whether we should agree with thee or with him.  Spare the weak in
this matter, lest thou exhibit the scandal of diversity.  For I frankly
acknowledge to thee that any one who goes against the authority of Saint
Hieronymus will be one to be repudiated as a heretic among the churches
of the West:  for they accommodate their faith in all respects
unhesitatingly to him with regard to the Divine Scriptures.  But let
this suffice with respect to Easter.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p25"></span>But I ask what thy judgment is about those
bishops whom thou hast written of as simoniacal, and whom the writer
Giltas <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) calls pests.  Should
communion be had with them?  For there are known to be many such in this
province, whereby the matter is made more serious.  Or as to others, who
having been polluted in their diaconate, are afterwards elected to the
rank of bishops?  For there are some whom we know to have conscientious
scruples on these grounds; and in conferring with our littleness about
them, they wished to know for certain whether they may minister without
peril after such transgressions; that is, either after having bought
their rank for money, or after adultery in their diaconate.  I mean,
however, concealed adultery with their dependents <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) , which with our teachers is accounted
as no less criminal.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p28"></span>As to a third head of enquiry, say in
reply, I pray thee, if it is not troublesome, what should be done in the
case of those monks who for a closer sight of God, or inflamed by a
longing for a more perfect life, going against their vows, leave the
places of their first conversion, and, against the will of their abbots,
the fervour of monks compelling them, either go free or fly to deserts. 
The author Vennianus enquired about these of Giltas, who replied to him
most elegantly:  yet still to one who is anxious to learn there is ever
an increase of greater fear.  These things, and much more which
epistolary brevity does not admit of, might well have been enquired
about more humbly and more clearly in a personal interview, but that
weakness of body and the care of my fellow-pilgrims keeps me bound at
home, though desirous of going to thee, so as to draw from that
spiritual vein of a living well and from the living water of knowledge
flowing from heaven and springing up unto eternal life.  And, if my body
were to follow my mind, Rome would once more be in danger of being
itself despised; seeing that—even as we read in the narration of the
learned Hieronymus how certain persons once came to Rome from the utmost
boundaries of the Heuline coast <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102.md)
; and then (wonderful to be told) sought something else outside of
Rome—so I too, saving reverence for the ashes of the saints should seek
out longingly, not Rome but thee:  for, though I confess myself not to
be wise, but athirst, I should do this same thing if I had time and
opportunity.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p30"></span>I have read thy book containing the
Pastoral Rule, short in style, lengthy in teaching, full of mysteries;
and acknowledge it to be a work sweeter than honey to one that is in
<span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span id="ii.v.lx-Page_42"></span>need. 
Wherefore bestow, I pray thee, on me who am athirst for what is thine,
the works on Ezekiel, which, as I have heard, thou hast elaborated with
wonderful genius.  I have read the six books of Hieronymus on that
prophet; but he has not expounded the middle part.  But, if thou wilt do
me the favour, send for me to the city some of thy remaining writings;
to wit, the concluding expositions of one book, and (? *namely*) the
Song of Songs from that place where it is said, *I will go to the
mountain of myrrh and the hill of frankincense*, to the end, treated
with short comments, either of others, or thine own:  and I beg that
thou wouldest expound the whole obscurity of Zachariah, and make
manifest its hidden meaning, that Western blindness may give thee thanks
for this.  I make unreasonable demands, and ask to have great things
told me:  who can fail to see this?  But it is true also that thou hast
great things, and knowest well that from a little less, and from much
more should be put out to use.  Let charity induce thee to write in
reply; let not the roughness of my letter hinder thee from expounding,
seeing that it is my mode of expression that has been in fault, and I
have it in my heart to pay thee due honour.  It was for me to provoke,
to interrogate, to request:  it is for thee not to refuse what thou hast
received freely, to put thy talent out to use, to give to him that asks
the bread of doctrine, as Christ enjoins.  Peace be to thee and thine;
pardon my forwardness, blessed pope, in that I have written so boldly;
and I pray thee in thy holy prayers to our common Lord to pray for me, a
most vile sinner.  I think it quite superfluous to commend to thee my
people, whom the Saviour judges fit to be received, as walking in His
name; and if, as I have heard from thy holy Candidus <span
id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103.md) , thou shouldest be disposed to say in
reply that things confirmed by ancient usage cannot be changed, error is
manifestly ancient; but truth which reproves it is ever more ancient
still.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_88"></span>[38:89](2130066.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p3"></span> This epistle of the Irish saint Columbanus
to Gregory was added to the *Registrum Epistolarum* by the Benedictine
editors, having been first published, with other writings of S.
Columban, by Patrick Fleming in *Collectanea sacra*; *Lovan.* <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lx-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 1667.  (See
Galland. *Bibliotheca veterum patrum*.  *Sæc. VI. circ.* <span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lx-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span> 589.)  It is
assigned by the Benedictines to <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p3.3"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9, and hence placed at the end
of Book IX. of Gregory’s Epistles.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p4"></span>At this time St. Columban was at the
monastery founded by him at Luxovium (*Luxueil*) among the Vosges
mountains in Burgundy over which country Theoderic II. was now king.  He
had already given offence in Gaul, not only by his protest in life and
teaching against prevalent laxity, but also by his continuing to observe
and uphold the custom of his own Celtic Church with regard to the time
for keeping Easter, which differed from what had now been adopted by
Rome and prevailed in the West generally.  The main purpose of this
epistle is to plead with pope Gregory for approval of the Celtic
tradition.  Subsequently, a synod being held in Gaul for considering the
question, he addressed the bishops there assembled in a letter which is
also extant, defending, as in this epistle, the Celtic usage, and
pleading for being allowed at any rate to follow it himself in peace (S.
Columbani, Ep. II. *in Collectan. sacr*.)

<span id="ii.v.lx-p5"></span>It may be observed in the epistle before
us, as also in a subsequent one to pope Boniface IV. with reference to
the same subject (*S. Columbani*, Ep. V.; *Collectan. sacr*), that,
though addressing the bishop of Rome in language of the utmost
deference, and recognizing his high position, he shews no disposition to
submit to his authority; telling him on the contrary that should he
declare himself so as to contradict the supposed teaching of St. Jerome,
he would be rejected as heretical by all the Celtic churches.  And
throughout the letter there runs a vein of sarcasm.  There is no extant
reply from Gregory to the letter.  Probably none was sent.  Possibly the
letter never reached its destination:  for in the subsequent letter,
above referred to, to Boniface IV. Columban says, “Once and again Satan
hindered the bearers of our letters written formerly to pope Gregory of
good memory, which are subjoined below.”

<span id="ii.v.lx-p6"></span>The point at issue, and Columban’s
argument, as it appears in this letter, may be briefly stated thus. 
Apart from any differences in the cycles for calculating the true day of
the Paschal full moon in successive years, there was this difference
between the Celtic and Roman usages.  While all agreed in keeping Easter
on a Sunday, the Celtic use was to keep it on the day of the Paschal
full moon itself (i.e. the calculated 14th day of the moon falling on,
or next after, the Vernal Equinox), in case of such a day falling on a
Sunday; whereas the Roman was, in such a case, to defer their Easter
celebration till the following Sunday, so as to avoid coincidence with
the actual day of the Jewish Passover.  Hence, in Bede’s account of the
controversy on the subject between the British and Scottish (i.e. Irish)
Churches on the one hand and the Roman on the other, he speaks of the
former keeping their Easter between the 14th and the 20th days of the
moon inclusive, but the latter between the 15th and the 21st (Bede, *H.
E.* II. 2; III. 25).  In Gaul however, as appears from the letter before
us, it was the rule to defer Easter for a week in case of the day of the
Paschal full moon (i.e. the 14th) falling on a Saturday, so as to avoid
coincidence even with the 15th day of the moon.  Hence, agreeing with
Bede as to the Celtic usage being to keep Easter between the 14th and
20th days, he speaks not of the 15th and 21st, but of the 16th and the
22nd being the extreme limits according to the Gallic usage.  The reason
of this difference was, that it had once been the Latin use, as against
the Alexandrian, to keep Easter from the 16th to the 22nd days, thus
avoiding the 15th; and this rule had been retained in the cycle of
Victorius (as to whom see below, note 7), which was still received in
Gaul.

<span id="ii.v.lx-p7"></span>The arguments of St. Columban in defence of
the Celtic usage may be thus summarized.  1. It had been sanctioned by
Anatolius (see below, note 5), whose view had been approved by St.
Jerome.  2. To defer Easter to the 22nd, or even the 21st day was
incongruous, seeing that the moon then entered her last quarter, rising
so late as to give darkness preponderance over light; and the solemnity
of light should not be celebrated under the domination of darkness.  He
quotes Anatolius as having insisted on this principle, of which (we may
here observe) we find an intimation in Philo with reference to the
Jewish Passover:—“That not only by day but also by night the world may
be full of all-beauteous light, inasmuch as sun and moon on that day
succeed each other with no interval of darkness between.”  (*De Sept. et
Fest*. 1191.)  3. The alleged objection to keeping Easter on the day of
the Jewish Passover was unfounded and futile.  4. The Mosaic Law
enjoined seven days, beginning with the 14th, as the duration of the
Passover festival; and within the same limits should be kept the Easter
festival.  \[This argument, it may be observed, whatever its worth in
other respects, appears to be founded on an error.  For the Passover,
having been killed before sunset on the 14th of Nisan, is believed to
have been eaten after sunset, i.e. after the 15th day, reckoned from
evening to evening, had begun; and from the latter day inclusive the
seven days of unleavened bread were reckoned, thus ending with the 21st,
which was a special day of “holy convocation.”  Cf . below, note 5.\]

<span id="fn_89"></span>[39:90](2130066.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p9"></span> *Theoria utpote divina castulitatis
potito.*  The word*castulitas* may possibly have been in use among the
Irish monks as an endearing diminutive of *castitas*(i.e. chastity or
purity), regarded as the object of their affections in the contemplative
life.  Their writers appear to have been given to the use of such
diminutives, not only of the names of people, but of other words
also.—“In the following pages (sc. in Adamnan’s Life of St. Columba) the
reader will observe the liberal employment of diminutives, so
characteristic of Irish composition; and he will find them, in many
cases, used without any grammatical force, and commutable, in the same
chapters, with their primitives.”  (*Reeve’s Adamnan. Appendix to
Preface,* Ed., 1857, p. lxi.).

<span id="fn_90"></span>[39:91](2130066.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p10"></span> Perhaps an error for Barjona, meaning
‘son of a dove,’ in allusion to his name, Columba, or Columbanus.  He
afterwards calls himself “vilis columba.”  Cf. “Pauperculus præpotenti
(mirum dictu! nova res!) rara avis scribere audet Bonifacio patri
Palumbus:”  “Sed talia suadenti, utpote torpenti actu, ac dicenti potius
quam facienti mihi, Jonæ Hebraice, Peristeræ Græce, Columbæ Latine,
potius tantum \[*al*. tamen\] vestræ idiomate linguæ nancto \[*al.*
nuncupato\], (*S. Columbani Ep. V. ad Bonifacium papam IV. Collectan.
sacr. Patr. Fleming. Galland. sæc.* VI. c. <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 598).  Cf. “Vir erat vitæ
venerabilis et beatæ memoriæ, monasteriorum pater et fundator, cum Jona
propheta homonymum sortitus nomen; nam licet diverso trium diversarum
sono linguarum, unam tamen eandemque rem significat hoc quod Hebraice
dicitur Jona, Græcitas vero <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p10.2"></span>ΠΕΡΙΣΤΕΡΑ</span> vocitat, et Latina lingua
Columba nuncupatur.”  (*Adamnan’s Life of S. Columba; Secunda
Præfatio*.)  Du Cange suggests a corruption of Barginna, said to be a
low Latin word, equivalent to peregrinus.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[39:92](2130066.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p12"></span> The meaning of this word is obscure. 
Patrick Fleming (*Collect. Sacr*.) suggests an error for *compte
pictam*:  Du Cange for *comptam,* or *acu comptam*, some artificial
arrangement of the hair being supposed to be referred to.  The intended
point of the comparison seems to be, that Gregory will still be
admirable, though the writer may set him off unskilfully.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[39:93](2130066.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p14"></span> Anatolius, an Alexandrian by birth and
bishop of Laodicea, <span class="sc"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p14.1"></span>a.d.</span> 269, is referred to by Eusebius
(*H. E.* VII. 32) as distinguished for learning, and the writer of a
work on the Paschal question, which he quotes.  A “Canon Paschalis,”
purporting to be this work, was published by Bucherius in a Latin
Version (*Doct. Temp*. Antv. 1634); but its genuineness is doubted. 
Anatolius was adduced by Colman at the Synod of Whitby (Bede, *H. E.*
III. 25), as an authority for the 14th and 20th days of the moon being
the limits for Easter.  But Wilfrid replied that Anatolius had been
misunderstood; for that, having in view the Egyptian mode of reckoning
days from sunset to sunset, he had meant the day which began after
sunset on the 14th day, i.e. really the 15th.  And so also with regard
to the 20th day.  His language, as quoted by Eusebius, supports this
explanation of his meaning:—“Given that the day of the Passover is on
the fourteenth of the moon *after evening* (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p14.2"></span>μεθ᾽ ἑσπέραν</span>).”  See above, end of note
1.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[39:94](2130066.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p14.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p15"></span> “Forte sic dictos, quod obscura et
difficilia rimarentur.”  *Benedictine edit. Migne*.—“Nostri *rimeurs*
vocant poetastras, sed an ea sit hic notio non definio.”  Du Cange.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[39:95](2130066.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p16"></span> The original here, being probably an
incorrect citation, is obscure.  It is “Pascha, ed est solemnitas
dominicæ Resurrectionis, ante transgressum vernalis æquinoctii 16
initiam non potest celebrari, ut scilicet æquinoctium non antecedat.”

<span id="fn_95"></span>[40:96](2130066.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p17"></span> Pope Leo I. referred the question between
the Roman and Alexandrian Churches as to the computation of Easter to
his archdeacon (afterwards pope) Hilarius for investigation; and he
referred it to Victorius of Aquitaine, who consequently (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lx-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 457) drew up a
cycle, which was accepted first in the Gallican Churches (*Concil.
Aurel*. IV., *an*. 541), and continued to be observed there after it had
been superseded in Italy by that of Dionysius Exiguus (<span
class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lx-p17.2"></span>a.d.</span> 527).  See above,
note 1.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[40:97](2130066.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p18"></span> “*Schynteneum* Græcam vocem <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p18.1"></span>σχοινοτενής</span> putat
Editor, id est, tanquam si rectum et legitimum esset.”  Du Cange.  This
interpretation appears probable from the fact that the Irish writers of
the period were given to air their Greek learning by the rise of such
words.—“He (Adamnan) occasionally employs Greek or Græco-Latin words”
(*Reeves’s Adamnan.* p. lxi.  See also p. 158, note, for other evidence
of this Irish tendency).  The meaning in the text would thus be, “I
wonder that this error should be tolerated by thee as though it were
right and legitimate.”

<span id="fn_97"></span>[40:98](2130066.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p20"></span> *Hermagoricæ novitatis*; the epithet
being apparently formed from the name of Hermagoras of Temnos, a
distinguished Greek rhetorician of the time of Pompey and Cicero.  He
devoted peculiar attention to what is called the *invention*. 
Quintilian refers to him and approves his system:  Cicero (*De Invent*.
i. 6) was opposed to it.  The use of a word like this is again
characteristic of the Irish writers.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[40:99](2130066.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p22"></span> i.e. pope Victor in his opposition
towards the end of the second century to the Asiatic Quarto-decimans who
kept their Pasch on the day of the Paschal full moon, whatever the day
of the week might be.  Colman at the synod of Whitby had alleged St.
John, to whom the Asiatics had traced their tradition, as an authority
for the Scottish usage.  But Wilfrid truly alleged in reply that the
question at issue between the Scots and Romans at that time was a
different one, since both parties agreed in keeping Easter on a Sunday
only.  Still, Columban’s argument here is to the point as shewing that
the Easterns had not objected to keeping Easter on the actual day of the
Jewish Passover.  It may be noted here how the authority of Victor, as
well as of other popes, is set at naught by S. Columbanus.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[40:100](2130066.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p23"></span> *Sed hoc soporans spina Dagonis, hoc
imbibit bubum erroris*.  On these obscure expressions it may be observed
that *spina Dagonis* evidently means what was left to the fish-god
(<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p23.1"></span>ῥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p23.2"></span>ά</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p23.3"></span>χις</span> in LXX.), after
his head and hands had been severed.  Gregory, in his comment on [1 Sam.
v.](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#000.md)<span id="ii.v.lx-p23.4"></span>,
interprets it as denoting heathenism prostrate, and at length deprived
of even the semblance of rationality, in the presence of the Gospel,
which was represented by the ark.  Columban may possibly have got the
idea from Gregory’s own interpretation of the incident, and been pleased
to use it against him.  *Bubum,*according to Du Cange, is a late Latin
word denoting *senium*, or *languor*, the noun *bubula*also being used
in the sense of *fabula*.  The idea seems to be that pope Victor’s view
was a figment, worthy only to be received (or, as we might now say,
swallowed) by senseless heathenism or wandering dotage.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[41:101](2130066.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p26"></span> Meaning Gildas.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[41:102](2130066.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p27"></span> *Cum clientelis:*  meaning perhaps living
with females of their own households as concubines, in distinction from
open transgression.  The word can hardly denote, as suggested by the
Benedictine Editors, wives lawfully married before ordination.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[41:103](2130066.htm#fr_102.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p29"></span> *De ultimis Heulini, litoris finibus.*—
“Loco *Heulini* esse legendum *Hualini*, vel *Huelini* constat ex
contextu Hieronymiano.  Est vox Græca, a *rad*. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.1"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.2"></span>αλο</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.3"></span>ς</span>, sive <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.4"></span>ὕ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.5"></span>ελο</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lx-p29.6"></span>ς</span>, *vitrum,
crystallus*.  Sic mare vocatur (*Apocal*. iv.) <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.7"></span>θ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.8"></span>ά</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.9"></span>λασσα</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.10"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.11"></span>αλ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.12"></span>ί</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.lx-p29.13"></span>νη</span>.  In Hieronymo hic legimus; *De
ultimis Hispaniæ Galliarumque finibus*” (*note in Benedictine
Edition*).  See above, note 8, as to the fondness of the old Irish
writers for the use of Greek words.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[42:104](2130066.htm#fr_103.md) <span
id="ii.v.lx-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lx-p31"></span> Candidus had been sent by Gregory to Gaul
as *rector patrimonii* there.  See previous Epistles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book X](2130067.md)
