[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130195)  [Next](2130197.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Hymn XIX.</span>

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p2"></span>1.  Thou who answerest to the name of
Abraham, in that Thou art made father of many; but because to Thee none
is spouse, as Sarah was to Abraham,—lo! Thy flock is Thy spouse; bring
up her sons in Thy truth; spiritual children may they be to Thee, and
the sons be sons of promise, that they may become heirs in Eden.  *R.,
Blessed be He Who foreshowed Thee in Abraham!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p3"></span>2.  Fair fruit of chastity, in whom the
priesthood was well pleased, youngest among Thy brethren as was the son
of Jesse; the horn overflowed and anointed Thee, the hand alighted and
chose Thee, the Church <span id="page_189">p. 189</span> <span
id="iii.iv.xx-Page_189"></span>desired and loved Thee; the pure altar is
for Thy ministry, the great throne for Thy honour, and all as one for
Thy crown.  *R., Blessed be He Who multiplied Thy crowning!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p4"></span>3.  Lo! thy flock, O blessed one, arise
and visit it, O diligent one!  Jacob ranged the flocks in order; range
Thou the sheep that have speech, and enlighten the virgin-youths in
purity, and the virgin-maids in chastity; raise up priests in honour,
rulers in meekness, and a people in righteousness.  *R. Blessed be He
Who filled Thee with understanding!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p5"></span>4.  Guard thou the sheep that are whole,
and visit them that are sick, and bind up them that are broken, and seek
out them that are lost; feed them in the pastures of the Scriptures, and
give them drink or the spring of doctrine:  let the truth be a wall unto
thee, let the cross be a staff unto thee, and truthfulness be peace unto
thee.  *R., Blessed be He Who multiplied Thy virtues!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p6"></span>5.  Let there be with Thee in Thy flock,
the power that was with David; for if he plucked a straying lamb, from
the mouth of the lion, how meet is it for Thee, O exalted one, to be
zealous to snatch from the Evil One the souls that are precious above
all, for by nothing can they be bought, save by the blood of Christ! 
*R., Blessed be He Who was sold and bought all!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p7"></span>6.  Unto Moses Joshua ministered, and for
the reward of his ministry, from him received the right hand.  Because
to an illustrious old man thou hast ministered, he too gave thee the
right hand.  Moses committed unto Joshua, a flock of which half were
wolves; but to thee is delivered a flock, whereof a fourth yea a third
is sanctified.  *R., Blessed be He who adorned thy flock!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p8"></span>7.  Let the love of Moses abide in thee,
for his love was a discerning love, his zeal a discreet zeal.  When
Korah and Dathan sundered themselves, he sundered the earth from beneath
them; by sundering he made the sundering to cease.  In Eldad and Medad
he made known, that his good will was altogether this that all the
people should prophesy.  *R., Blessed be He who in His good will was
reconciled!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p9"></span>8.  The poor estate of Elijah, Elisha
loved above wealth; a poor man gave to a poor man, a gift that was great
above all.  Because thou hast loved the poverty, of thy master who in
secret was rich, the fountain of his words shall flow from thee, that
thou mayst become a harp for the Spirit, and mayst sing to thyself
inwardly His good will.  *R., Blessed be He who made thee His treasure!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p10"></span>9.  There is none that envies thy
election, for meek is thy headship; there is none angered by the rebuke,
for thy word sows peace; there is none terrified by thy voice, for
pleasant in thy visitation; there is none that groans against thy yoke,
for it labors instead of our neck, and lightens the burden of our
souls.  *R., Blessed be He who chose thee for our rest*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p11"></span>10.  Contend not with the mighty,
despair not of the outcast; soften and teach the rich, exhort and win
the poor; with the harsh join the forbearing, and the long suffering
with the wrathful; catch them that are evil by them that are good, and
them that spoil by them that give, and the defiled by means of the
sanctified.  *R., Blessed be He who made thee our hunter!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p12"></span>11.  Take to thee ten thousand
medicaments, and arise and go forth among the sick; to the diseased
offer medicine, and to him that is sound a preservative; not one
medicine only shalt thou offer, for the sickness lest haply it be not
meet:  offer many remedies, that the sickness may find healing; likewise
thou shalt learn experience.  *R., Blessed be He who laboured to heal
our wounds!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p13"></span>12.  May the land be according to thy
desire; may the vineyard be according to thy husbandry; may the flock be
in the midst of thy dwelling, and the sheep sound under thy staff! 
Mayest thou be a great Head, and we the jewels of thy crown!  May we be
beautiful in thee and thou be beautiful in us! for they are goodly each
in the other, people and priest when they are <span id="page_190">p.
190</span> <span id="iii.iv.xx-Page_190"></span>at one.  *R., Blessed be
He who has sowed among us unity!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p14"></span>13.  Hearken to the Apostle when he
saith, to that virgin whom he had espoused; I am jealous over you with
jealousy, with a jealousy verily of God, not of the flesh but of the
spirit.  Be jealous therewith thou also in pureness, that He may know
what she is and whose she is.  In thee may she cherish, and in thee may
she love, Jesus the Bridegroom in truth.  *R., Blessed is he whose zeal
is holy!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p15"></span>14.  As are her masters, so are her
manners:  for with the teacher that lags a laggard is she, and with him
that is noble, excellent is she.  The Church is like unto a mirror, for
according to the face that gazes into it, thus does it put on the
likeness thereof.  For as is the king so also his host, and as is the
priest so also his flock; according as these are it is stamped on them. 
*R., Blessed be He Who stamped her in His likeness!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p16"></span>15.  Without a testament they departed,
those three illustrious priests; who in Testaments used to meditate,
those two Testaments of God.  Great gain have they bequeathed to us,
even this example of poverty.  They who possessed nothing the blessed
ones, made us their possessions; the Church was their treasure.  *R.,
Blessed is he who possessed in them his possessions!*

<span id="iii.iv.xx-p17"></span>16.  The priest Jacob the noble, with
him she was ennobled as he was:  because he joined his love to his
jealousy, with fear and love he was clothed.  With Babes a lover of
bounty, for money she redeemed the captives.  With Valgesh a scribe of
the law, her heart she opened to the Scriptures.  With thee then may her
profit be manifold!  *R., Blessed be He Who has magnified her
merchantmen!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XX.](2130197.md)
