[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130008)  [Next](2130010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.iii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.iii-p1.1"></span>Epistle III.</span>

<span id="ii.v.iii-p2"></span>To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
(Cagliari).

<span id="ii.v.iii-p3"></span>Gregory to Januarius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.iii-p4"></span>The most distinguished lady Nereida has
complained to us that your Fraternity does not blush to exact from her a
hundred *solidi* for the burial of her daughter, and would bring upon
her the additional vexation of expense over and above her groans of
sorrow.  Now, if the truth is so, it being a very serious thing and far
from a priest’s office to require a price for earth that is granted to
rottenness, and to wish to make profit out of another’s grief, let your
Fraternity refrain from this demand, and be no more troublesome to her,
especially as she tells us that Hortulanus, to whom she <span
id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span id="ii.v.iii-Page_2"></span>asserts she
bore this daughter, had formerly been munificent to your Church in no
small degree.  Now as to this abuse, we ourselves, after we had by God’s
permission acceded to the dignity of the episcopate, forbade it entirely
in our Church, and by no means permitted the evil custom to be taken up
anew, remembering that, when Abraham demanded for a price a sepulchre
for the burial of his wife’s body from the sons of Emor, that is from
Ephron the son of Seor, the latter refused to accept a price, lest he
should appear to have made profit out of a corpse ([Gen.
xxiii](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.v.iii-p4.1"></span>.).  If then a man that was a pagan showed
such great consideration, how much more ought we, who are called
priests, not to do this thing?  Wherefore I admonish you that this
abuse, which comes of avarice, be not ventured on any more, even in the
case of strangers.  But, if at any time you allow any one to be buried
in your Church, and the parents, relations, or heirs of such person
should of their own accord wish to offer something for lights, we do not
forbid it to be accepted.  But we altogether forbid anything to be asked
for or exacted, this being a very irreligious proceeding, lest (which
God forbid) the Church should haply be spoken of as venal, or you should
seem to take joy in men’s deaths, if you endeavour in any way whatever
to seek profit out of their corpses.

<span id="ii.v.iii-p5"></span>With regard to other cases included in the
petition of the aforesaid Nereida, we exhort thee, if possible, to
settle them by an amicable arrangement, or certainly not to omit sending
an instructed person to the court, deputed by us, for which purpose we
have sent to your parts Redemptus our guardian (*defensorem*), the
bearer of these presents, that he may compel the parties to appear for
trial, and carry out with summary execution what may be adjudged.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis (Cagliari).](2130010.md)
