[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130141)  [Next](2130143) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXVII.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p2"></span>To Anthemius, Subdeacon.

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p3"></span>Gregory to Anthemius, Subdeacon of
Campania.

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p4"></span>As often as we hear things of our
brethren and fellow-bishops that shew them to be to blame and cause us
sadness, necessity compels us in no slight degree to take thought for
their amendment.  Seeing, then, that it has been reported to us that the
bishops of Campania are so negligent that, unmindful of the dignity and
character of their office, neither towards their Churches nor towards
their sons do they shew the care of paternal vigilance, nor concern
themselves about monasteries, nor bestow their protection on the
oppressed and the poor, <span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="ii.ix.xii-Page_99"></span>we therefore enjoin thee and hereby give
thee authority to call them together, and strictly admonish them in
virtue of our mandate, that they be not any longer idle, but so evince
their priestly zeal and solicitude, and be so vigilant in what it
becomes them justly and according unto God to do, that no murmur
concerning them may exasperate us any more.  If, however, thou shouldest
find any one of them to be negligent after this being done, send him to
us without allowing any excuse, that by regular exercise of discipline
they may be made to feel how serious a matter it is to refuse to be
corrected in things that are reprehensible and exceedingly to be
condemned.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXXI](2130143)
