[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130047)  [Next](2130049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xlii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XCIV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p2"></span>To Romanus the Guardian (Defensorem).

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p3"></span>Gregory to Romanus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xlii-p4"></span>The bearers of these presents, who came
hither from the parts of Istria to find their bishop who is now living
in the parts of Sicily, have asked us to speed them in their way, and we
have arranged for their journey hence.  Let, then, thy Experience
receive them, and arrange for their reaching their said bishop as soon
as possible; lest, as they allege may be the case, others of the
schismatics in those parts should be beforehand to persuade them.  For,
so far as they indicate, the bishop himself has a desire to come to us
in behalf of the unity of the faith.  Assistance therefore should be
given them, that, with the help of the Lord, they may accomplish the
good things they desire.  But let thy Experience, in person if he is
near at hand or otherwise by letter, exhort this same bishop to lose no
time in hastening, with the Lord’s good favour, to the threshold of the
Apostles, being assured that he will be received by us with all
affection.  We also desire thee to pay him the cost of his journey to
enable him to come to us.  But, if he finds coming here burdensome, and
arranges to live in Sicily, and consents, with his security given, to
remain in the unity of the Church among the perverters of Scripture,
this also do not thou delay to inform us of, that we may arrange, with
the help of the Lord, how provision may be made for his expenses there. 
But lend also thy concurrence and succour for the bearers of these
letters to come to their said bishop, so that after leaving us they may
experience no less attention.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XCVIII](2130049.md)
