[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130046)  [Next](2130048) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xli"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xli-p1.1"></span>Epistle XCIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p2"></span>*To Gulfaris, Magister Militum* <span
id="fr_57"></span>[58](#fn_57) .

<span id="ii.v.xli-p4"></span>Gregory to Gulfaris, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xli-p5"></span>The bearers of these presents, who come
<span id="page_22">p. 22</span> <span id="ii.v.xli-Page_22"></span>to us
from the Istrian parts, have reported such good things of your Glory as
to inflame us ardently to return you thanks.  For we learn that, among
the cares of the government of those parts which has been committed to
you, you are especially anxious to win souls, and that you so take pains
to recall the hearts of wanderers to the unity of the Church that, as
far as your desire goes, you would have no one there separated from the
Apostolic Church; and that so great love of Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles, inflames you that you long with all your heart to restore the
sheepfold of him to whom the keys were delivered by the Lord the Creator
of all.  Have, glorious son, from such and so great a work, a confident
anticipation of divine retribution, wherein not only our admonition but
also the words of the apostle confirm thee, since he who shall have
caused a sinner to be converted from the error of his way shall save his
soul from death, and cover a multitude of sins ([James
v](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.xli-p5.1"></span>.). 
For, however great be temporal affluence, or at any rate prosperity, it
has its end,—the limit of death.  But this pursuit of winning souls,
which you have taken up, retains the certainty of its hope fixed; to
wit, the retribution of eternal life.  Wherefore, greeting you with
fatherly affection, we exhort your Glory that you the more earnestly
give effect to the zeal for the unity of our holy faith which the Author
of unity Himself has given you; and that, recalling whomsoever you can
from the error of their schism into the bosom of Mother Church, you
cherish them with continual admonition.  And accomplish this also,—so to
protect with the succour of your defence those whom the Lord through you
may grant to be restored to His fold that there may be no quarter to
which those who are still in error may be able to resort for the
accusation of such as return to sound counsels.  For, while you uphold
the cause of God on earth, He Himself will prosperously direct your
actions here with the aid of His protection, and there will remain for
you, in the eternal life which you long for, retribution for your so
great well-doing.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_57"></span>[21:58](2130047.htm#fr_57) <span
id="ii.v.xli-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xli-p3"></span> As to Gregory’s renewed efforts, now with
better hope after the accession of Callinicus as Exarch of Italy to
recover the Istrian schismatics in the matter of “the Three Chapters,”
see above, IX. 9, 10.  Gulfaris, addressed in this epistle, was in
military command in Istria, and appears to have exerted himself to
further the aims of Gregory, who ever gladly availed himself of the aid
of the secular arm.  Other letters on the same subject follow.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Romanus the Guardian (Defensorem).](2130048)
