[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130085)  [Next](2130087) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXV.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p2"></span>*To Januarius, Bishop of Caralis
(Cagliari* <span id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) *).*

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p4"></span>Gregory to Januarius, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p5"></span>Know ye that your Fraternity’s solicitude
has pleased us, in that you have evinced, as was right, pastoral
vigilance for the guardianship of souls.  For indeed it has been
reported to us that you have forbidden a monastery to be founded in the
house of the late Epiphanius, a reader of your Church, in accordance
with his will, for this reason; lest, seeing that this house was
adjacent to a monastery of hand-maidens of God <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) , deception of souls should thence
ensue.  And we praised you greatly for guarding, as became you, by
suitable foresight against the snares of the ancient foe.  But, since we
have been informed that the religious lady Pompeiana is desirous of
taking away the handmaidens of God from this same monastery, and
restoring them to their own monasteries whence they had been taken, and
establishing there a congregation of monks, it is necessary that if this
be accomplished, the disposition of the deceased should in all respects
be adhered to.  But, if this should not be done, that the will of the
testator may not seem to be entirely frustrated, we will that—inasmuch
as the monastery of the late abbot Urban, situated outside the city of
Caralis, is said to be left so destitute that not even one monk remains
there—we will, I say, that John, whom the said Epiphanius appointed to
be abbot in the monastery which, as has been said, he had determined
should be founded in his house, be ordained abbot (*i.e. of the late
Urban’s monastery*), provided only that there be no impediment against
him.

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p7"></span>And let the relics which were to have
been deposited in the house of the aforesaid Epi<span id="page_55">p.
55</span> <span id="ii.vii.iv-Page_55"></span>phanius be deposited
there, and let whatever the same Epiphanius had contributed for the
intended monastery in his own house be in all ways applied to the other;
that so, even though for safeguard, as above written, his will is not
carried out with regard to the place, the benefit intended may
nevertheless be preserved inviolate.  And indeed let your Fraternity,
together with the guardian (*defensore*) Vitalis, arrange all this, and
endeavour to order it so advantageously that you may have your reward,
as for your praiseworthy prohibition, so also for your good settlement
of the case.  Lastly, though it may be superfluous to commend this
monastery to your Fraternity, yet we abundantly exhort you that, as
becomes you, with due regard to justice, you hold it as commended to
you <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) .

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_132"></span>[54:133](2130086.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p3"></span> See I. 62, and *reff*.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[54:134](2130086.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.vii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p6"></span> See I. 48.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[55:135](2130086.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.vii.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.iv-p8"></span> For further reference to the subject of
this letter, see XIV. 2.  It appears there that Epiphanius, mentioned in
this letter, had been a son-in-law of Pompeiana.  It appears further
that this lady afterwards accused both the bishop Januarius and the
*defensor* Vitalis of having unjustly withheld her son-in-law’s pious
bequest, notwithstanding the admonition contained in this letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVIII](2130087)
