[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130273)  [Next](2130275) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.ii"></span> <span id="page_305">p. 305</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_305"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c7"><span
id="iii.viii.ii-p1.1"></span>Three Homilies.</span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p3"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.viii.ii-p3.1"></span>On Our Lord.</span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p4"></span>1.  Grace has drawn nigh to mouths,
once blasphemous, and has made them harps; sounding praise.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p5"></span>Therefore let all mouths render praise
to Him Who has removed from them blasphemous speech.  Glory to Thee Who
didst depart from one dwelling to take up thy abode in another! that He
might come and make us a dwelling-place for His Sender, the
only-begotten departed from \[being\] with Deity and took up His abode
in the Virgin; that by a common manner of birth, though only-begotten,
He might become the brother of many.  And He departed from Sheol and
took up His abode in the Kingdom; that He might seek out a path from
Sheol which oppresses all, to the Kingdom which requites all.  For our
Lord gave His resurrection as a pledge to mortals, that He would remove
them from Sheol, which receives the departed without distinction, to the
Kingdom which admits the invited with distinction; so that, from \[the
plan\] which makes equal the bodies of all men within it, we may come to
\[the plan\] which distinguishes the works of all men within it.  This
is He Who descended to Sheol and ascended, that from \[the place\] which
corrupts its sojourners, He might bring us to the place which nourishes
with its blessings its dwellers; even those dwellers who, with the
possessions, the fruits, and the flowers, of this world, that pass away,
have crowned and adorned for themselves there, tabernacles that pass not
away.  That Firstborn Who was begotten according to His nature, was born
in another birth that was external to His nature; that we might know
that after our natural birth we must have another birth which is outside
our nature.  For He, since He was spiritual, until He came to the
corporeal birth, could not be corporeal; in like manner also the
corporeal, unless they are born in another birth, cannot be spiritual. 
But the Son Whose generation is unsearchable, was born in another
generation that may be searched out; that by the one we might learn that
His Majesty is without limit, and by the other might be taught that His
grace is without measure.  For great is His Majesty without measure,
Whose first generation cannot be imagined in any of our thoughts.  And
His grace is abundant without limit, Whose second birth is proclaimed by
all mouths.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p6"></span>2.  This is He Who was begotten from
the Godhead according to His nature, and from manhood not after His
nature, and from baptism not after His custom; that we might be begotten
from manhood according to our nature, and from Godhead not after our
nature, and by the Spirit not after our custom.  He then was begotten
from the Godhead, He that came to a second birth; in order to bring us
to the birth that is discoursed of, even His generation from the
Father:—not that it should be searched out, but that it should be
believed;—and His birth from the woman, not that it should be despised,
but that it should be exalted.  Now His death on the cross witnesses to
His birth from the woman.  For He that died was also born.  And the
Annunciation of Gabriel declares His generation by the Father, namely
\[the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee\]. <span
id="fr_556"></span>[557](#fn_556)   If then it was the power of the
Highest, it is plain that it was not the seed of mortal man.  So then
His <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_306"></span>conception in the womb is bound up with
His death on the cross; and His first generation is bound up with the
declaration of the Angel; in order that whoso denies His birth may be
confuted by His crucifixion, and whoso supposes that His beginning was
from Mary, may be admonished that His Godhead is before all; so that
whoever has concluded His beginning to be corporeal, \[may be proved to
err hereby that His issuing forth from the Father is narrated\].  The
Father begat Him, and through Him created the creatures.  Flesh bare Him
and through Him slew lusts.  Baptism brought him forth, that through Him
it might wash away stains.  Sheol brought Him forth, that through Him
its treasures might be emptied out.  He came to us from beside His
Father by the way of them that are born:  and by the way of them that
die, He went forth to go to His Father; so that by His coming through
birth, His advent might be seen; and by His returning through
resurrection, His departure might be confirmed.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p8"></span>3.  But our Lord was trampled on by
Death; and in His turn trod out a way over Death.  This is He Who made
Himself subject to and endured death of His own will, that He might cast
down death against his will.  For our Lord bare His cross and went forth
according to the will of Death:  but He cried upon the cross <span
id="fr_557"></span>[558](#fn_557) and brought forth the dead from within
Sheol against the will of Death.  For in that very thing by which Death
had slain Him \[*i.e*., the body\], in that as armour He bore off the
victory over Death.  But the Godhead concealed itself in the manhood and
fought against Death, Death slew and was slain.  Death slew the natural
life; and the supernatural life slew Him.  And because Death was not
able to devour Him without the body, nor Sheol to swallow Him up without
the flesh, He came unto the Virgin, that from thence He might obtain
that which should bear Him to Sheol; as from beside the ass they brought
for Him the colt whereon He entered Jerusalem, and proclaimed concealing
her overthrow and the destruction of her children.  With the body then
that \[was\] from the Virgin, He entered Sheol and plundered its
storehouses and emptied its treasures.  He came then to Eve the Mother
of all living.  This is the vine whose fence Death laid open by her own
hands, and caused her to taste of his fruits.  So Eve the Mother of all
living became the well-spring of death to all living.  But Mary budded
forth, a new shoot from Eve the ancient vine; and new life dwelt in her,
that when Death should come confidently after his custom to feed upon
mortal fruits, the life that is slayer of death might be stored up
\[therein\] against him; that when Death should have swallowed \[the
fruits\] without fear, he might vomit them forth and with them many. 
For \[He Who is\] the Medicine of life flew down from heaven, and was
mingled in the body, the mortal fruit.  And when Death came to feed
after his custom, the Life in His turn swallowed up Death.  This is the
food that hungered to eat its eater.  So then, by one fruit which Death
swallowed hungrily, he vomited up many lives which he had swallowed
greedily.  The hunger then which hurried him against one, emptied out
his greed which had hurried him against many.  Thus Death was diligent
to swallow one, but was in haste to set many free.  For while One was
dying on the cross, many that were buried from within Sheol were coming
forth at His cry. <span id="fr_558"></span>[559](#fn_558)   This is the
fruit that cleft asunder Death who had swallowed it, and brought out
from within it the Life in quest of which it was sent.  For Sheol hid
away all that she had devoured.  But through One that was not devoured,
all that she had devoured were restored from within her.  He, whose
stomach is disordered, vomits forth both that which is sweet to him and
that which is not sweet.  So the stomach of Death was disordered, and as
he was vomiting forth <span id="page_307">p. 307</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_307"></span>the medicine of life which had sickened
it, he vomited forth along with it also those lives that had been
swallowed by him with pleasure.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p11"></span>4.  This is the Son of the carpenter,
Who skilfully made His cross a bridge over Sheol that swallows up all,
and brought over mankind into the dwelling of life.  And because it was
through the tree that mankind had fallen into Sheol, so upon the tree
they passed over into the dwelling of life.  Through the tree then
wherein bitterness was tasted, through it also sweetness was tasted;
that we might learn of Him that amongst the creatures nothing resists
Him.  Glory be to Thee, Who didst lay Thy cross as a bridge over death,
that souls might pass over upon it from the dwelling of the dead to the
dwelling of life!

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p12"></span>5.  The Gentiles praise Thee that Thy
Word has become a mirror before them, that in it they might see death,
secretly swallowing up their lives.  But graven images were being
adorned by their artificers; and by their adornments were disfiguring
their adorners.  But Thou didst draw them to Thy cross; and while the
beauties of the body were disfigured upon it, the beauties of the mind
shone forth upon it.  Then, as for the Gentiles who used to go after
gods which were no gods, He Who was God went after them, and by His
words, as by a bridle, turned them from many gods to the One.  This is
that Mighty One, Whose preaching became a bridle in the jaws of the
Gentiles, and led them away from idols to Him that sent Him.  But the
dead idols, with their closed mouths, used to feed on the life of their
worshippers.  On this account Thou didst mingle in their flesh that
blood of Thine, by which death was enfeebled and laid low; that the
mouths of their devourers might be driven away from their lives.  Also
because Israel slew Thee and was defiled by Thy blood, that idolatry,
that had been engrafted upon him was driven away from him on account of
Thy blood.  For he was weaned from that heathenism through Thy blood;
because that from it, he had never before been weaned.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p13"></span>6.  But Israel crucified our Lord, on
the plea that verily He was seducing us from the One God.  But they
themselves used constantly to wander away from the One God through their
many idols.  While then they imagine they crucify Him Who seduces them
from the One God, they are found to be led away by Him from all idols to
the One God; to the end that because they did not voluntarily learn of
Him that He is God, they might by compulsion learn of Him that He is
God; when the good which had accrued to them through Him should accuse
them concerning the evil which their hands had done.  Thus even though
the tongue of the oppressors denied, yet the help with which they were
helped convicted them.  For grace loaded them beyond their power, so
that they should be ashamed, while laden with Thy blessings, to deny Thy
person.  And also Thou didst have mercy on those, whose lives had been
made food for dead idols.  For the one calf which they made in the
desert, <span id="fr_559"></span>[560](#fn_559) pastured on their lives
as on grass in the desert.  For that idolatry which they had stolen and
brought out in their hearts from Egypt, when it was made manifest, slew
openly those in whom it was dwelling secretly.  For it was like fire
concealed in wood, which when it is gendered from within it, burns it. 
For Moses ground to powder the calf and caused them to drink it in the
water of ordeal; <span id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560) that by
drinking of the calf all those who were living for its worship might
die.  For the sons of Levi ran upon them, those who ran to \[help\]
Moses and girded on their swords. <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561)   For the sons of Levi did not know
whom they should slay, because those that worshipped were mingled with
those that worshipped not.  But He, for Whom it was easy to distinguish,
distinguished those who were defiled from those who were not defiled; so
that the innocent might give thanks that their innocence had not passed
\[unseen <span id="page_308">p. 308</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_308"></span>by\] the Just One; and the guilty might
be convicted that their offence had not escaped \[the eye of\] the
Judge.  But the sons of Levi were the open avengers.  Accordingly Moses
set a mark upon the offenders, that it might be easy for the avengers to
avenge.  For the draught of the calf entered those in whom the love of
the calf was dwelling, and displayed in them a manifest sign, that the
drawn sword might rush upon them.  The congregation therefore which had
committed fornication in \[the worship of\] the calf, he caused to drink
of the water of ordeal, that the mark of adulteresses might appear in
it.  From hence was derived that law about women, <span
id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562) that they should drink the water of
ordeal, that by the mark that came on adulteresses, the congregation
might be reminded of its fornication that was in the worship of the
calf, and be on its guard with fear against another \[fornication\]; and
remember the former \[fornication\] with penitence of soul; and that
when they were judging their women, if they played the harlot against
them, they might condemn themselves, who were playing the harlot against
their God.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p18"></span>7.  To Thee be glory who by Thy cross
hast taken away the heathenism in which both circumcised and
uncircumcised were caused to stumble!  To Thee be praise, the medicine
of life, Who hast converted all that are baptised, to Him Who is life of
all, and Lord of all!  The lost that are found bless Thee; for by the
finding of the lost, Thou hast given joy to the angels that are found
and were not lost.  The uncircumcised praise Thee, for in Thy peace the
enmity that was between is swallowed up, for Thou didst receive in Thy
flesh the outward sign of circumcision, through which the uncircumcised
that were Thine, used to be accounted as not Thine.  For Thou didst make
as Thy sign the circumcision of the heart; by which the circumcised were
made known, that they were not Thine.  For Thou didst come to Thine
own <span id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563) and Thine own received Thee
not; and by this they were made known that they were not Thine.  But
they to whom Thou didst not come, through Thy mercy cry out after Thee,
that Thou wouldst satisfy them with the crumbs which fall from the
children’s table.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p20"></span>8.  God was sent from the Godhead, to
come and convict the graven images that they were no gods.  And when He
took away from them the name of God which decked them out, then appeared
the blemishes of their persons.  And their blemishes were these;—They
have eyes and see not, and ears and hear not. <span
id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564)   Thy preaching persuaded their many
worshippers to change their many gods for the One.  For in that Thou
didst take away the name of godhead from the idols, worship also along
with the name was withdrawn; that, namely, which is bound up with the
name; for worship also attends on the Name of God.  Because, then,
worship also was rendered to the Name, by all the Gentiles, at the last
the worshipful Name shall be gathered in entirely to its Lord. 
Therefore at the last worship, also shall be gathered in completely to
its Lord, that it may be fulfilled that *all things shall be subjected
to Him*.  Then, He in His turn *shall be subjected to Him Who subjected
all things to Him*. <span id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565)   So that
that Name, rising from degree to degree, shall be bound up with its
root.  For when all creatures shall be bound by their love to the Son
through Whom they were created, and the Son shall be bound by the love
of that Father by Whom He was begotten, all creatures shall give thanks
at the last to the Son, through Whom they received all blessings; and in
Him and with Him they shall give thanks also to His Father, from Whose
treasure He distributes all riches to us.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p23"></span>9.  Glory be to Thee Who didst clothe
Thyself in the body of mortal Adam, and didst make it a fountain of life
for all mortals.  Thou art He that livest, for Thy slayers were as
husbandmen to Thy life, for that they sowed it as wheat in the depth
\[of the <span id="page_309">p. 309</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_309"></span>earth\], that it may rise and raise up
many with it.  Come, let us make our love the great censer of the
community, and offer on it as incense our hymns and our prayers to Him
Who made His cross a censer for the Godhead, and offered from it on
behalf of us all.  He that was above stooped down to those who were
beneath, to distribute His treasures to them.  Accordingly, though the
needy drew near to His manhood, yet they used to receive the gift from
His Godhead.  Therefore He made the body which He put on, the treasurer
of His riches, that He, O Lord, might bring them out of Thy storehouse,
and distribute them to the needy, the sons of His kindred.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p24"></span>10.  Glory be to Him Who received from
us that He might give to us; that through that which is ours we might
more abundantly receive of that which is His!  Yea through that
Mediator, mankind was able to receive life from its helper, as through a
Mediator it had received in the beginning death from its slayer.  Thou
art He Who didst make for Thyself the body as a servant, that through it
Thou mightest give to them that desire Thee, all that they desire. 
Moreover in Thee were made visible the hidden wishes of them that slew
\[Thee\] and buried \[Thee\]; through this, that Thou clothedst Thyself
in a body.  For taking occasion by that body of Thine, Thy slayers slew
Thee, and were slain by Thee; and taking occasion by Thy body, Thy
buriers buried Thee, and were raised up with Thee.  That Power Which may
not be handled came down and clothed itself in members that may be
touched; that the needy may draw near to Him, that in touching His
manhood they may discern His Godhead.  For that dumb man \[whom the Lord
healed\] with the fingers of the body, discerned that He had approached
his ears and touched his tongue; <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566)
nay, with his fingers that may be touched, he touched Godhead, that may
not be touched; when it was loosing the string of his tongue, and
opening the clogged doors of his ears.  For the Architect of the body
and Artificer of the flesh came to him, and with His gentle voice
pierced without pain his thickened ears.  And his mouth which was closed
up, that it could not give birth to a word, gave birth to praise to Him
Who made its barrenness fruitful in the birth of words.  He, then, Who
gave to Adam that he should speak at once without teaching, Himself gave
to the dumb that they should speak easily, tongues that are learned with
difficulty.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p26"></span>11.  Lo, again, another question is
made clear:—We enquire in what tongues our Lord gave the power of
speaking to the dumb, who from all tongues came unto Him?  And although
this be easy to know, yet our soul impels us to that knowledge which is
greater than this.  That \[knowledge\] then is, to know that through the
Son the first man was made.  For in this fact, that through Him speech
was given to the dumb, the sons of Adam, we may learn that through Him
speech was given to Adam their first father.  And here also defective
nature was supplied by our Lord.  He, then, Who was able to supply the
defect of nature,—it is manifest that through Him is established the
supplying of nature.  But there is no greater defect than this, when a
man is born without speech.  For since it is in this, in speech, that we
excel all the creatures, the defect of it is greater than all \[other\]
defects.  He, then, through Whom all this defect was supplied,—it is
manifest that through Him all fulness is established.  But because
through Him the members receive all fulness in the womb secretly,
through Him their defect was supplied openly; that we might learn that
through Him in the beginning the whole frame was constituted.  He spat
then on His fingers and placed them in the ears of that deaf man; and He
mixed clay of His spittle, and spread it upon the eyes of the blind
man; <span id="fr_567"></span>[568](#fn_567) that we might learn that as
there was defect in the eyeballs of that man who was blind from his
mother’s womb, so there was defect in <span id="page_310">p. 310</span>
<span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_310"></span>the ears of this \[man\].  So
then, by leaven from the body of Him Who completes, the defect of our
formation is supplied.  For it was not meet that our Lord should have
cut off anything from His body to supply the deficiency of other bodies;
but with that which could be taken away from Him, He supplied the
deficiency of them that lacked; just as in that which can be eaten,
mortals eat Him.  He supplied then the deficiency, and gave life to
mortality, that we may know that from the body in which fulness dwelt,
the deficiency of them that lacked was supplied; and from the body in
which life dwelt, <span id="fr_568"></span>[569](#fn_568) life was given
to mortals.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p29"></span>12.  Now the Prophets performed all
\[other\] signs; but on no occasion supplied the deficiency of members. 
But the deficiency of the body was reserved, that it should be supplied
through our Lord; that souls might perceive that it is through Him that
every deficiency must be supplied.  It is meet, then, that the prudent
should perceive that He Who supplies the deficiencies of the creatures,
is Master of the formative power of the Creator.  But when He was upon
earth, our Lord gave to the deaf \[and dumb\], \[the power\] of hearing
and of speaking tongues which they had not learned; that after He had
ascended, \[men\] might understand that He gave to His disciples \[the
power\] of speaking in every tongue.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p30"></span>13.  Now the crucifiers supposed when
our Lord was dead that His signs had died with Him.  But His signs
manifestly continued to live through His disciples; that the murderers
might know that the Lord of the signs was living.  Beforehand His
murderers made trouble, crying out that His disciples had stolen His
corpse.  But, afterwards, His signs performed through His disciples,
filled them with trouble.  For His disciples, who were supposed to have
stolen the dead corpse, were found to be raising to life the dead
corpses of others.  But the ungodly were terrified and said;—“His
disciples have stolen His body;” that they might be held in contempt
when it should be discovered.  But the disciples, who \[they said\]
stole the dead body from the living guards, were found to be assailing
Death in the name of Him Who was stolen; that \[Death\] might not steal
the life of the living.  So then, before He was crucified, He gave the
deaf the power of hearing, that after He was crucified, all ears should
hear and believe in His resurrection.  For beforehand He confirmed our
hearing by \[the word\] of the dumb whose mouth was opened, that it
should not doubt concerning the preaching of the Word.  Our Redeemer was
in every way equipped, that in every way He might rescue us from our
captor.  For our Lord did not merely clothe Himself in a body, but also
arrayed Himself in members and in garments; that through His members and
His garments, they that were afflicted with plagues might be encouraged
to approach the treasury of healing, that they who were encouraged by
His mercy might approach His body and they who were dismayed by His
terror might approach His vesture.  For with one woman her fear suffered
her merely to approach the hem of His raiment; <span
id="fr_569"></span>[570](#fn_569) but with another, her love impelled
her even to approach His flesh. <span id="fr_570"></span>[571](#fn_570)
  Now by her who received healing by His garments, those were put to
shame who did not receive healing from His words; and by her who kissed
His feet, he was rebuked who did not desire to kiss His lips.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p33"></span>14.  Now our Lord bestowed great gifts
through small means; that He might teach us of what they are deprived
who have scorned great things.  For if from the hem of His garment,
healing like this was secretly stolen, could He not assuredly heal when
His word distinctly granted healing?  And if defiled lips were
sanctified by kissing His feet, how much more should not pure lips be
sanctified by kissing His mouth?  For the sinful woman by her kisses
received the grace of His sacred feet, which had come with toil to bring
her remission of her sins.  <span id="page_311">p. 311</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_311"></span>She was refreshing the feet of her
Healer with oil freely, for freely had He brought her the treasure of
healing for her sickness.  For it was not for the sake of his stomach
that He Who satisfies the hungry was a guest; but for the sake of the
sinful woman’s repentance He Who justifies sinners made Himself a guest.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p34"></span>15.  For it was not for the dainties
of the Pharisees that our Lord hungered, but for the tears of the sinful
woman He was an hungered.  For when He was satisfied and refreshed by
the tears for which He hungered, He turned and rebuked him who had
bidden Him to the food that passes away, that He might show that it was
not for the sake of food for the body that He had become a guest, but
for the sake of help to the soul.  For it was not for the sake of
pleasure that our Lord mingled with gluttonous men and winebibbers, as
the Pharisee supposed; but that in their food as mortals He might mingle
for them His teaching as the medicine of life.  For even as it was in
the matter of eating that the Evil One gave his deadly counsel to Adam
and his helpmeet, so in the matter of eating the Good Lord gave His
life-giving counsel to the sons of Adam.  For He was the fisherman Who
came down to fish for the lives of the lost.  He saw the publicans and
harlots rushing into prodigality and drunkenness; and He hastened to
spread His nets amongst their places of assembly, that He might capture
them from food that fattens bodies, to fasting that fattens souls.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p35"></span>16.  Now the Pharisee made great
preparations for our Lord in His banquet; and the sinful woman did but
little things for Him there.  Yet he by his great dainties displayed the
smallness of his love to our Lord; but she by her tears displayed the
greatness of her love to our Lord.  Thus he that had invited Him to the
great banquet was rebuked because of the smallness of his love; but she
by her few tears atoned for the many follies of her offences.  Simon the
Pharisee received our Lord as a prophet; because of the signs, and not
because of faith.  For he was a son of Israel, who when signs drew near,
himself also drew near to the Lord of the signs; and when the signs
ceased, he also stood naked without faith.  This man also when he saw
our Lord with signs, esteemed Him as a prophet; but when our Lord ceased
from signs, the doubting mind of the sons of his people entered him. 
*This man if He had been a prophet, He would have known that this woman
is a sinner.*  But our Lord for Whom in every place all things are easy,
here also did not cease from His signs.  For He saw that because He had
ceased a little from signs, the blind mind of the Pharisee had turned
away from Him.  For he had said in error, *This man, had He been a
prophet, He would have known*.  In this reflection therefore the
Pharisee doubted concerning our Lord, whether He were a prophet or no;
but by this very reflection he learned that He is Lord of the prophets;
so that from the source from which error entered him, from that source
our Lord might bring help to Him.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p36"></span>17.  Our Lord then told him the
parable of the two debtors; and made him judge; that by his tongue He
might catch him in whose heart the truth was not.*  One owed five
hundred dinars*.  Here then our Lord showed to the Pharisee the
multitude of the offences of the sinful woman.  He then who imagined
concerning our Lord that He did not know that she was a sinner, in the
result heard from Him how great was the debt of her sins.  The Pharisee,
then, who imagined that our Lord did not know who she was, and what was
the reputation of the sinful woman, was found himself not to know who
our Lord was, and what was His reputation.  Thus he was reproved in his
error, who did not even perceive his error.  For the knowledge that he
was assuredly erring eluded him in his error.  But he received a
reminder from Him Who came to remind them that err.  The Pharisee had
seen great signs done by our Lord, as Israel by Moses; but because there
was not faith in him, that those <span id="page_312">p. 312</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_312"></span>prodigies which he saw might be
conjoined with that faith, a little cause hindered and annulled them. 
*Had this man been a prophet, he would have known that this woman is a
sinner*.  For he let slip the wonders that he had seen, and blindness
readily entered into him.  For he was of the sons of Israel, whom
terrible signs accompanied up to the sea, that they might fear; and
blessed miracles surrounded in the waste desert, that they might be
reconciled; but through lack of faith, for a slight cause, they rejected
them \[saying\]; *As for this Moses who brought us up, we know not what
has become of him*. <span id="fr_571"></span>[572](#fn_571)   For they
ceased to regard the mighty works that had been surrounding them.  They
perceived that Moses was not near them; so that for this cause that had
come near, they drew \[near\] to the heathenism of Egypt.  For Moses was
for a little removed from before them, that the calf that was before
them might appear, that they might worship it openly also; for they had
been secretly worshipping it in their hearts.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p38"></span>18.  But when their heathenism from
being inward became open, then Moses also from being hidden openly
appeared; that he might openly punish those whose heathenism had
revelled beneath the holy cloud which had overshadowed them.  But God
removed the Shepherd of the flock from it for forty days, that the flock
might show that its trust was fixed upon the calf.  While God was
feeding the flock with all delights, it chose for itself as its Shepherd
the calf, which was not able even to eat.  Moses who kept them in awe
was removed from them, that the idolatry might cry aloud in their
mouths, which the restraint of Moses had kept down in their hearts.  For
they cried:  *Make us gods, to go before us*. <span
id="fr_572"></span>[573](#fn_572)

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p40"></span>19.  But when Moses came down, he saw
their heathenism revelling in the wide plain with drums and cymbals. 
Speedily, he put their madness to shame by means of the Levites and
drawn swords.  So likewise here, our Lord concealed His knowledge for a
little when the sinful woman approached Him, that the Pharisee might
form into shape his thought, as his fathers had shaped the pernicious
calf.  But when the Pharisee’s error came to a head within him, then the
knowledge of our Lord was manifested against it and dispelled it; *I
entered into thy house; thou gavest Me no water for My feet:  But she
has moistened them with her tears.  Therefore her sins which are many
are forgiven her*. <span id="fr_573"></span>[574](#fn_573)   But the
Pharisee when he heard our Lord naming the sins of the woman, *many
sins*, was greatly put to shame because he had greatly erred.  For he
had supposed that our Lord did not even know that she was a sinner.  Our
Lord had before shown Himself as though not knowing her for a sinner. 
For He allowed him who had seen His signs, to show the doubt of his
mind, that it might become manifest that his mind was bound in the
ungodliness of his fathers.  But the physician, who by his medicines
brings out the hidden disease, is not the helper of the disease but its
destroyer.  For while the disease is hidden, it rules in the members,
but when it is made manifest by medicines, it is rooted out.  So then
the Pharisee saw great things and doubted about small things.  But when
our Lord saw that his littleness made little of great things in his
mind, He speedily showed him not only that she was a sinner, but even
the multitude of her sins; that he might be put to shame by little
things,—he who had not believed in wonders.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p42"></span>20.  God gave room to Israel to
enlarge its heathenism in the wide desert; whom God cut short with
whetted sword, that their idolatry might not be spread abroad among the
Gentiles.  So our Lord allowed the Pharisee to imagine perverse things,
that He might in turn duly reprove his pride.  For concerning those
things which the sinful woman was doing rightly, the Pharisee was
thinking wrongly.  But our Lord in His turn rebuked him, concerning the
right things which he had wrongly withheld:*  I* <span id="page_313">p.
313</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_313"></span>*entered thy house;
thou gavest Me no water for My feet*.  Behold the withholding of that
which was due!  *But she has moistened them with her tears*.  Behold the
payment of what was due!  *Thou didst not anoint Me with oil*.  Behold
the token of neglect!*  But she has anointed My feel with sweet
ointment*.  Behold the sign of zeal!  Thou didst not kiss Me.  Behold
the testimony of enmity!  But she has not ceased to kiss My feet. 
Behold the sign of love!  So then, by this enumeration our Lord showed
that the Pharisee owed Him all those things and had withheld them; but
that the sinful woman had come in and rendered all those things which he
had withheld.  Because then she had paid the debts of him who wrongfully
withheld them, the Just One forgave her, her own debt, even her sins.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p43"></span>21.  Now the Pharisee, while he was
doubting concerning our Lord, that He was not a prophet, pledged himself
to the truth unawares, in saying—*Had this man been a prophet, he would
have known that this woman is a sinner*.  Therefore, if it should be
found that our Lord knew that she was a sinner, He is, according to thy
word, O Pharisee, a prophet.  Our Lord, therefore, hastened to show both
that she was a sinner, and that her sins were many; that the testimony
of his own mouth might confute him as a liar.  For he was companion of
those that said:  *Who is able to forgive sins, but God only*? <span
id="fr_574"></span>[575](#fn_574)   For from them our Lord received
testimony, that, therefore, He Who is able to forgive sins, is God. 
Thenceforth, then, the contention was this, that our Lord should show
them whether He was able to forgive sins or no.  So He speedily healed
the members that were visible, that it might be made sure that He had
forgiven the sins that were invisible.  For our Lord cast before them
the word which was expected to catch him that said it; so that when they
should rush forward to catch Him by it, according to their wish, they
might be caught by Him according to His wish.  *Fear not, My son, thy
sins are forgiven thee*. <span id="fr_575"></span>[576](#fn_575)   While
they were hastening to catch Him on the charge of blasphemy, they
pledged themselves unawares to the truth.  For *Who is able forgive sins
but God only?*  Accordingly, our Lord confuted them \[as though
saying\]:  “If I shall have shown that I am able to forgive sins, even
though ye do not believe in Me that I am God; yet abide ye by your word,
which determined that whoso forgives sins is God.”  Therefore that our
Lord might teach them that He forgives sins, He forgave that man his
hidden sin, and caused him to carry his bed openly; that by the carrying
of the bed which carries \[those that lie on it\], they might believe in
the slaying of the sin that slays.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p46"></span>This is a wonderful thing, that while
our Lord there called Himself the Son of man, His adversaries, unawares,
made Him to be God as forgiving sins.  Accordingly, while they supposed
that they had ensnared Him by their craftiness, He entangled them in
their craftiness; He made it a testimony to His truth.  So their evil
thoughts became unto them as bitter bonds; and that they might not free
themselves from their bonds, our Lord strengthened them by giving
strength to him \[to whom He said\];—*Arise, take up thy bed and go into
thine house*. <span id="fr_576"></span>[577](#fn_576)   For the
testimony could not again be undone, as though He were not God; inasmuch
as He forgave sins.  Nor yet could it be falsely affirmed that He had
not forgiven sins; for lo! He had healed \[men’s\] limbs.  For our Lord
bound up His hidden testimonies in those which were manifest; that their
own testimony might choke the infidels.  Accordingly our Lord made their
thoughts to war against them, because they had warred with the Good One,
who by His healing power warred against their diseases.  For that which
Simon the Pharisee imagined, and that which the scribes his companions
imagined, they imagined in their hearts secretly; but our Lord spread it
forth openly.  Our Lord represented their hidden ima<span
id="page_314">p. 314</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_314"></span>ginations before them, that they might
learn that His knowledge reveals and shows their secret things(;) so
that though they had not recognized Him by His open signs, they might
recognize Him when He represented their secret imaginations; and that if
only but by this,—that He searched out their hearts,—their hearts might
perceive that He was God;—that at least when they saw that their
imaginations could not be hidden from Him, they might cease from
imagining evil against Him.  For they had imagined evil in their heart;
but He exposed it openly, by this \[word\] *Why are ye imagining evil in
your heart?*  So that by this, that our Lord perceived their hidden
imagination, they should recognize His hidden Godhead.  For that
Godhead, by this very thing that they in their error were reviling it,
was by that reviling made known to them.  For they reviled our Lord in
the body, and supposed that He was not God, and cast Him down below from
on high; but by the body He was made known to them as being God, by that
body which was found passing to and fro amongst them.  For they, by
casting Him down to the depth, attempted to show this, that God Who is
above, cannot in bodily wise be born below.  But He by His passage up to
the height, taught them this; that for the body also that is sent down
below, it is not its nature to pass up to the height rather than down to
the depths; so that by the body which from below passed on high upwards
in the air, they might learn of God that by His grace He descended down
below from on high.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p48"></span>22.  But why instead of a stern
reproof did our Lord speak a parable of persuasion to that Pharisee?  He
spoke the parable to him tenderly, that he, though froward, might
unawares be enticed to correct his perversities.  For the waters that
are congealed by the force of a cold wind, the heat of the sun gently
dissolves.  So our Lord did not at once oppose him harshly, that he
might not give occasion to the rebellious to rebel again.  But by
blandishment He brought him under the yoke, that when he had been yoked,
He might work with him, though rebellious, according to His will.  Now,
because Simon was proudly minded, our Lord began humbly with him, that
He might not be to him a teacher according to his folly.  For if that
Pharisee retained the Pharisees’ pride, how could our Lord cause him to
acquire humility, when the treasure of humility was not under his hand? 
But since our Lord was teaching humility to all men, He showed that His
treasury was free from every form of pride.  But this was for our sakes,
that He might teach us, that whatever treasuries pride enters into, it
is by boastfulness that it gains access to them.  On this account *let
not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth*. <span
id="fr_577"></span>[578](#fn_577)   Our Lord then did not employ harsh
reproof, because His coming was of grace:  He did not refrain from
reproof, because His later coming will be of retribution.  For He put
men to fear in His coming of humility; because *it is a fearful thing to
fall into His hands* <span id="fr_578"></span>[579](#fn_578) when He
shall come *in flaming fire*. <span id="fr_579"></span>[580](#fn_579)  
But our Lord bestowed the most part of His helps rather by persuasion
than by reproof.  For the gentle shower softens the earth and penetrates
all through it:  but violent rain binds and hardens the face of the
earth, so that it does not receive it.  For a harsh word excites wrath,
and with it are bound up wrongs.  And when a harsh word has opened the
door, wrath enters in, and at the heels of wrath, along with it enter in
wrongs.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p52"></span>23.  But because all helps attend on
humble speech, He who came to render help employed it.  Observe how
mighty is the power of a humble word; for lo! by it vehement wrath is
put down, and by it the billows of a swelling mind are calmed.  But hear
whence this was.  That Pharisee thought, *had this man been a prophet,
he would have known*.  Contempt as well as blasphemy can be discerned
here.  Hear how our Lord in reply encountered this:  <span
id="page_315">p. 315</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_315"></span>*Simon, I have somewhat to say unto
thee*.  Love and reproof can be discerned here.  For this is a word of
love such as friends use with their friends.  For when an adversary
reproaches his adversary, he speaks not to him like this; for the
madness of anger does not allow enemies to speak reasonably one to
another.  But He Who prayed for them that crucified Him, that He might
show that the fury of anger had no power over Him, was about to put to
the question those that crucified Him, that He might show that He was
governed by reason and not by anger.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p53"></span>24.  Accordingly, our Lord placed a
word of conciliation at the beginning of His speech, that by
conciliation He might pacify the Pharisee, into whose mind discord and
division had entered.  He was the physician who ranged His cures against
the things hurtful \[to men\].  Our Lord then shot forth this word as an
arrow, and set in the head of it conciliation as the barb.  And He
anointed it with love, that soothes the members; so that when it flew
into him who was full of discord, he was at once changed from discord to
harmony.  For straightway upon hearing that humble voice of our Lord,
saying,—*Simon, I have somewhat to say unto thee*, that secret despiser
returned his answer, *Say on, Lord*.  For the sweet voice entered his
bitter mind, and begot of it pleasant fruit.  For he who before this
voice was one that secretly despised, after this voice became one that
openly honoured.  For humility, by its sweet utterance, subdues even its
adversaries into rendering it honour.  For it is not over its friends
that humility tests its power, but over its enemies it exhibits its
victories.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p54"></span>25.  Thus the heavenly King arrayed
Himself in armour of humility, and so conquered the bitter one, and drew
from him a good answer as a sure pledge \[of victory\].  This is the
armour concerning which Paul said, that by it *we humble the loftiness
that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God*. <span
id="fr_580"></span>[581](#fn_580)   For Paul had received the proof of
it in himself.  For as he had been warring in pride, but was conquered
in humility, so is to be conquered every *lofty thing which exalteth
itself* against this humility.  For Saul was journeying to subdue the
disciples with hard words, but the Master of the disciples subdued him
with a humble word.  For when He to whom all things are possible
manifested Himself to him, giving up all things else, He spoke to him in
humility alone, that He might teach us that a soft tongue is more
effectual than all things else against hard thoughts.  For neither
threats nor words of terror were heard by Paul, but weak words not able
to avenge themselves:  *Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me*? <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581)   But the words which were thought not
even capable of avenging themselves, were found to be taking vengeance
by drawing him away from the Jews and making him a goodly vessel.  He
who was full of the bitter will of the Jews, was then filled with the
sweet preaching of the cross.  When he was filled with the bitterness of
the crucifiers, in his bitterness he made havoc of the churches.  But
when he was filled with the sweetness of the Crucified, he embittered
the synagogues of the crucifiers.  Our Lord then strove with humble
voice with him, who had been warring against His churches with hard
bonds.  Thus Saul, who had been binding the disciples with bitter
chains, was bound with pleasant persuasions; that he might not again
cast the disciples into bonds; since he was bound by the Crucified, Who
puts to silence evil voices, whom all they that were set against Him
could not bind or injure.  But when Paul ceased from binding the
disciples, he himself was bound with chains by the persecutors.  But
when he was bound with chains, he loosed the bonds of idolatry by his
bonds.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p57"></span>26.  *Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me?*  He who had conquered His persecutors in the world below, and ruled
over the angels in the world above, spoke from above with <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_316"></span>humble voice.  And He Who while He was
upon earth had denounced ten woes against His crucifiers, when He was in
heaven, did not denounce even one woe against Saul, His persecutor. 
Now, our Lord denounced woe to His crucifiers, that He might teach His
disciples not to be dismayed by His murderers.  But our Lord spoke in
humility from heaven, that in humility the heads of His church might
speak.  And if any one should say, “Wherein did our Lord speak humbly
with Paul? for lo! the eyes of Paul were grievously smitten;” let him
know that it was not from our merciful Lord that this chastisement
proceeded, who spoke those words in humility; but from the vehement
light that vehemently shone forth there.  And this light did not strike
Paul by way of retribution on account of his deeds, but on account of
the vehemence of its rays it hurt him, as he also said:  *When I arose,
I could discern nothing for the glory of the light*. <span
id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582)   But if that light was glorious, O
Paul, how did the glorious light become a blinding light to thee
thyself?  The light was that which, according to its nature, illuminates
above, but contrary to its nature, it shone forth below.  When it
illumined above, it was delightful; but when it shone forth below, it
was blinding.  For the light was both grievous and pleasant.  It was
grievous and violent towards the eyes of the flesh; and it was pleasant
and lightful to those who are fire and spirit. <span
id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583)

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p60"></span>27.  *For I saw a light from heaven
that excelled the sun, and its light shone upon me*. <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584)   So then mighty rays streamed forth
without moderation, and were poured upon feeble eyes, which moderate
rays refresh.  For, lo! the sun also in measure assists the eyes, but
beyond measure and out of measure it injures the eyes.  And it is not by
way of vengeance in wrath that it smites them.  For lo! it is the friend
of the eyes and beloved of the eyeballs.  And this is a marvel; while
with its gentle lustre it befriends and assists the eyes; yet by its
vehement rays it is hostile to and injures the eyeballs.  But if the sun
which is here below, and of kindred nature with the eyes that are here
below, yet injures them, in vehemence and not in anger, in its proper
force and not in wrath; how much more should the light that is from
above, akin to the things that are above, by its vehemence injure a man
here below who has suddenly gazed upon that which is not akin to his
nature?  For since Paul might have been injured by the vehemence of this
sun to which he was accustomed, if he gazed upon it not according to
custom, how much more should he be injured by the glory of that light to
which his eyes never had been accustomed?  For behold, Daniel also <span
id="fr_585"></span>[586](#fn_585) was melted and poured out on every
side before the glory of the angel, whose vehement brightness suddenly
shone upon him! and it was not because of the angel’s wrath that his
human weakness was melted, just as it is not on account of the wrath or
hostility of fire that wax is melted before it; but on account of the
weakness of the wax it cannot keep firm and stand in presence of fire. 
When then the two approach one another, the power of the fire by its
quality prevails; but the weakness of the wax on the other hand is
brought lower even than its former weakness.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p63"></span>28.  But the majesty of the angel was
manifested in itself; the weakness of flesh in itself could not endure. 
For *my inward parts were turned into corruption*. <span
id="fr_586"></span>[587](#fn_586)   But yet men see men, their fellows,
and faint before them:  Yet it is not by their bright splendour that
they are moved, but by their harsh will.  For servants are terrified by
the wrath of their masters, and those that are judged tremble through
fear of their judges.  But this did not befall Daniel on account of
threatening or anger from the angel; but on account of his terrible
nature and prevailing brightness.  For it was not with threatening, the
angel came to him.  For if he had come with threatening, how could a
mouth full of threatening become full of peace, <span id="page_317">p.
317</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_317"></span>when it came, saying,
*Peace be unto thee, thou man* of desire? <span
id="fr_587"></span>[588](#fn_587)   Thus that mouth that was a fountain
of thunderings—*for the voice of his words was like the voice of many
hosts*, <span id="fr_588"></span>[589](#fn_588) that voice became to him
a fountain teeming with and containing peace.  And when \[the voice\]
reached the terrified ears which were athirst for the encouraging
greeting of peace, there was opened and poured out \[for Daniel\] a
draught of peace.  And by the angel’s later \[word of\] peace, those
ears were encouraged, which had been terrified by his former voice
first.  For \[he said\], *Let my Lord speak because I have been
strengthened*. <span id="fr_589"></span>[590](#fn_589)   But because in
that heart-moving vision the fiery angel was about to announce nothing
concerning Him, \[the Lord\], on this account that majesty \[of the
angel\] was forward to give the salutation of peace to the lowliness
\[of the prophet\]; that by the gladdening salutation which that awful
majesty gave, the dread should be removed which lay on the mind of the
lowliness and that was terrified.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p68"></span>29.  But what shall we say about the
Lord of the Angel, Who said to Moses,—*No man shall see Me and
live*? <span id="fr_590"></span>[591](#fn_590)   Is it on account of the
fury of His anger, that whoso shall see Him shall die?  Or on account of
the splendour of His Being?  For that Being was not made and was not
created:  so that eyes which have been made and created cannot look upon
it.  For if it is on account of His fury that whoso shall look upon Him
shall not live, lo! He would have granted to Moses to see Him because of
His great love to him.  Accordingly, the Self-Existent by His vision
slays them that look upon Him; but He slays, not because of harsh fury
but because of His potent splendour.  Because of this He in His great
love granted to Moses to see His glory; yet in the same great love He
restrained him from seeing His glory.  But it was not that the glory of
His majesty would have been at all diminished, but that weak eyes could
not suffice to bear the overpowering billows of His glory.  Therefore
God, Who in His love desired that the vision of Moses should be directed
upon the goodly brightness of His glory, in His love did not desire that
the vision of Moses should be blinded amidst the potent rays of His
glory.  Therefore Moses saw and saw not.  He saw, that he might be
exalted; he saw not, that he might not be injured.  For by that which he
saw, his lowliness was exalted; and by that which he saw not, his
weakness was not blinded.  As also our eyes look upon the sun and look
not upon it; and by what they see are assisted; and by what they see
not, are uninjured.  Thus the eye sees, that it may be benefited; but it
ventures not \[to look\], that it may not be injured.  So then through
love God hindered Moses from seeing that glory that was too hard for his
eyes:  As also Moses through his love prevented the children of his
people from seeing the brightness that was too strong for their eyes. 
For he learned from Him Who covered him, and spread His hand, and hid
from him the splendour of the glory, that it might not injure him; so
that he also should spread the veil and conceal from the feeble ones the
overpowering splendour, that it might not hurt them.  Now when Moses saw
that the sons of perishable flesh could not gaze upon the borrowed glory
that was on his face, his heart failed within him; for that he had
sought to dare to gaze upon the glory of the Eternal Being; in whose
floods, lo! those above and those below are plunged and spring forth;
the depths whereof none can fathom; the shores whereof none can reach;
whereof no end or limit can be found.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p70"></span>30.  Now if any one should say, “Was
it not then possible for God \[to bring it to pass\] that Moses should
look upon that glory and not be injured; and that Paul likewise should
look upon the light and take no hurt?”  Let him that says this
understand that though it is possible for the power and overruling force
of God, that the eyes should change their nature; yet it is inconsistent
with the wisdom and nature of God that the order of nature should be
confused.  For, lo! it is <span id="page_318">p. 318</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_318"></span>also easy for the arm of the artificer
to destroy \[his fabrics\]; but it is inconsistent with the good sense
of the artificer to ruin goodly ornaments.  And if any one wishes to
say, concerning something which to himself seems meet;—“It were meet for
God to do this;” let him know that it is meet for himself not to speak
thus concerning God.  For the chief of all things meet is this:  that a
man should not teach God what is meet.  For it becomes not man to become
God’s instructor.  For this is a great wickedness, that we should become
teachers to Him, of Whom these created mouths of ours are unable to
tell, in the formation of His handiwork.  For it is an unpardonable
iniquity, that the mouth in its boldness should teach what is proper to
that God by Whose grace it learned to speak at all.  If any one then
shall say, “It had been meet for God to do this,” I also, because I have
a mouth and a tongue, may say, “It had been meet for God not to give to
man freedom by which he thus reproaches Him Who is not to be
reproached.”  But I do not dare to say that it was not meet for Him to
give it; lest I also make myself an instructor of Him Who is not to be
instructed.  For because He is just, He would have been reproached by
Himself, had He not given freedom to men, as though through grudging He
had withheld from lowly man the gift that makes great.  Therefore He
gave it betimes by His grace, that He might not be justly reproached by
Himself; even though through freedom, His own gift, lo! blasphemers
wickedly reproach Him.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p71"></span>31.  Now why were the eyes of Moses
made to shine because of the glory which he saw, while on the contrary
\[the eyes of\] Paul, instead of being made to shine, were made utterly
blind?  Yet we may be sure that the eyes of Moses were not stronger than
those of Paul; for they were akin in one brotherhood of blood and
flesh.  But another power through grace sustained the eyes of Moses;
whereas no power was added in mercy to the eyes of Paul, beyond their
natural power, which in wrath was taken from them.  But if we say that
their natural power was taken away from them, and that \[it was\] on
this account he was defeated and overcome by the overpowering light,—for
had their natural power remained, they would have been able to endure
that supernatural light.  Yet let us be sure of this, that as often as
anything transcendent is revealed, that surpasses and transcends our
nature, our natural power is not able to stand before it.  But if on the
other hand another power beyond our natural one is added to us, then by
that power received by us in excess of and beyond nature, we shall be
able to stand before any strange thing which comes upon us
supernaturally.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p72"></span>32.  For, lo! the power of our ears
and eyes is in us and is formed in us in its natural manner; and yet our
sight and hearing cannot stand before mighty thunderings and lightnings;
first, because they come with vehemence; and secondly, because their
potency suddenly surprises and astounds our feebleness.  This is what
happened to Paul.  For the potency of the light suddenly surprised his
feeble eyes and injured them.  But the greatness of the voice brought
low his strength and entered his ears and opened them.  For they had
been closed up by Jewish contentiousness as by wax.  For the voice did
not plough up the ears, as the light injured the eyeballs.  Why? but
because it was meet that he should hear, but not that he should see. 
Therefore the doors of hearing were opened by the voice as by a key: 
but the doors of sight were shut by the light that should open them. 
Why then was it meet that he should hear?  Clearly because by that voice
our Lord was able to reveal Himself as being persecuted by Saul.  For He
was not able to show Himself by sight as being persecuted; for there was
no way whereby this should be, that the son of David should be seen
fleeing and Saul pursuing after Him. <span
id="fr_591"></span>[592](#fn_591)   For this happened in very deed with
that first Saul and with the first David.  The one was pursuing; the
other <span id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_319"></span>was being persecuted; they both of them
saw and were seen, each by the other.  But here the ear alone could hear
of the persecution of the Son of David; the eye could not see that He
was being persecuted.  For it was in \[the person of\] others He was
being persecuted, while He was Himself in heaven;—He Who beforetime had
been persecuted in His own person while He was upon earth.  Therefore
the ears \[of Saul\] were opened and his eyes were closed.  And He Who
by sight could not represent Himself before Saul as persecuted,
represented Himself by word before him as persecuted; when he cried and
said;—*Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou Me?*  Accordingly, his eyes were
closed, because they could not see the persecution of Christ; but his
ears were opened, because they could hear of His persecution.  So then
although the eyes of Moses were bodily eyes, as those of Paul, yet his
inward eyes were Christian; for *Moses wrote of Me*, <span
id="fr_592"></span>[593](#fn_592) but the outward eyes of Paul were
open, while the inward \[eyes\] were shut.  Then because the inward eyes
of Moses shone clear, his outward eyes also were made to shine clearly. 
But the outward eyes of Paul were closed, that by the closing of those
that were outward, there might come to pass the opening of those that
were inward.  For he who by the outward eyes was not able to see the
Lord in His signs, he when those bodily eyes were closed, saw with those
within.  And because he had received the proof in his own person, he
wrote to those who had their bodily eyes full of light;—*May He illumine
the eyes of your hearts*. <span id="fr_593"></span>[594](#fn_593)  
Therefore the signs manifested to the external eyes of the Jews,
profited them not at all; but faith of the heart opened the eyes of the
heart of the Gentiles.  But because, had Moses come down in his
accustomed aspect from the mountain, without that shining of
countenance, and said, “I saw there the glory of God,” the faithless
fathers would not have believed him; so also, had Paul, without
suffering blindness of his eyes, said, “I heard the voice of Christ,”
the sons who crucified Christ would not have received it as true. 
Therefore He set on Moses as in love, an excelling sign of splendour,
that the deceivers might believe that he had seen the Divine glory; but
on Saul, as on a persecutor, He set the hateful sign of blindness, that
the liars might believe that he had heard the words of Christ; that so
thou might not again speak against Moses, and that these might not doubt
concerning Paul.  For God set signs on the bodies of the blind, and sent
them to those who were in error, who used to make signs upon the borders
of their garments.  But they remembered not the signs on their garments,
and in the signs of the body they greatly erred.  The fathers who saw
the glory of Moses, did not obey Moses; nor did the sons who saw the
blindness of Paul believe Paul.  But three times in the desert they
threatened to stone Moses and his house with stones as dogs. <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594)   For *all congregation bade stone
them with stones*. <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595)   And thrice
they scourged Paul with rods as a dog on his body.  \[?\] <span
id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596)   Thrice was I beaten with rods. <span
id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597)   These are the lions who through
their love for their Lord were beaten as dogs and were torn as flocks of
sheep, those flocks that used to stone their guardian shepherds, in
order that ravening wolves might rule over them.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p80"></span>33.  But the crucifiers who corrupted
the soldiers with a bribe, they perhaps said concerning Paul;—“The
disciples have bribed him with a bribe; therefore he associates with the
disciples.”  For those who by the giving of a bribe strove that the
resurrection of our Lord might not be preached, slandered Paul with the
name of a bribe, that his revelation might not be believed.  Therefore
the voice astonished him, and the light blinded him, that his
astonishment might pacify his violence, and his blindness might put to
shame his slanderers.  For the voice <span id="page_320">p. 320</span>
<span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_320"></span>astounded his hearing in this,
that it said meekly to him;—(*Saul, why persecutes thou Me?*):  and the
light blinded his sight, that when the slanderers should have said that
he had received a bribe, and thereby was suborned to lie, his blindness
which had been brought about by that light might confute them, showing
that it was through it that he had been driven to speak what was true. 
So that those who supposed that his hands had received a bribe, and that
because of it his lips lied, might know that his eyes had given up their
light and because of this his lips proclaimed the truth.  But again for
another reason the meek voice accompanied the overpowering light;
namely, that as it were from meekness unto exaltation our Lord might
produce help for the persecutor; in like manner as also all His helps
were produced, from lowliness unto greatness.  For our Lord’s meekness
continued from the womb to the tomb.  And observe that greatness comes
close upon His lowliness, and exaltation on His meekness.  For whereas
His greatness was observed in divers things, His Divinity was revealed
by glorious signs; that it might be known that the One Who stood amongst
them, was not one but two.  For His nature is not humble nature alone,
nor is it an exalted nature alone; but there are two natures that are
mingled, the one with the other; the exalted and the humble.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p81"></span>Therefore these two natures show forth
their qualities; so that by the quality of each of the two, mankind
might distinguish between the two; that it might not be supposed that He
was merely one,—He Who was two by commingling:  but that it might be
known that He was two in respect of the blending, though He was one in
respect of His Being.  These things our Lord, through His humility and
exaltation, taught to Paul also in the way to Damascus.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p82"></span>34.  For our Lord appeared to Saul in
meekness, since meekness was close to His greatness; that because of His
greatness it might be known Who He is Who spake meekly.  For even as His
disciples preached on earth of our Lord in meekness and in
exaltation,—in the meekness of His persecution, and in the exaltation of
His signs,—so also our Lord preached of Himself in meekness and in
exaltation in Paul’s presence—in the exaltation of the potency of the
light which flashed, and in the meekness of that meek voice which said;
*Saul, why persecutest thou Me?*—so that the preaching of Him which His
disciples preached concerning Him in presence of many, should be like to
that preaching which He preached concerning Himself.  But even as, if He
had not spoken meekly, it would not have been made known there that He
was meek, so, had He not appeared there as an overpowering light, it
would not have been made known there that He was exalted.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p83"></span>35.  And if thou shouldst say; “What
necessity was there that He should speak humbly?  Could He not have
convinced him also through the greatness of the light?”  Know, thou that
questionest, that this rejoinder may be returned to thee; that because
it was necessary that He should speak humbly, He therefore spoke
humbly.  For by Him Who is wise in all things, there was done there
nothing that was not meet to be done.  For He Who has given knowledge to
artificers to do each thing severally with the instrument meet for it,
does He not Himself know that which He gives others the power of
knowing?  Therefore whatsoever has been wrought or is being wrought by
the Godhead, that very thing that is wrought by Him at that time, is for
the furtherance of \[God’s\] working at that time, even though to the
blind the Divine orderings seem contrariwise.  But that we may not
restrain by constraint of words a wise enquirer, one that wishes to grow
by true persuasion as the seed by the rain-drops; know, O enquirer, that
because Saul was a persecutor, but our Lord was endeavouring to make him
persecuted instead of persecutor, therefore He of His wisdom made haste
to cry—*Saul, why persecutest thou Me?*—in order that, when Saul who was
being made a disciple, heard Him Who was mak<span id="page_321">p.
321</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_321"></span>ing him a disciple,
saying, *Why persecutest thou Me?* he might know that the Master Whose
servant he was becoming, was a persecuted Master, and so might quickly
cast away the persecution of his former masters, and might clothe
himself in the persecuted state of his persecuted Master.  Now any
master who wishes to teach a man anything, teaches him either by deeds
or by words.  But if he teach him neither by words nor by deeds, the man
cannot be instructed in his craft.  So that, even though our Lord did
not teach Paul humility by deeds, yet by voice He taught him endurance
of persecution which He could not teach him by deed.  For before our
Lord was crucified, He taught His disciples humble endurance of
persecution by deed.  But after He had finished His persecution by
crucifixion, as He said, *Lo! all things are finished*. <span
id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598)   He could not vainly return and begin
again anything which once for all had been wisely finished.  Or why
again do ye seek for the crucifixion and shame of the Son of God?

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p85"></span>36.  For even though our Lord in His
grace had beforetime brought the majesty of His Godhead into humility,
yet afterwards in His justice He willed not again to bring back to
humiliation the littleness of manhood which had been made great.  But
because it was necessary that the persecuting disciple should learn
endurance of persecution, while yet it was impossible that the Master
should again come down and be persecuted afresh; He taught him by voice
that which could not be taught by deeds.  *Saul, why persecutest thou
Me?*  The explanation of which utterance is this;—“Saul, why art thou
not persecuted in Me?”  But in order that Saul might not suppose that it
was because of His weakness our Lord was persecuted, the strength of the
overpowering light which shone upon him, convinced him.  For if the eyes
of Saul could not endure the shining of that light, how could the hands
of Saul bind and fetter the disciples of the Lord of that light?  But
his hands had fettered the disciples, that he might learn their power in
their bonds; while his eyes could not endure the beams, that by their
strength he might learn his own weakness.  But had not the power of that
light shone upon him, when the Lord said to him; *Saul, why persecutest
thou Me?*  Then because of the madness of the pride wherein Paul was set
up at that time, he would perhaps have said this to Him, “I am
persecuting Thee for this reason, because Thou hast said, *Why
persecutest thou Me? * For who is there that would not persecute Thee,
when Thou, with such strength, troublest Thy persecutor with these
feeble cries.”  But the humility of our Lord was heard in the voice, and
the power of the light shone forth in the beams.  So Paul could not
despise the humility of the voice, because of the glory of the light.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p86"></span>37.  Thus were his ears brought into
discipleship to the voice which he heard, because his eyes sufficed not
to endure the beams which they saw.  That marvel of the dawning of the
light was shed forth upon his eyeballs and did them hurt; and the voice
of the Lord of the light entered his ears, but did them no harm.  But
between the light and the Lord of the light, which ought to have been
the stronger?  For if the light which was created by Him was so
overpowering, how much more overpowering He by Whom this very light was
created!  But if the Lord of the light was overpowering, as indeed He is
overpowering, how did His voice enter the hearing and not harm it? even
as that light which hurt the sight?  But hear the wonder and the marvel
which our Lord wrought by His grace.  For our Lord willed not to humble
that light which is His; but He being Lord of the light humbled
Himself.  But as the Lord of the light is greater than the light which
is His, so great is the glory that the Lord of the light should humble
Himself rather than humble the light.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p87"></span>38.  As also in the night, while He
was praying, it is written;—*There appeared to* <span id="page_322">p.
322</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_322"></span>*Him an angel
strengthening Him*. <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599)   But here
all mouths, celestial and terrestrial, are insufficient to give thanks
to Him by Whose hand the angels were created; that He was strengthened
for the sake of sinners by that angel who was created by His hand.  As
then the angel from above stood in glory and in brightness, while the
Lord of the angel, that He might *exalt* man who was degraded, stood in
degradation and humility; so also here that light flashed forth in
manifestation; but the Lord of the light, for the sake of helping one
persecutor, spoke with humble voice and lowly words.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p89"></span>39.  For this cause therefore that
light which was overpowering, because it was not diminished, entered the
eyeballs with overpowering manifestation and injured them.  But the Lord
of the light, because He had lowered Himself in order to help, His lowly
voice entered the ears that had need and helped them.  But in order that
the help of that voice which had become lowly, might not fail Him,
therefore the strength of that light was not lowered, in order that
because of that light, which was not lowered, the help of that voice
which was lowered, might be believed.  But this is a marvel, that until
our Lord made Himself lowly in voice, Paul was not made lowly in deed;
for even as, before He came down and clothed Himself in a body, our Lord
was in exaltation with His Father; yet in His exaltation men did not
learn humility; but when He humbled Himself and came down from His
exaltation, then by His humbleness humility was soon among men; so again
after His resurrection and ascension He was in glory at the right hand
of God His Father, but by that His exaltation, Paul did not learn
humility.  Therefore He that was exalted and sat at the right hand of
His Father, ceased from glorious and lofty speech, and He cried as one
wronged and oppressed, with feeble and meek words, saying,—*Saul, Saul,
why persecutest thou Me? * Thus, humble words prevailed over harsh
bridles.  For by humble words, as by bridles, the persecuted led the
persecutor from the broad way of the persecutors into the narrow way of
the persecuted.  And since all the signs that were done in the Name of
our Lord did not convince Paul, our Lord made haste to meet with
humility him who was hastening on the way to Damascus in the vehemence
of pride.  Thus by His humble words, the harsh vehemence of pride was
checked.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p90"></span>40.  He then Who used humble words
with Paul His persecutor, He also used humble sayings with the
Pharisee.  For so great is the power of humility that even God Who
overcomes all did not overcome without it.  Humility was able also in
the wilderness to bear the burden of the stiff-necked people.  For
against the people who were more stubborn than all men, was set Moses
who was more meek than all men.  For God Who needs not anything, when He
had set free the people, afterwards had need of the humility of Moses,
that this humility might endure the wrath and murmuring of the People
that provoked him.  For humility alone could endure the gainsayings of
that people, which the signs of Egypt and the prodigies (wrought) in the
desert could not subdue.  For when pride had wrought divisions amongst
the people, humility by its prayer used to close up their divisions.  If
then the humility of the Stammerer endured six hundred thousand, how
much more exceedingly did the humility of Him, Who gave speech to the
Stammerer endure?  For the humility of Moses is a shadow of the humility
of our Lord.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p91"></span>41.  Our Lord then saw that Simon the
Pharisee did not believe the signs and wonders which he had seen.  He
came to him to persuade him with humble words; and humble utterances
overcame him, whom mighty wonders had not overcome.  What then are the
wonders which that Pharisee had seen?  He had seen the dead raised to
life, the lepers cleansed, the blind with eyes opened.  These signs
compelled that Pharisee to entertain our Lord as a prophet.  But <span
id="page_323">p. 323</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_323"></span>he
who entertained Him as a prophet, changed so as to despise Him for one
who had not knowledge, saying (namely);—*Had this man been a prophet, He
would have known that this woman*—who had approached Him—*is a sinner*. 
But we may despise the Pharisee and say, Had he been a man of
discernment, <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600) he would have
learned from that sinful woman, who approached our Lord, not that He was
a prophet, but the Lord of the Prophets.  For the tears of the sinful
woman testified, that it was not a prophet they were propitiating, but
Him, Who, as God, was wroth with her sins.  For, because the prophets
sufficed not to raise sinners to life, the Lord of the prophets came
down to heal those who were in evil case.  But what physician is there
who hinders the smitten, that they should not come to him, O blind
Pharisee, as it befel that she came to our Physician!  For why did the
smitten woman approach Him,—she, whose wounds were healed by her tears? 
He Who had come down to be a fountain of healing amongst the diseased,
was proclaiming this;—*Let every one that is athirst, come and
drink*. <span id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601)   But when the
Pharisees, this man’s companions, murmured at the healing of sinners,
the Physician taught concerning His art, that the door is opened for the
diseased and not for the whole, for *they that are whole need not a
physician but they that are sick*. <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602)   Therefore the praise of the
physician is the healing of the diseased;—that the shame of the Pharisee
who reproved the praise of our physician may be greater.  But our Lord
used to show signs in the streets; and also when He entered into the
house of the Pharisee, He showed signs which were greater than those He
had shown outside.  For in the street He made whole the bodies that were
sick, but within He healed the souls that were diseased.  Outside, He
raised to life the mortality of Lazarus:  but within, He raised to life
the mortality of the sinful woman.  He restored the living soul to the
corpse from which it had gone out; and He expelled from the sinful woman
the deadly sin which dwelt within her.  But the blind (Pharisee) who was
insufficient for great things, because of the great things which he saw
not, belied those small things which he had seen.  For he was a son of
Israel who attributed weakness to his God, and not to himself.  For
(Israel said), *Though He smote the rock and the waters flowed, can He
also give us bread*? <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603)   But when
our Lord saw his weakness, that it missed the great things and, because
of them, the small things also, He hasted to put forward a simple word,
as though for a babe that was being reared on milk, and was not capable
of solid food.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p96"></span>42.  For by that wherein thou knewest,
O Pharisee, that our Lord was not a prophet, by that very thing it was
proved that thou didst not know the prophets.  For by this that thou
saidst;—*Had this man been a prophet, he would have known*, thou showest
herein that (in thy esteem) whoever is a prophet knows all things.  But
lo! some matters were hidden from the prophets; how then dost thou
attribute the revelation of all hidden things to the prophets?  But this
unwise teacher who perverted the scriptures of the Prophets, did not
even understand what he read in the scriptures.  For it was not only
that the greatness of the Lord was not discerned by that Pharisee, but
he did not even discern the weakness of the prophets.  For our Lord, as
knowing all things, allowed that sinful woman to come in and receive His
peace.  But Elisha, as one ignorant, said to the Shunamite;—Peace to
thee *and peace be to the child*. <span
id="fr_604"></span>[605](#fn_604)   Accordingly he who supposed that our
Lord was proved not to be a prophet, was himself proved not to know the
Prophets.  When the mind contains malice and cannot refrain, then that
malice which is in it, is cunning in finding a pretext for opening a
door; but in case that pretext, in which the deceiver takes refuge is
confuted, he knows that <span id="page_324">p. 324</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_324"></span>within this there is another concealed
which he may employ.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p98"></span>Now observe this son of Israel, how he
was like Israel in stubbornness.  For heathenism was bound up in the
mind of the People; therefore Moses was taken away from them, that the
wickedness that was within them might become manifest.  But that they
might not be put to shame, and that it might not be known how they were
seeking idols, they first sought for Moses, and then for idols.  *As for
this Moses, we know not what has become of him*. <span
id="fr_605"></span>[606](#fn_605)   And if God, Who cannot die, brought
thee out of Egypt, why dost thou seek for a man, who at some time must
die?  Yet they did not desire Moses, that he should become a god to
them; because Moses could hear and see and reprove; but they sought for
a god who could neither hear nor see nor reprove.  But whensoever Moses
shall have died, what shall remain of him?  For behold, thy God is a
living God, and lo! He has revealed Himself to thee by living
testimonies.  For the bright cloud was at that time overshadowing them,
and they had the pillar of light in the night-time.  Water flowed for
them from the rock, and they drank its streams.  They were delighted
every day by tasting that manna, the fame of which we have heard.  How
was Moses far from thee?  Behold the signs of Moses surround thee.  Or
how does the person of Moses profit thee, when thou hast such a guide as
this?  If thy garments wear not old, and a temperate air refreshes thee,
if the heat and the cold do not hurt thee, and thou hast rest from war,
and art far removed from the fear of Egypt,—what thing then was lacking
to Israel that he sought for Moses?  Open heathenism was lacking to
him.  For it was not for Moses that he sought, but on the pretext of
Moses’ absence he followed after the calf.  Thus briefly have we showed,
that when the mind is full of anything, but an opposing reason meets it,
then it forces it by violence to open for it a door to that which it
desires.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p100"></span>43.  Thou too, O Pharisee, athirst
for blasphemy, what sawest thou in our Lord, to show that He was not a
prophet?  For lo! the things that belong to the Lord of the Prophets
were seen in Him.  For the gushing tears made haste to proclaim that
they were shed as before God.  The sorrowing kisses testified that they
sought to win over the creditor to tear up the debt-bonds.  The goodly
ointment of the sinful woman proclaimed that it was a bribe of
penitence.  These medicines the sinful woman offered to her Physician,
that by her tears He might wash away her stains, by her kisses He might
heal her wounds, by her sweet ointment He might make her evil name sweet
as the odour of her ointment.  This is the Physician who heals men by
the medicines which they bring to Him.  These marvels were shown at that
time; but to the Pharisee instead of these there appeared blasphemy. 
For what could be established in the weeping of the sinful woman, but
that He can justify sinners?  Else, judge thou in thy mind, O blind
teacher, why was that mournful weeping in the joyful feast, so that,
while they were making merry with food, she was in bitterness with her
tears?  Because she was a sinner, her deeds were unchaste, and these
(deeds) she was wont to do.  But if at that time, from the wantonness of
sinners she was turned to chastity, then acknowledge, thou who saidst
*He is not a prophet*, that He is One who makes those chaste that have
been wanton.  For by this, that thou knowest that she is a sinner, and
by this, that thou seest her now penitent, search out where is the power
that changed her.  For he ought to have fallen down and worshipped Him
Who, while silent, in His silence turned to chastity those sinners whom
the Prophets by their vehement utterances could not turn to chastity.  A
wonderful and marvellous thing was seen in the house of the Pharisee; a
sinful woman that sat and wept, and she who wept said not wherefore she
wept; nor did He at Whose feet she sat say to her, Why weepest thou? 
The sinner did not need with her lips to <span id="page_325">p.
325</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_325"></span>petition our Lord,
because she believed that He knew, as God, the petitions that were
hidden in her tears.  Nor did our Lord ask her, What hast thou done? 
For He knew that by her pure kisses she was atoning for her
transgressions.  So then she, because she believed that He knew the
things that were hidden, offered to Him her prayers in her heart; for
knowing secret things He had no need of the outward lips.  If then the
sinner, because she knew that our Lord was God, sought not to persuade
Him with her lips; and our Lord, because as God He discerned her
thoughts, therefore questioned her not; dost not thou, O tyrant
Pharisee, from the silence of both understand the position of both; that
she was praying as to God in her heart, and that He as God was in
silence searching out her thoughts?  But the Pharisee could not see and
understand these things, because he was a son of Israel who though
perceiving, saw not, and though he heard, understood not.  Though then
our Lord knew that that Pharisee thought evil thoughts concerning Him,
He confuted him gently and not harshly.  For sweetness came down from on
high to break down the bitterness with which the Evil One had stamped
us.  Therefore our Lord taught that Pharisee of Himself and in Himself,
as though saying, Even as I, though I knew the evil things in thy heart,
yet gently persuaded thee, so though I knew the evil things of this
woman, I mercifully received her.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p101"></span>But let us hear how long-suffering
was drawn after the hasty thought, so as to draw it from haste to
understanding.  *A certain creditor had two debtors.  One owed five
hundred dinars, and the other fifty dinars*.—(Be not wearied, O hearer,
at the length of the repetition of the parable, lest thou be contrary to
Him Who in the parable was long-suffering for the sake of giving
help.)—*At length, when neither of them had wherewithal to pay, he
forgave them both.  Which of them dost thou think would love him more? 
Simon said to Him, I suppose that he, to whom more was forgiven.  Our
Lord said to him, Thou has rightly judged.*  Our Lord in His justice
commended the perverse (Pharisee), because of the right judgment, which
he had judged, though he in his wickedness had answered the good Lord
concerning the mercy He had wrought.  Now many things are laid up in
this parable; for it is a treasury full of many helps.  Why then did our
Lord require that the Pharisee should pass judgment for Him between the
two debtors?  Was it not that the greatness, coming after the
littleness, might show itself that nothing of the littleness was drawn
after the greatness?  For our Lord, since He knew the secret things, was
long-suffering and questioned Simon, that those might be put to shame
who, though not knowing, were hasty to blame, but not to enquire.  For
if, O man, before I heard thy judgment passed, I judged not of it, why
didst thou, before thou heardest from Me, the case of the sinful woman,
hastily blame?  Now this was done for our instruction, that we might be
swift to enquire, but slow to pass our sentence.  For had that Pharisee
been long-suffering, lo! that pardon which our Lord in the end gave to
the sinful woman, would have taught him everything.  Long-suffering is
wont to acquire all things for those that acquire it.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p102"></span>44.  But again; through the
forgiveness of the two debtors, our Lord led into forgiveness him who
was in need of forgiveness, yet in whose eyes the forgiveness of debts
was hateful.  For though the debts of the Pharisee himself needed
forgiveness, yet the forgiveness of the debts of the sinful woman was
hateful in his eyes.  For had there been this forgiveness of debts in
the mind of the Pharisee, it would not have been in his eyes disgraceful
that that sinful woman should have come for forgiveness of her debts to
God and not to the priests; for the priests could not forgive sins such
as those.  But this sinful woman from the glorious works which our Lord
did, believed that He could also forgive sins.  For she knew that whoso
is able to restore the members of the body, is able also to cleanse
<span id="page_326">p. 326</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_326"></span>away the spots of the soul.  But the
Pharisee, though he was a teacher, did not know this.  For the teachers
of Israel were wont to be fools, put to shame by the despised and vile. 
For they were put to shame by that blind man to whom they said;—*We know
that this man is a sinner*. <span id="fr_606"></span>[607](#fn_606)  
But he said to them:—*How did He open my eyes? lo! God hears not
sinners*. <span id="fr_607"></span>[608](#fn_607)   These are the blind
teachers who were made guides to others; and their perverse path was
made straight by a blind man.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p105"></span>45.  But hear ye the marvel that our
Lord wrought.  Because that Pharisee supposed that our Lord did not know
that the woman who touched Him was a sinner; our Lord made the lips of
the Pharisee like the strings of a harp; and by his very lips He sang
how she was trampling under foot his sins, though he knew it not.  And
he who as though he knew had blamed, was found to be a harp, whereto
another could sing of that which he knew.  For our Lord compared the
sins of the sinful woman to five hundred dinars, and caused them to pass
into the hearing of the Pharisee by the parable which he heard; and
again brought them forth from his mouth in the judgment he gave; though
Simon knew not, when he was judging, that those five hundred dinars
denoted the sins of the sinful woman.  And (the Pharisee) who thought
concerning our Lord that He had not knowledge of her sins, was himself
found not to have knowledge of them, when he heard of those debts in the
parable, and gave judgment concerning them with his voice.  But when it
was explained to him at last by our Lord, then the Pharisee knew that
alike his ears and also his lips were, as it were, instruments for our
Lord, through which He might sing the glories of His knowledge.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p106"></span>For this Pharisee was the fellow of
those scribes, whose sentence by their own mouths our Lord gave against
them;—*What then will the Lord of the vineyard do to those
husbandmen*? <span id="fr_608"></span>[609](#fn_608)   They say unto
Him, against themselves:—*He will terribly destroy them, and will hire
out the vineyard to husbandmen who will render unto Him the fruit in its
season*.  This is the Godhead to which all things are easy, which by the
mouths, the very mouths that blasphemed it, pronounced the sentence of
those very mouths against them.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p108"></span>46.  Glory then be to Him the
Invisible, who clothed Himself in invisibility, that sinners might he
able to draw near to Him.  For our Lord did not repel the sinful woman
as the Pharisee expected; inasmuch as He descended from the height which
no man can reach unto, altogether in order that lowly publicans, like
Zaccheus, might reach unto Him.  And the Nature which none can handle,
clothed Itself in a body, altogether in order that all lips <span
id="fr_609"></span>[610](#fn_609) might kiss His feet as the sinful
woman did.  For the sacred soul was hidden within the veil of flesh, and
so touched all unclean lips and sanctified them.  Thus He Whom His
appetite was supposed to invite to feasting, His feet invited to tears;
He was the good Physician, who came forth to go to the sinful woman who
was seeking Him in her soul.  She then anointed the feet of our Lord,
who (anointed) not His head,—she who was trodden down in the dust by
all.  For those Pharisees who justified themselves and despised all
(else), trod her down.  But He the Merciful, Whose pure body sanctified
her uncleanness, had pity on her.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p110"></span>47.  But Mary anointed the head of
our Lord’s body, <span id="fr_610"></span>[611](#fn_610) as a token of
the better part which she had chosen.  And Christ prophesied concerning
that which her soul had chosen.  While Martha was cumbered with serving,
Mary was hungering to be satisfied with spiritual things by Him Who also
satisfies us with bodily things.  So Mary refreshed Him with precious
ointment, as He had refreshed her with His exalted teaching.  Mary by
the oil showed forth the mystery of His mortality, Who by His teaching
mortified the concupiscence of her flesh.  <span id="page_327">p.
327</span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_327"></span>Thus the sinful woman
by the flood of her tears, in full assurance was rewarded with remission
of sins from beside His feet; and she who had the issue of blood, stole
healing from the hem of His garment.  But Mary received blessing openly
from His mouth, as a reward of the service of her hands upon His head. 
For she poured out on His head the precious ointment, and received from
His mouth a wonderful promise.  This is the ointment which was sown
above and yielded fruit below.  For she sowed it on His head and
gathered its fruit from between His lips;—*She shall have a name and
this memorial in every place where My Gospel shall be preached*. <span
id="fr_611"></span>[612](#fn_611)   Accordingly, what she then received
of Him, He is able to cause to pass unto all generations:  and in no
generation can any hinder it.  For the ointment which she poured upon
His head, gave its odour in presence of all the guests and refreshed
Him; so also the goodly name which He gave her, passes down through all
generations and brings honour to her.  Even as all who were at the feast
were sensible of her ointment; it was meet that all who come into the
world should be sensible of her triumph.  This is a loan whereof the
increase is exacted in all generations.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p113"></span>48.  Now Simeon the priest, when he
took Him up in his arms to present Him before God, <span
id="fr_612"></span>[613](#fn_612) understood as he saw \[Him\] that He
was not presenting Him, but was being himself presented.  For the Son
was not presented by the servant to His Father, but the servant was
presented by the Son to his Lord.  For it is not possible that He, by
Whom every offering is presented, should be presented by another.  For
the offering does not present him that offers it; but by them that offer
are offerings presented.  So then He Who receives offerings gave Himself
to be offered by another, that those who presented Him, while offering
Him, might themselves be presented by Him.  For as He gave His body to
be eaten, that when eaten It might quicken to life them that ate Him; so
He gave Himself to be offered, that by His Cross the hands of them that
offered Him might be sanctified.  So, then, though the arms of Simeon
seemed to be presenting the Son, yet the words of Simeon testified that
he was presented by the Son.  Therefore we can have no dispute
concerning this, because that which was said put an end to dispute;—*Now
lettest Thou Thy servant depart in peace*. <span
id="fr_613"></span>[614](#fn_613)   He then who is let depart to go in
peace to God, is presented as an offering to God.  And in order to make
known by whom he was presented, he said,—*For lo! mine eyes have seen
Thy mercy*. <span id="fr_614"></span>[615](#fn_614)   If there was no
grace wrought on him, why then did he give thanks?  But rightly did he
give thanks, that he was thought worthy to receive in his arms Him, Whom
angels and prophets greatly desired to see.  For lo! *mine eyes have
seen Thy mercy*.  Let us understand then and see.  Is *mercy* that which
shows mercy to another, or is it that which receives mercy from
another?  But if mercy is that which shows mercy to all, well did Simeon
call our Lord by the name of the mercy that showed mercy to him,—Him Who
freed him from the world which is full of snares, that he might go to
Eden which is full of pleasures; for he who was priest said and
testified that he was offered as an offering, that from the midst of the
perishing world he should go and be stored up in the treasure-house
which is kept safe.  For one for whom it may be that what he has found
should be lost, to him it belongs to be diligent that it should be kept
safe.  But for our Lord it could not be that He should be lost; but by
Him the lost were found.  So then, through the Son Who could not be
lost, the servant who was very desirous not to be lost, was presented. 
*Lo! mine eyes have seen Thy mercy*.  It is evident Simeon received
grace from that Child Whom he was carrying.  For inwardly he received
grace from that Infant, Whom openly he received in his <span
id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span
id="iii.viii.ii-Page_328"></span>arms.  For through Him Who was
glorious, even when He was carried, being small and feeble, he that
carried Him was made great.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p117"></span>49.  But inasmuch as Simeon endured
to carry on his weak arms that Majesty which the creatures could not
endure, it is evident that his weakness was made strong by the strength
which he carried.  For at that time Simeon also along with all creatures
was secretly upheld by the almighty strength of the Son.  Now this is a
marvel, that outwardly it was he that was strengthened that carried Him
Who strengthened him; but inwardly it was the strength that bore its
bearer.  For the Majesty straitened itself, that they who carried it
might endure it; in order that as far as that Majesty stooped to our
littleness, so far should our love be raised up from all desires to
reach that Majesty.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p118"></span>50.  So likewise the ship that
carried our Lord; it was He that bare it, in that He stayed from it the
wind that would have sunk it.  Peace, for thou art shut up.  While He
was on the sea, His arm reached even to the fountain of the wind, <span
id="fr_615"></span>[616](#fn_615) to shut it up.  The ship bare His
manhood, but the power of His Godhead bare the ship and all that was
therein.  But that He might show that even His manhood needed not the
ship, instead of the planks which a shipwright puts together and
fastens, He like the Architect of creation, made the waters solid and
joined them together and laid them under His feet.  So the Lord
strengthened the hands of Simeon the Priest, that his arms might bear up
in the Temple the strength that was bearing up all; as He strengthened
the feet of Simeon the Apostle, that they might bear themselves up on
the water.  And so that name which bore the first-begotten in the Temple
was afterwards borne up by the first-begotten in the sea; that He might
show that as in the sea the drowning was borne up by Him, He did not
need to be borne by Simeon on the dry ground.  But our Lord bare Simeon
up openly in the midst of the sea to teach that also on the dry land He
supported him secretly.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p120"></span>51.  Accordingly, the Son came to the
servant; not that the Son might be presented by the servant, but that by
the Son the servant might present to His Lord Priesthood and Prophecy,
to be laid up with Him.  For prophecy and priesthood, which were given
through Moses, were handed down, both of them, and reached to Simeon. 
For he was a pure vessel, who sanctified himself that he might be like
Moses, capable for both of them.  There are small vessels which are
capable for great gifts.  There are gifts for which one is capable, by
reason of their grace; yet many are not capable for them, by reason of
their greatness.  Thus, then, Simeon presented our Lord, and in Him
offered both these things; so that that which was given to Moses in the
wilderness, was received from Simeon in the Temple.  But seeing that our
Lord is the vessel wherein all fulness dwells, when Simeon was offering
Him before God, he poured over Him (as a drink-offering) those two
(gifts), priesthood from His hands and prophecy from His lips. 
Priesthood continued on the hands of Simeon, because of his
purifications; and prophecy dwelt in operation upon his lips, because of
revelations.  When then these two powers saw Him who was Lord of both,
they two united together and poured themselves into the vessel that was
capable of both; that could contain priesthood and kingdom and
prophecy.  That Infant then, who was wrapped in swaddling clothes,
because of His graciousness, clothed Himself in priesthood and prophecy
because of His Majesty.  For Simeon clothed Him in these, and gave Him
to her who had wrapped Him in swaddling clothes.  For when he gave Him
to His mother, he gave along with Him the priesthood; and when he
prophesied to her concerning Him, *This (child) is set for the fall and
rising again*, <span id="fr_616"></span>[617](#fn_616) he gave prophecy
also with Him.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p122"></span><span id="page_329">p. 329</span>
<span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_329"></span>52.  Then Mary received her
firstborn and went forth.  He was outwardly wrapped in swaddling
clothes, but secretly He was clothed with prophecy and priesthood. 
Whatsoever then was handed down from Moses, was received from Simeon,
but continued and was possessed by the Lord of both.  So then the
steward first, and the treasurer lastly, handed over the keys of
priesthood and prophecy to Him who has authority over the treasurer of
them both.  Therefore, His Father gave Him the spirit not by
measure, <span id="fr_617"></span>[618](#fn_617) because all measures of
the spirit are under his hand.  And that our Lord might show that He
received the keys from the former stewards, He said to Simeon:  *To thee
I will give the keys of the doors*. <span
id="fr_618"></span>[619](#fn_618)   But how should He have given them to
another, had He not received them from another?  So, then, the keys
which He had received from Simeon the priest, them He gave to another
Simeon the Apostle; that even though the People had not hearkened to the
former Simeon, the Gentiles might hearken to the latter Simeon.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p125"></span>53.  But because John also was the
treasurer of baptism, the Lord of the stewardship came to him to receive
from him the keys of the house of reconciliation.  For John used to wash
away in common water the blemishes of sins; that bodies might become
meet for the garment of the Spirit, given by our Lord.  Therefore,
because the Spirit was with the Son, He came to John to receive from him
baptism, that He might mingle with the visible waters the invisible
Spirit; that they whose bodies should feel the moistening of the water,
their souls should feel the gift of the Spirit; that even as the bodies
outwardly feel the pouring of the water upon them, so the souls inwardly
may feel the pouring of the Spirit upon them.  Accordingly, even us our
Lord when He was baptised, was clothed in baptism and carried baptism
with Him, so also when He was presented in the Temple, He put on
prophecy and priesthood, and went forth bearing the purity of the
priesthood upon His pure members, and bearing the words of prophecy in
His wondrous ears.  For when Simeon was sanctifying the body of the
Child who sanctifies all, that body received the priesthood in its
sanctification.  And again, when Simeon was prophesying over Him,
prophecy quickly entered the hearing of the Child.  For if John leaped
in the womb and perceived the voice of the Mother of our Lord, <span
id="fr_619"></span>[620](#fn_619) how much more should our Lord have
heard in the Temple?  For lo! it was because of Him that John knew (so
as) to hear in the womb.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p127"></span>54.  Accordingly, each one of the
gifts that was stored up for the Son, He gathered from their true tree. 
For He received baptism from the Jordan, even though John still after
Him used to baptise.  And He received priesthood from the Temple, even
though Annas the High Priest exercised it.  And again, He received
prophecy which had been handed down amongst the righteous, even though
by it Caiaphas in mockery platted a crown for our Lord, and He received
the kingdom from the house of David, even though Herod held the place
and exercised it.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p128"></span>55.  This is He Who flew and came
down from on high; and when all those gifts which He had given to those
of old time saw Him, they came flying from every quarter and rested on
Him their Giver.  For they gathered themselves together from every side,
to come and be grafted into their natural tree.  For they had been
grafted into bitter trees, namely into wicked kings and priests. 
Therefore they hastened to come to their sweet parent-stock; namely to
the Godhead Who in sufficiency came down to the people of Israel, that
the parts of Him might be gathered to Him.  And when He received of them
that which was His own, that which was not His own was rejected; since
for the sake of His own He had borne also with that which was not His
own.  For He bore with the idolatry of <span id="page_330">p. 330</span>
<span id="iii.viii.ii-Page_330"></span>Israel, for the sake of His
priesthood; and He bore with its diviners, for the sake of His prophets;
and He bore with its wicked dominion, for the sake of His holy crown.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p129"></span>56.  But when our Lord took to
Himself Priesthood from them, He sanctified by it all the Gentiles.  And
again, when He took to Himself prophecy, He revealed by it His counsels
to all nations.  And when he wove His crown, He bound the strong One who
takes all men captive, and divides his spoils.  These gifts were barren,
with the fig-tree, which while it was barren of fruit made barren such
glorious powers as these.  Therefore as being without fruit, it was cut
off, that these gifts might pass forth from it and bring forth fruit
abundantly among all the Gentiles.

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p130"></span>57.  So He, Who came to make our
bodies abodes for His indwelling, passed by all those dwelling-places. 
Let each one of us then be a dwelling-place for Him Who loves me.  Let
us come to Him and make our abode with Him.  This is the Godhead Whom
though all creation cannot contain, yet a lowly and humble soul suffices
to receive Him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_556"></span>[305:557](2130274.htm#fr_556) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p7"></span> [Luke i.
35](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#035)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_557"></span>[306:558](2130274.htm#fr_557) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p9"></span> St. [Matt. xxvii.
50-52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_558"></span>[306:559](2130274.htm#fr_558) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p10"></span> St. [Matt. xxvii.
50-53](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_559"></span>[307:560](2130274.htm#fr_559) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p14"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_560"></span>[307:561](2130274.htm#fr_560) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p15"></span> [Exod. xxxii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_561"></span>[307:562](2130274.htm#fr_561) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p16"></span> [Exod.
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#028)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_562"></span>[308:563](2130274.htm#fr_562) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p17"></span> [Num. v.
17-27](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#017)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[308:564](2130274.htm#fr_563) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p19"></span> [John i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[308:565](2130274.htm#fr_564) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p21"></span> [Ps.
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#006)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[308:566](2130274.htm#fr_565) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p22"></span> [1 Cor.
15:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#028)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_566"></span>[309:567](2130274.htm#fr_566) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p25"></span> [Mark vii.
32-37](../../../bib/kjv/mar007.htm#032)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_567"></span>[309:568](2130274.htm#fr_567) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p27"></span> St. [John ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#006)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_568"></span>[310:569](2130274.htm#fr_568) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p28"></span> [Col. ii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_569"></span>[310:570](2130274.htm#fr_569) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p31"></span> St. [Matt. ix.
20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p31.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_570"></span>[310:571](2130274.htm#fr_570) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p32"></span> St. <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p32.1"></span><span id="iii.viii.ii-p32.2"></span>[Luke
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#037),
[38](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#038)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p32.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_571"></span>[312:572](2130274.htm#fr_571) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p37"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p37.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_572"></span>[312:573](2130274.htm#fr_572) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p38.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p39"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p39.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_573"></span>[312:574](2130274.htm#fr_573) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p41"></span> [Luke vii.
44-47](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#044)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p41.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_574"></span>[313:575](2130274.htm#fr_574) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p44"></span> [Mark ii.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#007)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p44.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_575"></span>[313:576](2130274.htm#fr_575) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p44.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p45"></span> [Matt. ix.
2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p45.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_576"></span>[313:577](2130274.htm#fr_576) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p47"></span> [Matt. ix.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#006)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p47.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_577"></span>[314:578](2130274.htm#fr_577) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p48.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p49"></span> [Matt. ii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p49.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_578"></span>[314:579](2130274.htm#fr_578) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p49.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p50"></span> [Hebr. x.
31](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#031)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p50.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_579"></span>[314:580](2130274.htm#fr_579) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p50.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p51"></span> [2 Thess. i.
7-8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p51.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_580"></span>[315:581](2130274.htm#fr_580) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p54.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p55"></span> [2 Cor. x.
5](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#005)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p55.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_581"></span>[315:582](2130274.htm#fr_581) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p55.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p56"></span> [Acts ix.
4](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#004)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p56.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[316:583](2130274.htm#fr_582) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p57.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p58"></span> [Acts xxii.
11](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#011)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p58.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_583"></span>[316:584](2130274.htm#fr_583) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p58.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p59"></span> [Matt. iv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#011)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p59.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_584"></span>[316:585](2130274.htm#fr_584) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p60.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p61"></span> [Acts xxvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#013)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p61.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_585"></span>[316:586](2130274.htm#fr_585) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p61.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p62"></span> [Dan.
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p62.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_586"></span>[316:587](2130274.htm#fr_586) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p63.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p64"></span> [Dan. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#008)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p64.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_587"></span>[317:588](2130274.htm#fr_587) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p64.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p65"></span> [Dan. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p65.1"></span>
(Peshitto).

<span id="fn_588"></span>[317:589](2130274.htm#fr_588) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p65.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p66"></span> [Dan. x.
6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p66.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_589"></span>[317:590](2130274.htm#fr_589) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p66.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p67"></span> [Dan. x.
19](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#019)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p67.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_590"></span>[317:591](2130274.htm#fr_590) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p68.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p69"></span> [Exod. xxxiii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p69.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_591"></span>[318:592](2130274.htm#fr_591) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p72.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p73"></span> <span id="iii.viii.ii-p73.1"></span>1
Sam. xxiii, xxiv.

<span id="fn_592"></span>[319:593](2130274.htm#fr_592) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p73.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p74"></span> [John v.
46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p74.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_593"></span>[319:594](2130274.htm#fr_593) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p74.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p75"></span> [Eph. i.
18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p75.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_594"></span>[319:595](2130274.htm#fr_594) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p75.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p76"></span> Only one such threat is recorded (see
margin); but cf. [Exod. 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#026), [Exod.
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p76.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[319:596](2130274.htm#fr_595) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p76.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p77"></span> [Num. xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#010)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p77.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[319:597](2130274.htm#fr_596) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p77.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p78"></span> Rendering doubtful.

<span id="fn_597"></span>[319:598](2130274.htm#fr_597) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p78.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p79"></span> [2 Cor. xi.
25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p79.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[321:599](2130274.htm#fr_598) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p83.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p84"></span> [John xix.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p84.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[322:600](2130274.htm#fr_599) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p87.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p88"></span> [Luke xxii.
43](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#043)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p88.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[323:601](2130274.htm#fr_600) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p91.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p92"></span> Parûshâ; the resemblance of the word
to Parishâ (=Pharisee) is here played on.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[323:602](2130274.htm#fr_601) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p92.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p93"></span> [John vii.
37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p93.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[323:603](2130274.htm#fr_602) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p93.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p94"></span> [Matt. ix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#012)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p94.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[323:604](2130274.htm#fr_603) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p94.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p95"></span> [Ps. lxxviii.
20](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#020)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p95.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_604"></span>[323:605](2130274.htm#fr_604) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p96.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p97"></span> [2 Kings iv.
26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p97.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[324:606](2130274.htm#fr_605) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p98.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p99"></span> [Ex. xxxii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001)<span id="iii.viii.ii-p99.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[326:607](2130274.htm#fr_606) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p102.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p103"></span> [John ix.
24-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p103.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[326:608](2130274.htm#fr_607) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p103.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p104"></span> [John ix.
24-31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p104.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[326:609](2130274.htm#fr_608) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p106.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p107"></span> [Matt. xxi.
40-44](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#040)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p107.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_609"></span>[326:610](2130274.htm#fr_609) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p108.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p109"></span> [Is. vi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#007)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p109.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[326:611](2130274.htm#fr_610) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p110.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p111"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
7](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#007)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p111.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[327:612](2130274.htm#fr_611) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p111.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p112"></span> [Matt. xxvi.
13](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#013)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p112.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[327:613](2130274.htm#fr_612) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p113.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p114"></span> [Luke ii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#028)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p114.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_613"></span>[327:614](2130274.htm#fr_613) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p114.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p115"></span> [Luke ii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#029)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p115.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_614"></span>[327:615](2130274.htm#fr_614) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p115.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p116"></span> [Luke ii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#030)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p116.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_615"></span>[328:616](2130274.htm#fr_615) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p118.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p119"></span> [Mark iv.
39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p119.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_616"></span>[328:617](2130274.htm#fr_616) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p120.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p121"></span> [Luke ii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p121.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[329:618](2130274.htm#fr_617) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p122.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p123"></span> [John iii.
34](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#034)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p123.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_618"></span>[329:619](2130274.htm#fr_618) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p123.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p124"></span> [Matt. xvi.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p124.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[329:620](2130274.htm#fr_619) <span
id="iii.viii.ii-p125.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.ii-p126"></span> [Luke i.
41](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#041)<span
id="iii.viii.ii-p126.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Admonition and Repentance.](2130275)
