[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130162)  [Next](2130164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.i"></span> <span id="page_119">p. 119</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_119"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p1"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p1.1"></span>Introductory Dissertation.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p3.1"></span>Ephraim the Syrian</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p4"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p4.1"></span>and</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p5"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p5.1"></span>Aphrahat the Persian Sage.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p6"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.iii.i-p7"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p7.1"></span>Preliminary.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.i-p8"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.iii.i-p8.1"></span>The</span> two Fathers of the Syrian Church,
from whose writings the present Volume presents a selection, are from
more than one point of view fitly associated as examples of the leaders
of Syriac theological thought and literature.  They are the earliest
Syriac authors of whom any considerable remains survive; and they both
represent the religious mind of the Syrian Church, but little affected
by influences from without, other than the all-pervading influence of
the Jewish and Christian Scriptures.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p9"></span>Syriac Literature is, on the whole, of
derivative growth.  It consists largely of versions or adaptations from
the Greek.  The Syriac language, in the hands of those to whom the
Syriac Church owes the admirable version of the Scriptures known as the
“Peshitto,” proved itself capable of reproducing adequately, not only
the sublime conceptions of God and of man’s relations to God which
belong to the cognate Hebrew of the Old Testament, but also—the wider,
subtler, and more complex religious ideas for which the writers of the
New Testament found their fit vehicle in the Greek.  But the Peshitto,
great as its value must have been to the religious life of
Syriac-speaking Christians, never became to them what Luther’s Bible has
been to Germany, and the “Authorized” Bible of King James’s translators
to England—an inspiring force in literature, not merely to elevate and
enrich its language, but to quicken it in every branch.  Syriac
literature was indeed deeply penetrated by the Syriac Bible, but its
level was never raised above mediocrity.  For the most part it is
imitative not original;—nay, it rarely succeeds in assimilating so as to
make its own what it has borrowed.  The Syriac translator, if he worked
on the writings of a Greek divine, would often paraphrase or even
interpolate; if of a Greek historian, would subjoin a continuation; but
he would seldom venture farther.  Those who essayed independent
authorship were few.  A home-grown Syriac literature began with Ephraim
and Aphrahat; but \[setting aside a very small number of the writers who
followed\] it may almost be said to have ended with them.  These two,
and these alone, in place of being imitators or translators, were
translated and imitated by the writers of foreign nations.  Aphrahat’s
literary lot was the singular one, that his work survived in an alien
tongue for alien readers, when the original had wellnigh perished out of
the mem<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span
id="iii.iii.i-Page_120"></span>ory of his own people.  To Ephraim
pertains the high and unique distinction of having originated—or at
least given its living impulse to—a new departure in sacred literature;
and that, not for his own country merely, but for Christendom.  From him
came, if not the first idea, at all events the first successful example,
of making song an essential constituent of public worship, and an
exponent of theological teaching; and from him it spread and prevailed
through the Eastern Churches, and affected even those of the West.  To
the Hymns, on which chiefly his fame rests, the Syriac ritual in all its
forms owes much of its strength and richness; and to them is largely due
the place which Hymnody holds throughout the Church everywhere.  And
hence it has come to pass that, in the Church everywhere, he stands as
the representative Syrian Father, as the fixed epithet appended to his
name attests—“Ephraim *the Syrian*,”—the one Syrian known and reverenced
in all Christendom.

<span id="iii.iii.i-p10"></span>Of the two, it has been usual of late to
reckon Aphrahat as the elder.  Further on, it will be shown in this
Dissertation that the reasons for so reckoning him are inadequate.  For
the present it suffices to note that they were contemporaries—both
living and writing about the middle of the fourth century, and that
priority of treatment cannot with confidence be claimed for either.  On
grounds of convenience, therefore, we may properly proceed to deal first
with Ephraim, as being indisputably far the first in order of
importance, of copiousness, and of celebrity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Part I](2130164.md)
