[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130155)  [Next](2130157.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>Epistle XIII.</span>

<span id="ii.x.vi-p2"></span>*To Alcyson, Bishop of Corcyra* <span
id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241.md) .

<span id="ii.x.vi-p4"></span>Gregory to Alcyson, &c.

<span id="ii.x.vi-p5"></span>To brethren who bethink themselves and
return to wholesome counsels kindness is not to be denied, lest a fault
seem to weigh more in the minds of bishops than charity.  We have
therefore received, in the presence of thy Love’s *responsales*, Peter,
reader of the Church of Euria, who came to us with letters from our
brother and fellow-bishop John, and, when the letters which he had
brought had been read, we took care to ask him if he had anything to say
against the allegation of those thy *responsales*.  And on his stating
that he had been charged with nothing, and had no answer to make, beyond
what the epistle of his bishop contained, we decreed without tardiness,
under God, what was agreeable to the canons.  After a long time,
however, the above-written Peter produced a document which he asserted
had been given him by his bishop; and so the case underwent delay.  But
inasmuch as in this document the above-mentioned bishop was found to say
that he had hoped to have leave to deposit the holy and venerable body
of the blessed Donatus in the church of the blessed John which is within
the camp called that of Cassiopus, saying that he is prepared, on
account of its being proved to be in thy diocese, to give thy Love a
security that no prejudice to thee should thence arise, we thought it
right that his petition should not be left without effect, now that in a
time of necessity he desires provision to be made for him in such a way
as to secure his acknowledgment in all respects of the jurisdiction of
thy Church.  Moved therefore by this reason, we exhort thy Fraternity by
this present letter, that, without any delay or excuse thou afford
opportunity for depositing the venerable body of the above-written Saint
in the aforenamed Church of the blessed John; on condition only that he
previously protect thee by a security in writing that he will never on
any plea whatever claim to himself any jurisdiction or privilege in the
aforesaid Church or camp, as though he were the bishop of the place, but
guard there inviolably all the right and power of thy Church, the place
being in thy diocese.  At the same time it becomes thee also, as the
same our brother has requested, to reply to him that whenever, peace
being restored by the mercy of God, he may be at liberty to return to
his own place, it shall be lawful for him to take away with him, without
any objection made, the aforesaid venerable body.  Herein, lest what is
done should seem to be personal, and occasion should possibly be found
for stirring up the contention anew, your successors also should be in
all respects included in this promise to keep things as they are, to the
end that through this preventional security neither may he in future
presume to claim anything there in thy diocese against equity and the
decrees of the sacred canons, nor the rights of thy Church ever in any
manner sustain any prejudice from such concession.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_241"></span>[107:242](2130156.htm#fr_241.md) <span
id="ii.x.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.vi-p3"></span> See XIV. 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XVI](2130157.md)
