[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130040)  [Next](2130042.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxxv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXXVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p2"></span>To Eulogius, Patriarch of Alexandria.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p3"></span>Gregory to Eulogius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p4"></span>I have received at the hands of the
bearer of these presents the letter of your most sweet Holiness,
speaking to me about your cause being terminated speedily.  But, as soon
as he had come, he learnt how the possession which he sought from our
Church was held, and soon satisfied himself about it.  The business he
had with others he settled without contention.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p5"></span>But concerning the matter which ought by
all means to have been written about to me, your Holiness has written
nothing, considering me also to be tardy therein.  And indeed, for fear
of its breaking out into the scandal of division, I have been unwilling
to be the author of such division.  For I have chosen that whatever may
follow should ensue through others.  But in time to come, God granting
it, you will have proof that in a cause wherein I desire to please God I
am not afraid of men.  Concerning this I took care to write to you
before now, even when you went to Constantinople.

<span id="ii.v.xxxv-p6"></span>As to the timber, I had prepared pieces
of a larger size, as your Blessedness had requested in your letter; but
so small a ship has been sent here that it could not carry them, <span
id="page_20">p. 20</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxv-Page_20"></span>unless
they had been cut.  But I was unwilling to have them cut, and have
reserved for your judgment what should be done about them.  If you do
not require them, we will adapt them for other uses here.  Moreover, I
beg of your Holiness to pray for me earnestly, since I am incessantly
pressed down by pains of gout, and swords of barbarians, and distressing
cares.  But, if you bestow on me the help of your prayer, I believe that
you will strongly aid me against all adversities.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Marinianus, Bishop of Ravenna.](2130042.md)
