[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130260)  [Next](2130262.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p1"></span> <span id="page_284">p. 284</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xv-Page_284"></span><span class="c50"><span
id="iii.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>Hymn XIV.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p2"></span><span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.xv-p2.1"></span>Hymn concerning our Lord and John.</span>

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p3"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.vi.xv-p3.1"></span>Resp</span>.—*Glory to Thee,* my Lord, for
Thee*—with joy Heaven and earth worship!*)

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p4"></span>1.  My thought bore me to Jordan,—and I
saw a marvel when there was revealed—the glorious Bridegroom who to the
Bride—shall bring freedom and holiness.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p5"></span>2.  I saw John filled with wonder,—and
the multitudes standing about him,—and the glorious Bridegroom bowed
down—to the Son of the barren that he might baptize Him.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p6"></span>3.  At the Word and the Voice my thought
marvelled:—for lo! John was the Voice;—our Lord was manifested as the
Word, that what was hidden should become revealed.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p7"></span>4.  The Bride was espoused but knew
not—who was the Bridegroom on whom she gazed:—the guests were assembled,
the desert was filled,—and our Lord was hidden among them.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p8"></span>5.  Then the Bridegroom revealed
Himself;—and to John at the voice He drew near:—and the Forerunner was
moved and said of Him—“This is the Bridegroom Whom I proclaimed.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p9"></span>6.  He came to baptism Who baptizes
all,—and He showed Himself at Jordan.—John saw Him and drew
back,—deprecating, and thus he spake:—

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p10"></span>7.  “How, my Lord, willest Thou to be
baptized,—Thou Who in Thy baptism atonest all?—Baptism looks unto
Thee;—shed Thou on it holiness and perfection?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p11"></span>8.  Our Lord said “I will *it so*;—draw
near, baptize Me that My Will may be done.—Resist My Will thou canst
not:—I shall be baptized of thee, for thus I will *it*.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p12"></span>9.  “I entreat, my Lord, that I be not
compelled,—for this is hard that Thou hast said to me,—‘I have need that
thou shouldst baptize Me;’—for it is Thou that with Thy hyssop purifiest
all.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p13"></span>10.  “I have asked it, and it pleases Me
that thus it should be;—and thou, John, why gainsayest thou?—Suffer
righteousness to be fulfilled,—and come, baptize Me; why standest Thou?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p14"></span>11.  “How can one openly grasp—in his
hands the fire that burns?—O *Thou that art* fire have mercy on me,—and
bid me not come near Thee, for it is hard for me!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p15"></span>12.  “I have revealed to Thee My Will;
what questionest thou?—Draw near, baptize Me, and thou shalt not be
burned.—The bridechamber is ready; keep Me not back—from the
wedding-feast that has been made ready.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p16"></span>13.  “The Watchers fear and dare
not—gaze on Thee lest they be blinded;—and I, how, O my Lord, shall I
baptize Thee?—I am too weak to draw near; blame me not!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p17"></span>14.  “Thou fearest; therefore gainsay
not—against My Will in what I desire:—and Baptism has respect unto
Me.—Accomplish the work to which thou hast been called!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p18"></span>15.  “Lo! I proclaimed Thee at Jordan—in
the ears of the people that believed not and if they shall see Thee
baptized of me,—they will doubt that Thou art the Lord.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p19"></span>16.  “Lo! I am *to be* baptized in their
sight,—and the Father Who sent Me bears witness of Me—that I am His Son
and in Me He is well pleased,—to reconcile Adam who was under *His*
wrath.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p20"></span>17.  “It becomes, me, O my Lord, to know
my nature—that I am moulded out of the ground,—and Thou the moulder Who
formest all things:—I, then, why should I baptize Thee in water?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p21"></span><span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xv-Page_285"></span>18.  “It becomes thee to know wherefore I
am come,—and for what cause I have desired that thou shouldst baptize
Me.—It is the middle of the way wherein I have walked;—withhold thou not
Baptism.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p22"></span>19.  “Small is the river whereto Thou
art come,—that Thou shouldst lodge therein and it should cleanse
Thee.—The heavens suffice not for Thy mightiness;—how much less shall
Baptism contain Thee!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p23"></span>20.  “The womb is smaller than
Jordan;—yet was I willing to lodge in the Virgin:—and as I was born from
woman,—so too am I *to be* baptized in Jordan.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p24"></span>21.  “Lo! the hosts are standing!—the
ranks of Watchers, lo! they worship!—And if I draw near, my Lord, to
baptize Thee,—I tremble for myself with quaking.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p25"></span>22.  “The hosts and multitudes call thee
happy,—all of them, for that thou baptizest Me.—For this I have chosen
thee from the womb:—fear thou not, for I have willed *it.*

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p26"></span>23.  “I have prepared the way as I was
sent:—I have betrothed the Bride as I was commanded.—May Thy Epiphany be
spread over the world—now that Thou art come, and let me not baptize
Thee!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p27"></span>24.  “This is My preparation, for so
have I willed;—I will go down and be baptized in Jordan,—and make bright
the armour for them that are baptized,—that they may be white in Me and
I not be conquered.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p28"></span>25.  “Son of the Father, why should I
baptize Thee?—for lo! Thou art in Thy Father and Thy Father in
Thee.—Holiness unto the priests Thou givest;—water that is common
wherefore askest Thou?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p29"></span>26.  “The children of Adam look unto
Me,—that I should work for them the new birth.—A way in the waters I
will search out for them,—and if I be not baptized *this* cannot be.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p30"></span>27.  “Pontiffs of Thee are
consecrated,—priests by Thy hyssop are purified;—the anointed and the
kings Thou makest.—Baptism, how shall it profit *Thee*?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p31"></span>28.  “The Bride thou betrothedst to Me
awaits Me,—that I should go down, be baptized, and sanctify her.—Friend
of the Bridegroom withhold Me not—from the washing that awaits Me.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p32"></span>29.  “I am not able, for I am weak,—Thy
blaze in my hands to grasp.—Lo! Thy legions are as flame;—bid one of the
Watchers baptize Thee!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p33"></span>30.  “Not from the Watchers was My Body
assumed,—that I should summon a Watcher to baptize Me.—The body of Adam,
lo! I have put on,—and thou, son of Adam, art to baptize Me.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p34"></span>31.  “The waters saw Thee, and greatly
feared;—the waters saw Thee, and lo! they tremble!—The river foams in
its terror;—and I *that am* weak, how shall I baptize Thee?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p35"></span>32.  “The waters in My Baptism are
sanctified,—and fire and the Spirit from Me shall they receive;—and if I
be not baptized they are not made perfect—to be fruitful of children
that shall not die.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p36"></span>33.  “Fire, if to Thy fire it draw
near,—shall be burnt up of it as stubble.—The mountains of Sinai endured
Thee not,—and I *that am* weak, wherein shall I baptize Thee?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p37"></span>34.  “I am the flaming fire;—yet for
man’s sake I became a babe—in the virgin womb of the maiden.—And now I
am to be baptized in Jordan.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p38"></span>35.  “It is very meet that Thou shouldst
baptize me,—for Thou hast holiness to purify all.—In Thee it is that the
defiled are made holy; but Thou *that art* holy, why art Thou to be
baptized?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p39"></span><span id="page_286">p. 286</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xv-Page_286"></span>36.  “It is very right that thou shouldst
baptize Me,—as I bid, and shouldst not gainsay.—Lo! I baptized thee
within the womb;—baptize thou me in Jordan!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p40"></span>37.  “I am a bondman and I am weak.—Thou
that freest all have mercy on me!  Thy latchets to unloose I am not
able;—Thy exalted head who will make me worthy *to touch*?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p41"></span>38.  “Bondmen in My Baptism are set
free;—handwritings in My washing are blotted out;—manumissions in the
water are sealed ;—and if I be not baptized all these come to nought.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p42"></span>39.  “A mantle of fire the air
wears,—and waits for Thee, above Jordan;—and if Thou consentest to it
and willest to be baptized,—Thou shalt baptize Thyself and fulfil all.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p43"></span>40.  “This is meet, that thou shouldst
baptize Me,—that none may err and say concerning Me,—‘Had He not been
alien from the Father’s house,—why feared the Levite to baptize Him?’”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p44"></span>41.  “The prayer, then, when Thou art
baptized,—how shall I complete over Jordan?—When the Father and the
Spirit are seen over Thee,—Whom shall I call on, as priest?”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p45"></span>42.  “The prayer in silence is to be
completed:—come, thy hand alone lay thou on Me.—and the Father shall
utter in the priest’s stead—that which is meet concerning His Son.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p46"></span>43.  “They that are bidden, lo! all of
them stand;—the Bridegroom’s guests, lo! they bear witness—that day by
day I said among them,—‘I am the Voice and not the Word.’”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p47"></span>44.  “Voice of him that cries in the
wilderness,—fulfil thou the work for which thou camest,—that the desert
whereunto thou wentest out may resound—with the mighty peace thou
preachedst therein.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p48"></span>45.  “The shout of the Watchers has come
to my ears;—lo! I hear from the Father’s house—the hosts that sound
forth the cry,—‘In Thy Epiphany, O Bridegroom, the worlds have life.’”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p49"></span>46.  “The time hastes on, and the
marriage guests—look to Me to see what is doing.—Come, baptize Me, that
they may give praise—to the Voice of the Father when it is heard!”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p50"></span>47.  “I hearken, my Lord, according to
Thy Word:—come to Baptism as Thy love constrains Thee!—The dust worships
that whereunto he has attained,—that on Him Who fashioned him he should
lay his hand.”

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p51"></span>48.  The *heavenly* ranks were silent as
they stood,—and the Bridegroom went down into Jordan;—the Holy One was
baptized and straightway went up,—and His Light shone forth on the
world.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p52"></span>49.  The doors of the highest were
opened above,—and the voice of the Father was heard,—“This is my Beloved
in Whom I am well pleased.”—All ye peoples, come and worship Him.

<span id="iii.vi.xv-p53"></span>50.  They that saw were amazed as they
stood, at the Spirit Who came down and bare witness to Him.—Praise to
Thy Epiphany that gladdens all,—Thou in Whose revelation the worlds are
lightened!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XV.](2130262.md)
