[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130032)  [Next](2130034.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle LVIII.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p2"></span>*To Martin, Scholasticus* <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36.md) .

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p4"></span>Gregory to Martin, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p5"></span>Seeing that questions arising in civil
affairs need, as is known to thy Greatness, very full enquiry, let thy
wisdom consider with what care and vigilance the causes of bishops
should be investigated.  But, in the letter which thou hast sent us by
the bearer of these presents on the questions with respect to which thou
wert sent to us by our brother and fellow-bishop Crementius, thou hast
given only a superficial account of them, and hast been entirely silent
about their root.  But, had their origin and intrinsic character been
manifest to us, we should have known what should be decided about them,
and would then settle the mind of our aforesaid brother by a plain and
suitable reply.  This, however, is altogether displeasing to us, that
thou givest us to understand that some of the bishops have gone to the
court <span id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37.md) without letters from their
primate, and that they hold unlawful assemblies.  But since, as we have
before said, the origin and nature of the questions are entirely unknown
to us, we cannot pronounce anything definitely, lest, as would be very
reprehensible, we should seem to pass sentence about things imperfectly
known.  Hence it was very needful that, for our complete information,
thy Greatness should have proceeded hither to reply to our questions
during the time of thy lingering in Sicily.  Nevertheless, now that thou
hast seen our brother and fellow-bishop John, we believe that in him
thou hast seen us also.  And so since he has been at pains himself also
to write to us about the same questions, we have written in reply to him
what seemed to us right.  And, since he is a priest of ripe and cautious
judgment, if you are willing to treat with him on the questions which he
has been commissioned to entertain, we are sure that you will find in
him what is both advantageous and reasonable.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[15:37](2130033.htm#fr_36.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxvii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p3"></span> On the designation *Scholasticus*, see
II. 32, note 2; V. 36, note 9.  The occasion of this and the following
epistle appears to have been as follows.  Crementius, who was at that
time primate of the province of Bizacia in Africa, had been accused by
other African bishops.  The Emperor, appealed to by them, had desired
Gregory to take cognizance of the case; but his interference had been
objected to in Africa, where, as appears elsewhere, there was still
jealousy of the claims of the Roman See.  Gregory had commissioned John,
Bishop of Syracuse, to investigate the matter, and to him Crementius
(who now professed—though Gregory doubted his sincerity—to defer to the
Roman bishop) had sent the lawyer Martin to state his case.  The latter
seems to have been directed to go on to Rome too, but had not done so. 
Both Martin and John had subsequently written to Gregory on the subject,
and to them he now replies.  Some three years seem to have afterwards
elapsed without anything more being done:  see XII. 32, where Gregory
urges the bishops of the province to investigate the old charges against
their primate in synod:  but with what result does not further appear.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[15:38](2130033.htm#fr_37.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvii-p6"></span> *Ad comitatum*; referring to the
suffragans of Crementius having complained to the Emperor against their
primate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To John, Bishop of Syracuse.](2130034.md)
