[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130242)  [Next](2130244.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.v.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p1"></span> <span class="c50"><span
id="iii.v.xviii-p1.1"></span>Hymn XVII.</span>

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p2"></span>(<span class="sc"><span
id="iii.v.xviii-p2.1"></span>Resp</span>., *Praise to Thee from every
mouth on this Day of Thy Birth!*)

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p3"></span>1.  Infants were slain because of Thy
Birth, Thou Giver of life to all—But because He Who was slain was a
King, our Lord the Lord of Kingdoms,—the tyrant in subtlety, gave for
Him slain hostages,—clad in the mysteries of His slaying:  the ranks of
heaven received,—the hostages that they of earth offered.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p4"></span>R., Blessed be the King who magnified
Him!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p5"></span>2.  All the Kings of the house of
David, transmitted and hauled on each to each,—the throne and crown of
the Son of David, as guardian of a deposit.—In one they reached their
bound and limit, when He came, the Lord of all things,—and took away
from them all things, and cut off the transmission of all things.…

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p6"></span>R., Blessed be He Who is clad in that
which is His!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p7"></span>3.  The doves moaned in Bethlehem, that
the serpent destroyed their offspring.—The eagle betook himself to
Egypt, to go down and receive the promises.—Egypt rejoiced in Him that
there came, abundance for payment of debts,—which had failed the sons of
Joseph.  Among the sons of Joseph He laboured and paid—the debts of the
sons of Joseph.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p8"></span>R., Blessed is He Who called Him out of
Egypt!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p9"></span>4.  The Scribes read daily, that the
Star arises out of Jacob.—For the People *were* the Voice and the
reading, for the nations the rising *of the Star* and the
interpretation:—for them were the Books and for us the facts; for them
boughs and for us fruits.—The Scribes read in things written; the Magi
saw in things done, the outshining of that which was read.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p10"></span>R., Blessed be He Who added to us
their books!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p11"></span>5.  Who is able to tell, of the
withdrawal and the appearings,—of the shining star that went, before the
bearers of the offerings?—It appeared and proclaimed the crown; it was
hid and concealed *His* Body.—It was for the Son in twofold wise, herald
and guardian;—it guarded His Body, it proclaimed His Crown.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p12"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has given wisdom
to them that proclaim Him!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p13"></span>6.  The tyrant gazed on the Magi, as
they asked “Where is the son of the King?”—While his heart was gloomy,
he sought for himself a cheerful countenance.—With the sheep he sent
wolves, that should kill the Lamb of God.—The Lamb went down to Egypt,
that thence He might judge them,—whence He had saved them.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p14"></span>R., Blessed be He Who yet again
subdued them.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p15"></span>7.  The Magi declared to the tyrant,
“When thy servants joined us,—the bright star withdrew itself, yea the
paths hid themselves.”—The blessed ones knew not, that the king had sent
bitter *foes*,—murderers as *if* worshippers, to destroy the sweet
fruit,—whereof the bitter eat and are made sweet.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p16"></span>R., To Thee be glory, Medicine of
life!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p17"></span>8.  When there the Magi received,
commandment to go and seek Him.—it is written of them that they saw,
that bright star and rejoiced.—*Thus* it is known that it had been
withdrawn; therefore rejoiced they at its aspect.—It was hid and
hindered the murderers, it arose and called the worshippers;—it
overthrew a part and it called a part.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p18"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has triumphed in
both parts!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p19"></span>9.  The abhorred one who slew the
children, how did he overlook the Child?—Justice <span id="page_258">p.
258</span> <span id="iii.v.xviii-Page_258"></span>hindered him that he
thought, the Magi would return to him.—While he stayed waiting to seize,
the Worshipped and His worshippers,—everything escaped his hands, the
offerings and the worshippers took flight,—from the tyrant to the Son of
the King.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p20"></span>R., Glory to Him who knows all
counsels!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p21"></span>10.  The blameless Magi as they slept,
meditated on their beds:—sleep became a mirror, and a dream rose *on it*
as light.—The murderer they saw and trembled, as his guile and his sword
flashed forth.—He taught the men guile, he sharpened the sword to
sharpness:—the Watcher taught the sleepers.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p22"></span>R., Blessed is He who gives prudence
to the simple!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p23"></span>11.  The simple who believe have
known, two Comings of Christ:—but the foolish scribes have not even
perceived one Coming.—Yet the nations have life in the first, and shall
rise again there in the second.—The People whose mind is blinded, the
first Coming has dispersed;—the second shall blot out their memory.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p24"></span>R., Blessed be the King Who is come
and is to come!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p25"></span>12.  When the Saviour arose as the
blind, the Sun showed forth his beams,—and they were clothed in
darkness:  the Brightness sent forth his light,—and He brought the sons
of the stars, to make manifest the sons of darkness.—For lo! among you
is the star, but on your eyes the veil.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p26"></span>R., To Thee be glory, newborn Sun!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p27"></span>13.  Prophets declared concerning His
Birth, but they made not plain the time thereof.—He sent the Magi, and
they came and showed of its time.—Yet the Magi who made known the time,
made not plain who the Child *should be*.—A star of splendid light, in
its course showed who the Child was,—*how* splendid was *His* lineage.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p28"></span>R., Blessed be He Who by them all was
pointed out!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p29"></span>14.  They scorned the trumpet of
Isaiah, which sounded forth His pure Conception,—they silenced the lute
of the Psalms, which sang of His Priesthood;—the harp of the Spirit they
hushed, which sang again of His Kingdom;—under deep silence they closed
up, the great Birth that joined the cry—of them above with them below.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p30"></span>R., Blessed be He Who appeared in the
midst of silence!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p31"></span>15.  His voice was the secret key that
opened the mouths of the Magi.—Whereas preachers were silent in Judah,
they made their voice sound through creation;—and the Gospel which those
had scorned, these who came from far took and departed.—The scorners
began to hear their *own* orders from strangers, who cried out *the name
of* the Son of David.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p32"></span>R., Blessed be He Who by our voice has
put them to silence!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p33"></span>16.  Whereas the People scorned
offerings, and brought them not to Him the Son of the King,—He sent His
herald to the nations, and caused them to come with their offerings:—yet
not all of them caused He to come, for it could not suffice for
them,—the narrow bosom of Bethlehem; but the bosom of Holy
Church,—enlarged itself and contained her children.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p34"></span>R., Blessed be He Who has made the
barren fruitful!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p35"></span>17.  The slayers of Bethlehem mowed
down the tender flowers that among them—should perish the tender
seedling, wherein was hidden the Bread of life.—But the ear of corn that
has life had escaped, that it should come to the sheaves in harvest:—the
grape that escaped when young, gave itself to the treading,—that its
wine might give life to souls.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p36"></span>R., Glory to Thee, Treasury of life!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p37"></span>18.  The murderers went into a
paradise, full of tender fruits:—they shook off the flowers from the
bough, blossoms and buds they destroyed,—unblemished oblations he
offered, the persecutor unwittingly.—To him woe, but to them blessing! 
Bethlehem was first to give, virgin fruits to the Holy One.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p38"></span>R., Blessed is He Who receives the
first fruits!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p39"></span>19.  The Scribes were silenced in
envy, the Pharisees in jealousy.—Men of stone <span id="page_259">p.
259</span> <span id="iii.v.xviii-Page_259"></span>cried out and gave
praise, who had a heart of stone.—They applauded in presence of the
Stone, the rejected that has become the Head.—Stones were made flesh by
that Stone, and obtained mouths to speak; stones cried out through that
Stone.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p40"></span>R., Blessed be Thy Birth that has
caused stones to cry out!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p41"></span>20.  The Star that is written in
Scripture, the nations beheld from afar,—that the People might be shamed
which is near; O People instructed and puffed up! which by the nations
hast been in turn instructed, how and where they saw,—that vision
whereof Balaam spake; a stranger he who spread abroad concerning
it,—strangers they who saw it.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p42"></span>R., Blessed is He Who has provoked to
jealousy them of His own house!

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p43"></span>21.  Let my supplication draw nigh to
Thy Door, yea my poverty to Thy Treasury!—Give to me my Lord without
measure, as God unto man!—And though Thou increase gifts as Son of the
Blessed, and though Thou add to them as Son of the King;—though I be
thankless as *are all* creatures of dust, as Adam *so is* the son of
Adam,—and as the Blessed *so* too *is* the Son of the Blessed.

<span id="iii.v.xviii-p44"></span>*R., Praise be to Thee Who art like
unto Thy Father!*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn XVIII.](2130244.md)
