[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130050)  [Next](2130052.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xlv-p1.1"></span>Epistle CVI.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p2"></span>*To Syagrius, Ætherius, Virgilius, and
Desiderius, Bishops* <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md) .

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p4"></span>Gregory to Syagrius of Augustodunum
(*Autun*), Etherius of Lugdunum (*Lyons*), Virgilius of Aretale
(*Arles*), and Desiderius of Vienna (*Vienne*), bishops of Gaul.  *A
paribus*.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p5"></span><span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="ii.v.xlv-Page_24"></span>Our Head, which is Christ, has to this end
willed us to be His members, that through the bond of charity and faith
He might make us one body in Himself.  And to Him it befits us so to
adhere in heart, that, since without Him we can be nothing, through Him
we may be able to be what we are called.  Let nothing divide us from the
citadel of our Head, lest, if we refuse to be His members, we be left
apart from Him, and wither like branches cast off from the vine. 
Wherefore, that we may be counted worthy to be the dwelling-place of our
Redeemer, let us abide in His love with entire earnestness of mind.  For
He Himself says, *He that loveth me will keep my word, and my Father
will love him, and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him*
([Joh. xiv. 23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023.md)<span
id="ii.v.xlv-p5.1"></span>).  But, since we cannot keep close to the
author of all good, unless we cut away from us covetousness, which is
the root of all evil, we therefore by these present writings (which
associate us together mutually as in the alternate discourse of a wished
for visitation) approach your Fraternity in accordance with apostolic
institutes, that, leaning on the rules of the Fathers and the Lord’s
commands, we may banish from the temple of faith avarice, which is the
service of idols, so as to suffer nothing hurtful, and nothing
disorderly, to be in the house of the Lord.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p6"></span>I apprize you to wit, that we have long
heard it currently reported how that in the regions of Gaul sacred
orders are conferred through simoniacal heresy.  And we are affected
with sorrowful disgust, if money has any place in ecclesiastical
offices, and that which is sacred is made secular.  Whosoever, then,
sets himself to buy this thing by the giving of a price, having regard
not to the office but to the title, covets not to be a priest, but only
to be called one.  What forsooth?  What comes of this but that there is
no trial of a man’s conduct, no carefulness about his moral character,
no enquiry into his life, but that he only is counted worthy who has the
means to give a price?  Hence it ensues, if the matter be weighed in a
true balance, that, while one wickedly makes haste to snatch a place of
utility with a view to vain glory, he is all the more unworthy from the
very fact of his seeking dignity.  Moreover, as one who refuses when
invited and flies when sought should be brought up to the sacred altar,
so one that sues of his own accord and pushes himself forward
importunately should without doubt be repelled.  For whoever thus
strives to climb to higher places, what does he but decrease in
increasing, and in rising outwardly sink low inwardly?  Wherefore,
dearest brethren, in ordaining priests let sincerity prevail, let there
be simple consent without venality, let a pure election be preferred, so
that advancement to the highest place of the priesthood may be believed
to be due, not to the suffrage of sellers, but to the judgment of God. 
For that it is a grievous crime to wish to procure or to sell the gift
of God for a price evangelical authority is witness ([Matth.
xxi](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p6.1"></span>..md).

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p7"></span>For, when our Lord and Redeemer went into
the temple, He overthrew the seats of them that sold doves.  What else
is it to sell doves but to receive a price for the laying on of hands,
and to put to sale the Holy Spirit whom Almighty God gives to men?  And
that the priesthood of such as do so falls before the eyes of God is
plainly signified by the overthrowing of the seats.  And yet the
perverseness of this iniquity still puts forth its strength.  For it
drives those to sell whom it deceives into buying.  And, while attention
is not paid to what is enjoined by the divine voice, *Freely ye have
received, freely give* ([Matth. x.
8](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#008)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p7.1"></span>.md), it
is brought to pass that it increases, and becomes doubled in one and the
same contagion of sin, to wit of the buyer and of the seller.  And, it
being well known that this heresy crept into the Church with a
pestiferous root before all others, and was condemned in its very origin
by apostolic detestation, why is it not guarded against?  Why is it not
considered that blessing is turned into a curse to him who is promoted
to the end that he may become a heretic?

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p8"></span>For the most part, then, the adversary of
souls, when unable to insinuate into them what is wrong on the face of
it, endeavours to supplant them by throwing over it as it were a show of
piety, and persuades them, perhaps, that money ought to be received from
those who have it, so that there may be wherewith to give to those who
have it not, if only he may even so infuse mortal poisons concealed
under the appearance of almsgiving.  For neither would the hunter
deceive the wild beast, nor the fowler the bird, nor the fisherman catch
the fish, if the former were to set their snares in open view, or if the
latter had not his hook hidden by the bait.  By all means, then, the
cunning of the enemy is to be feared and guarded against, lest those
whom he cannot subvert by open temptation he should succeed in slaying
more cruelly by a hidden weapon.  For indeed it is not to be accounted
almsgiving if that be dispensed to the poor which is got by unlawful
dealings, since he who with this intention receives amiss as though with
the view of dispensing well is the worse for it rather than the better. 
<span id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="ii.v.xlv-Page_25"></span>The
alms that please the eyes of our Redeemer are not those that are
gathered together in unlawful ways and from iniquity, but such as are
bestowed out of what has been granted to us and well acquired.  Hence
this also is certain, that, though monasteries or hospitals or aught
else be built with the money given for sacred orders, it profits not for
reward; since, when one that is perverse and a buyer of dignity is
transferred to a holy place, and constitutes others after the likeness
of himself for a consideration given, he destroys more by his evil
administration than he who has received money from him for ordination
can build up.  That we should not, then, try to get anything with sin
under pretence of almsgiving we are plainly warned by Holy Scripture,
which says, *The sacrifices of the impious are abominable which are
offered of wickedness* ([Prov. xxi.
27](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#027)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p8.1"></span>.md). 
For whatever in God’s sacrifice is offered of wickedness appeases not,
but provokes, the anger of Almighty God.  Hence again it is written,
*Honour the Lord from thy just labours* ([Prov. iii.
9](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#009)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p8.2"></span>.md). 
Whoso, then, takes evilly that he may, as he supposes, give well, it is
evident without doubt that he honours not the Lord.  Hence also it is
said through Solomon, *Whoso offers a sacrifice of the substance of the
poor is as though he slew a son in his father’s sight* ([Ecclus. xxxiv.
24](../../../bib/apo/sir034.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p8.3"></span>.md). 
Now let us consider how great is a father’s grief if his son be killed
in his sight:  and hence we easily understand how much God is grieved
when a sacrifice is given Him out of pillage.  Exceedingly to be shunned
then, most beloved brethren, is the perpetration of the sins of
simoniacal heresy under pretence of almsgiving.  For it is one thing to
do alms on account of sins, but another to commit sins on account of
alms.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p9"></span>This also, which has reached our ears, we
include as worthy of no dissimilar detestation; that some persons,
inflated with desire of dignity, are tonsured on the death of bishops,
and from being laymen are suddenly made priests, and shamelessly snatch
at the leadership of religious life, not having as yet even learnt to be
soldiers.  What good do we suppose these will do their subjects, who,
before touching the threshold of discipleship, fear not to occupy the
place of mastership?  In such a case it is needful that, even though any
one were of unquestioned merit, he should be exercised in ecclesiastical
offices by passing through distinct orders.  He should see what he is to
imitate, he should be formed into the shape he is to retain, so that
afterwards he may not err, when chosen for shewing the way of life to
the erring.  He should, then, be polished long by religious meditation,
that he may be well-pleasing, and so shine as a candle placed on a
candlestick that the adverse force of winds driving against the kindled
flame of erudition may not extinguish it, but increase it.  For, since
it is written, *That one should first be proved, and so minister* ([1
Tim. iii. 10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#010.md)<span
id="ii.v.xlv-p9.1"></span>), much more ought he first to be proved who
is taken as an intercessor for the people, lest bad priests should
become the cause of the people’s ruin.  There can therefore be no
excuse, no defence against this, since it is clearly known to all how
solicitous about diligent attention to this matter is the holy and
excellent teacher, who forbids that a novice should accede to sacred
orders ([1 Tim. iii](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.v.xlv-p9.2"></span>.).  But, as then one was called a novice who
had been newly planted in the conversation of the holy faith, so one is
now to be held to be a novice who, having been suddenly planted in the
habit of religion, creeps on to canvass for sacred dignities.  Orders,
then, should be risen to in an orderly way:  for he courts a fall who
seeks to rise to the topmost heights of a place by steep ascents,
disregarding the steps that lead to it.  And, seeing that the same
apostle teaches his disciple, among other directions with regard to
sacred orders, that hands are to be laid hastily on no man ([1 Tim.
v](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#000)<span id="ii.v.xlv-p9.3"></span>..md),
what can be more hasty or what more headlong than to begin at the top,
and that a man should commence by being a bishop before he has been a
minister?  Whosoever, then, desires to obtain priesthood, not for the
pomp of elation but for doing good, let him first measure his own
strength with the burden he is to undergo, that, if unequal to it, he
may abstain, and also approach it with fear, even if he thinks himself
sufficient for it.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p10"></span>Further, it will not be beside the mark,
if, in addition to the argument from rational beings we draw one from
our use of irrational things.  For timber suitable for buildings is cut
from forests, and yet the weight of the building is not imposed on them
while they are yet green, or till a delay of many days has dried their
greenness, and rendered them fit for necessary use.  And, if by any
chance this precaution is neglected, they are soon broken by the mass
imposed upon them, and the material provided for support begets ruin.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p11"></span>For hence also medical men, whose care is
for the body, do not offer certain remedies to him that needs them while
recently concocted, but leave them to be macerated for some time.  For,
should any one give them immaturely, there is no doubt that the means of
health become a cause of danger.  Let them learn, therefore, let priests
in their office learn, those namely to whom the cure of souls is
entrusted, to observe what men of various arts under the <span
id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="ii.v.xlv-Page_26"></span>teaching of
reason attend to, and restrain themselves from ambition, if not of fear,
yet at any rate of very shame.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p12"></span>But, lest perchance any one should still
wish to defend himself on the pretext of an evil custom, let the
discretion of your Fraternity restrain them with the rein of reason, and
not allow them to lapse into unlawful doings, since whatever is
deserving of punishment ought not to be adduced as an example for
imitation, but for correction.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p13"></span>Nor, further, can we suffer you to pass
over neglectfully this other matter, which alike requires correction. 
For of what profit is it to have guarded all besides if through one
place pernicious access be afforded to the enemy?  Therefore let women
be prohibited from living with those who are constituted in any sacred
order.  With regard to them, lest the old enemy of the human race should
exult, it must be laid down by the consent of all that they may have no
other women with them but those whom the sacred canons include.  And,
though this interdiction is perhaps bitter for the time to some, there
is no doubt that it will afterwards grow sweet from its very benefit to
their souls, if the enemy be overcome in that whereby he might have
overcome them.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p14"></span>In this part of our solicitude also we
must not leave unnoticed what has been ordained by the provision of the
Fathers, for the sake of advantage, concerning the holding of councils
throughout dioceses.  Wherefore, lest there should be any dissension
among brethren, or any fomentation of discord between superiors and
subordinates, it is necessary that priests should assemble together, so
that there may be discussion about cases that arise, and salutary
conference about ecclesiastical observances; to the end that, while
things past are corrected and things future regulated, the Almighty Lord
may be praised on all sides in one accord by brethren.  Know ye whose
presence will be with you, seeing that it is written, *Where two or
three are gathered together in My name, there am I in the midst of them*
([Matth. xviii. 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#020.md)<span
id="ii.v.xlv-p14.1"></span>).  If, then, He will vouchsafe to be present
where there are two or three, how much more will He not be wanting where
many priests have come together?  And indeed it is not unknown what is
appointed by the rules of the Fathers as to the holding of a council
twice in the year.  But, lest haply any necessity should not allow this
rule to be carried out, we decree that still one shall meet, without any
excuse allowed, once; so that nothing wrong, nothing unlawful, may be
ventured on while a council is being expected.  For commonly, though not
from love of justice, yet from fear of enquiry, people abstain from that
which it is known may displease the judgment of all.  Let us, most
beloved brethren, keep this observance to be left to our posterity; and
let us meditate on all that is written in the sacred writings for our
instruction, and incite all we can to follow it.  For it is certain
that, if with all our heart we attend to these salutary precepts, we
escape all taint of vices, since, while we lean on these whereby we are
built up, we shut out, no doubt, all place for deception.

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p15"></span>Therefore for the purposes mentioned
above, we desire your Fraternity, God willing, to assemble a synod, and
in it, through the mediation of our most reverend brother and
fellow-bishop Aregius <span id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) , and our
most beloved son Cyriacus, let all things that are, as we have before
said, opposed to the sacred canons, be strictly condemned under the ban
of anathema; that is, that any one should presume to give any
consideration for acquiring ecclesiastical orders, or receive any for
conferring them; or that any one should all at once from a lay condition
dare to enter on a place of rule; or that any other women should live
with priests but such as are allowed, as aforesaid, by the sacred
canons.  Concerning all these things let our most reverend brother the
bishop Syagrius, with the whole synod, when our most beloved brother
Cyriacus returns to us, take care to send us word of what has been done;
in order that, knowing accurately what has been decreed, and with what
safeguards and in what manner, we may render thanks without ceasing to
Almighty God for your life and manners.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_64"></span>[23:65](2130051.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p3"></span> This is a circular letter to the
metropolitan bishops to prepare them for the general synod which Gregory
was anxious should be held in Gaul for checking the simony, and other
abuses, continually referred to by him as prevalent there.  Cf. in this
book, Epistles XI., CVII., CVIII., CIX., CX.  On *a paribus*, see I. 25,
note 8.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[26:66](2130051.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ii.v.xlv-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlv-p16"></span> Perhaps an error for Syagrius, bishop of
Augustodunum (*Autun*), to whom the use of the pallium had been recently
conceded on certain conditions, and to whom the assembling of the synod
was committed, though he was not thus authorized to take precedence of
his metropolitan, the bishop of Lyons.  See Ep. CVIII. and Ep. XI. note
2.  Cyriacus, mentioned below, had been sent specially from Rome to
forward and regulate the proceedings (see Ep. CIX., note 2), Aregius of
Vapincum being also directed to send Gregory a full report of the
proceedings (see Ep. CVII.).  If the intended synod was held at all, it
appears to have failed to put a stop to the abuses complained of.  For a
year or two later we find Gregory still referring to them, and pressing
for a synod to suppress them.  See XI. 55, 56, 57, 59, 60, 63.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Aregius, Bishop of Vapincum.](2130052.md)
