[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130170)  [Next](2130172.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>VII.—Chronology of the Life of
Ephraim.</span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p2"></span>Thus the fixed points for
determining the chronology of Ephraim’s life are:

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p3"></span>1.  The death of his patron, St.
Jacob, Bishop of Nisibis, in 338, after the first siege of that city.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p4"></span>2.  The third siege, in which he was
among the defenders of the city, in 350.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p5"></span>3.  The surrender of Nisibis by
Jovian, and its abandonment by its Christian inhabitants, 363; followed
by Ephraim’s removal to Edessa.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p6"></span>4.  The consecration of Basil to the
see of Cæsarea, late in 370, followed by Ephraim’s visit to him there.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p7"></span>5.  The deliverance of the Edessenes
from the persecution of Valens (370–372), celebrated by Ephraim in a
hymn.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p8"></span>6.  Ephraim’s death, 373.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p9"></span>To this list it would be right to
prefix the meeting of the Council of Nicæa in 325, if the evidence of
Ephraim’s presence at it, along with St. Jacob, were sufficient.  But it
has no early attestation; and no writer prior to Theodoret (*Hist.
Eccles*. II. 30) associates the name of Jacob with any incident in
Ephraim’s life.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p10"></span><span id="page_145">p. 145</span>
<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-Page_145"></span>The date of Ephraim’s birth is
nowhere directly stated, but it is usually assumed to have been early in
the reign of Constantine (306–337), on the authority of the Vatican
*Life*, which says, “In the days of the victorious Constantine, true
believer, was born the holy man Ephraim.”  But the statement of the
Parisian *Life* is less explicit, and is capable of a different
meaning:—“*He was* in the days of the victorious Constantine.”  This
merely implies that Ephraim (if the pronoun represent him) lived in the
reign of that emperor.  But it rather appears that Ephraim’s father is
meant, inasmuch as he is the subject of the immediately preceding
sentence which describes him as a heathen priest; and the purport of the
passage is, that the saint was the son of a man who not merely had been
one of an idolatrous priesthood, but continued to be so after
Constantine had acknowledged the Christian religion. <span
id="fr_296"></span>[297](#fn_296.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p12"></span>The earlier authorities give no
express statement on this point; but a late tenth-century Greek
*menologium*, that of the Emperor Basil (Porphyrogenitus), says that he
“continued from the reign of Constantine to that of Valens,” <span
id="fr_297"></span>[298](#fn_297.md) —implying as it seems that he was
born, as the Vatican *Life* represents, after Constantine’s accession in
306.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p14"></span>Considering, however, that the
*Life* in both its forms affirms that Ephraim was brought by St. Jacob
to the Council of Nicæa in 325—in which it is borne out by Gregory
Barhebræus in his *Ecclesiastical Chronicle* <span
id="fr_298"></span>[299](#fn_298.md) (who though a very late writer
(1226–1286) had access to early authorities and judgment in using
them)—it is hard to reconcile the chronology, for the improbability of
the admission of a lad of nineteen, in any capacity, to that venerable
assembly, is very great.  If we accept it as a fact that he was chosen
by Jacob to accompany him, and was permitted to be present among the
Fathers at Nicæa, it seems almost necessary to place his birth before
Constantine became emperor. <span id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299.md)

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p17"></span>Farther:  the *menologium* above
cited adds that he died “in extreme old age;” and the tone and tenor of
his *testament* go far to confirm the truth of these words.  But as he
died in 373, he cannot have been more than 67 years old in that year if
he was born in 306.  No doubt 67 is a ripe age, but hardly sufficient to
warrant the strong expression of the *menologium*.  Without pressing its
language unduly, we may surely take it as implying that he had passed
the “threescore years and ten” of the Psalmist at the time of his
death—in other words that he was born not later than the first or second
year of the fourth century.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p18"></span>Thus by rectifying the text and
rendering of the opening sentences of the *Life*, we relieve ourselves
of the supposed necessity of placing his birth in or after 306.  And his
presence in the Council of 325, and his extreme old age in 373, concur
in pointing to the beginning of the fourth century—if not to the later
years of the third—as the probable time of that event.

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p19"></span>However this may be, whether he was
born in 306 or earlier, it is certain that by far the greater part of
the long life of the “Deacon of Edessa”—all of it save its last <span
id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-Page_146"></span>ten or eleven years (363–373) was
passed in his native Nisibis; and that he did not even attain the
diaconate till he was considerably over sixty years of age, and within
three years of his end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_296"></span>[145:297](2130171.htm#fr_296.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p11"></span> The passage is as follows: 
“Ephraim was a Syrian by birth.  His father was of Nisibis, and his
mother of Amid.  And his father was priest in Nisibis of an idol named
Abizal, which afterwards the victorious Emperor Jovian broke.  He \[*or
it, scil.*, the idol\] was in the days of the victorious Emperor
Constantine, true believer.  But his father had this famous son, of whom
is our narrative.”  The meaning may be that the idol was suffered to
exist during Constantine’s reign and after, till Jovian destroyed it: 
but it is now natural to understand it, as above, of Ephraim’s father. 
The Vatican editor seems to have misunderstood his original, which the
Parisian transcriber has preserved faithfully,—and to have altered it
into accordance with his misunderstanding, by recasting the passage and
substituting “*was born*” for “*was*.”

<span id="fn_297"></span>[145:298](2130171.htm#fr_297.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p13"></span> In Migne’s *Patrologia Græca*,
CXVI I., p. 254.

<span id="fn_298"></span>[145:299](2130171.htm#fr_298.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p15"></span> I., 23 (Abbeloos and Lamy’s
edition).

<span id="fn_299"></span>[145:300](2130171.htm#fr_299.md) <span
id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii.ii.vii-p16"></span> Gregory Barhebr. (*Chron.
Eccles*., II., 10) mentions, but doubtfully, a tradition that Ephraim
wrote a letter circ. 334 in which he took the part of Papas, the
Catholicus, against “the Bishops of the East” who accused him of neglect
and misconduct.  If this be accepted, it is additional evidence for the
early date of Ephraim’s birth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: His Writings:  Their Characteristics.](2130172.md)
