[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130022)  [Next](2130024.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xvii-p1.1"></span>Epistle XXIV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p2"></span>To Romanus, Guardian (Defensorem).

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p3"></span>Gregory to Romanus, &c.

<span id="ii.v.xvii-p4"></span>Our son Theodosius, abbot of the
Monastery founded by the late Patrician Liberius in Campania, is known
to have intimated to us that the late illustrious lady Rustica about one
and twenty years ago, in the will that she made, appointed in the first
place Felix, her husband, to be her heir, and delegated to him the
foundation of a Monastery in Sicily; but on this condition,—that if he
should not within the space of one year pay all the legacies bequeathed
to her freedmen, or establish the aforesaid Monastery as she desired,
then the holy Roman Church should have undisputed claim to the portion
which she was understood to have in the farm of Cumas, and that it
should lend aid for paying the above legacies, and for the construction
of the said monastery.  Hence, seeing that, as is said, the bequeathed
property has not so far been made over in full to this same monastery,
and some part of the possession is up to this time detained by her
heirs, let thy Experience thoroughly enquire into and examine the case. 
And in the first place indeed, if under the conditions of the will any
heirship comes in wherein our Church may have a plea, we desire thee to
investigate and clearly ascertain it, and act for the advantage of the
poor, as the order of the business may require; and then to be instantly
solicitous for the due establishment of that cell, and the recovery of
the bequeathed property, to the end that the pious desire of the
testatrix may be fulfilled in both respects, and the unjust detainers of
the property may learn from just loss the guilt of their undue <span
id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.v.xvii-Page_11"></span>retention.  With all vivacity, then, we
desire thee both to enquire into this case and, with the help of the
Lord, to bring it to an issue, that the pious devotion of the ordainer
may at length take effect.  But we desire thee also, as far as justice
allows, to succour this monastery in all ways, that lay persons who
ought to have rendered the succour of their assistance may not, as is
asserted, have power of doing hurt in the name of the founder.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle XXVI](2130024.md)
