[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130057)  [Next](2130059) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.lii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lii-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.lii-p1.1"></span>Epistle CXV.</span>

<span id="ii.v.lii-p2"></span>To Syagrius, Bishop of Augustodunum
(Autun).

<span id="ii.v.lii-p3"></span>Gregory to Syagrius, &c.

<span id="ii.v.lii-p4"></span>If in secular affairs every man should
have his right and his proper rank preserved to him, how much more in
ecclesiastical arrangements ought no confusion to be let in; lest
discord should find place there, whence the blessings of peace should
proceed.  And this will in this way be secured, if nothing is yielded to
power but all to equity.

<span id="ii.v.lii-p5"></span>Now it has been reported to us that our
most beloved brother Ursicinus, bishop of the city of Taurini <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73) , after the captivity and plunder which
he endured, has suffered serious prejudice in his parishes <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74) , which are said to be situated within
the boundaries of the Franks, even to the extent of another person being
constituted bishop there in contravention of ecclesiastical ordinances,
no crime of his demanding it.  And, lest this prejudicial proceeding
should perchance seem to be a light matter, there has been also some
hardship added in the taking from him of the property of his Church
which he might have held.  Now, if these things are really so, seeing
that it is a very cruel thing and opposed to the sacred canons, that the
ambition of any should remove from his own altar an innocent priest who
does not deserve to be superseded on account of crime, let all regard
his cause as their own, and strive against the imposition on others of
what they would be unwilling to endure themselves.  For if the entrance
for an evil thing is not closed before it has been long open, it grows
wider by use; and what is evidently forbidden by reason will be allowed
by custom.  But, beyond all others, let the solicitude of your
Fraternity, in consideration of our commendation and your own sense of
what you owe to God, devote itself earnestly to his defence, and not
allow him to be any longer removed against reason from his parishes. 
But, as well in your own person as by making supplication to the most
excellent kings <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75) , whom we believe
to cause you no sadness in any respect, do you bring it about that this
thing which has been done amiss may be corrected, and that what has been
taken away by force may under the patronage of truth be restored; for,
seeing that it is written, *A brother helping a brother shall be
exalted* ([Prov. xviii. 19](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#019)<span
id="ii.v.lii-p8.2"></span>), your Charity may know that it will receive
by so much the more from Almighty God as His precepts shall have been
gladly and constantly executed in helping a brother.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_73"></span>[32:74](2130058.htm#fr_73) <span
id="ii.v.lii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lii-p6"></span> *Augusta Taurinarum*, the modern *Turin*.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[32:75](2130058.htm#fr_74) <span
id="ii.v.lii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lii-p7"></span> *In parochiis suis*   Though the term
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.lii-p7.1"></span>παροικία</span>
meant originally what we should now call a bishop’s whole diocese, it
came after the third century to be applied to parishes within such
diocese.  Hence here *parochiis* in the plural.  Cf. Bingham, Bk. IX.,
ch. ii., sect. 1; Ch. viii., Sect. 1.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[32:76](2130058.htm#fr_75) <span
id="ii.v.lii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.lii-p8"></span> Viz. Theoderic and Theodebert (see VI.
58, note 1), to whom a letter on the same subject was sent at the same
time, viz., Ep. CXVI., which follows.  The former would be in this year
(<span class="sc"><span id="ii.v.lii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 598–9)
about ten, and the latter about thirteen years of age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Theoderic and Theodebert, Kings of the Franks.](2130059)
