[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130080)  [Next](2130082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Epistle LXIII.</span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p2"></span>To Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p3"></span>Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p4"></span>We have already learnt what great
pestilence has invaded the African parts; and, inasmuch as neither is
Italy free from such affliction, doubled are the groans of our sorrows. 
But amid these evils and other innumerable calamities our heart, dearest
brother, would fail from desperate distress, had not the Lord’s voice
fortified our weakness beforehand.  For long ago to the faithful the
trumpet of the Gospel lesson sounded, warning them that at the approach
of the end of the world wars and many other things, which, as you know,
are now feared, would come to pass ([Matt.
24:0](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#000), [Luke
21:0](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vi.xiv-p4.1"></span>.).  We ought not, then, to be too much
afflicted in suffering things that we knew of beforehand, as though they
had been unknown.  Frequently also, in our consideration of another’s
death, the kind of death may be an alleviation.  For what manglings,
what cruelties have we seen, where death was the only remedy, and life
was a torment!  Did not David, when a choice of deaths was offered him,
refuse famine or the sword, and choose that his people should fall under
the hand of God?  Gather ye from this how great favour is granted to
such as perish under Divine smiting, since they die by the call that was
offered to the holy prophet for a boon.  Wherefore let us return thanks
to our Creator in all adversities, and, trusting in His mercy, bear all
things patiently, since we suffer much less than we deserve.  Since,
however, we are so scourged temporally that we may not be left without
the consolation of life eternal, it is needful (since we are not
ignorant, through the announcements of these signs, that the Judge Who
is to come is at hand) that we should so much the more, by zeal for good
works and the wailing of penitence, make secure our accounts which we
shall have to submit to His scrutiny; so that such great smitings may be
to us, by the favour of His grace, not the beginning of damnation, but a
purgation for our good.

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p5"></span>Since, however, the nature of our
infirmity is such that we cannot but grieve for those who pass away, let
the teaching of your Fraternity be a consolation to the afflicted. 
Instil into them that the good things which are promised will remain
with them; so that, strengthened by a most sure hope, they may learn not
to grieve for the loss of temporal things in comparison with the gift to
come.  Let your tongue, as indeed we believe it does, restrain them more
and more from the perpetration of evil deeds; let it announce the
rewards of the good, the punishments of the bad, so that those who have
little love for good things may at least be greatly afraid of bad
things, and keep themselves from the things which must be punished.  For
to commit things worthy of scourges when placed in the midst of scourges
is to be peculiarly proud against the smiter, and provokes the incensed
one to fiercer anger.  And it is a prime kind of madness for any one to
be unwilling to desist justly from his own evil, and to wish God to
cease unjustly from His vengeance.  But, since in all this there is need
of Divine help, let us, beloved brother, with united prayers implore the
clemency of Almighty God, that He would both grant unto us thus to
acquit ourselves worthily, and mercifully stir the hearts of the people
to perform such things; to the end that, while we order our actions
wholesomely in His fear, we may be counted worthy both to be delivered
from impending evils, and, by the leading of His grace, without which we
can do nothing, to come to supernal joys.

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p6"></span>The month of August, Indiction 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book XI](2130082)
