[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130034)  [Next](2130036.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.v.xxix-p1.1"></span>Epistle LX.</span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p2"></span>To Romanus and other Guardians
(defensores) of the Ecclesiastical Patrimony.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p3"></span>Gregory to Romanus the guardian, Fantinus
the guardian, Sabinus the sub-deacon, Sergius <span id="page_16">p.
16</span> <span id="ii.v.xxix-Page_16"></span>the guardian, Boniface the
guardian (*a paribus* <span id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40) .md), and the
six *patroni*.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p5"></span>Since, even as cautious foresight knows
how to block the way against faults, and to avoid what is hurtful, so
neglect opens the way to excesses, and is wont to incur what ought to be
guarded against, we ought to bestow very careful attention, and see
alike to the reputation and to the safeguard of our brethren and
priests.  Now it has come to our ears that certain of the bishops, under
pretext, as it were, of help, associate themselves in one house with
women.  And so, lest hereby just occasion of detraction should be given
to scoffers, or the ancient enemy of the human race should take
advantage of an easy matter of deceit, we enjoin thee by the tenor of
this mandate that thou study to shew thyself strenuous and solicitous. 
And, if any of the bishops included within the limits of the patrimony
committed to thee are living with women, do thou entirely put a stop to
this, and for the future by no means suffer any women to reside with
them, except such as the censorship of the sacred canons allows, that is
a mother, an aunt, a sister, and others of this sort, concerning whom
there can be no ill suspicion.  Yet they do better, if they refrain from
living together even with such as these.  For we read that the blessed
Augustine refused to live even with his sister, saying, *Those who are
with my sister are not my sisters*.

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p6"></span>The caution, then, of a learned man ought
to be a great instruction to us.  For it is a mark of uncautious
presumption for one that is less firm not to fear what a strong man is
afraid of.  For he wisely overcomes what is unlawful who has learnt not
to use even what is allowed him:  and indeed we bind none in this matter
against their will, but, as physicians are accustomed to do, we
prescribe carefulness for health’s sake, even though it be for the time
distressful.  And therefore we impose no necessary obligation; but, if
any should choose to imitate a learned and holy man, we leave it to
their own will.  Let, then, thy Experience act with zeal and solicitude
for the observance of what we have ordered to be prohibited.  For, if
hereafter it should chance to be found otherwise, know that thou wilt
incur no slight risk with us.  Furthermore, let it be thy care to exhort
these same bishops, our brethren, that they admonish those who are
subject to them, to wit those who are constituted in sacred orders, to
observe in all ways after their example what they themselves observe;
this only being added, that these, as canonical authority has decreed,
are not to leave wives whom they ought to govern chastely.  Given in the
month of March, Indiction 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_40"></span>[16:41](2130035.htm#fr_40.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxix-p4"></span> See I. 25, note 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The epistle of Rechared, King of the Goths, addressed to the
blessed Gregory, Bishop of Rome.](2130036.md)
