[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130121)  [Next](2130123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.i"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.i-p1"></span> <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> <span
id="ii.viii.i-Page_87"></span><span class="c14"><span
id="ii.viii.i-p1.1"></span>Book XII.</span>

<span id="ii.viii.i-p2"></span><span class="c1"><span
id="ii.viii.i-p2.1"></span>Epistle I.</span>

<span id="ii.viii.i-p3"></span>To Dominicus, Bishop of Carthage.

<span id="ii.viii.i-p4"></span>Gregory to Dominicus, &c.

<span id="ii.viii.i-p5"></span>How abundant is the charity of your heart
you shew by its interpreter—your tongue, while so seasoning the words of
your epistles with its sweetness that all you write is pleasant and
delightful.  Hence it comes that we embrace your Fraternity in the arms
of love, though unable to do so in the body.  For it is the office of
charity to supply to souls that are in concord what distance of place
denies.  And since the sickness of our most loving brethren saddens us
even as their health refreshes us, we give thanks to Almighty God, who
has solaced our sadness by good news.  For, having heard that you had
contracted a very severe illness, before the receipt of your letter we
were in a state of great distress.  But since, when we are snatched from
peril of death, it is uncertain, dearest brother, for what we are
reserved, let us turn the time of respite to the profit of our souls,
and, having to render our accounts to the coming Judge, let us fortify
our cause before Him with tears and good works, that we may be counted
worthy to have security given us with regard to the things that we have
done.  For in secular causes also a kind judge frequently grants a
respite to this end, that one who had not been prepared before may
afterwards come to his trial prepared.  And what a thing it would be,
were we to neglect for the salvation of the soul what we carefully
attend to in matters of earthly concern!  And so, since, according to
the words of the Apostle John, no one is without sin, let us call to
mind enticements of thought, incontinence of tongue, deeds of
transgression; and let us, while we may, with great knocking, do away
with the stains of our iniquities, that our just and loving Redeemer may
not execute vengeance according to our deservings, but according to His
mercy be bent to pardon.  And, since we do not sufficiently fulfil our
office by weeping for our own sins only, let us the more earnestly
devote ourselves to the custody of the flock committed to us, and by
persuading, by exhorting, by alarming, by preaching, so far as heavenly
clemency gives us power, let us hasten to fulfil our office in very
deed, that, through the bounty of our Creator, we may look for the
longed for reward.  But, since we cannot do anything that is good
without divine aid, let us implore Almighty God, most beloved brother,
with united prayers, that He would direct us, with the flock committed
to us, into the way of His commandments by the leading of His grace, and
Himself, who by the gift of His mercy has willed us to have the name of
shepherds, grant to us to understand and do what is well pleasing to
Him.  Moreover, we have received with the charity wherewith you sent it
the blessing of the blessed martyr Agileus, transmitted to us by your
Holiness.  In the month of September, Indiction 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle VIII](2130123.md)
