[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2130102)  [Next](2130104.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p1"></span> <span class="c1"><span
id="ii.vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Epistle LV.</span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p2"></span>*To Virgilius, Bishop of Arelate
(Arles*) <span id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165.md) .

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p4"></span>Gregory to Virgilius, &c.

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p5"></span>Since by the testimony of Holy Writ
avarice is called the service of idols, with what earnestness it ought
to be banished from the temple of God is acknowledged; and yet (we say
it with groaning) by some priests this is not regarded.  For fierce
cupidity holds the heart captive, and persuades one that what it
commands is lawful, and so proceeds as to slay with the same sword both
the giver and the receiver.  What safe place, then, can hereafter be of
avail against avarice, if the Church of God is opened to it by bad
priests?  How can he keep the sheepfolds inviolate who invites the wolf
to enter?  Alas for shame!  He pollutes his hands by an unlawful bribe,
and thinks to lift up others by his benediction, while himself prostrate
under his own iniquity, and captive notwithstanding to his own
ambition.  Since then this evil of rapacity has never entered the
citadel of your mind, and you say that you have your hands unpolluted in
the matter of ordinations, give thanks to Almighty God, and acknowledge
yourselves to be His debtors in that under His protection you have
remained unharmed by the contagion of this disease.  But this good in
you will profit you less than it might have done if you have not
carefully forbidden this thing in others also.  As in thyself this evil
had displeased thee, thou oughtest to have been zealous against it in
thy brother also.  For, seeing that the divine precepts admonish us to
love our neighbours as ourselves, it is no small fault to disregard
them, and not to fear for others what for ourselves we shrink from. 
Even now, therefore, most beloved brother, give thy mind to repairing
what thou hast lost in others through thy negligence in correction, and
restrain whomsoever thou canst from this wickedness, and insist on a
synod being assembled for rooting out this same heresy, to the end that,
with reward to thy Love, what shall have been condemned, God granting
it, by the ordinance of all may be better guarded against by all.

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p6"></span>Furthermore, it has come to our ears
that our brother and fellow-bishop, Serenus of Massilia (*Marseilles*),
receives bad men into his intimate society, so as to have, in fine, as
his familiar friend a certain presbyter. who, after lapse, is said to
wallow still in his iniquities.  This you ought to enquire into
closely.  And, if it should prove to be so, let it be your care so to
correct this matter in our stead that both he who has received such a
one may learn not to encourage him by familiarity, but rather to
constrain him by punishment, and he who has been received may learn to
wash away his sins with tears, and not to pile up iniquity by unclean
living.  Let your Fraternity hold as commended to you in all respects
the monks whom we have sent to our brother and fellow-bishop Augustine,
and take pains so to succour them for proceeding on their way, and so to
concur with them, that through your assistance they may be able, under
the protection of God, to arrive speedily at their destination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_165"></span>[70:166](2130103.htm#fr_165.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxi-p3"></span> The bishop of Arles had vicariate
jurisdiction committed to him under Rome.  Cf. V. 53.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: To Ætherius, Bishop of Lugdunum (Lyons.)](2130104.md)
