[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh07)  [Next](ehh09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

## SECOND DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

### I. THE KINGDOM OF KHENTI-AMENTI-OSIRIS ACCORDING TO THE BOOK AM-TUAT.

THE god AFU-Ra now enters the region URNES which derives its name from
that of the river flowing through it; it is 309, or 480 *atru* or
leagues in length, and 120 wide. URNES is a portion of the dominions of
OSIRIS-KHENTI-AMENTI, the great god of Abydos, and it, no doubt, formed
a section of the SEKHET-HETEPET according to the old theology of Egypt.
The Boat Of AFU-Ra is now under the direction of the goddess of the
second hour of the night, SHESAT-MAKET-NEB-S, and the uraei of Isis and
Nephthys have been added to its crew. Immediately in front of it are
four boats, which move by themselves; the first contains the full moon,
of which Osiris was a form, the second the emblem of a deity of harvest,
the third the symbols of another agricultural deity, and the fourth the
Grain-god personified. All four boats contain either forms or symbols of
Osiris, in his different aspects, as the god of ploughing, sowing, and
reaping, and of the

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

grain from the time when it germinates to the season of harvest.

When AFU-RA has come into URNES, he addresses the gods of the region,
who are called "BAIU-TUATIU," and tells them to open their doors so that
they may receive air, and fresh food, and fresh water, in return for the
deeds of valour which they have done on behalf of AFU-RA. It seems that
at one portion of this Division the followers of Osiris and RA had to do
battle against Apep and his friends, and that in return for their
services the god gave them places here in which to dwell, with an
abundance of wheat and barley, etc. The gods in reply welcome AFU-RA,
and beg him to dissipate the darkness in Amenti, and to slay the
serpents HAU and NEHA-HRA (vol. i., p. 40); they promise that those who
guide his boat shall destroy APEP, that Osiris shall come to meet him
and shall avenge him, and that he shall rest in Ament, and shall appear
in the East the following morning under the form of KHEPERA. After this
speech they lead AFU-RA into a state of peace in SEKHET-EN-PERTIU, the
"Field of the Gods of grain," wherein are the boats of the Grain-gods
already described. In this fair haven AM-RA rests, and every follower of
Osiris hoped to follow his example.

If we consider for a moment the group of divine beings which stands on
each bank of the river URNES it becomes evident that each god or goddess
belongs to

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

the company of Osiris. To the right of the boat stand six gods, who
either hold or wear an ear of corn and are connected with the growth of
the grain (vol. i., p. 31), gods armed with knives, and connected with
the harvest, gods of the seasons, each holding a notched palm-stick, the
god of the year, the gods of SOTHIS and ORION (vol. i., p. 32)
Osiris-Unnefer, Akhabit, Anubis, the "Eater of the Ass," <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) etc. To the left of the Boat are six
deities, each with a phallus in the form of a knife, the double god
HORUS-SET (Vol. i., p. 29), various animal- and bird-headed gods,
goddesses both with and without uraei on their heads, the "Crook"
(*mest*) of Osiris, the serpent-protector of Osiris, and so on. The gods
on the right of AFU-RA are they who give him "the seasons, and the years
which are in their hands," and so soon as he speaks to them "they have
life through his voice"; he, moreover, tells them what to do, and he
orders that the herbs of the field of URNES shall be given to them in
abundance.

 

<span id="img_11300"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/11300.jpg)  
Nekht spearing the Eater of the Ass.

 

The duties of these gods are simple: they supply

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

the followers of AFU-RA, i.e., those spirits who have succeeded in
entering his boat, with green herbs, they give them water, and they
light the fires which are to destroy the enemies of Ra. It is not,
however, easy to understand their position. All these gods are under the
rule of AM-NEBAUI, who is "the lord of this Field," but it seems that
they remain in a state of inertness until AFU-RA enters and shines upon
them; and although they have their duties and know how to perform them,
it is suggested by the texts that they perform nothing until he speaks
to them. In other words, they are merely dead gods, until the word of
power spoken by AFU-RA makes them produce grain on which to feed
themselves and the followers of Ra." In this way is the power of Amen-Ra
shown: his dead body, i.e., the night sun, is able to re-vivify all the
gods of the kingdom of Osiris, and to make them work. The gods on the
left have, first of all, to praise AFU-RA after he has entered URNES;
they next "guard the day, and bring on the night until the great god
cometh out into the East of the sky." Besides this their duty is to
bring to the god's notice the words of those who are upon earth, and
they make souls to come to their forms (vol. i., p. 34); they are also
concerned with the "offerings of the night," and effect the overthrow of
enemies.

From this passage it is clear that the Egyptians believed that words
uttered on earth were taken to AFU-RA by his ministers, and it is
difficult not to think

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

that such words must have been in the form of petitions, or prayers, if
only for sepulchral offerings. So soon as AFU-RA has passed through the
Division, and his light has begun to leave them, all the gods of URNES
"cry out in lamentation, and utter wailings because he has left them."
From the SUMMARY of the BOOK AM-TUAT we gather that the pictures and
texts referring to this Division of the Tuat, or Hour of the night, were
believed to possess special efficacy, and the faithful thought that if a
man knew the names of its gods he would receive a place of abode in
URNES, and would travel about with the god, would have the power of
entering the earth and the Tuat and of going so far as the pillars which
supported the heavens, would travel over the serpent AMU-AA (i.e., the
Eater of the Ass), would eat the bread intended for the Boat of the
Earth, <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) and would partake of the
perfumed unguent of the god TATUBA. Moreover, it is stated that the man
who makes offerings to the BAIU-TUATIU (i.e., the divine souls of the
Tuat), mentioning them by their names, shall in very truth receive
innumerable benefits upon earth. The texts giving these facts are most
important, for they prove that in early times the abode of the blessed
was believed to be in URNES, and that the making of offerings to the
dead was inculcated as a meritorious act, and that it was believed to
bring blessings upon him that made the offering even whilst he was upon
earth. It may also be noted in passing

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

that the heaven URNES was somewhat exclusive, for only the followers of
Osiris and RA were admitted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[113:1](ehh08.htm#fr_47) This is a name given to
the serpent which is seen attacking an ass in the XIth Chapter of the
Book of the Dead, and which is a form of the god Set; the Ass is
probably a form of the sun-god RA. THE EATER OF THE GREAT PHALLUS, i.e.,
the Ass, was also a power of evil, yet here he is found seated among
beneficent gods.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[115:1](ehh08.htm#fr_48) See within, page 126.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Second Division of the Tuat. II. The Kingdom of
Khenti-Amenti-Osiris According to the Book of Gates](ehh09)
