[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh15)  [Next](ehh17) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

# CHAPTER X.

## SIXTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

### I. KINGDOM OF OSIRIS ACCORDING TO THE BOOK AM-TUAT.

THIS DIVISION, or HOUR, is the first of four which are devoted to the
Kingdom of Osiris; its name is METCHET-MU-NEBT-TUAT, its Gate is called
SEPT-METU, and the Hour-goddess is MESPERIT-AR-AT-MAATU. Here we see at
once that the god AFU-RA has re-entered his boat, and that he has
discarded the serpent-boat in which he travelled through the Land of
Seker; the boat advances by means of paddling and not by towing. The
greater part of the road of AFU-RA in this DIVISION is occupied by a
very long building--or series of houses, or chambers, set close
together--which contains the forms of Osiris. Here are four
representatives of each of four classes of beings, viz., the SUTENIU, or
kings of Upper Egypt, the BATIU, or kings of Lower Egypt, the HETEPTIU,
or those who have been abundantly supplied with offerings, and the KHU,
or spirits of the beatified dead. Thus it seems that the first mansion
of the House of Osiris contains royal folk, the rich, and the
superlatively good (vol. i., p. 117-120); as AFU-RA passes these by he

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

salutes them, and wishes them an abundant supply of offerings, and
entreats them to hack APEP in pieces for him. Immediately beyond these
we see represented the transformation of AFU-RA into the living Sun-god.
Here is the five-headed serpent ASHT-HRAU, and on his back lies the dead
Sun-god; with his right hand, which is raised above his head, he is
drawing to himself the Beetle of KHEPERA, which is the type of
regeneration,

 

<span id="img_14900"></span> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/14900.jpg)  
The Serpent Asht-hrau.

 

or new birth, or resurrection. This is the equivalent of the scene in
the BOOK AIM-TUAT where the Beetle descends from the vault of night, and
joining itself to the Boat of AFU-RA revivifies the dead Sun-god (see
vol. i., p. 103). That this revivification of AM-RA should take place at
the end of the SIXTH DIVISION is quite correct, for at this point the
god arrives at the most northerly limit of his course. He has travelled
due north from Thebes and Abydos, and has occupied

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

six hours in performing the journey; he must now alter his course and
travel towards the East so that he may appear at BAKHAU, the Mountain of
Sunrise. The path over which he now journeys is called the "secret path
of Amentet," and he who knoweth it, and the names of those who are on
it, and their forms, shall partake of the offerings made to the gods of
Osiris, and receive the gifts which his relatives (*abt* <span
id="fr_49"></span>[1](#fn_49)) shall make upon earth.

On the right of AFU-RA are a company of gods and goddesses, and a group
of sceptres surmounted by crowns and uraei, and provided with knives;
these are the beings who hold and cultivate the territory in this
DIVISION, or HOUR, and minister to the wants of the followers of Osiris.
Beyond these we have a lion, the two Eyes of Horus, three deities, and
three small sepulchres,, into each of which, through an opening under
the roof, a serpent is belching fire (vol. i., pp. 124-130). In each
sepulchre is an "image" of Ra, i.e., a human head, a hawk's wing, and a
hind-quarter of a lion, and these appear to be symbols under which the
god was worshipped in and around Annu, or Heliopolis. On the left of
AFU-RA are eight gods and four goddesses, whose duty it is to accompany
his Boat, and to escort the souls and shadows of men through the
Division, and to provide the spirits with food and water. Next is the

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

monster serpent "AM-KHU," i.e., "Eater of the Spirits," whose duty it is
to devour the shadows of the dead, and to eat up the spirits of the foes
of Ra; from his back spring the heads of the Four Children of Horus, and
they come into being when they hear the voice of AFU-RA. Beyond these
are four Osiris forms, "which stand though they are seated, and move
though they are motionless," and nine serpents armed with knives, which
represent the ancient gods, TA-THENEN, TEMU, KHEPERA, SHU, SEB, ASAR
(OSIRIS), HERU, APU, and HETEPUI. These gods had faces of fire, and
lived in the water of TATHENEN, and they only came to life by virtue of
the words of power of AFU-RA, who is now to be regarded as KHEPERA.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_49"></span>[150:1](ehh16.htm#fr_49) See above, p. 66.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Seventh Division of the Tuat. I. Kingdom of Osiris According to
the Book Am-Tuat](ehh17)
