[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Egypt](../index)  [EHH
Index](../ehh)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ehh13)  [Next](ehh15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

# CHAPTER IX.

## FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT.

### II. THE KINGDOM OF KHENTI-AMENTI-OSIRIS ACCORDING TO THE BOOK OF GATES.

THE pictures and texts of this DIVISION, or HOUR, in the BOOK OF GATES
vary considerably from those in the BOOK-AM-TUAT. The god AFU-RA.
appears in his Boat as before with SA and HEKAU, and four gods tow him
on his way; he has passed through the Gate which is called NEBT-TCHEFAU,
and its guardian serpent TCHETBI has in no way resisted his progress.
The region now entered by AFU-RA has no connexion with the Land of
Seker, and it appears to be a continuation of the dominions Of
KHENTI-AMENTI. Immediately in front of the boat are nine sepulchres,
each containing a god in mummied form; these are the "gods who are in
the following of Osiris, who dwell in their caves" (vol. ii., p. 123).
Next come the twelve Hour-goddesses who stand in two groups; between the
groups is the monster serpent HERERET, which spawns twelve serpents to
be consumed by the Twelve Hour-goddesses. As AFU-RA goes on his way he
adjures the Tuat gods to take

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

him to the eastern part of heaven, so that he may visit the habitations
of the god ARES, (or SAR), and when he has come to them, he orders the
doors to open, and raises up the beings therein whose "souls are
broken," and allots to them meat and drink. The Hour-goddesses are the
daughters of RA, and their work is to guide their father through the
night; six of them represent the first six hours of the night, and the
other six the last six. These are here (vol. ii., p. 123) depicted
together, whilst in the BOOK AM-TUAT each appears in the boat of AFU-RA
in the Hour to which she belongs.

On the right of AFU-RA are the Twelve gods who "carry their doubles"
(vol. ii., p. 131) and who live upon the offerings which are made to
them and upon what is given to them by TESERT-BAIU, i.e., the place of
holy souls. Their duty is to offer their kau or doubles to the god, whom
they address as the "lord of years and of everlastingness which hath no
diminution" (vol. ii., p. 130). Beyond these gods are two lakes, viz.,
the LAKE OF LIFE, and the LAKE OF THE LIVING URAEI. Round the LAKE OF
LIFE stand twelve jackal-headed gods who invite AFU-RA to bathe in it,
even as the "lord of the gods" did, and who state that the souls of the
dead do not come near it because it is holy. When he passes out of this
DIVISION they lift up their voices in lamentation (vol. ii., p. 132).
The LIVING URAEI turn back the souls from their Lake, and the mere sound
of

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

the words which they utter destroys the shadows of the dead who have
succeeded in coming near it. They preserve with great care the flames
and fire which are in them, so that they may hurl them at the enemies of
AFU-RA.

In the course of his journey through this HOUR AFU-RA passes the shrine
of KHENTI-AMENTI, the ancient god of Abydos, which is seen on the left
(vol. ii., p. 137); he is in mummied form, wears the white crown, as
befits a god of the South, and stands on a serpent. Immediately before
the shrine is the Flame-goddess NESERT. Before and behind the shrine are
twelve gods, at the head of the first company being HERU-UR, or "Horus
the Aged." HERU-UR addresses the god in the shrine by the names "Osiris"
and "Khenti-Amenti," and declares that he has performed the magical
ceremonies which have made KHENTI-AMENTI to be the "Governor of the
Tuat," to such purpose that the spirits of the blessed (*khu*) look upon
him with awe, and the dead, i.e., the damned, (*mit*) are in terror of
him. Here we have the proof of the existence of the belief that Osiris
was enabled to travel safely through the Tuat by means of the spells,
and incantations, and magical formulae, and words of power which were
uttered by HERU-UR. The Twelve gods who are in front of the shrine
ascribe praise and dominion to KHENTI-AMENTI, and declare that his son
Horus has restored to him his crown, and crushed his

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

enemies, and made strong OSIRIS-KHENTI-AMENTI. To these AFU-RA makes no
answer, but he calls upon Horns to avenge him on those who work against
him, and to cast them to the Master of the lords of the pits, so that
they may be destroyed. Now the pits here referred to are four in number
(vol. ii., p. 137), and they are filled with fire; into these the
enemies of the god are cast, and the keepers of them are adjured by
Horus to watch and tend the fires. Who the plotters against the god may
be it is impossible to say, but it is quite clear that one portion of
the FOURTH DIVISION OF THE TUAT was a fiery hell wherein all the wicked
were consumed. It is interesting to note that of the beings who are to
the left of the Boat of AFU-RA Horus is the only one whom the god
addresses.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fifth Division of the Tuat. II. The Kingdom of
Khenti-Amenti-Osiris According to the Book of Gates](ehh15)
