[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Grimoires](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](m7110)  [Next](m7112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE USE OF THE SEALS

If these great princes do not appear immediately on the foregoing
Citations, or if they hesitate in their obedience, then cast
frankincense and myrrh upon burning coals; when the smoke arises, place
the spirit seal thereon, and pronounce the following mysterious words:

ALTISSIMA DIE VERBA

Spirituum Cactiva Mosis Aaron et Salomonis

Zijmuorsobet, Noijm, Zavaxo, Quehaij, Abawo, Noquetonaij, Oasaij, Wuram,
Thefotoson, Zijoronoaifwetho, Mugelthor, Yzxe, Agiopuaij, Huzije,
Surhatijm, Sowe, Oxursoij, Zijbo, Yzweth, Quaij, Salrthos, Quaij,
Qeahaij, Qijrpu, Sardowe, Xoro, Wuggofhoswerhiz, Kaweko, Ykquos,
Zehatho, Aba. Amen.

#### The Apparition

The conjured spirit will appear almost as soon as these word are said.
As soon as he appears, address and compel him with the following words.

#### Binding Of Moses

Zebaoth, Abatho, Tetragrammaton, Adonaij, Abathoij, Zijhawe, Aglaij,
Quohowe, Agla, Muijroshoweth, Phalowaij, Agla, Theos, Messias,
Zijwethororijm, Feghowo, Aba, Mowewo, Choe, Adonaij, Cewoe,
Christohatos, Tetragrammaton.

#### Instructions

Since the spirits will now appear quickly, express your desires to them
clearly, honestly and without fear for nothing can harm you. Rather they
must serve you obediently and give your all you require of them.
However, remember not to compromise with any spirits in any way, do not
yield to them in any way, and be firm in your demeanor. For these words
of might and power that you have used in the conjuration are sufficient
to compel the spirits to obey you and to do so without harm or
deception.

#### MIHI FAUSTO ![](img/cross.jpg) EXPERTO

#### VALEDICTO OR DISMISSAL OF THE SPIRITS

Since the spirits have now served you according to your wishes, dismiss
them and discharge them with the following words:

Zebaoth, Theos, Yschyres, Messias, Imas, Weghaymnko, Quoheos, Roveym,
Christoze, Abay, Xewefaraym, Agla.

And now depart in the name of God. Praise, love and thank God to the
end.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Rabellini Table](m7112.md)
