[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mab17)  [Next](mab19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z8PY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Mabinogion*, tr. by Lady Charlotte Guest, \[1877\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

<span id="img_29900"></span> ![](img/29900.jpg)

# THE DREAM OF RHONABWY

Madawc the son of Maredudd [299a](mab19.htm#xref_299a) possessed Powys
within its boundaries [299b](mab19.htm#xref_299b), from Porfoed to
Gwauan in the uplands of Arwystli. And at that time he had a brother,
Iorwerth the son of Maredudd [299c](mab19.htm#xref_299c), in rank not
equal to himself. And Iorwerth had great sorrow and heaviness because of
the honour and power that his brother enjoyed, which he shared not. And
he sought his fellows and his foster-brothers, and took counsel with
them what he should do in this matter. And they resolved to dispatch
some of their number to go and seek a maintenance for him. Then Madawc
offered him to become Master of the Household and to have horses, and
arms, and honour, and to fare like as himself. But Iorwerth refused
this.

And Iorwerth made an inroad into Loegria, slaying the inhabitants, and
burning houses, and carrying away prisoners. And Madawc took counsel
with the men of Powys, and they determined to place an hundred men in
each of the three Commots of Powys to seek for him. And thus did they in

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

the plains of Powys from Aber Ceirawc, and in Allictwn Ver, and in Rhyd
Wilure [300a](mab19.htm#xref_300a), on the Vyrnwy, the three best
Commots of Powys. So he was none the better, he nor his household, in
Powys, nor in the plains thereof. And they spread these men over the
plains as far as Nillystwn Trevan.

Now one of the men who was upon this quest was called Rhonabwy. And
Rhonabwy and Kynwrig Vrychgoch, a man of
Mawddwy [300b](mab19.htm#xref_300b), and Cadwgan Vras, a man of Moelvre
in Kynlleith [300c](mab19.htm#xref_300c), came together to the house of
Heilyn Goch the son of Cadwgan the son of Iddon. And when they came near
to the house, they saw an old hall, very black and having an upright
gable, whence issued a great smoke; and on entering, they found the
floor full of puddles and mounds; and it was difficult to stand thereon,
so slippery was it with the mire of cattle. And where the puddles were,
a man might go up to his ankles in water and dirt. And there were boughs
of holly spread over the floor, whereof the cattle had browsed the
sprigs. When they came to the hall of the house, they beheld cells full
of dust, and very gloomy, and on one side an old hag making a fire. And
whenever she felt cold, she cast a lapful of chaff upon the fire, and
raised such a smoke, that it was scarcely to be borne, as it rose up the
nostrils. And on the other side was a yellow calf-skin on the floor; a
main privilege was it to any one who should get upon that hide.

And when they had sat down, they asked the hag where were the people of
the house. And the hag spoke not, but muttered. Thereupon behold the
people of the house entered; a ruddy, clownish, curly-headed man, with a
burthen of faggots on his back, and a pale slender woman, also carrying
a bundle under her arm. And they barely welcomed the men, and kindled a
fire with the boughs. And the woman cooked something, and gave them to
eat, barley bread, and cheese, and milk and water.

And there arose a storm of wind and rain, so that it was hardly possible
to go forth with safety. And being weary with their journey, they laid
themselves down and sought to

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

sleep. And when they looked at the couch, it seemed to be made but of a
little coarse straw full of dust and vermin, with the stems of boughs
sticking up there-through, for the cattle had eaten all the straw that
was placed at the head and the foot. And upon it was stretched an old
russet-coloured rug, threadbare and ragged; and a coarse sheet, full of
slits, was upon the rug, and an ill-stuffed pillow, and a worn-out cover
upon the sheet. And after much suffering from the vermin, and from the
discomfort of their couch, a heavy sleep fell on Rhonabwy's companions.
But Rhonabwy, not being able either to sleep or to rest, thought he
should suffer less if he went to lie upon the yellow calf-skin that was
stretched out on the floor. And there he slept.

As soon as sleep had come upon his eyes, it seemed to him that he was
journeying with his companions across the plain of
Argyngroeg [301a](mab19.htm#xref_301a), and he thought that he went
towards Rhyd y Groes on the Severn. As he journeyed, he heard a mighty
noise, the like whereof heard he never before; and looking behind him,
he beheld a youth with yellow curling hair, and with his beard newly
trimmed, mounted on a chestnut horse, whereof the legs were grey from
the top of the forelegs, and from the bend of the hindlegs downwards.
And the rider wore a coat of yellow satin sewn with green silk, and on
his thigh was a gold-hilted sword, with a scabbard of new leather of
Cordova, belted with the skin of the deer, and clasped with gold. And
over this was a scarf of yellow satin wrought with green silk, the
borders whereof were likewise green. And the green of the caparison of
the horse, and of his rider, was as green as the leaves of the fir-tree,
and the yellow was as yellow as the blossom of the broom. So fierce was
the aspect of the knight, that fear seized upon them, and they began to
flee. And the knight pursued them. And when the horse breathed forth,
the men became distant from him, and when he drew in his breath, they
were drawn near to him, even to the horse's chest. And when he had
overtaken them, they besought his mercy. "You have it gladly," said he,
"fear nought." "Ha, chieftain, since thou hast

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

mercy upon me, tell me also who thou art," said Rhonabwy. "I will not
conceal my lineage from thee, I am Iddawc the son of Mynyo, yet not by
my name, but by my nickname am I best known." "And wilt thou tell us
what thy nickname is?" "I will tell you; it is Iddawc Cordd
Prydain [302a](mab19.htm#xref_302a)." "Ha, chieftain," said Rhonabwy,
"why art thou called thus?" "I will tell thee. I was one of the
messengers between Arthur and Medrawd his nephew, at the battle of
Camlan [302b](mab19.htm#xref_302b); and I was then a reckless youth, and
through my desire for battle, I kindled strife between them, and stirred
up wrath, when I was sent by Arthur the Emperor to reason with Medrawd,
and to show him, that he was his foster-father and his uncle, and to
seek for peace, lest the sons of the Kings of the Island of Britain, and
of the nobles, should be slain. And whereas Arthur charged me with the
fairest sayings he could think of, I uttered unto Medrawd the harshest I
could devise. And therefore am I called Iddawc Cordd Prydain, for from
this did the battle of Camlan ensue. And three nights before the end of
the battle of Camlan I left them, and went to the Llech Las in North
Britain to do penance. And there I remained doing penance seven years,
and after that I gained pardon."

Then lo! they heard a mighty sound which was much louder than that which
they had heard before, and when they looked round towards the sound,
they beheld a ruddy youth, without beard or whiskers, noble of mien, and
mounted on a stately courser. And from the shoulders and the front of
the knees downwards the horse was bay. And upon the man was a dress of
red satin wrought with yellow silk, and yellow were the borders of his
scarf. And such parts of his apparel and of the trappings of his horse
as were yellow, as yellow were they as the blossom of the broom, and
such as were red, were as ruddy as the ruddiest blood in the world.

Then, behold the horseman overtook them, and he asked of Iddawc a share
of the little men that were with him. "That which is fitting for me to
grant I will grant, and thou shalt be a companion to them as I have
been." And the horseman

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

went away. "Iddawc," inquired Rhonabwy, "who was that horseman?"
"Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of Prince Deorthach."

And they journeyed over the plain of Argyngroeg as far as the ford of
Rhyd y Groes on the Severn. And for a mile around the ford on both sides
of the road, they saw tents and encampments, and there was the clamour
of a mighty host. And they came to the edge of the ford, and there they
beheld Arthur sitting on a flat island below the ford, having Bedwini
the Bishop on one side of him, and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw on the
other. And a tall, auburn-haired youth stood before him, with his
sheathed sword in his hand, and clad in a coat and cap of jet-black
satin. And his face was white as ivory, and his eyebrows black as jet,
and such part of his wrist as could be seen between his glove and his
sleeve, was whiter than the lily, and thicker than a warrior's ankle.

Then came Iddawc and they that were with him, and stood before Arthur
and saluted him. "Heaven grant thee good," said Arthur. "And where,
Iddawc, didst thou find these little men?" "I found them, lord, up
yonder on the road." Then the Emperor smiled. "Lord," said Iddawc,
"wherefore dost thou laugh?" "Iddawc," replied Arthur, "I laugh not; but
it pitieth me that men of such stature as these should have this island
in their keeping, after the men that guarded it of yore." Then said
Iddawc, "Rhonabwy, dost thou see the ring with a stone set in it, that
is upon the Emperor's hand?" "I see it," he answered. "It is one of the
properties of that stone to enable thee to remember that thou seest here
to-night, and hadst thou not seen the stone, thou wouldest never have
been able to remember aught thereof."

After this they saw a troop coming towards the ford. "Iddawc," inquired
Rhonabwy, "to whom does yonder troop belong?" "They are the fellows of
Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of Prince Deorthach. And these men are honourably
served with mead and bragget, and are freely beloved by the daughters of
the kings of the Island of Britain. And this

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

they merit, for they were ever in the front and the rear in every
peril." And he saw but one hue upon the men and the horses of this
troop, for they were all as red as blood. And when one of the knights
rode forth from the troop, he looked like a pillar of fire glancing
athwart the sky. And this troop encamped above the ford.

Then they beheld another troop coming towards the ford, and these from
their horses' chests upwards were whiter than the lily, and below
blacker than jet. And they saw one of these knights go before the rest,
and spur his horse into the ford in such a manner that the water dashed
over Arthur and the Bishop, and those holding counsel with them, so that
they were as wet as if they had been drenched in the river. And as he
turned the head of his horse, the youth who stood before Arthur struck
the horse over the nostrils with his sheathed sword, so that, had it
been with the bare blade, it would have been a marvel if the bone had
not been wounded as well as the flesh. And the knight drew his sword
half out of the scabbard, and asked of him, "Wherefore didst thou strike
my horse? Whether was it in insult or in counsel unto me?" "Thou dost
indeed lack counsel. What madness caused thee to ride so furiously as to
dash the water of the ford over Arthur, and the consecrated Bishop, and
their counsellors, so that they were as wet as if they had been dragged
out of the river?" "As counsel then will I take it." So he turned his
horse's head round towards his army.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who was yonder knight?" "The most eloquent and
the wisest youth that is in this island; Adaon, the son of
Taliesin [304a](mab19.htm#xref_304a)." "Who was the man that struck his
horse?" "A youth of froward nature; Elphin [304b](mab19.htm#xref_304b),
the son of Gwyddno."

Then spake a tall and stately man, of noble and flowing speech, saying
that it was a marvel that so vast a host should be assembled in so
narrow a space, and that it was a still greater marvel that those should
be there at that time who had promised to be by mid-day in the battle of
Badon [304c](mab19.htm#xref_304c), fighting with Osla
Gyllellvawr [304d](mab19.htm#xref_304d). "Whether thou mayest choose to

<span id="page_305">p. 305</span>

proceed or not, I will proceed." "Thou sayest well," said Arthur, "and
we will go altogether." "Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who was the man who
spoke so marvellously unto Arthur erewhile?" "A man who may speak as
boldly as he listeth, Caradawc Vreichvras [305a](mab19.htm#xref_305a),
the son of Llyr Marini, his chief counsellor and his cousin."

Then Iddawc took Rhonabwy behind him on his horse, and that mighty host
moved forward, each troop in its order, towards
Cevndigoll [305b](mab19.htm#xref_305b). And when they came to the middle
of the ford of the Severn, Iddawc turned his horse's head, and Rhonabwy
looked along the valley of the Severn. And he beheld two fair troops
coming towards the ford. One troop there came of brilliant white,
whereof every one of the men had a scarf of white satin with jet-black
borders. And the knees and the tops of the shoulders of their horses
were jet-black, though they were of a pure white in every other part.
And their banners were pure white, with black points to them all.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who are yonder pure white troop?" "They are
the men of Norway, and March the son of
Meirchion [305c](mab19.htm#xref_305c) is their prince. And he is cousin
unto Arthur." And further on he saw a troop, whereof each man wore
garments of jet-black, with borders of pure white to every scarf; and
the tops of the shoulders and the knees of their horses were pure white.
And their banners were jet-black with pure white at the point of each.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who are the jet-black troop yonder?" "They are
the men of Denmark, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd is their prince."

And when they had overtaken the host, Arthur and his army of mighty ones
dismounted below Caer Badou, and he perceived that he and Iddawc
journeyed the same road as Arthur. And after they had dismounted he
heard a great tumult and confusion amongst the host, and such as were
then at the flanks turned to the centre, and such as had been in the
centre moved to the flanks. And then, behold, he saw a knight coming,
clad, both he and his horse, in mail, of which the

<span id="page_306">p. 306</span>

rings were whiter than the whitest lily, and the rivets redder than the
ruddiest blood. And he rode amongst the host.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "will yonder host flee?" "King Arthur never
fled, and if this discourse of thine were heard, thou wert a lost man.
But as to the knight whom thou seest yonder, it is Kai. The fairest
horseman is Kai in all Arthur's Court; and the men who are at the front
of the army hasten to the rear to see Kai ride, and the men who are in
the centre flee to the side, from the shock of his horse. And this is
the cause of the confusion of the host."

Thereupon they heard a call made for Kadwr, Earl of
Cornwall [306a](mab19.htm#xref_306a), and behold he arose with the sword
of Arthur in his hand. And the similitude of two serpents was upon the
sword in gold. And when the sword was drawn from its scabbard, it seemed
as if two flames of fire burst forth from the jaws of the serpents, and
then, so wonderful was the sword, that it was hard for any one to look
upon it. And the host became still, and the tumult ceased, and the Earl
returned to the tent.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who is the man who bore the sword of Arthur?"
"Kadwr, the Earl of Cornwall, whose duty it is to arm the King on the
days of battle and warfare."

And they heard a call made for Eirynwych Amheibyn, Arthur's servant, a
red, rough, ill-favoured man, having red whiskers with bristly hairs.
And behold he came upon a tall red horse with the mane parted on each
side, and he brought with him a large and beautiful sumpter pack. And
the huge red youth dismounted before Arthur, and he drew a golden chair
out of the pack, and a carpet of diapered satin. And he spread the
carpet before Arthur, and there was an apple of ruddy gold at each
corner thereof, and he placed the chair upon the carpet. And so large
was the chair that three armed warriors might have sat therein. Gwenn
was the name of the carpet, and it was one of its properties that

<span id="page_307">p. 307</span>

whoever was upon it no one could see him, and he could see every one.
And it would retain no colour but its own.

And Arthur sat within the carpet, and Owain the son of Urien was
standing before him. "Owain," said Arthur, "wilt thou play chess?" "I
will, Lord," said Owain. And the red youth brought the chess for Arthur
and Owain; golden pieces and a board of silver. And they began to play.

And while they were thus, and when they were best amused with their
game, behold they saw a white tent with a red canopy, and the figure of
a jet-black serpent on the top of the tent, and red glaring venomous
eyes in the head of the serpent, and a red flaming tongue. And there
came a young page with yellow curling hair, and blue eyes, and a
newly-springing beard, wearing a coat and a surcoat of yellow satin, and
hose of thin greenish-yellow cloth upon his feet, and over his hose
shoes of parti-coloured leather, fastened at the insteps with golden
clasps. And he bore a heavy three-edged sword with a golden hilt, in a
scabbard of black leather tipped with fine gold. And he came to the
place where the Emperor and Owain were playing at chess.

And the youth saluted Owain. And Owain marvelled that the youth should
salute him and should not have saluted the Emperor Arthur. And Arthur
knew what was in Owain's thought. And he said to Owain, "Marvel not that
the youth salutes thee now, for he saluted me erewhile; and it is unto
thee that his errand is." Then said the youth unto Owain, "Lord, is it
with thy leave that the young pages and attendants of the Emperor harass
and torment and worry thy Ravens? And if it be not with thy leave, cause
the Emperor to forbid them." "Lord," said Owain, "thou hearest what the
youth says; if it seem good to thee, forbid them from my Ravens." "Play
thy game," said he. Then the youth returned to the tent.

That game did they finish, and another they began, and when they were in
the midst of the game, behold, a ruddy young man with auburn curling
hair and large eyes, well-grown,

<span id="page_308">p. 308</span>

and having his beard new-shorn, came forth from a bright yellow tent,
upon the summit of which was the figure of a bright red lion. And he was
clad in a coat of yellow satin, falling as low as the small of his leg,
and embroidered with threads of red silk. And on his feet were hose of
fine white buckram, and buskins of black leather were over his hose,
whereon were golden clasps. And in his hand a huge, heavy, three-edged
sword, with a scabbard of red deer-hide, tipped with gold. And he came
to the place where Arthur and Owain were playing at chess. And he
saluted him. And Owain was troubled at his salutation, but Arthur minded
it no more than before. And the youth said unto Owain, "Is it not
against thy will that the attendants of the Emperor harass thy Ravens,
killing some and worrying others? If against thy will it be, beseech him
to forbid them." "Lord," said Owain, "forbid thy men, if it seem good to
thee." "Play thy game," said the Emperor. And the youth returned to the
tent.

And that game was ended and another begun. And as they were beginning
the first move of the game, they beheld at a small distance from them a
tent speckled yellow, the largest ever seen, and the figure of an eagle
of gold upon it, and a precious stone on the eagle's head. And coming
out of the tent, they saw a youth with thick yellow hair upon his head,
fair and comely, and a scarf of blue satin upon him, and a brooch of
gold in the scarf upon his right shoulder as large as a warrior's middle
finger. And upon his feet were hose of fine Totness, and shoes of
parti-coloured leather, clasped with gold, and the youth was of noble
bearing, fair of face, with ruddy cheeks and large hawk's eyes. In the
hand of the youth was a mighty lance, speckled yellow, with a
newly-sharpened head; and upon the lance a banner displayed.

Fiercely angry, and with rapid pace, came the youth to the place where
Arthur was playing at chess with Owain. And they perceived that he was
wroth. And thereupon he saluted Owain, and told him that his Ravens had
been killed, the

<span id="page_309">p. 309</span>

chief part of them, and that such of them as were not slain were so
wounded and bruised that not one of them could raise its wings a single
fathom above the earth. "Lord," said Owain, "forbid thy men." "Play,"
said he, "if it please thee." Then said Owain to the youth, "Go back,
and wherever thou findest the strife at the thickest, there lift up the
banner, and let come what pleases Heaven."

So the youth returned back to the place where the strife bore hardest
upon the Ravens, and he lifted up the banner; and as he did so they all
rose up in the air, wrathful and fierce and high of spirit, clapping
their wings in the wind, and shaking off the weariness that was upon
them. And recovering their energy and courage, furiously and with
exultation did they, with one sweep, descend upon the heads of the men,
who had erewhile caused them anger and pain and damage, and they seized
some by the heads and others by the eyes, and some by the ears, and
others by the arms, and carried them up into the air; and in the air
there was a mighty tumult with the flapping of the wings of the
triumphant Ravens, and with their croaking; and there was another mighty
tumult with the groaning of the men, that were being torn and wounded,
and some of whom were slain.

And Arthur and Owain marvelled at the tumult as they played at chess;
and, looking, they perceived a knight upon a dun-coloured horse coming
towards them. And marvellous was the hue of the dun horse. Bright red
was his right shoulder, and from the top of his legs to the centre of
his hoof was bright yellow. Both the knight and his horse were fully
equipped with heavy foreign armour. The clothing of the horse from the
front opening upwards was of bright red sendal, and from thence opening
downwards was of bright yellow sendal. A large gold-hilted one-edged
sword had the youth upon his thigh, in a scabbard of light blue, and
tipped with Spanish laton. The belt of the sword was of dark green
leather with golden slides and a clasp of ivory upon it, and a buckle of
jet-black upon the clasp. A helmet of gold was on the head of the
knight, set with precious stones of great virtue, and at

<span id="page_310">p. 310</span>

the top of the helmet was the image of a flame-coloured leopard with two
ruby-red stones in its head, so that it was astounding for a warrior,
however stout his heart, to look at the face of the leopard, much more
at the face of the knight. He had in his hand a blue-shafted lance, but
from the haft to the point it was stained crimson-red with the blood of
the Ravens and their plumage.

The knight came to the place where Arthur and Owain were seated at
chess. And they perceived that he was harassed and vexed and weary as he
came towards them. And the youth saluted Arthur, and told him that the
Ravens of Owain were slaying his young men and attendants. And Arthur
looked at Owain and said, "Forbid thy Ravens." "Lord," answered Owain,
"play thy game." And they played. And the knight returned back towards
the strife, and the Ravens were not forbidden any more than before.

And when they had played awhile, they heard a mighty tumult, and a
wailing of men, and a croaking of Ravens, as they carried the men in
their strength into the air, and, tearing them betwixt them, let them
fall piecemeal to the earth. And during the tumult they saw a knight
coming towards them, on a light grey horse, and the left foreleg of the
horse was jet-black to the centre of his hoof. And the knight and the
horse were fully accoutred with huge heavy blue armour. And a robe of
honour of yellow diapered satin was upon the knight, and the borders of
the robe were blue. And the housings of the horse were jet-black, with
borders of bright yellow. And on the thigh of the youth was a sword,
long, and three-edged, and heavy. And the scabbard was of red cut
leather, and the belt of new red deer-skin, having upon it many golden
slides and a buckle of the bone of the sea-horse, the tongue of which
was jet-black. A golden helmet was upon the head of the knight, wherein
were set sapphire-stones of great virtue. And at the top of the helmet
was the figure of a flame-coloured lion, with a fiery-red tongue,
issuing above a foot from his mouth, and with venomous eyes,
crimson-red, in his head. And the knight came, bearing in his hand a

<span id="page_311">p. 311</span>

thick ashen lance, the head whereof, which had been newly steeped in
blood, was overlaid with silver [311a](mab19.htm#xref_311a).

And the youth saluted the Emperor: "Lord," said he, "carest thou not for
the slaying of thy pages, and thy young men, and the sons of the nobles
of the Island of Britain, whereby it will be difficult to defend this
island from henceforward for ever?" "Owain," said Arthur, "forbid thy
Ravens [311b](mab19.htm#xref_311b)." "Play this game, Lord," said Owain.

So they finished the game and began another; and as they were finishing
that game, lo, they heard a great tumult and a clamour of armed men, and
a croaking of Ravens, and a flapping of wings in the air, as they flung
down the armour entire to the ground, and the men and the horses
piecemeal. Then they saw coming a knight on a lofty-headed piebald
horse. And the left shoulder of the horse was of bright red, and its
right leg from the chest to the hollow of the hoof was pure white. And
the knight and horse were equipped with arms of speckled yellow,
variegated with Spanish laton. And there was a robe of honour upon him,
and upon his horse, divided in two parts, white and black, and the
borders of the robe of honour were of golden purple. And above the robe
he wore a sword three-edged and bright, with a golden hilt. And the belt
of the sword was of yellow goldwork, having a clasp upon it of the
eyelid of a black sea-horse, and a tongue of yellow gold to the clasp.
Upon the head of the knight was a bright helmet of yellow laton, with
sparkling stones of crystal in it, and at the crest of the helmet was
the figure of a griffin, with a stone of many virtues in its head. And
he had an ashen spear in his hand, with a round shaft, coloured with
azure blue. And the head of the spear was newly stained with blood, and
was overlaid with fine silver.

Wrathfully came the knight to the place where Arthur was, and he told
him that the Ravens had slain his household and the sons of the chief
men of this island, and he besought him to cause Owain to forbid his
Ravens. And Arthur besought Owain to forbid them. Then Arthur took the
golden chessmen that were upon the board, and crushed them until they

<span id="page_312">p. 312</span>

became as dust. Then Owain ordered Gwres the son of Rheged to lower his
banner. So it was lowered, and all was peace.

Then Rhonabwy inquired of Iddawc who were the first three men that came
to Owain, to tell him his Ravens were being slain. Said Iddawc, "They
were men who grieved that Owain should suffer loss, his
fellow-chieftains and companions, Selyv the son of Kynan
Garwyn [312a](mab19.htm#xref_312a) of Powys, and Gwgawn
Gleddyvrudd [312b](mab19.htm#xref_312b), and Gwres the son of Rheged, he
who bears the banner in the day of battle and strife." "Who," said
Rhonabwy, "were the last three men who came to Arthur, and told him that
the Ravens were slaughtering his men?" "The best of men," said Iddawc,
"and the bravest, and who would grieve exceedingly that Arthur should
have damage in aught; Blathaon the son of Mawrheth, and Rhuvawn Pebyr
the son of Prince Deorthach, and Hyveidd Unllenn."

And with that behold four-and-twenty knights came from Osla Gyllellvawr,
to crave a truce of Arthur for a fortnight and a month. And Arthur rose
and went to take counsel. And he came to where a tall, auburn,
curly-headed man was a little way off, and there he assembled his
counsellors. Bedwini, the Bishop, and Gwarthegyd the son of Kaw, and
March the son of Meirchawn, and Caradawc Vreichvras, and Gwalchmai the
son of Gwyar, and Edeyrn the son of Nudd, and Rhuvawn Pebyr the son of
Prince Deorthach, and Rhiogan [312c](mab19.htm#xref_312c) the son of the
King of Ireland, and Gwenwynwyn the son of Nav, Howel the son of Emyr
Llydaw, Gwilym the son of Rhwyf Freinc, and Daned the son of Ath, and
Goreu Custennin, and Mabon the son of Modron, and Peredur Paladyr Hir,
and Hyveidd Unllenn, and Twrch the son of Perif, and Nerth the son of
Kadarn, and Gobrwy the son of Echel Vorddwyttwll, Gwair the son of
Gwestyl, and Gadwy the son of Geraint, Trystan the son of
Tallwch [312e](mab19.htm#xref_312e), Moryen [312f](mab19.htm#xref_312f)
Manawc, Granwen the son of Llyr, and Llacheu the son of Arthur<span
id="xref_312g">312g</span>, and Llawvrodedd Varvawc, and Kadwr Earl of
Cornwall, Morvran the son of Tegid, and Rhyawd the son of Morgant<span
id="xref_312h">312h</span>, and Dyvyr the son of Alun Dyved, Gwrhyr

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gwalstawd
Ieithoedd, Adaon the son of Taliesin, Llary the son of Kasnar Wledig,
and Fflewddur Fflam, and Greidawl Galldovydd, Gilbert the son of
Kadgyffro [313a](mab19.htm#xref_313a), Menw the son of Teirgwaedd,
Gwrthmwl Wledig [313b](mab19.htm#xref_313b), Cawrdav the son of Caradawc
Vreichvras, Gildas the son of Kaw, Kadyriaith the son of Saidi, and many
of the men of Norway and Denmark, and many of the men of Greece, and a
crowd of the men of the host came to that council.

"Iddawc," said Rhonabwy, "who was the auburn haired man to whom they
came just now?" "Rhun the son of Maelgwn Gwynedd, a man whose
prerogative it is, that he may join in counsel with all." "And wherefore
did they admit into counsel with men of such dignity as are yonder a
stripling so young as Kadyriaith the son of Saidi?" "Because there is
not throughout Britain a man better skilled in counsel than he."

Thereupon, behold, bards came and recited verses before Arthur, and no
man understood those verses but Kadyriaith only, save that they were in
Arthur's praise.

And lo, there came four-and-twenty asses with their burdens of gold and
of silver, and a tired way-worn man with each of them, bringing tribute
to Arthur from the Islands of Greece. Then Kadyriaith the son of Saidi
besought that a truce might be granted to Osla Gyllellvawr for the space
of a fortnight and a month, and that the asses and the burdens they
carried might be given to the bards, to be to them as the reward for
their stay and that their verse might be recompensed during the time of
the truce. And thus it was settled.

"Rhonabwy," said Iddawc, "would it not be wrong to forbid a youth who
can give counsel so liberal as this from coming to the councils of his
Lord?"

Then Kai arose, and he said, "Whosoever will follow Arthur, let him be
with him to-night in Cornwall, and whosoever will not, let him be
opposed to Arthur even during the truce." And through the greatness of
the tumult that ensued, Rhonabwy awoke. And when he awoke he was upon
the yellow calf-skin, having slept three nights and three days.

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

And this tale is called the Dream of Rhonabwy. And this is the reason
that no one knows the dream without a book, neither bard nor gifted
seer; because of the various colours that were upon the horses, and the
many wondrous colours of the arms and of the panoply, and of the
precious scarfs, and of the virtue-bearing stones.

<span id="img_31400"></span> ![](img/31400.jpg)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes to the Dream of Rhonabwy](mab19)
