[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](mab32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B001W0Z8PY/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Mabinogion*, tr. by Lady Charlotte Guest, \[1877\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_495">p. 495</span>

<span id="img_49500"></span> ![](img/49500.jpg)

### NOTES TO TALIESIN.

<span id="xref_471a">471a</span> TALIESIN.--*Page*
[471](mab32.htm#page_471).

TALIESIN, literally, the "Radiant Brow," was a Welsh Bard of the sixth
century. His name, regarded by his countrymen with the reverence due to
the "Prince of Song," is known to the Saxon chiefly through the brief
but spirited invocation of Gray.

The text records the fiction of which Taliesin is the hero. Of his real
history little is known, excepting what may be gleaned from his works,
and from the following notices given in the volume of Iolo MSS. recently
published by the Welsh MSS. Society. The first of these latter is taken
from Anthony Powel of Llwydarth's MS.

"Taliesin, Chief of the Bards, the son of Saint Henwg of Caerlleon upon
Usk, was invited to the court of Urien Rheged, at Aberllychwr. He, with
Elffin, the son of Urien, being once fishing at sea in a skin coracle,
an Irish pirate ship seized him and his coracle, and bore him away
towards Ireland; but while the pirates were at the height of

<span id="page_496">p. 496</span>

their drunken mirth, Taliesin pushed his coracle to the sea, and got
into it himself, with a shield in his hand which he found in the ship,
and with which he rowed the coracle until it verged the land; but, the
waves breaking then in wild foam, he lost his hold on the shield, so
that he had no alternative but to be driven at the mercy of the sea, in
which state he continued for a short time, when the coracle stuck to the
point of a pole in the weir of Gwyddno, Lord of Ceredigion, in Aberdyvi;
and in that position he was found, at the ebb, by Gwyddno's fishermen,
by whom he was interrogated; and when it was ascertained that he was a
bard, and the tutor of Elffin, the son of Urien Rheged, the son of
Cynvarch:--'I, too, have a son named Elffin,' said Gwyddno, 'be thou a
bard and teacher to him, also, and I will give thee lands in free
tenure.' The terms were accepted, and for several successive years he
spent his time between the courts of Urien Rheged and Gwyddno, called
Gwyddno Garanhir, Lord of the Lowland Cantred; but after the territory
of Gwyddno had become overwhelmed by the sea, Taliesin was invited by
the Emperor Arthur to his court at Caerlleon upon Usk, where he became
highly celebrated for poetic genius and useful, meritorious sciences.
After Arthur's death he retired to the estate given to him by Gwyddno,
taking Elffin, the son of that prince, under his protection. It was from
this account that Thomas, the son of Einion Offeiriad, descended from
Gruffydd Gwyr, formed his romance of Taliesin, the son of
Cariadwen--Elffin, the son of Goddnou--Rhun, the son of Maelgwn Gwynedd,
and the operations of the Cauldron of Ceridwen."

Next follows the Pedigree of Taliesin, Chief of the Bards, from Thomas
Hopkin of Coychurch's MS.:--

"Taliesin, Chief of the Bards of the West, the son of Saint Henwg, of
Caerlleon upon Usk, the son of Fflwch, the son of Cynin, the son of
Cynvarch, the son of Saint Clydawc, of Ewyas, the son of Gwynnar, the
son of Caid, the son of Cadren, the son of Cynan, the son of Cyllin, the
son of Caradog, the son of Bran, the Son of Llyr Llediaith, King
Paramount of all the Kings of Britain, and King, in lineal descent, of
the country between the rivers Wye and Towy. Taliesin became Chief Bard
of the West, from having been appointed to preside over the chair of the
Round Table, at Caerlleon upon Usk."

A manuscript once in the Havod Uchtryd collection gives the following
particulars:--

"Taliesin, Chief of the Bards of the West, the son of Henwg the Bard, of
the College of Saint Cadocus, the son of Fflwch Lawdrwm,

<span id="page_497">p. 497</span>

of Caerlleon upon Usk, in Glamorgan, the son of Cynvar, the son of Saint
Clydog, the son of Gwynnar, the son of Cadrain, the son of Cynan, the
son of Caradog, the son of Bran the Blessed, the son of Llyr Llediaith.

Taliesin, Chief of the Bards, erected the church of Llanhenwg, at
Caerlleon upon Usk, which he dedicated to the memory of his father,
called Saint Henwg, who went to Rome on a mission to Constantine the
Blessed, requesting that he would send Saints Germanus and Lupus to
Britain, to strengthen the faith and renew baptism there.

Taliesin, the son of Henwg, was taken by the wild Irish, who unjustly
occupied Gower; but while on board ship, on his way to Ireland, he saw a
skin coracle, quite empty, on the surface of the sea, and it came
closely to the side of the ship; whereupon Taliesin, taking a
skin-covered spar in his hand, leaped into it, and rowed towards land,
until he stuck on a pole in the weir of Gwyddno Garanhir; when a young
chieftain, named Elphin, seeing him so entangled, delivered him from his
peril. This Elphin was taken for the son of Gwyddno, although in reality
he was the son of Elivri, his daughter, but by whom was then quite
unknown; it was, however, afterwards discovered that Urien Rheged, King
of Gower and Aberllychwr, was his father, who introduced him to the
court of Arthur, at Caerlleon upon Usk, where his feats, learning, and
endowments were found to be so superior that he was created a
golden-tongued Knight of the Round Table. After the death of Arthur,
Taliesin became Chief Bard to Urien Rheged, at Aberllychwr in Rheged."

Another extract, given in the above volume, is from a manuscript by
Llywelyn Sion, of Llangewydd:--

"Talhaiarn, the father of Tangwn, presided in the chair of Urien Rheged,
at Caer-Gwyroswydd, after the expulsion of the Irish from Gower,
Carnwyllion, Cantrev-Bychan, and the Cantred of Iscennen. The said chair
was established at Caer-Gwyroswydd, or Ystum Llwynarth, where Urien
Rheged was accustomed to hold his national and royal court,

After the death of Talhaiarn, Taliesin, Chief of the Bards, presided in
three chairs, namely: the chair of Caerlleon upon Usk, the chair of
Rheged, at Bangor Teivy, under the patronage of Cedig ab Ceredig, ab
Cuneddav Wledig; but he afterwards was invited to the territory of
Gwyddnyw, the son of Gwydion, in Arllechwedd, Arvon, where he had lands
conferred on him, and where he resided until the

<span id="page_498">p. 498</span>

time of Maelgwn Gwynedd, when he was dispossessed of that property, for
which he pronounced his curse on Maelgwn, and all his possessions;
whereupon the Vad Velen came to Rhos, and whoever witnessed it became
doomed to certain death. Maelgwn saw the Vad Velen through the keyhole,
in Rhos church, and died in consequence. Taliesin, in his old age,
returned to Caer-Gwyroswydd, to Riwallon, the son of Urien; after which
he visited Cedig, the son of Ceredig, the son of Cunnedav Wledig, where
he died, and was buried with high honours, such as should always be
shown to a man who ranked among the principal wise men of the Cymric
nation; and Taliesin, Chief of the Bards, was the highest of the most
exalted class, either in literature, wisdom, the science of vocal song,
or any other attainment, whether sacred or profane. Thus terminates the
information respecting the chief bards of the chair of Caerlleon upon
Usk, called now the chair of Glamorgan."

 

It is probable that Taliesin was educated, or completed his education,
at the school of the celebrated Cattwg, at Llanveithin, in Glamorgan. In
after life he became the bard of Urien Rheged, to whom and to his son
Owain, his principal poems are addressed. In the opinion of the most
judicious critics these poems are undoubtedly genuine. They certainly
contain passages of exquisite beauty, and are far superior to many of
the other compositions attributed to him, of which some rest on very
questionable authority, and some are evidently Middle Age productions.
Indeed, the last of the poems translated in the text bears in some MSS.
the name of Ionas Athraw o Fynyw.

The name of Taliesin is thus commemorated in the Triads:--

"The three Baptismal Bards of the Isle of Britain:--Merddin Emrys,
Taliesin, Chief of Bards, and Merddin, son of Madoc Morvryn."--Tr. 125.

This Triad is more fully explained in an extract from MS. Triads of the
Round Table, given in the Iolo MSS., p. 468.

 

"The Nine Impulsive Stocks of the Baptismal Bards of Britain.--The three
primitive baptismal bards of the Cambro-Britons: Madog, the son of
Morvryn, of Caerlleon upon Usk; Taliesin, the son of Saint Henwg, of
Caerlleon upon Usk; and Merddin Emrys, of Maesaleg, in Glywysyg; after
whom came Saint Talhaiarn, the father of Tangwyn, Merddin, the son of
Madog Morvryn, and Meugant Hên, of Caerlleon upon Usk; who were
succeeded by Balchnoe, the bard of Teilo, at Llandaff; Saint Cattwg; and
Cynddylan, the bard. These nine were called the Impulsive Stocks

<span id="page_499">p. 499</span>

of the baptismal bards of Britain; Taliesin being their chair-president;
for which reason he was designated Taliesin, Chief Bard of the West.
They are likewise called the nine superinstitutionists of the baptismal
chair; and no institution is deemed permanent unless renewed
triennially, till the end of thrice three, or nine years. The
institution was also called the Chair of the Round Table, under the
superior privileges of which Gildas, the prophet, and Saint Cattwg the
Wise, of Lancarvan, were bards; and also Llywarch Hên, the son of Elidr
Lydanwyn, Ystudvach, the bard, and Ystyphan, the bard of Teilo."

 

There are evidently in the foregoing notices some authentic historical
facts, as well as legendary traditions of the age of chivalry, which it
would require an able critic to separate from each other.

Tradition has handed down a Cairn near Aberystwyth as the grave of
Taliesin, the locality of which agrees with the foregoing account.

At one of the meetings of the Cambrian Archæological Association this
Cairn was visited. It contains a Cistvaen, eight feet long by two feet
six wide, and about three feet deep, composed of rude slabs of stone.
One of the top stones, which lies near it, measures five feet nine by
three feet nine. The Cairn was opened some fifty or sixty years ago, and
the Cistvaen then contained some earth of a different colour to that of
the adjoining soil.

The various poems recited in the Tale of Taliesin appear to have been
composed at different periods, and it is not improbable that the
above-mentioned Thomas ab Einion Offeiriad collected the poems
attributed to Taliesin, which were in existence before his time, and
added others to form the Mabinogi, which from expressions in page
[474](mab32.htm#page_474), and the very numerous transformations stated
in the poetry, but not given in the prose, must have been much more
complete than in its present state.

That the story of Taliesin was current in the Middle Ages is well known.
If proof were wanting the lines of Llywarch Prydydd Moch, in allusion to
the liberation of Elphin, might be adduced. They occur in an ode to
Llywelyn ap, Iorwerth, composed probably not later than 1220.

 

"I will address my Lord with the greatly greeting muse, with the dowry
of Keridwen, the Ruler of Bardism, in the manner of Taliesin, when he
liberated Elphin, when he overshaded the Bardic mystery with the banners
of the Bards."--Davies's Myth. of the Druids.

<span id="page_500">p. 500</span>

From several poems being, addressed to Hopkin ap Thomas ab Einiawn, by
Davydd y Coed, Iorwerth Llwyd, and others who flourished about the years
1300 to 1350, it may be inferred that Hopkin's father, the above Thomas
ab Einiawn, was contemporary with Llywarch Prydydd y Koch, and therefore
not the author but merely the compiler of the already well-known story
of Caridwen, Taliesin, and Elphin.

No perfect copy of the Mabinogi of Taliesin being accessible, it has
been necessary to print it in the present series from two fragments. The
former of the two is contained in a MS. in the Library of the Welsh
School, in London. It is written in a modern round hand and bears the
title "Y Prif-feirdd Cymreig, sef Canau &c. a gasglwyd ganwyf fi,
William Morris o Gaergybi ym Môn, 1758." The MS. is of quarto size.

The second fragment is from a MS. in the library of the late Iolo
Morganwg, and was kindly communicated by his son, the late Mr. Taliesin
Williams (Ab Iolo).

It should be mentioned that the Mabinogi of Taliesin has already been
published, although not in so complete a form as the present version,
with a translation, by the late Dr. Owen Paghe, in the fifth volume of
the Cambrian Quarterly; and, with two exceptions (the poems beginning
"Discover thou what is," and "I adore the Supreme, Lord of all
animation," pp. [485](mab32.htm#page_485), [487](mab32.htm#page_487)),
the translations of the poems now published are extracted from that
work, the necessary alterations being made where the text differed
materially. The first portion of it is also to be found (untranslated)
in the Myvyrian Archaiology, vol. I. page 17, and part of it is inserted
in Jones's Welsh Bards.

The Transmigrations of Taliesin will remind the general reader of the
adventures of the second Royal Calender in the Arabian Nights.

 

<span id="xref_471b">471b</span> CARIDWEN.--*Page*
[471](mab32.htm#page_471).

CARIDWEN is generally considered to be the Goddess of Nature of Welsh
mythology. The principal circumstances of her fabulous history are those
detailed in the Mabinogi of Taliesin. Upon them are founded most of the
allusions to her contained in the poems of the bards, with whom the
cauldron of Caridwen, of Inspiration, or the Awen, is a subject of
frequent reference. As regards her singular family we have but little
information and few details. Several notices, however, occur in Welsh
writings of her fair

<span id="page_501">p. 501</span>

daughter Creirwy. Of these it may be sufficient to instance the Triad
which celebrates her with Arianrod and Gwenn, verch Cywryd ab Crydon, as
one of the three beauteous ladies of the island. <span
id="fr_215"></span>[1](#fn_214) One of the two Triads extant on the
subject of Morvran has been already cited. (See [p.
273](mab17.htm#page_273).) It alludes to the extreme ugliness assigned
him in the text, to which, nevertheless, he was indebted for the
preservation of his life in the battle of Camlan; the other ranks him
with Gilbert mab Cadgyffro and Gwgan Gleddyvrudd, as one of the three
stayers of slaughter. <span id="fr_216"></span>[2](#fn_215) No further
particulars of him are preserved.

 

<span id="xref_472a">472a</span> GWYDDNO GARANHIR.--*Page*
[472](mab32.htm#page_472).

GWYDDNO GARANHIR was Sovereign of Cantref y Gwaelod, a territory
bordering on the sea, and protected from its ravages by a high
embankment. One evening there was revelry at the Court, and
Seithenin, <span id="fr_217"></span>[3](#fn_216) the son of Seithyn
Saidi, King of Dyved, upon whom it devolved to look after the
embankment, <span id="fr_218"></span>[4](#fn_217) and see that all was
safe, became inebriated and neglected his charge. The consequence was
that the sea broke in through the bank in the course of the night.
Gwyddno and his Court escaped with difficulty from the impending ruin,
and the Cantrev y Gwaelod was submerged and irretrievably lost. By this
calamity sixteen fortified cities, the largest and finest that were in
Wales, excepting only Caerlleon upon Usk, were entirely destroyed, and
Cardigan Bay occupies the spot, where the fertile plains of the Cantrev
had been the habitation and support of a flourishing population. Such as
escaped the inundation fled to Ardudwy, and the country of Arvon, and
the mountains of Eryri (Snowdon), and other places not previously
inhabited. By none was this misfortune more severely felt than by
Gwyddno Garanhir, to whom the reverse of circumstances it occasioned was
so great that, from being an opulent monarch, he was all at once reduced
to

<span id="page_502">p. 502</span>

the necessity of maintaining himself and his only son, the unfortunate
Elphin, by the produce of the fishing weir mentioned in the text.

This disastrous event is commemorated in a proverb still repeated in the
Principality.--

"The sigh of Gwyddno Garanhir  
When the wave rolled over his land."

There is also preserved in the Myvyrian Archaiology (I. 165), a short
poem upon the subject attributed to Gwyddno Garanhir, in which there are
some exceedingly poetic and striking passages. The bereft monarch calls
upon the author of his distress to view the calamitous effects of his
intemperance, pronounces maledictions upon his head, and describes the
outcry of the perishing inhabitants of that unhappy region. The piece
bears a strong resemblance to some of the Works of Llywarch Hên, and is
probably as old as the sixth century.

"Stand forth Seithenin and behold the dwelling of heroes,--the plain of
Gwyddno the ocean covers!  
Accursed be the sea guard, who after his carousal let loose the
destroying fountain of the raging deep.  
Accursed be the watcher, who after his drunken revelry, loosed the
fountain of the desolating sea.  
A cry from the sea arises above the ramparts; even to heaven does it
ascend,--after the fierce excess comes the long cessation!  
A cry from the sea ascends above the ramparts; even to heaven does the
supplication come!-after the excess there ensues restraint!  
A cry from the sea awakens me this night!-  
A cry from the sea arises above the winds!  
A cry from the sea impels me from my place of rest this night  
After excess comes the far extending death!"

Another composition, attributed to him, is to be found in the same
valuable collection. It is in the colloquial form, between himself and
the king of Faerie, Gwyn ap Nudd.

The magic basket of Gwyddno has a place amongst the Thirteen Precious
Things of Britain.--See page [285](mab17.htm#page_285).

<span id="page_503">p. 503</span>

<span id="xref_476a">476a</span> MAELGWN GWYNEDD.--*Page*
[476](mab32.htm#page_476).

This king succeeded his father Caswallon Lawhir in the sovereignty of
Gwynedd, about the year 517. He is the subject of a most violent
invective by Gildas, who accuses him of being a most cruel and
profligate character; which is rather confirmed by its being recorded
that he was rebuked by St. Padarn, for certain injuries committed by him
in Ceredigion; and that he oppressed Tydecho, one of the Armorican
Saints, who had settled in his dominion; but in consequence of some
miracles said to have been performed by that Saint, be was compelled to
make ample amends. He afterwards founded a College at Caergybi, and a
Priory at Penmon, and also endowed Bangor, and erected it into a
Bishopric. His reign was more powerful than most of those we read of in
those unsettled ages; about the year 546 he was elected to the nominal
sovereignty of the Britons, and, according to the Brut, he added six
*islands*, Ireland, Iceland, Gothland, Orkney, Llychlyn (Norway), and
Denmark to the British possessions. He died of the Vad Velen, or Yellow
Pestilence, usually called the Yellow Plague of Rhos, which was said to
have been caused by the number of unburied bodies of the slain that
remained on that spot, and whoever went within the reach of the effluvia
fell dead immediately.

To avoid the effects of this pestilence it is said that Maelgwn retired
from his castle of Dyganwy, to the church of Llaurhos, where he hoped to
remain, shut up in the sanctuary, safe from all danger; but being
impelled by curiosity, he looked out through the keyhole of the door,
and thereby caught the infection, thus fulfilling the prediction uttered
by Taliesin,--

"A most strange creature will come,  
From the sea marsh of Rhianedd,  
As a punishment of iniquity,  
On Maelgwn Gwynedd;  
His hair and his teeth,  
And his eyes being as gold;  
And this will bring destruction  
On Maelgwn Gwynedd."

A traditionary remembrance of this circumstance is preserved in the
adage "Hun Maelgwn Gwynedd yn Eglwys Llanrhos," or as it is given in the
"Annales Cambriæ," published by the Record Commission, "Hir hun Maelgwn
en llis Ros," The long sleep of Maelgwn in the court of Rhos.

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

This plague lasted from the year 557 to 562, and its ravages were
fearful in the extreme. A Triad records it as one of the three direful
maladies, and it is even employed as an image of horror in the
compositions of the Bards.

 

<span id="xref_477a">477a</span> HEININ VARDD.--*Page*
[477](mab32.htm#page_477).

IT would appear that Heinin was Bard to the College of Llanveithin, at
Llancarvan, in Glamorganshire, and that he flourished between A.D. 520
and 560. In the "Chwedlau'r Doethion," or "Sayings of Wise Men,"
preserved in a Welsh MS. called "Llyfr Tre Brynn," and published in the
collection of Iolo MSS. by the Welsh MSS. Society, the following saying
is attributed to him.--

Hast thou heard the saying of Heinin,  
The Bard of the college of Llanveithin? <span
id="fr_219"></span>[1](#fn_218)  
The brave is never cruel!"

 

<span id="img_50400"></span> ![](img/50400.jpg)

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_  
WYMAN AND SONS, PRINTERS, GREAT QUEEN STREET, LONDON, W.C.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_214"></span>[501:1](mab33.htm#fr_215) Triad 107.

<span id="fn_215"></span>[501:2](mab33.htm#fr_216) Triad xxix.

<span id="fn_216"></span>[501:3](mab33.htm#fr_217) Seithinyn the
Drunkard's mischance in letting the sea overflow the Cantrev y Gwaelod,
is related in Triad xli.

<span id="fn_217"></span>[501:4](mab33.htm#fr_218) Traces of three
ancient stone embankments are said to be still visible in the district
where this inundation took place. They are called Sarn Cynvelyn, Sarn y
Bwch, and Sarn Padrig. "The latter is particularly conspicuous, being
left dry at low water to the extent of about nine miles, and the sailors
of the neighbouring ports describe its whole length to be twenty-one
miles, beginning near Harlech, and running in a south-west direction."
(Cambro-Briton, 1. 362.) The Hanes Cymru contains some interesting
remarks on this subject.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[504:1](mab33.htm#fr_219) Qu. ? "Bangor"--Iolo
Morganwg.
