[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af04) [Next](af06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## BEROSSUS: FROM JOSEPHUS, &c.<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### OF ABRAHAM.

   A<span class="small">FTER</span> the deluge, in the tenth generation,
was a certain man among the Chaldæans renowned for his justice and great
exploits, and for his skill in the celestial sciences.—*Euseb. Præp.
Evan.* lib. 9.

### OF NABONASAR.

   From the reign of Nabonasar only are the Chaldæans (from whom the
Greek mathematicians copy) accurately acquainted with the heavenly
motions: for Nabonasar collected all the mementos of the kings prior to
himself, and destroyed them, that the enumeration of the Chaldæan kings
might commence with him.—*Syncel. Chron.* 207.

### OF THE DESTRUCTION OF THE JEWISH TEMPLE.

   He (Nabopollasar) sent his son Nabuchodonosor with a great army
against Egypt, and against Judea, upon his being informed that they had
revolted from him; and by that means he subdued them all, and set fire
to the temple that was at Jerusalem; and removed our people entirely out
of their own country, and transferred them to Babylon, and our city
remained in a state of desolation during the interval of seventy years,
until the days of Cyrus king of Persia. (He then says, that) this
Babylonian king conquered Egypt, and Syria, and Phœnicia, and Arabia,
and exceeded in his exploits all that had reigned before him in Babylon
and Chaldæa.—*Joseph. contr. Appion.* lib. 1. c. 19.

### OF NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

   When Nabopollasar his (Nabuchodnosor's) father, heard that the
governor, whom he had set over Egypt, and the provinces of Cœlesyria and
Phœnicia, had revolted, he was determined to punish his delinquencies,
and for that purpose entrusted part of his army to his son
Nabuchodonosor, who was then of mature age,<span
id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2) and sent him forth against the rebel: and
Nabuchodonosor engaged and overcame him, and reduced the country again
under his dominion. And it came to pass that his father, Nabopollasar,
was seised with a disorder which proved fatal, and he died in the city
of Babylon, after he had reigned nine and twenty years.

   Nabuchodonosor, as soon as he had received intelligence of his
father's death, set in order the affairs of Egypt and the other
countries, and committed to some of his faithful officers the captives
he had taken from the Jews, and Phœnicians, and Syrians, and the nations
belonging to Egypt, that they might conduct them with that part of the
forces which had heavy armour, together with the rest of his baggage, to
Babylonia: in the mean time with a few attendants he hastily crossed the
desert to Babylon. When he arrived there he found that his affairs had
been faithfully conducted by the Chaldæans, and that the principal
person among them had preserved the kingdom for him: and he acordingly
obtained possession of all his father's dominions. And he distributed
the captives in colonies in the most proper places of Babylonia: and
adorned the temple of Belus, and the other temples, in a sumptuous and
pious manner, out of the spoils which he had taken in this war. He also
rebuilt the old city, and added another to it on the outside, and so far
completed Babylon, that none, who might besiege it afterwards, should
have it in their power to divert the river, so as to facilitate an
entrance into it: and he effected this by building three walls about the
inner city, and three about the outer. Some of these walls he built of
burnt brick and bitumen, and some of brick only. When he had thus
admirably fortified the city, and had magnificently adorned the gates,
he added also a new palace to those in which his forefathers had dwelt,
adjoining them, but exceeding them in height and splendor. Any attempt
to describe it would be tedious: yet notwithstanding its prodigious size
and magnificence it was finished within fifteen days. In this palace he
erected very high walks, supported by stone pillars; and by planting
what was called a pensile paradise, and replenishing it with all sorts
of trees, he rendered the prospect an exact resemblance of a mountainous
country. This he did to gratify his queen, because she had been brought
up in Media, and was fond of a mountainous situation.—*Joseph. contr.
Appion.* lib. 1. c. 19.—*Syncel. Chron.* 220.—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib.
9.

### OF THE CHALDÆAN KINGS AFTER NEBUCHADNEZZAR.

   Nabuchodonosor, whilst he was engaged in building the above-mentioned
wall, fell sick, and died after he had reigned forty-three years;
whereupon his son Evilmerodachus succeeded him in his kingdom. His
government however was conducted in an illegal and improper manner, and
he fell a victim to a conspiracy which was formed against his life by
Neriglissoorus, his sister's husband, after he had reigned about two
years.

   Upon his death Neriglissoorus, the chief of the conspirators,
obtained possession of the kingdom, and reigned four years.

   He was succeeded by his son Laborosoarchodus who was but a child,
reigned nine months; for his misconduct he was seized by conspirators,
and put to death by torture.

   After his death, the conspirators assembled, and by common consent
placed the crown upon the head of Nabonnedus, a man of Babylon, and one
of the leaders of the insurrection. It was in his reign that the walls
of the city of Babylon which defend the banks of the river were
curiously built with burnt brick and bitumen.

   In the seventeenth year of the reign of Nabonnedus, Cyrus came out of
Persia with a great army, and having conquered all the rest of Asia,
advanced hastily into the country of Babylonia. As soon as Nabonnedus
perceived he was advancing to attack him, he assembled his forces and
opposed him, but was defeated, and fled with a few of his adherents, and
was shut up in the city of Borsippus. Upon this Cyrus took Babylon, and
gave orders that the outer walls should be demolished, because the city
appeared of such strength as to render a siege almost impracticable.
From thence he marched to Borsippus, to besiege Nabonnedus: but
Nabonnedus delivered himself into his hands without holding out the
place: he was therefore kindly treated by Cyrus, who provided him with
an establishment in Carmania, but sent him out of Babylonia. Nabonnedus
accordingly spent the remainder of his life in that country, where he
died.—*Joseph. contr. App.* lib. 1. c. 20.—*Euseb. Præp. Evan.* lib. 9.

### OF THE FEAST OF SACEA.

   Berossus, in the first book of his Babylonian history, says; That in
the eleventh month, called Loos, is celebrated in Babylon the feast of
Sacea for five days, in which it is the custom that the masters should
obey their domestics, one of whom is led round the house, clothed in a
royal garment, and him they call Zoganes.—*Athenæus*, lib. 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af06)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1) The various readings to some of the
following extracts would, if they were all given, exceed the text in
size. I have selected those which appear to be most material.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2) Lat.—Fab.—but a youth—Qy.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
