[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af09) [Next](af11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## ORPHIC FRAGMENTS.

### FROM ORPHEUS.<span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#note_1)

Zeus is the first. Zeus the thunderer, is the last.  
Zeus is the head. Zeus is the middle, and by Zeus all things were
fabricated.  
Zeus is male, Immortal Zeus is female.  
Zeus is the foundation of the earth and of the starry heaven.  
Zeus is the breath of all things. Zeus is the rushing of indefatigable
fire.  
Zeus is the root of the sea: He is the Sun and Moon.  
Zeus is the king; He is the author of universal life;  
One Power, one Dæmon, the mighty prince of all things:  
One kingly frame, in which this universe revolves,  
Fire and water, earth and ether, night and day,  
And Metis (Counsel) the primeval father, and all-delightful Eros
(Love).  
All these things are United in the vast body of Zeus.  
Would you behold his head and his fair face,  
It is the resplendent heaven, round which his golden locks  
Of glittering stars are beautifully exalted in the air.  
On each side are the two golden taurine horns,  
The risings and settings, the tracks of the celestial gods;  
His eyes the sun and the Opposing moon;  
His unfallacious Mind the royal incorruptible Ether.  

   *Eus. Pr. Ev. III.—Proc. Tim.—Aristot. de Mund.*

### FROM ORPHEUS.

First I sung the obscurity of ancient Chaos,  
How the Elements were ordered, and the Heaven reduced to bound;  
And the generation of the wide-bosomed Earth, and the depth of the
Sea,  
And Eros (Love) the most ancient, self-perfecting, and of manifold
design;  
How he generated all things, and parted them from one another.  
And I have sung of Cronus so miserably undone, and how the kingdom  
Of the blessed Immortals descended to the thunder-loving Zeus.  

   *Arg*. 419.

### FROM ORPHEUS.

First (I have sung) the vast necessity of ancient Chaos,  
And Cronus, who in the boundless tracts brought forth  
The Ether, and the splendid and glorious Eros of a two-fold nature,  
The illustrious father of night, existing from eternity.  
Whom men call Phanes, for he first appeared.  
I have sung the birth of powerful Brimo (Hecate), and the unhallowed
deeds  
Of the earth-born (giants), who showered down from heaven  
Their blood, the lamentable seed of generation, from whene sprung  
The race of mortals, who inhabit the boundless earth for ever.  

   *Arg.* v. 12.

### FROM HESIOD.

Chaos was generated first, and then  
The wide-bosomed Earth, the ever stable seat of all  
The Immortals that inhabit the snowy peaks of Olympus,  
And the dark aerial Tartarus in the depths of the permeable Earth,  
And Eros, the fairest of the immortal Gods,  
That relaxes the strength of all, both gods and men,  
And subjugates the mind and the sage will in their breasts.  
From Chaos were generated Erebus and black Night,  
And from Night again were generated Ether and Day,  
Whom she brought forth, having conceived from the embrace of Erebus.  
And Earth first produced the starry Heaven equal to herself,  
That it might inclose all things around herself.  

   *Theog*. v. 116.

### FROM ARISTOPHANES.

First was Chaos and Night, and black Erebus and vast Tartarus;  
And there was neither Earth, nor Air, nor Heaven: but in the boundless
bosoms of Erebus.  
Night, with her black wings, first produced an aerial egg,  
From which, at the completed time, sprang forth the lovely Eros,  
Glittering with golden wings upon his back, like the swift whirlwinds.  
But embracing the dark-winged Chaos in the vast Tartarus.  
He begot our race (the birds),<span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#note_2) and
first brought us to light.  
The race of the Immortals was not, till Eros mingled all things
together;  
But when the elements were mixed one with another, Heaven was produced,
and Ocean,  
And Earth, and the imperishable race of all the blessed Gods.  

   *Aristop. Aves.* 698.—*Suid. v. Chaos.*

### FROM ORPHEUS.

Chaos and a vast yawning chasm on every side.

   *Tay.*

"Maia, supreme of Gods, Immortal Night, tell me this,  
How shall I constitute the magnanimous first principles of the
Immortals?"  
"Surround all things with ineffable Ether, and place them  
In the mid Heaven."  

   *Proc. Tim.* 63.

### ORPHIC HYMN TO PROTOGONUS.

I invoke Protogonus, of a double nature, great, wandering through the
ether,  
Egg-born, rejoicing in thy golden wings,  
Having the countenance of a bull, the procreator of the blessed gods and
mortal men,  
The renowned Light, the far-celebrated Ericepæus,  
Ineffable, occult, impetuous, all-glittering strength;  
Who scatterest the twilight clouds of darkness from the eyes,  
And roamest throughout the world upon the flight of thy wings,  
Who bringest forth the pure and brilliant light, wherefore I invoke thee
as Phanes,  
As Priapus the king, and as dazzling fountain of splendour.  
Come, then, blessed being, full of wisdom and generation, come in joy  
To thy sacred, ever-varying mystery. Be present with the Priests of thy
Orgies.  

### FROM ORPHEUS.<span id="fr_3"></span>[3](#note_3)

   What Orpheus has asserted upon the subject is as follows: "From the
beginning the Ether was manifested in time," evidently having been
fabricated by God: "and on every side of the Ether was the Chaos; and
gloomy Night enveloped and obscured all things which were under the
Ether." by attributing to Night a priority, he intimates the explanation
to be, that there existed an incomprehensible nature, and a being
supreme above all others, and pre-existing, the demiurgus of all things,
as well of the Ether itself (and of the night)<span
id="fr_4"></span>[4](#note_4) as of all the creation which existed and
was concealed under the Ether. Moreover he says, "Earth was invisible on
account of the darkness: but the Light broke through the Ether, and
illuminated the Earth and all the material of the creation:" signifying
by this Light, which burst forth through the Ether, the before-mentioned
being who was supreme above all things: "and its name," which Orpheus
learnt from the oracle, is Metis, Phanes, Ericepæus," which in the
common Greek language may be translated will (or counsel), light,
life-giver; signifying, when explained, that these three powers of the
three names are the one power and strength of the only God, whom no one
ever beheld, and of whose power no one can have an idea or comprehend
the nature. "By this power all things were produced, as well incorporeal
principles as the sun and moon, and their influences, and all the stars,
and the earth and the sea, and all things that are visible and invisible
in them. And man," says he, "was formed by this God out of the earth,
and endued with a reasonable soul," in like manner as Moses has
revealed.—*J. Malala*, p. 89.—*Ced.—Suidas v. Orpheus.*

### FROM ORPHEUS.

Metis bearing the seed of the Gods, whom the blessed  
Inhabitants of Olympus call Phanes Protogonus.  

   *In Crat.*

And Metis, the first father, and all-delightful Eros.

   *In Tim. II.* 102.

Soft Eros and inauspicious Metis.

   *Ib*. 181.

Metis bearing the generation of the Gods, illustrious Ericepæus.

### FROM ORPHEUS.

   Orpheus has the following theological speculation in allusion to
Phanes. Therefore the first God bears with himself the heads of animals,
many and single, of a bull, of a serpent, and of a fierce lion, and they
sprung from the primeval egg in which the animal is seminally contained.

   *Proc. in Tim.*

### FROM THE ANCIENT THEOLOGISTS.

   The theologist places around him the heads of a ram, a bull, a lion,
and a dragon, and assigns him first both the male and female sex.

Female and father is the mighty god Ericapæus.

   To him also the wings are first given.

   *Proc. in Tim.*

### FROM THE ANCIENT THEOLOGISTS.<span id="fr_5"></span>[5](#note_5)

   They, the theologists, assert that Night and Heaven (Ouranus)
reigned, and before these their most mighty father.

<table data-align="center" data-cellpadding="10">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td>Who distributed the world to Gods and Mortals,<br />
Over which he first reigned, the illustrious Ericepæus,</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

   After whom reigned Night,

Having in her hands the excellent sceptre of Ericepæus,

   After whom Heaven (Ouranus),

Who first reigned over the Gods after his mother Night.

### FROM THE ANCIENT THEOLOGISTS.

   In short, that to the power of the Sun is to be referred the control
and supremacy of all things, is indicated by the theologists, who make
it evident in the mysteries by the following short invocation.

   Oh, all-ruling Sun, Spirit of the world, Power of the world, Light of
the world.—*Macrob. Sat.* lib. i. c. 23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af11)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="note_1"></span>[1](#fr_1) Eusebius and Proclus omit the fifth
and sixth verses between the parentheses. Aristotle places the fourth
before the third.

<span id="note_2"></span>[2](#fr_2) This cosmogony is delivered by the
Birds in the comedy so called, and in this line they claim the priority
of birth before the gods as well as men.

<span id="note_3"></span>[3](#fr_3) I have given this fragment from
Malala, in whose text it appears to be less corrupted. It was originally
preserved by Timotheus, who has evidently endeavoured to explain it upon
Christian principles. His parenthetical explanations have been
considered as part of the Orphic text, and been the cause of its
obscurity. Without tampering with the text, I have endeavoured to
restore it in the translation to its original purity. It is, doubtless,
the same passage from the theogony of Orpheus, commented upon by
Damascius. See infra.

<span id="note_4"></span>[4](#fr_4) Omitted by Ced.

<span id="note_5"></span>[5](#fr_5) This extract from a MS. of Syrian is
is given by Lobeck, Aglaophamus I. 577, and a translation of it with the
Orphic lines from a MS. of Gale, was first given by Mr. Taylor, Class.
Jour. XVII. 163.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
