[Sacred-Texts](../../index) [Classics](../index) [Index](index) [Previous](af10) [Next](af12)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## PYTHAGOREAN FRAGMENTS.

### FROM TIMÆUS LOCRUS.

   Thus says Timæus the Locrian.—The causes of all things are two;
Intellect, of those which are produced according to Reason; and
Necessity, of those which necessarily exist according to the powers of
bodies. Of these the first is of the nature of good, and is called God,
the principle of such things as are most excellent. Those which are
consequent, and concauses rather than causes, may be referred to
Necessity, and they consist of Idea or Form, and Matter, to which may be
added the Sensible (world), which is as it were the offspring of these
two. The first of these is an essence ungenerated, immoveable, and
stable, of the nature of Same, and the intelligible exemplar of things
generated which are in a state of perpetual change: and this is called
Idea or Form, and is to be comprehended only by Mind. But Matter is the
receptacle of Form, the mother and female principle of the generation of
the third essence, for, by receiving the likenesses upon itself, and
being stamped with Form, it perfects all things, partaking of the nature
of generation. And this Matter, he says, is eternal, moveable, and of
its own proper nature, without form or figure, yet susceptible of
receiving every form: it is divisible also about bodies, and is of the
nature of Different. They also call Matter, Place and Situation. These
two, therefore, are contrary principles; Idea or Form is of the nature
of Male and Father; but Matter of the nature of Female and Mother; and
things which are of the third nature are the offspring of the two. Since
then there are three natures, they are comprehended in three different
ways; Idea, which is the object of science, by Intellect; Matter, which
is not properly an object of comprehension, but only of analogy, by a
spurious kind of reasoning; but things compounded of the two are the
objects of sensation, and opinion or appearance. Therefore, before the
heaven was made, there existed in reality Idea, and Matter, and God the
demiurgus of the better nature; and since the nature of Elder
(Continuance) is more worthy than that of Younger (Novelty,) and Order
than of Disorder; God in his goodness seeing that Matter was continually
receiving Form and changing in an omnifarious and disordered manner,
undertook to reduce it to order and put a stop to its indefinite
changes, by circumscribing it with determinate figure: that there might
be corresponding distinctions of bodies, and that it might not be
subject to continual variations of its own accord. Therefore he
fabricated this world out of all the matter, and constituted it the
boundary of essential nature, comprising all things within itself, one,
only-begotten, perfect, with a Soul and Intellect (for an animal so
constituted is superior to one devoid of Soul and Intellect): he gave it
also a spherical body, for such of all other forms is the most perfect.
Since, therefore, it was God's pleasure to render this his production
most perfect, he constituted it a God, generated indeed, but
indestructible by any other cause than by the God who made it, in case
it should be his pleasure to dissolve it.

### FROM PLATO.

   You say that, in my former discourse, I have not sufficiently
explained to you the nature of the First. I purposely spoke
enigmatically, that in case the tablet should have happened with any
accident, either by land or sea, a person, without some previous
knowledge of the subject, might not be able to understand its contents.
This, then is the explanation, About the king of all things, all things
are, and all things are on account of Him, and He is the cause of all
good things. But the second is about things of the second kind, and the
third about things of the third kind. Therefore the human soul, from its
earnest desire to know what these things may be, examines those within
itself which are akin to them, none of which it possesses in sufficient
perfection. Such (imperfection) however is not the case with regard to
the King and those natures of which I spoke,—*Plat. Ep. II.* p. 312.

### FROM PLATO.

   Conjuring the God of all things, the ruler of those which are, and
are about to be, and the sovereign father of the ruler and cause.—*Plat.
Ep. VI.* p. 323.

### FROM AMELIUS.

   Amelius makes the Demiurgus triple, and the three Intellects the
three Kings—Him that *exists*, Him that *possesses*, Him that *beholds*.
And these are different; therefore the First Intellect *exists*
essentially as *that which exists*. But the Second *exists* as the
Intelligible in him, but *possesses* that which is before him, and
partakes altogether of that, wherefore it is the Second. But the Third
*exists* as the Intelligible in the Second as did the Second in the
First, for every Intellect is the same with its conjoined Intelligible,
and it *possesses* that which is in the Second, and *beholds* or regards
that which is the First: for by how much greater the remove, by so much
the less intimate is that which *possesses*. These three Intellects,
therefore, he supposes to be the Demiurgi, the same with the three kings
of Plato, and with the three whom Orpheus celebrates under the names of
Phanes, Ouranus, and Cronus, though, according to him, the Demiurgus is
more particularly Phanes.—*Proc. in Tim. II.* 93.

### FROM ONOMACRITUS.

   Onomacritus, in the Orphics, says, that Fire, and Water, and Earth,
were the first principles of all things.—*Sextus. Hyp. III.* 4.
136.—*Phys. IX.* 5. 6. 620.

### FROM ION.

   This, says Ion, is the beginning of my discourse. All things are
three, and nothing more or less; and the virtue of each one of these
three is a triad consisting of Intellect, Power, and Chance.

### FROM PHILOPONUS.

   Parmenides holds Fire and Earth primary principles: but Ion of Chios,
the tragedian, placed them after Air.—*Philoponus*.

### FROM PLUTARCHUS.

   The moist nature, being the first principle and origin of all things
from the beginning made the three first bodies, Earth, Air, and
Fire.—*Plut. de. Is.*

### FROM OCELLUS.

   There are three boundaries, Generation, Summit, Termination.—I. 4.

### FROM OCELLUS.

   The first triad consists of Beginning, Middle, and End.—*Lyd. de
Mens.* p. 20.

### FROM PLATO.

   Some say that all things consist of those which are in the course of
generation, those generated, and those about to be generated; the first
by nature, the second by art, and the third by chance.—*Plat. de Leg.
X.*

### FROM ARISTOTELES.

   All things are three: for as the Pythagoreans say, the Universe and
all things are bounded by three: for the End, the Middle, and the
Beginning, include the enumeration of every thing, and they fulfil the
number of the triad.—*Aristot. de Cœlo. I.*

### FROM ARISTOTELES.

   The good and contemplative become so through three things; and these
three are Nature, Habit, and Reason.—*Aristot. Polit. VII.*

### FROM DAMASCIUS.

   All things, therefore, are three, but not one; Hyparxis, Power, and
Energy.—*Damas. Quæst.* c. 39.

### COSMOGONY OF THE TYRRHENIANS.

   A certain person among them, well versed in these matters, wrote a
history, in which he says: That God, the demiurgus of all things, for
the sake of giving dignity to his productions, was pleased to employ
twelve thousand years in their creation; and extended these years over
twelve divisions, called houses. In the first thousand years he created
the heaven the earth; in the second he made all this apparent firmament
above us, and called it heaven; in the third, the sea and all the waters
in the earth; in the fourth, the great lights, the sun and the moon,
together with the stars; in the fifth, every soul of birds, and
reptiles, and quadrupeds, in the air, and in the earth, and in the
waters: in the sixth, man. It appears, therefore, that the first six
thousand years were consumed before the formation of man; and during the
other six thousand years the human race will continue, so that the full
time shall be completed even to twelve thousand years.—*Suid. v.
Tyrrhenia.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](af12)
