[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb06)  [Next](olb08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">These are the Laws Established for the Government of the Citadels.</span>

1\. Whenever a citadel is built, the lamp belonging to it must be
lighted at the original lamp in Texland, and that can only be done by
the mother.

2\. Every mother shall appoint her own maidens. She may even choose
those who are mothers in other towns.

3\. The mother of Texland may appoint her own successor, but should she
die without having done so, the election shall take place at a general
assembly of the whole nation.

4\. The mother of Texland may have twenty-one maidens and seven
assistants, so that there may always be seven to attend the lamp day and
night. She may have the same number of maidens who are mothers in other
towns.

5\. If a maiden wishes to marry, she must announce it to the mother, and
immediately resign her office, before her passion shall have polluted
the light.

6\. For the service of the mother and of each of the Burgtmaidens there
shall be appointed twenty-one townsmen—seven civilians of mature years,
seven warriors of mature years, and seven seamen of mature years.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span> <span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

7\. Out of the seven three shall retire every year, and shall not be
replaced by members of their own family nearer than the fourth degree.

8\. Each may have three hundred young townsmen as defenders.

9\. For this service they must study Frya's Tex and the laws. From the
sages they must learn wisdom, from the warriors the art of war, and from
the sea-kings the skill required for distant voyages.

10\. Every year one hundred of the defenders shall return to their
homes, and those that may have been wounded shall remain in the
citadels.

11\. At the election of the defenders no burgher or Grevetman, or other
person of distinction, shall vote, but only the people.

12\. The mother at Texland shall have three times seven active
messengers, and three times twelve speedy horses. In the other citadels
each maiden shall have three messengers and seven horses.

13\. Every citadel shall have fifty agriculturists chosen by the people,
but only those may be chosen who are not strong enough to go to war or
to go to sea.

14\. Every citadel must provide for its own sustenance, and must
maintain its own defences, and look after its share of the general
contributions.

15\. If a man is chosen to fill any office and refuses to serve, he can
never become a burgher, nor have any vote. And if he is already a
burgher, he shall cease to be so.

16\. If any man wishes to consult the mother or a Burgtmaid, he must
apply to the secretary, who will take him to the Burgtmaster. He will
then be examined by a surgeon to see if he is in good health. If he is
passed,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> <span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

he shall lay aside his arms, and seven warriors shall present him to the
mother.

17\. If the affair concerns only one district, he must bring forward not
less than three witnesses; but if it affects the whole of Friesland, he
must have twenty-one additional witnesses, in order to guard against any
deceptions.

18\. Under all circumstances the mother must take care that her
children, that is, Frya's people, shall remain as temperate as possible.
This is her most important duty, and it is the duty of all of us to help
her in performing it.

19\. If she is called upon to decide any judicial question between a
Grevetman and the community, she must incline towards the side of the
community in order to maintain peace, and because it is better that one
man should suffer than many.

20\. If any one comes to the mother for advice, and she is prepared to
give it, she must do it immediately. If she does not know what to
advise, he must remain waiting seven days; and if she then is unable to
advise, he must go away without complaining, for it is better to have no
advice at all than bad advice.

21\. If a mother shall have given bad advice out of illwill, she must be
killed or driven out of the land, deprived of everything.

22\. If her Burgtheeren are accomplices, they are to be treated in a
similar manner.

23\. If her guilt is doubtful or only suspected, it must be considered
and debated, if necessary, for twenty-one weeks. If half the votes are
against her, she must be declared innocent. If two-thirds are against
her, she must wait a whole year. If the votes are then the same, she
must be considered guilty, but may not be put to death.

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

24\. If any of the one-third who have voted for her wish to go away with
her, they may depart with all their live and dead stock, and shall not
be the less considered, since the majority maybe wrong as well as the
minority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Universal Law](olb08.md)
