[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb07)  [Next](olb09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Universal Law.</span>

1\. All free-born, men are equal, wherefore they must all have equal
rights on sea and land, and on all that Wr-alda has given.

2\. Every man may seek the wife of his choice, and every woman may
bestow her hand on him whom she loves.

3\. When a man takes a wife, a house and yard must be given to him, If
there is none, one must be built for him.

4\. If he has taken a wife in another village, and wishes to remain,
they must give him a house there, and likewise the free use of the
common.

5\. To every man must be given a piece of land behind his house. No man
shall have land in front of his house, still less an enclosure, unless
he bas performed some public service. In such a case it may be given,
and the youngest son may inherit it, but after him it returns to the
community.

6\. Every village shall possess a common for the general good, and the
chief of the village shall take care that it is kept in good order, so
that posterity shall find it uninjured.

7\. Every village shall have a market-place. All the rest of the land
shall be for tillage and forest. No one shall fell trees without the
consent of the community, or without the knowledge of the forester; for
the forests are general property, and no man can appropriate them.

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span> <span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

8\. The market charges shall not exceed one-twelfth of the value of the
goods either to natives or strangers. The portion taken for the charges
shall not be sold before the other goods. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5.md)

9\. All the market receipts must be divided yearly into a hundred parts
three days before the Juul-day.

10\. The Grevetman and his council shall take twenty parts; the keeper
of the market ten, and his assistants five; the Volksmoeder one, the
midwife four, the village ten, and the poor and infirm shall have fifty
parts.

11\. There shall be no usurers in the market.

If any should come, it will be the duty of the maidens to make it known
through the whole land, in order that such people may not be chosen for
any office, because they are hard-hearted.

For the sake of money they would betray everybody—the people, the
mother, their nearest relations, and even their own selves.

12\. If any man should attempt to sell diseased cattle or damaged goods
for sound, the market-keeper shall expel him, and the maidens shall
proclaim him through the country.

In early times almost all the Finns lived together in their native land,
which was called Aldland, and is now submerged. They were thus far away,
and we had no wars. When they were driven hitherwards, and appeared as
robbers, then arose the necessity of defending ourselves, and we had
armies, kings, and wars.

For all this there were established regulations, and out of the
regulations came fixed laws.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_5"></span>[33:\*](olb08.htm#fr_5.md) The market dues were paid
in kind.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Here Follow the Laws which were thus Established](olb09.md)
