[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb19)  [Next](olb21.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">What is written hereunder is inscribed on the Walls of Waraburgt.</span>

(See [Plate I.](olb19.htm#img_pl01).md)

What appears at the top is the signs of the Juul—that is, the first
symbol of Wr-alda, also of the origin or beginning from which Time is
derived; this is the Kroder, which must always go round with the Juul.
According to this model Frya formed the set hand which she used to write
her Tex. When Fasts was Eeremoeder she made a running hand out of it.
The Witkoning—that is, the Sea-king Godfried the Old—made separate
numbers for the set hand and for the runic hand. It is therefore not too
much that we celebrate it once a year. We may be eternally thankful to
Wr-alda that he allowed his spirit to exercise such an influence over
our forefathers.

In her time Finda also invented a mode of writing,

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span id="img_pl02"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Plate
2](tn/pl02.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/pl02.jpg.md)  
Plate 2  
</span>

but that was so high-flown and full of flourishes that her descendants
have soon lost the meaning of it.

Afterwards they learned our writing—that is, the Finns, the Thyriers,
and the Krekalanders—but they did not know that it was taken from the
Juul, and must therefore always be written round like the sun.
Furthermore, they wished that their writing should be illegible by other
people, because they always had matters to conceal. In doing this they
acted very unwisely, because their children could only with great
difficulty read the writings of their predecessors, whereas our most
ancient writings are as easy to read as those that were written
yesterday.

Here is a specimen of the set hand and of the running hand, as well as
of the figures, in both.

(See [Plate II.](#img_pl02).md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This stands inscribed upon all Citadels](olb21.md)
