[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb28)  [Next](olb30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">This is about the Geertmen.</span> <span id="fr_38"></span>[\*](#fn_38)

When Hellenia or Min-erva died, the priests pretended to be with us, and
in order to make it appear so, they deified Hellenia. They refused to
have any other mother chosen, saying that they feared there was no one
among her maidens whom they could trust as they had trusted Minerva,
surnamed Nyhellenia.

But we would not recognise Min-erva as a goddess, because she herself
had told us that no one could be perfectly good except the spirit of
Wr-alda. Therefore we chose Geert Pyre's daughter for our mother. When
the priests saw that they could not fry their herrings on our fire (have
everything their own way), they left Athens, and said that we

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

refused to acknowledge Min-erva as a goddess out of envy, because she
had shown so much affection to the natives. Thereupon they gave the
people statues of her, declaring that they might ask of them whatever
they liked, as long as they were obedient to her. By these kinds of
tales the stupid people were estranged from us, and at last they
attacked us; but as we had built our stone city wall with two horns down
to the sea, they could not get at us. Then, to and behold I an Egyptian
high priest, bright of eye, clear of brain, and enlightened of mind,
whose name was Cecrops <span id="fr_39"></span>[\*](#fn_39), came to
give them advice.

When he saw that with his people he could not storm our wall, he sent
messengers to Tyre. Thereupon there arrived three hundred ships full of
wild mountain soldiers, which sailed unexpectedly into our haven while
we were defending the walls. When they had taken our harbour, the wild
soldiers wanted to plunder the village and our ships—one had already
ravished a girl—but Cecrops would not permit it; and the Tyrian sailors,
who still had Frisian blood in their veins, said, If you do that we will
burn our ships, and you shall never see your mountains again. Cecrops,
who had no inclination towards murder or devastation, sent messengers to
Geert, requiring her to give up the citadel, offering her free exit with
all her live and dead property, and her followers the same. The wisest
of the citizens, seeing that they could not hold the citadel, advised
Geert to accept at once, before Cecrops became furious and changed his
mind. Three months afterwards Geert departed with the best of Frya's
sons, and seven times twelve ships. Soon after they had left the harbour
they fell in with at least thirty ships coming from Tyre with women and
children. They were on their way to Athens, but when they heard how
things stood there they went with Geert. The sea-king of

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span> <span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

the Tyrians brought them altogether through the strait which at that
time ran into the Red Sea (now re-established as the Suez Canal) <span
id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_40). At last they landed at the Punjab,
called in our language the Five Rivers, because five rivers flow
together to the sea. Here they settled, and called it Geertmania. The
King of Tyre afterwards, seeing that all his best sailors were gone,
sent all his ships with his wild soldiers to catch them, dead or alive.
When they arrived at the strait, both the sea and the earth trembled.
The land was upheaved so that all the water ran out of the strait, and
the muddy shores were raised up like a rampart. This happened on account
of the virtues of the Geertmen, as every one can plainly understand.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_38"></span>[101:\*](olb29.htm#fr_38) Here follows the
narrative contained in page from 48 to 56.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[103:\*](olb29.htm#fr_39) Sêkrops is Cecrops.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[105:\*](olb29.htm#fr_40) Strête, at present
restored as the Suez Canal. Pangab is the Indus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In the Year One Thousand and Five after Atland was submerged,
this was inscribed on the Eastern Wall of Fryasburgt](olb30)
