[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb26)  [Next](olb28.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">We now come to the History of Jon.</span>

Jon, Jôn, Jhon, Jan, are all the same name, though the pronunciation
varies, as the seamen like to shorten everything to be able to make it
easier to call. Jon—that is, "Given"—was a sea-king, born at Alberga,
who sailed

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span> <span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

from the Flymeer with a fleet of 127 ships fitted out for a long voyage,
and laden with amber, tin, copper, cloth, linen, felt, otter-skins,
beaver and rabbit skins. He would also have taken paper from here, but
when he saw how Kalta <span id="fr_33"></span>[\*](#fn_33.md) had destroyed
the citadel he became so angry that he went off with all his people to
Flyburgt, and out of revenge set fire to it. His admiral and some of his
people saved the lamp and the maidens, but they could not catch Sijrhed
(or Kalta). She climbed up on the furthest battlement, and they thought
she must be killed in the flames; but what happened? While all her
people stood transfixed with horror, she appeared upon her steed more
beautiful than ever, calling to them, "To Kalta!" Then the other Schelda
people poured out towards her. When the seamen saw that, they shouted,
"We are for Min-erva!" from which arose a war in which thousands were
killed.

At this time Rosamond the mother, who had done all in her power by
gentle means to preserve peace, when she saw how bad it was, made short
work of it. Immediately she sent messengers throughout all the districts
to call a general levy, which brought together all the defenders of the
country. The landsmen who were fighting were all caught, but Jon with
his seamen took refuge on board his fleet, taking with him the two
lamps, as well as Minerva and the maidens of both the citadels. Helprik,
the chief, summoned him to appear; but while all the soldiers were on
the other side of the Scheldt, Jon sailed back to the Flymeer, and then
straight to our islands. His fighting men and many of our people took
women and children on board, and when Jon saw that he and his people
would be punished for their misdeeds, he secretly took his departure. He
did well, for all our islanders, and the other Scheldt people who had
been fighting were

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span> <span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

transported to Britain. This step was a mistake, for now came the
beginning of the end. Kalta, who, people said, could go as easily on the
water as on the land, went to the mainland and on to Missellia
(Marseilles). Then came the Gauls out of the Mediterranean Sea with
their ships to Cadiz, and along all our coasts, and fell upon Britain;
but they could not make any good footing there, because the government
was powerful and the exiles were still Frisians. But now came Kalta and
said: You were born free, and for small offences have been sent away,
not for your own improvement, but to get tin by your labour. If you wish
to be free again, and take my advice, and live under my care, come away.
I will provide you with arms, and will watch over you. The news flew
through the land like lightning, and before the carrier's wheel had made
one revolution she was mistress of all the Thyriers in all our southern
states as far as the Seine <span id="fr_34"></span>[\*](#fn_34.md). She
built herself a citadel on the high land to the north, and called it
Kaltasburgh. It still exists under the name of Kêrenak. From this castle
she ruled as a true mother, against their will, not *for* her followers,
but *over* them, who were thenceforth called Kelts <span
id="fr_35"></span>[†](#fn_35.md). The Gauls gradually obtained dominion
over the whole of Britain, partly because they no longer had any
citadel; secondly, because they had there no Burgtmaagden; and thirdly,
because they had no real lamps. From all these causes the people could
not learn anything. They were stupid and foolish, and having allowed the
Gauls to rob them of their arms, they were led about like a bull with a
ring in his nose.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_33"></span>[93:\*](olb27.htm#fr_33.md) Kâlta Min-his,
Minnesdaughter.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[95:\*](olb27.htm#fr_34.md) Sêjene is the Seine.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[95:†](olb27.htm#fr_35.md) Kâltana are the Celts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Now we shall write how it fared with Jon. It is inscribed at
Texland.](olb28.md)
