[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb27)  [Next](olb29.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span> <span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

### Now we shall write how it fared with Jon.

### <span class="smallcaps">It is inscribed at Texland.</span>

Ten years after Jon went away, there arrived three ships in the Flymeer;
the people cried Huzza! (What a blessing!) and from their accounts the
mother had this written.

When Jon reached the Mediterranean Sea, the reports of the Gauls had
preceded him, so that on the nearest Italian coast he was nowhere safe.
Therefore he went with his fleet straight over to Lybia. There the black
men wanted to catch them and eat them. At last they came to Tyre, but
Min-erva said, Keep clear, for here the air has been long poisoned by
the priests. The king was a descendant of Teunis, as we were afterwards
informed; but as the priests wished to have a king, who, according to
their ideas, was of long descent, they deified Teunis, to the vexation
of his followers. After they had passed Tyre, the Tyrians seized one of
the rearmost ships, and as the ship was too far behind us, we could not
take it back again; but Jon swore to be revenged for it. When night
came, Jon bent his course towards the distant Krekalanden. At last they
arrived at a country that looked very barren, but they found a harbour
there. Here, said Min-erva, we need not perhaps have any fear of princes
or priests, as they always look out for rich fat lands. When they
entered the harbour, there was not room for all the ships, and yet most
of the people were too cowardly to go any further. Then Jon, who wished
to get away, went with his spear and banner, calling to the young
people, to know who would volunteer to share his adventures. Min-erva
did the same thing, but she wished to remain there. The greater part
stopped with Min-erva, but the young sailors went with Jon.

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span> <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Jon took the lamp
of Kalta and her maidens with him. Min-erva retained her lamp and her
own maidens.

Between the near and the distant coasts of Italy Jon found some islands,
which he thought desirable. Upon the largest he built a city in the wood
between the mountains. From the smaller islands he made expeditions for
vengeance on the Tyrians, and plundered their ships and their lands.
Therefore these islands were called Insulæ Piratarum, as well as
Johannis Insulæ <span id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_36.md).

When Min-erva had examined the country which is called by the
inhabitants Attica <span id="fr_37"></span>[†](#fn_37.md), she saw that the
people were all goatherds, and that they lived on meat, wild roots,
herbs, and honey. They were clothed in skins, and had their dwellings on
the slopes (*hellinga*) of the hills, wherefore they were called
Hellingers. At first they ran away, but when they found that we did not
attack them, they came back and showed great friendship. Min-erva asked
if we might settle there peaceably. This was agreed to on. the condition
that we should help them to fight against their neighbours, who came
continually to carry away their children and to rob their dwellings.
Then we built a citadel at an hour's distance from the harbour. By the
advice of Min-erva it was called Athens, because, she said, those who
come after us ought to know that we are not here by cunning or violence,
but were received as friends (*âtha*). While we were building the
citadel the principal personages came to see us, and when they saw that
we had no slaves it did not please them, and they gave her to understand
it, as they thought that she was a princess. But Min-erva said, How did
you get your slaves? They answered, We bought some and took others in
war. Min-erva replied, If nobody would buy slaves they would

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span> <span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

not steal your children, and you would have no wars about it. If you
wish to remain our allies, you will free your slaves. The chiefs did not
like this, and wanted to drive us away; but the most enlightened of the
people came and helped us to build our citadel, which was built of
stone.

This is the history of Jon and of Min-erva.

When they had finished their story they asked respectfully for iron
weapons; for, said they, our foes are powerful, but if we have good arms
we can withstand them. When this had been agreed to, the people asked if
Frya's customs would flourish in Athens and in other parts of Greece
(Krekalanden). The mother answered, If the distant Greeks belong to the
direct descent of Frya, then they will flourish; but if they do not
descend from Frya, then there will be a long contention about it,
because the carrier must make five thousand revolutions of his Juul
before Finda's people will be ripe for liberty.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_36"></span>[99:\*](olb28.htm#fr_36.md) Jonhis êlanda—John's
Islands, or the Pirated Isles.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[99:†](olb28.htm#fr_37.md) Athenia is Athens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is about the Geertmen](olb29.md)
