[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb34)  [Next](olb36) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Elegy of the Burgtmaagd.</span>

Yes, departed friend, thousands are arrived, and more are coming. They
wish to hear the wisdom of Adela. Truly, she was a princess, for she had
always been the leader. O Sorrow, what good can you do!

Her garments of linen and <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_51) wool she
spun and wove herself. How could she add to her beauty? Not with pearls,
for her teeth were more white; not with gold, for her tresses were more
brilliant; not with precious stones, for her eyes, though soft as those
of a lamb, were so lustrous that you could scarcely look into them. But
why do I talk of beauty? Frya was certainly not more beautiful; yes, my
friends, Frya, who possessed seven perfections, of which each of her
daughters inherited one, or at most three. But even if she had been
ugly, she would still have been dear to us. Is she warlike? Listen, my
friend. Adele was the only daughter of our Grevetman. She stood seven
feet high. Her wisdom exceeded her stature, and her courage was equal to
both together. Here is an instance. There was once a turf-ground on
fire. Three children got upon yonder gravestone. There was a furious
wind. The people were all shouting, and the mother was helpless. Then
came Adela. What are you all standing still here for? she cried. Try to

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span> <span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

help them, and Wr-alda will give you strength. Then she ran to the
Krylwood and got some elder branches, of which she made a bridge. The
others then came to assist her, and the children were saved. The
children bring flowers to the place every year. There came once three
Phœnician sailors, who began to ill-treat the children, when Adela,
having heard their screams, beat the scoundrels till they were
insensible, and then, to prove to them what miserable wretches they
were, she tied them all three to a spindle.

The foreign lords came to look after their people, and when they saw how
ridiculously they had been treated they were very angry, till they were
told what had happened. Upon that they bowed themselves before Adele,
and kissed the hem of her garment. But come, distant living friend. The
birds of the forest fled before the numerous visitors. Come, friend, and
you shall hear her wisdom. By the gravestone of which mention has
already been made her body is buried. Upon the stone the following words
are inscribed:—

<span class="small">TREAD SOFTLY, FOR HERE LIES ADELA.</span>

The old legend which is written on the outside wall of the city tower is
not written in "The Book of Adela's Followers." Why this has been
neglected I do not know; but this book is my own, so I will put it in
out of regard to my relations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_51"></span>[133:\*](olb35.htm#fr_51) *To hnekka*, a high
petticoat reaching up to the neck.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Oldest Doctrine](olb36)
