[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb30)  [Next](olb32) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">This is inscribed in all our Citadels.</span>

How our Denmark <span id="fr_44"></span>[\*](#fn_44) was lost to us 1602
years after the submersion of Atland <span
id="fr_45"></span>[†](#fn_45). Through the mad wantonness of Wodin, Magy
had become master of the east part of Scandinavia. They dare not come
over the hills and over the sea. The mother would not prevent it. She
said, I see no danger in their weapons, but much in taking the
Scandinavians back again, because they are so degenerate and spoilt. The
general assembly were of the same opinion. Therefore it was left to him.
A good hundred years ago Denmark began to trade; they gave their iron
weapons in exchange for gold ornaments, as well as for copper and
iron-ore. The mother sent messengers to advise them to have nothing to
do with this trade. There was danger to their morals in it, and if they
lost their morals they would soon lose their liberty. But the
Den-markers paid no attention to her. They did not believe that they
could lose their morals, therefore they would not listen to her. At last
they were at a loss themselves for weapons and necessaries, and this
difficulty was their punishment. Their bodies were brilliantly adorned,
but their cupboards and their sheds were empty. Just one hundred years
after the first ship with provisions sailed from the coast, poverty and
want made their appearance, hunger spread her wings all over the
country, dissension marched proudly about the streets and into the
houses, charity found no place, and unity departed. The child asked its
mother for food; she had no food to give, only jewels. The women applied
to their husbands, the husbands appealed to the counts; the counts had
nothing to give, or if they had, they hid it away. Now the jewels must
be sold, but while the sailors

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span> <span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

were away for that purpose, the frost came and laid a plank upon the sea
and the strait (the Sound). When the frost had made the bridge,
vigilance ceased in the land, and treachery took its place. Instead of
watching on the shores, they put their horses in their sledges and drove
off to Scandinavia. Then the Scandinavians, who hungered after the land
of their forefathers, came to Denmark. One bright night they all came.
Now, they said, we have a right to the land of our fathers; and while
they were fighting about it, the Finns came to the defenceless villages
and ran away with the children. As they had no good weapons, they lost
the battle, and with it their freedom, and Magy became master. All this
was the consequence of their not reading Frya's Tex, and neglecting her
counsels. There are some who think that they were betrayed by the
counts, and that the maidens had long suspected it; but if any one
attempted to speak about it, his mouth was shut by golden chains.

We can express no opinion about it, we can only say to you, Do not trust
too much to the wisdom of your princes or of your maidens; but if you
wish to keep things straight, everybody must watch over his own
passions, as well as the general welfare.

Two years afterwards Magy himself came with a fleet of light boats to
steal the lamp from the mother of Texland. This wicked deed he
accomplished one stormy winter night, while the wind roared and the hail
rattled against the windows. The watchman on the tower hearing the
noise, lighted his torch. As soon as the light from the tower fell upon
the bastion, he saw that already armed men had got over the wall.

He immediately gave the alarm, but it was too late. Before the guard was
ready, there were two thousand people battering the gate. The struggle
did not last long.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span> <span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As the guard had
not kept a good watch, they were overwhelmed. While the fight was going
on, a rascally Finn stole into the chamber of the mother, and would have
done her violence. She resisted him, and threw him down against the
wall. When he got up, be ran his sword through her: If you will not have
me, you shall have my sword. A Danish soldier came behind him and clave
his bead in two. There came from it a stream of black blood and a wreath
of blue flame.

The Magy had the mother nursed on his own ship. As soon as she was well
enough to speak clearly, the Magy told her that she must sail with him,
but that she should keep her lamp and her maidens, and should hold a
station higher than she had ever done before. Moreover, he said that he
should ask her, in presence of all his chief men, if he would become the
ruler of all the country and people of Frya; that she must declare and
affirm this, or be would let her die a painful death. Then, when he had
gathered all his chiefs around her bed, he asked, in a loud voice,
Frana, since you are a prophetess, shall I become ruler over all the
lands and people of Frya? Frana did as if she took no notice of him; but
at last she opened her lips, and said: My eyes are dim, but the other
light dawns upon my soul. Yes, I see it. Hear, Irtha, and rejoice with
me. At the time of the submersion of Atland, the first spoke of the Juul
stood at the top. After that it went down, and our freedom with it. When
two spokes, or two thousand years, shall have rolled down, the sons
shall arise who have been bred of the fornication of the princes and
priests with the people, and shall witness against their fathers. They
shall all fall by murder, but what they have proclaimed shall endure,

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

and shall bear fruit in the bosoms of able men, like good seed which is
laid in thy lap. Yet a thousand years shall the spoke descend, and sink
deeper in darkness, and in the blood shed over yon by the wickedness of
the princes and priests. After that, the dawn shall begin to glow. When
they perceive this, the false princes and priests will strive and
wrestle against freedom; but freedom, love, and unity will take the
people under their protection, and rise out of the vile pool. The light
which at first only glimmered shall gradually become a flame. The blood
of the bad shall flow over your surface, but you must not absorb it. At
last the poisoned animals shall eat it, and die of it. All the stories
that have been written in praise of the princes and priests shall be
committed to the flames. Thenceforth your children shall live in peace.
When she had finished speaking she sank down.

The Magy, who had not understood her, shrieked out, I have asked you if
I should become master of all the lands and people of Frya, and now you
have been speaking to another. Frana raised herself up, stared at him,
and said, Before seven days have passed your soul shall haunt the tombs
with the night-birds, and your body shall be at the bottom of the sea.
Very good, said the Magy, swelling with rage; say that I am coming. Then
he said to his executioners, Throw this woman overboard. This was the
end of the last of the mothers. We do not ask for revenge. Time will
provide that; but a thousand thousand times we will call with Frya,
Watch! watch! watch!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_44"></span>[111:\*](olb31.htm#fr_44) Dêna marks, the low
marches.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[111:†](olb31.htm#fr_45) 2193-1602 is 691 years
before Christ.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: How it fared afterwards with the Magy](olb32)
