[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb32)  [Next](olb34) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

### THE WRITINGS OF ADELBROST AND APOLLONIA.

My name is Adelbrost, the son of Apol and Adela. I was elected by my
people as Grevetman over the Lindaoorden. Therefore I will continue this
book in the same way as my mother has spoken it.

After the Magy was killed and Fryasburgt was restored, a mother had to
be chosen. The mother had not named her successor, and her will was
nowhere to be found. Seven months later a general assembly was called at
Grênegâ (Groningen) <span id="fr_47"></span>[\*](#fn_47), because it was
on the boundary of Saxamarken. My mother was chosen, but she would not
be the mother. She had saved my father's life, in consequence of which
they had fallen in love with each other, and she wished to marry. Many
people wished my mother to alter her decision, but she said an
Eeremoeder ought to be as pure in her conscience as she appears
outwardly, and to have the same love for all her children. Now, as I
love Apol better than anything else in the world, I cannot be such a
mother. Thus spoke and reasoned Adela, but all the other maidens wished
to be the mother. Each state was in favour of its own maiden, and would
not yield. Therefore none was chosen, and the kingdom was without any
restraint. From what follows you will understand Liudgert, the king who
had lately died, had been chosen in the lifetime of the mother, and
seemingly with the love and confidence of all the states. It was his
turn to live at the great court of Dokhem <span
id="fr_48"></span>[†](#fn_48), and in the lifetime of the mother great
honour was done to him there, as there were more messengers and knights
there than had ever been seen there before. But now he was lonely and
forsaken,

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span> <span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

because every one was afraid that he would set himself above the law,
and rule them like the slave kings. Every headman imagined that he did
enough if he looked after his own state, and did not care for the
others. With the Burgtmaagden it was still worse. Each of them depended
upon her own judgment, and whenever a Grevetman did anything without
her, she raised distrust between him and his people. If any case
happened which concerned several states, and one maid had been
consulted, the rest all exclaimed that she had spoken only in the
interest of her own state. By such proceedings they brought disputes
among the states, and so severed the bond of union that the people of
one state were jealous of those of the rest, or at least considered them
as strangers; the consequence of which was that the Gauls or Truwenden
(Druids) took possession of our lands as far as the Scheldt, and the
Magy as far as the Wesara. How this happened my mother has explained,
otherwise this book would not have been written, although I have lost
all hope that it would be of any use. I do not write in the hope that I
shall win back the land or preserve it: in my opinion that is
impossible. I write only for the future generations, that they may all
know in what way we were lost, and that each may learn that every crime
brings its punishment.

My name is Apollonia. Two-and-thirty days after my mother's death my
brother Adelbrost was found murdered on the wharf, his skull fractured
and his limbs torn asunder. My father, who lay ill, died of fright. Then
my younger brother, Apol, sailed from here to the west side of
Schoonland. There he built a citadel named Lindasburgt <span
id="fr_49"></span>[\*](#fn_49), in order there to avenge our wrong.
Wr-alda accorded him many years for that. He had five sons, who all
caused fear

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span> <span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

to Magy, and brought fame to my brother. After the death of my mother
and my brother, all the bravest of the land joined together and made a
covenant, called the Adelbond. In order to preserve us from injury, they
brought me and my youngest brother, Adelhirt, to the burgt—me to the
maidens, and him to the warriors. When I was thirty years old I was
chosen as Burgtmaagd, and my brother at fifty was chosen Grevetman. From
mother's side my brother was. the sixth, but from father's side the
third. 'By right, therefore, his descendants could not put "overa Linda"
after their names, but they all wished to do it in honour of their
mother. In addition to this, there was given to us also a copy of "The
Book of Adela's Followers." That gave me the most pleasure, because it
came into the world by my mother's wisdom. In the burgt I have found
other writings also in praise of my mother. All this I will write
afterwards.

These are the writings left by Bruno, who was the writer of this burgt.
After the followers of Adele had made copies, each in his kingdom, of
what was inscribed upon the walls of the burgt, they resolved to choose
a mother. For this purpose a general assembly was called at this farm.
By the first advice of Adela, Teuntje was recommended. That would have
been arranged, only that my Burgtmaagd asked to speak: she had always
supposed that she would be chosen mother, because she was at the burgt
from which mothers had generally been chosen. When she was allowed to
speak, she opened her false lips and said: You all seem to place great
value on Adela's advice, but that shall not shut my mouth. Who is Adele,
and whence comes it that you respect her so highly? She was what I am
now, a Burgtmaagd of this

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span> <span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

place; is she, then, wiser and better than I and all the others? or is
she more conversant with our laws and customs? If that had been the
case, she would have become mother when she was chosen; but instead of
that, she preferred matrimony to a single life, watching over herself
and her people. She is certainly very clear-sighted, but my eyes are far
from being dim. I have observed that she is very much attached to her
husband, which is very praiseworthy; but I see, likewise, that Teuntje
is Apol's niece. Further I say nothing.

The principal people understood very well which way the wind blew with
her; but among the people there arose disputes, and as most of the
people came from here, they would not give the honour to Teuntje. The
conferences were ended, knives were drawn, and no mother was chosen.
Shortly afterwards one of oar messengers killed his comrade. As he had
been a man of good character hitherto, my Burgtmaagd had permission to
help him over the frontier; but instead of helping him over to Twiskland
(Germany), she fled with him herself to Wesara, and then to the Magy.
The Magy, who wished to please his sons of Frye, appointed her mother of
Godaburgt, in Schoonland; but she wished for more, and she told him that
if he could get Adele out of the way he might become master of the whole
of Frya's land. She said she hated Adele for having prevented her from
being chosen mother. If be would promise her Tex-land, her messenger
should serve as guide to his warriors. All this was confessed by her
messenger.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[123:\*](olb33.htm#fr_47) Grênegâ is Groningen.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[123:†](olb33.htm#fr_48) Dokhem is Dokkum.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[125:\*](olb33.htm#fr_49) Lindasburch, on Cape
Lindanaes, Norway.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Writing](olb34)
