[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb35)  [Next](olb37.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Oldest Doctrine.</span>

Hail to all the well-intentioned children of Frya!

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span> <span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Through them the
earth shall become holy. Learn and announce to the people Wr-alda is the
ancient of ancients, for he created all things. Wr-alda is all in all,
for he is eternal and everlasting. Wr-alda is omnipresent but invisible,
and therefore is called a spirit. All that we can see of him are the
created beings who come to life through him and go again, because from
Wr-alda all things proceed and return to him. Wr-alda is the beginning
and the end. Wr-alda is the only almighty being, because from him all
other strength comes, and returns to him. Therefore he alone is the
creator, and nothing exists without him. Wr-alda established eternal
principles, upon which the laws of creation were founded, and no good
laws could stand on any other foundation. But although everything is
derived from Wr-alda, the wickedness of men does not come from him.
Wickedness comes from heaviness, carelessness, and stupidity; therefore
they may well be injurious to men, but never to Wr-alda. Wr-alda is
wisdom, and the laws that he has made are the books from which we learn,
nor is any wisdom to be found or gathered but in them. Men may see a
great deal, but Wr-alda sees everything. Men can learn a great deal, but
Wr-alda knows everything. Men can discover much, but to Wr-alda
everything is open. Mankind are male and female, but Wr-alda created
both. Mankind love and hate, but Wr-alda alone is just. Therefore
Wr-alda is good, and there is no good without him. In the progress of
time all creation alters and changes, but goodness alone is unalterable;
and since Wr-alda is good, he cannot

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span> <span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

change. As he endures, he alone exists; everything else is show.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Second Part of the Oldest Doctrine](olb37.md)
