[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb37)  [Next](olb39) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">This is written on Parchment—"Skrivfilt." Speech and Answer to other Maidens as an Example.</span>

An unsociable, avaricious man came to complain to Troost, who was the
maid of Stavia. He said a thunderstorm had destroyed his house. He had
prayed to Wr-alda, but Wr-alda had given him no help. Are you a true
Frisian? Troost asked. From father and forefathers, replied the man.
Then she said, I will sow something in your conscience, in confidence
that it will take root, grow, and bear fruit. She continued, When Frya
was born, our mother stood naked and bare, unprotected from the rays of
the sun. She could ask no one, and there was no one who could give her
any help. Then Wr-alda wrought in her conscience inclination and love,
anxiety and fright. She looked round her, and her inclination chose the
best. She sought a hiding-place under the sheltering lime-trees, but the
rain came, and the difficulty was that she got wet. She had seen.

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

how the water ran down the pendent leaves; so she made a roof of leaves
fastened with sticks, but the wind blew the rain under it. She observed
that the stem would afford protection. She then built a wall of sods,
first on one side, and then all round. The wind grew stronger and blew
away the roof, but she made no complaint of Wr-alda. She made a roof of
rushes, and put stones upon it. Having found how hard it is to toil
alone, she showed her children how and why she had done it. They acted
and thought as she did. This is the way in which we became possessed of
houses and porches, a street, and lime-trees to protect us from the rays
of the sun. At last we have built a citadel, and all the rest. If your
house is not strong enough, then you must try and make another. My house
was strong enough, he said, but the flood and the wind destroyed it.
Where did your house stand? Troost asked. On the bank of the Rhine, he
answered. Did it not stand on a knoll? Troost asked. No, said the man;
my house stood alone on the bank. I built it alone, but I could not
alone make a hillock. I knew it, Troost answered; the maidens told me.
All your life you have avoided your neighbours, fearing that you might
have to give or do something for them; but one cannot get on in the
world in that way, for Wr-alda, who is kind, turns away from the
niggardly. Fâsta has advised us, and it is engraved in stone over all
our doors. If you are selfish, distrustful towards your neighbours,
teach your neighbours, help your neighbours, and they will return the
same to yon. If this advice is not good enough for you, I can give you
no better. The man blushed for shame, and slunk away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Now I will write myself, first about my Citadel, and then about
what I have been able to see](olb39)
