[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb31)  [Next](olb33.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">How it fared afterwards with the Magy.</span>

After the murder of the mother, he brought the lamp and the maidens into
his own ship, together with all

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span> <span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

the booty that he chose. Afterwards he went p the Flymeer because he
wished to take the maiden of Medeasblik or Stavoren and install her as
mother; but there they were on their guard. The seafaring men of
Stavoren and Alderga would gladly have gone to Jon, but the great fleet
was out on a distant voyage; so they proceeded in their small fleet to
Medeasblik, and kept themselves concealed in a sheltered place behind
trees. The Magy approached Medeasblik in broad daylight; nevertheless,
his men boldly stormed the citadel. But as they landed from the boats,
our people sallied forth from the creek, and shot their arrows with
balls of burning turpentine upon the fleet. They were so well aimed that
many of the ships were instantly on fire. Those left to guard the ships
shot at us, but they could not reach us. When at last a burning ship
drifted towards the ship of the Magy, he ordered the man at the helm to
sheer off, but this man was the Dane who had cleft the head of the Finn.
He said, You sent our Eeremoeder to the bottom of the sea to say that
you were coming. In the bustle of the fight you might forget it; now I
will take care that you keep your word. The Magy tried to push him off,
but the sailor, a real Frisian and strong as an ox, clutched his head
with both hands, and pitched him into the surging billows. Then he
hoisted up his brown shield, and sailed straight to our fleet. Thus the
maidens came unhurt to us; bat the lamp was extinguished, and no one
knew how that had happened. When those on the uninjured ships heard that
the Magy was drowned, they sailed away, because their crews were Danes.
When the fleet was far enough off, our sailors turned and shot their
burning arrows at the Finns. When the Finns saw that, and found that
they were betrayed, they fell into confusion, and lost all discipline
and order. At this moment the garrison sallied

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span> <span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

forth from the citadel. Those who resisted were killed, and those who
fled found their death in the marshes of the Krylinger wood.

### <span class="smallcaps">Postscript.</span>

When the sailors were in the creek, there was a wag from Stavoren among
them, who said, Medea may well laugh if we rescue her from her citadel.
Upon this, the maidens gave to the creek the name Medea mêilakkia <span
id="fr_46"></span>[\*](#fn_46) (Lake of Medea.md). The occurrences that
happened after this everybody can remember. The maidens ought to relate
it in their own way, and have it well inscribed. We consider that our
task is fulfilled. Hail!

 

 

<span class="small">THE END OF THE BOOK.</span>

 

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[121:\*](olb32.htm#fr_46.md) Medemi lacus, Lake of
Medea's laughter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Writings of Adelbrost and Apollonia](olb33.md)
