[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb36)  [Next](olb38) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">The Second Part of the Oldest Doctrine.</span>

Among Finda's people there are false teachers, who, by their
over-inventiveness, have become so wicked that they make themselves and
their adherents believe that they are the best part of Wr-alda, that
their spirit is the best part of Wr-alda's spirit, and that Wr-alda can
only think by the help of their brains.

That every creature is a part of Wr-alda's eternal being, *that* they
have stolen from us; but their false reasoning and ungovernable pride
have brought them on the road to ruin. If their spirit was Wr-alda's
spirit, then Wr-alda would be very stupid, instead of being sensible and
wise; for their spirit labours to create beautiful statues, which they
afterwards worship. Finda's people are a wicked people, for although
they presumptuously pretend among themselves that they are gods, they
proclaim the unconsecrated false gods, and declare everywhere that these
idols created the world and all that therein is—greedy idols, full of
envy and anger, who desire to be served and honoured by the people, and
who exact bloody sacrifices and rich offerings; but these presumptuous
and false men, who call themselves God's servants and priests, receive
and collect everything in the name of the idols that have no real
existence, for their own benefit.

They do all this with an easy conscience, as they think themselves gods
not answerable to any one. If there are some who discover their tricks
and expose them, they hand them over to the executioners to be burnt for
their calumnies, with solemn ceremonies in honour of the false gods;

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span> <span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

but really in order to save themselves. In order that our children may
be protected against their idolatrous doctrine, the duty of the maidens
is to make them learn by heart the following: Wr-alda existed before all
things, and will endure after all things. Wr-alda is also eternal and
everlasting, therefore nothing exists without him. From Wr-alda's life
sprang time and all living things, and his life takes away time and
every other thing. These things must be made clear and manifest in every
way, so that they can be made clear and comprehensible to all. When we
have learned thus much, then we say further: In what regards our
existence, we are a part of Wr-alda's everlasting being, like the
existence of all created beings; but as regards our form, our qualities,
our spirit, and all our thoughts, these do not belong to the being. All
these are passing things which appear through Wr-alda's life, and which
appear through his wisdom, and not otherwise; but whereas his life is
continually progressing, nothing can remain stationary, therefore all
created things change their locality, their form, and their thoughts. So
neither the earth nor any other created object can say, I am; but
rather, I was. So no man can say, I think; but rather, I thought. The
boy is greater and different from the child; he has different desires,
inclinations, and thoughts. The man and father feels and thinks.
differently from the boy, the old man just the same. Everybody knows
that. Besides, everybody knows and must acknowledge that he is now
changing, that he changes every minute even while he says, I am, and
that his thoughts change even while he says, I think. Instead, then, of
imitating Finda's wicked people, and saying, I am the best part of
Wr-alda, and through us alone he can think,

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span> <span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

we proclaim everywhere where it is necessary, We, Frya's children, exist
through Wr-alda's life—in the beginning mean and base, but always
advancing towards perfection without ever attaining the excellence of
Wr-alda himself. Our spirit is not Wr-alda's spirit, it is merely a
shadow of it. When Wr-alda created us, he lent us his wisdom, brains,
organs, memory, and many other good qualities. By this means we are able
to contemplate his creatures and his laws; by this means we can learn
and can speak of them always, and only for our own benefit. If Wr-alda
had given us no organs, we should have known nothing, and been more
irrational than a piece of sea-weed driven up and down by the ebb and
flood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: This is written on Parchment. Speech and Answer to other Maidens
as an Example](olb38)
