[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb41)  [Next](olb43) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span> <span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">This Writing has been given to me about Northland and Schoonland (Scandinavia).</span>

When our land was submerged I was in Schoonland. It was very bad there.
There were great lakes which rose from the earth like bubbles, then
burst asunder, and from the rents flowed a stuff like red-hot iron. The
tops of high mountains fell and destroyed whole forests and villages. I
myself saw one mountain torn from another and fall straight down. When I
afterwards went to see the place there was a lake there. When the earth
was composed there came a duke of Lindasburgt with his people, and one
maiden who cried everywhere, Magy is the cause of all the misery that we
have suffered. They continued their progress, and their hosts increased.
The Malty fled, and his corpse was found where he had killed himself.
Then the Finns were driven to one place where they might live. There
were some of mixed blood who were allowed to stay, but most of them went
with the Finns. The duke was chosen as king. The temples which had
remained whole were destroyed. Since that time the good Northmen come
often to Texland for the advice of the mother; still we cannot consider
them real Frisians. In Denmark it has certainly happened as with us. The
sea-people, who call themselves famous sea-warriors, went on board their
ships, and afterwards went back again.

Heil!

Whenever the Carrier has completed a period, then posterity shall
understand that the faults and misdeeds that the Brokmannen have brought
with them belonged to their forefathers; therefore I will watch, and
will describe as much of their manners as I have seen. The Geertmannen I
can

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span> <span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

readily pass by. I have not had much to do with them, but as far as I
have seen they have mostly retained their language and customs. I cannot
say that of the others. Those who descend from the Greeks speak a bad
language, and have not much to boast of in their manners. Many have
brown eyes and hair. They are envious and impudent, and cowardly from
superstition. When they speak, they put the words first that ought to
come last. For old they say *at;* for salt, *sât;* and for man, *ma*—too
many to mention. They also use abbreviations of names, which have no
meaning. The Joniers speak better, but they drop the H, and put it where
it ought not to be. When they make a statue of a dead person they
believe that the spirit of the departed enters into it; therefore they
have hidden their statues of Frya, Fâsta, Medea, Thiania, Hellenia, and
many others. When a child is born, all the relatives come together and
pray to Frya to send her servants to bless the child. When they have
prayed, they must neither move nor speak. If the child begins to cry,
and continues some time, it is a bad sign, and they suspect that the
mother has committed adultery. I have seen very bad things come from
that. If the child sleeps, that is a good sign—Frya's servants are come.
If it laughs in its sleep, the servants have promised it happiness.
Moreover, they believe in bad spirits, witches, sorcerers, dwarfs, and
elves, as if they descended from the Finns. Herewith I will finish, and
I think I have written more than any of my forefathers. Frethorik.

Frethorik, my husband, lived to the age of 63. Since 108 years he is the
first of his race who died a

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span> <span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

peaceable death; all the others died by violence, because they all
fought with their own people, and with foreigners for right and duty.

My name is Wiljo. I am the maiden who came home with him from
Saxsenmarken. In the course of conversation it came out that we were
both of Adela's race—thus our affection commenced, and we became man and
wife. He left me with five children, two sons and three daughters.
Konreed was my eldest son, Hachgana my second. My eldest daughter is
called Adela, my second Frulik, and the youngest Nocht. When I went to
Saxsenmarken I preserved three books—the book of songs, the book of
narratives, and the Hellenia book.

I write this in order that people may not think they were by Apollonia.
I have had a good deal of annoyance about this, and therefore now wish
to have the honour of it. I also did more. When Gosa Makonta died, whose
goodness and clear-sightedness have become a proverb, I went alone to
Texland to copy the writings that she had left; and when the last will
of Frana was found, and the writings left by Adela or Hellenia, I did
that again. These are the writings of Hellenia. I have put them first
because they are the oldest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hail to all true Frisians](olb43)
