[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb47)  [Next](olb49) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Here is the Writing with Gosa's Advice.</span>

When Wr-alda gave children to the mothers of mankind, he gave one
language to every tongue and to all lips. This gift Wr-alda had bestowed
upon men in order that by its means they might make known to each other
what must be avoided and what must be followed to find salvation, and to
hold salvation to all eternity. Wr-alda is wise and good, and
all-foreseeing. As he knew that happiness and holiness would flee from
the earth when wickedness could overcome virtue, he has attached to the
language an equitable property. This property consists in this, that men
can neither lie nor use deceitful words without stammering or blushing,
by which means the innately bad are easily known.

As thus our language opens the way to happiness and blessedness, and
thus helps to guard against evil inclinations, it is rightly named the
language of the gods, and all those by whom it is held in honour derive
honour from it. But what has happened? As soon as among our half
brothers and sisters deceivers arose, who gave themselves out as
servants of the good, it soon became otherwise. The deceitful priests
and the malignant princes, who always clung together, wished to live
according to their own inclinations, without regard to the laws of
right. In their wickedness they went

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span> <span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

so far as to invent other languages, so that they might speak secretly
in anybody's presence of their wicked and unworthy affairs without
betraying themselves by stammering, and without showing a blush upon
their countenances. Bat what has that produced? Just as the seed of good
herbs which has been sown by good men in the open day springs up from
the ground, so time brings to light the evil seed which has been sown by
wicked men in secret and in darkness.

The wanton girls and effeminate youths who consorted with the immoral
priests and princes, taught the new language to their companions, and
thus spread it among the people till God's language was clean forgotten.
Would you know what came of all this? how that stammering and blushing
no longer betrayed their evil doings;—virtue passed away, wisdom and
liberty followed; unity was lost, and quarrelling took its place; love
flew away, and unchastity and envy met round their tables; and where
previously justice reigned, now it is the sword. All are slaves—the
subjects of their masters, envy, bad passions and covetousness. If they
had only invented one language things might possibly have still gone on
well; but they invented as many languages as there are states, so that
one people can no more understand another people than a cow a dog, or a
wolf a sheep. The mariners can bear witness to this. From all this it
results that all the slave people look upon each other as strangers; and
that as a punishment of their inconsiderateness and presumption, they
must quarrel and fight till they are all destroyed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Here is my Counsel](olb49)
