[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](olb50)  [Next](olb52.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Oera Linda Book*, by Wiliam R. Sandbach, \[1876\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### <span class="smallcaps">Letter of Rika the Oudmaagd, read at Staveren at the Juul Feast.</span>

My greeting to all of you whose forefathers came here with Friso.
According to what you say, you are not guilty of idolatry. I will not
speak about that now, but will at once mention a failing which is very
little better. You know, or you do not know, how many titles Wr-alda
has; but you all know that he is named universal provider, because that
everything comes and proceeds from him for the sustenance of his
creatures. It is true that Irtha is named sometimes the feeder of all,
because she brings forth all the fruits and grains on which men and
beasts are fed; but she would not bear any fruit or grain unless Wr-alda
gave her the power. Women who nourish their children at their breasts
are called nurses, but if Wr-alda did not give them milk the children
would find no advantage; so that, in short, Wr-alda really is the
nourisher. That Irtha should be called the universal nourisher, and that
a mother should be called a feeder, one can understand, figuratively
speaking; but that a father should be called a feeder, because he is a
father, goes against all reason. Now I know whence all this folly comes.
Listen to me. It comes from our enemies; and if this is followed up you
will become slaves, to the sorrow of Frya and to the punishment of your
pride. I will tell you what happened to the slave people; from that you
may take warning. The foreign kings, who follow their own will, place
Wr-alda below the crown. From envy that Wr-alda is called the universal
father, they wish also to be called fathers of the people. Now,
everybody knows that kings do not regulate

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span> <span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

the productiveness of the earth; and that they have their sustenance by
means of the people, but still they will persist in their arrogance. In
order to attain their object they were not satisfied from the beginning
with free gifts, but imposed a tax upon the people. With the tax thus
raised they hired foreign soldiers, whom they retained about their
courts. Afterwards they took as many wives as they pleased, and the
smaller princes and gentry did the same. When, in consequence, quarrels
and disputes arose in the households, and complaints were made about it,
they said every man is the father (feeder) of his household, therefore
he shall be master and judge over it. Thus arose arbitrariness, and as
the men ruled over their households the kings would do over their
people. When the kings had accomplished that, they should be called
fathers of the people, they had statues of themselves made, and erected
in the churches beside the statues of the idols, and those who would not
bow down to them were either killed or put in chains. Your forefathers
and the Twisklanders had intercourse with the kings, and learned these
follies from them. But it is not only that some of your men have been
guilty of stealing titles, I have also much to complain of against your
wives. If there are men among you who wish to put themselves on a level
with Wr-alda, there are also women who wish to consider themselves
equals of Frya. Because they have borne children, they call themselves
mothers; but they forget that Frya bore children without having
intercourse with a man. Yes, they not only have desired to rob Frya and
the Eeremoeders of their honourable title (with whom they cannot put
themselves upon an equality), but they do the same with the honourable
titles of their fellow-creatures. There are women who allow themselves
to be called ladies,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span> <span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

although they know that that only belongs to the wives of princes. They
also let their daughters be called maagden, although they know that no
young girls are so called unless. they belong to a citadel. Yon all
fancy that you are the better for this name-stealing, but you forget
that jealousy clings to it, and that every wrong sows the seed of its
own rod. If you do not alter your course, in time it will grow so strong
that you cannot see what will be the end. Your descendants will be
flogged by it, and will not know whence the stripes come. But although
you do not build citadels for the maidens and leave them to their fate,
there will still remain some who will come out of woods and caves, and
will prove to your descendants that you have by your disorderliness been
the cause of it. Then you will be damned. Your ghosts will rise
frightened out of their graves. They will call upon Wr-alda, Frya, and
her maidens, but they shall receive no succour before the Juul shall
enter upon a pew circuit, and that will only be three thousand years
after this century. <span id="fr_86"></span>[\*](#fn_86.md)

 

 

<span class="small">THE END OF RIKA'S LETTER.</span>

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_86"></span>[233:\*](olb51.htm#fr_86.md) Here the writing of
Beeden ends. In the manuscript two successive pages are missing
according to the paging, but no doubt there are more wanting. The abrupt
opening of what follows shows that the beginning of the following
writing has been lost, and, in consequence, also the notification of the
name of the writer, who may have been a son or a grandson of Beeden.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Fragmentary](olb52.md)
