[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sds01)  [Next](sds03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### BRICKS WITHOUT STRAW

<div align="center">

|                                                                                           |
|-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "There shall no straw be given you, yet ye shall make bricks without straw."—Exodus 5:18. |

</div>

 

In the 5th chapter of Exodus, we have a picture of every day life, when
giving a metaphysical interpretation.

The Children of Israel were in bondage to Pharaoh, the cruel taskmaster,
ruler of Egypt. They were kept in slavery, making bricks, and were hated
and despised.

Moses had orders from the Lord to deliver his people from bondage—"Moses
and Aaron went in and told Pharaoh—Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,
Let my people go, that they may hold a feast unto me in the wilderness."

He not only refused to let them go, but told them he would make their
tasks even more difficult: they must make bricks without straw being
provided for them.

"And the task-masters of the people went out, and their officers, and
they spake to the people, saying, Thus saith Pharaoh, I will not give
you straw."

"Go ye, get you straw where ye can find it: yet not ought of your work
shall be diminished."

It was impossible to make bricks without straw. The Children of Israel
were completely crushed by Pharaoh, they were beaten for not producing
the bricks—Then came the message from Jehovah.

"Go therefore now, and work; for there shall no straw be given you, yet
shall ye deliver the tale (number) of bricks."

*Working with Spiritual law they could make bricks without straw, which
means to accomplish the seemingly impossible*.

How often in life people are confronted with this situation.

Agnes M. Lawson in her "Hints to Bible Students" says—"The Life in Egypt
under foreign oppression is the symbol of man under the hard taskmasters
of Destructive thinking, Pride, Fear, Resentment, Ill-will, etc. The
deliverance under Moses is the freedom man gains from the taskmasters,
as he learns the law of life, for we can never come under grace, except
we first know the law. The law must be made known in order to be
fulfilled."

In the 111th Psalm we read in the final verse, "The fear of the Lord
(law) is the beginning of Wisdom: a good understanding have all they
that do his commandments: his praise endureth forever."

Now if we read the word Lord (law) it will give us the key to the
statement.

The fear of the law (Karmic law) is the beginning of wisdom (not the
fear of the Lord).

When we know that whatever we send out comes back, we begin to be afraid
of our own boomerangs.

I read in a medical journal the following facts telling of the Boomerang
this great Pharaoh received.

"It would appear that flesh is indeed heir to a long and ancient line of
ills, when, as was revealed by Lord Monyahan at a lecture at Leeds, that
the Pharaoh of the oppression suffered from hardening of the heart in a
literal sense; Lord Monyahan showed some remarkable photographic slides
of results of surgical operations a thousand years before Christ, and
among these was a slide of the actual anatomical remains of the Pharaoh
of the Oppression.

"The large vessel springing from the heart was in such a well-preserved
state, as to enable sections of it to be made and compared with those
made recently from the lantern slide. It was impossible to distinguish
between the ancient and modern vessel. Both hearts had been attacked by
Atheroma, a condition in which calcium salts are deposited in the walls
of the vessel, making it rigid and inelastic.

"Inadequate expanse to the stream of blood from the heart caused the
vessel to give way; with this condition went the mental changes that
occur with a rigid arterial system: *A narrowness of outlook;
restriction and dread of enterprise, a literal hardening of the heart*."

*So Pharaoh's hardness of heart, hardened his own heart*.

This is as true today as it was several thousand years ago—we are all
coming out of the Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

Your doubts and fears keep you in slavery; you face a situation which
seems hopeless; What can you do? It is a case of making bricks without
straw.

But remember the words of Jehovah, "Go therefore now, and work; for
there shall no straw be given you, yet shall ye deliver the tale
(number) of bricks."

*You shall make bricks without straw. God makes a way where there is no
way! *

I was told the story of a woman who needed money for her rent: it was
necessary to have it at once, she knew of no channel, she had exhausted
every avenue.

However, she was a Truth student, and kept making her affirmations. Her
dog whined and wanted to go out, she put on his leash and walked down
the street, in the accustomed direction.

However, the dog pulled at his leash and wanted to go in another
direction.

She followed, and in the middle of the block, opposite an open park, she
looked down, and picked up a roll of bills, which exactly covered her
rent.

She looked for ads, but never found the owner. There were no houses near
where she found it.

The reasoning mind, the intellect, takes the throne of Pharaoh in your
consciousness. It says continually, "It can't be done. What's the use!"

We must drown out these dreary suggestions with a vital affirmation!

For example take this statement: "*The unexpected happens, my seemingly
impossible good now comes to pass*." This stops all argument from the
army of the aliens (the reasoning mind).

"The unexpected happens!" That is an idea it cannot cope with.

"Thou hast made me wiser than mine enemies." Your enemy thoughts, your
doubts, fears and apprehensions!

Think of the joy of really being free forever, from the Pharaoh of the
oppression. To have the idea of *security, health, happiness and
abundance established in the subconscious*. It would mean a life free
from all limitation!

It would be the Kingdom which Jesus Christ spoke of, where all things
are automatically added unto us. I say automatically added unto us,
because all life is vibration; and when we vibrate to success, happiness
and abundance, the things which symbolize these states of consciousness
will attach themselves to us.

Feel rich and successful, and suddenly you receive a large cheque or a
beautiful gift.

I tell the story showing the working of this law. I went to a party
where people played games, and whoever won, received a gift. The prize
was a beautiful fan.

Among those present, was a very rich woman, who had everything. Her name
was Clara. The poorer and resentful ones got together and whispered: "We
hope Clara doesn't get the fan." Of course Clara won the fan.

She was care-free and vibrating to abundance. *Envy and resentment
short-circuit your good* and keep away your fans.

If you should happen to be resentful and envious, take the statement;
*What God has done for others He now does for me and more!* 

Then all the fans and things will come your way.

No man gives to himself but himself, and no man takes away from himself
but himself: the "Game of Life" is a game of solitaire; as you change,
all conditions will change.

Now to go back to Pharaoh the oppressor; no one loves an oppressor.

I remember a friend I had many years ago, her name was Lettie; her
father had plenty of money and supplied her mother and herself with food
and clothes, but no luxuries.

We went to Art School together, and all the students would buy
reproductions of the "Winged Victory," "Whistler's Mother" or something
to bring art into their homes.

My friend's father called all these things "plunder." He would say,
"Don't bring home any plunder."

So she lived a colorless life without a "Winged Victory" on her bureau
or "Whistler's Mother" on the wall.

He would say often to my friend and her mother, "When I die, you'll both
be well off."

One day someone said to Lettie, "When are you going abroad?" (all art
students went abroad.)

She replied, cheerfully, "Not ’till Papa dies."

So people always look forward to being free from lack and oppression.

Let us now free ourselves from the *tyrants of negative thinking:* we
have been slaves to doubts, fears and apprehension and let us be
delivered as Moses delivered the Children of Israel; and come out of the
Land of Egypt, out of the House of Bondage.

Find the thought which is your great oppressor; find the *King-Pin*.

In the logging camps in the Spring, the logs are sent down the rivers in
great numbers.

Sometimes the logs become crossed and cause a jam; the men look for the
log causing the jam (they call it the King-Pin), straighten it, and the
logs rush down the river again.

Maybe your King-Pin is resentment, resentment holds back your good.

The more you resent, the more you will have to resent; you grow a
resentment track in your brain, and your expression will be one of
habitual resentment.

You will be avoided and miss the golden opportunities which await you
each day.

I remember a few years ago, the streets were filled with men selling
apples.

They got up early to get the good corners.

I passed one several times on Park Avenue, he had the most disagreeable
expression I have ever seen.

As people passed he said, "Apples! Apples!" but no one stopped to buy.

I invested in an apple and said, "You'll never sell apples unless you
change your expression."

He replied, "Well that guy over there took my corner."

I said, "Never mind about the corner, you can sell apples right here if
you'll look pleasant."

He said "O. K. lady," and I went on. The next day I saw him, his whole
expression had changed; he was doing a big business, selling apples with
a smile.

So find your King-Pin—(you may have more than one); and your logs of
*success, happiness and abundance will go rushing down your river*.

 

"*Go therefore now and work, for there shall no straw be given you, yet
ye shall make bricks without straw*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: “And Five of Them Were Wise”](sds03.md)
