[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sds00)  [Next](sds02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE SECRET DOOR TO SUCCESS

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "So the people shouted when the priests blew with the trumpets: and it came to pass, when the people heard the sound of the trumpet, and the people shouted with a great shout, that the wall fell down flat, so that the people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and they took the city."—Joshua 6:20. |

</div>

 

A successful man is always asked—"What is the secret of your success?"

People never ask a man who is a failure, "What is the secret of your
failure?" It is quite easy to see and they are not interested.

People all want to know how to open the secret door of success.

For each man there is success, but it seems to be behind a door or wall.
In the Bible reading, we have heard the wonderful story of the falling
of the walls of Jericho.

Of course all biblical stories have a metaphysical interpretation.

We will talk now about *your* wall of Jericho: the wall separating *you*
from *success*. Nearly everyone has built a wall around his own Jericho.

This city you are not able to enter, contains great treasures; your
divinely designed success, your heart's desire!

*What kind of wall have you built around your Jericho?* Often, it is a
wall of resentment—resenting someone, or resenting a situation, shuts
off your good.

If you are a failure and resent the success of someone else, you are
keeping away your own success.

I have given the following statement to neutralize envy and resentment.

*What God has done for others, He now does for me and more*.

A woman was filled with envy because a friend had received a gift, she
made this statement, and an exact duplicate of the gift was given
her—plus another present.

It was when the children of Israel shouted, that the walls of Jericho
fell down. When you make an affirmation of Truth, your wall of Jericho
totters.

I gave the following statement to a woman: *The walls of lack and delay
now crumble away, and I enter my Promised Land, under grace*. She had a
vivid picture of stepping over a fallen wall, and received the
demonstration of her good, almost immediately.

It is the word of realization which brings about a change in your
affairs; for words and thoughts are a form of radio-activity.

Taking an interest in your work, enjoying what you are doing opens the
secret door to success.

A number of years ago I went to California to speak at the different
centers, by way of the Panama Canal, and on the boat I met a man named
Jim Tully.

For years he had been a tramp. He called himself The King of the Hoboes.

He was ambitious and picked up an education.

He had a vivid imagination and commenced writing stories about his
experiences.

He dramatized tramp life, he enjoyed what he was doing, and became a
very successful author. I remember one book called "Outside Looking In."
It was made into a motion picture.

He is now famous and prosperous and lives in Hollywood. What opened the
secret door to success for Jim Tully?

Dramatizing his life—being interested in what he was doing, he made the
most of being a tramp. On the boat, we all sat at the captain's table,
which gave us a chance to talk.

Mrs. Grace Stone was also a passenger on the boat; she had written the
"Bitter Tea of General Yen," and was going to Hollywood to have it made
into a moving-picture: she had lived in China and was inspired to write
the book.

That is the *Secret* of Success, to *make what you are doing interesting
to other people*. Be interested yourself, and others will find you
interesting.

A good disposition, a smile, often opens the secret door; the Chinese
say, "A man without a smiling face, must not open a shop."

The success of a smile was brought out in a French moving-picture in
which Chevalier took the lead, the picture was called, "With a Smile."
One of the characters had become poor, dreary and almost a derelict; He
said to Chevalier "What good has my honesty done me?" Chevalier replied,
"Even honesty won't help you, without a smile:" so the man changes on
the spot, cheers up, and becomes very successful.

Living in the past, complaining of your misfortunes, builds a thick wall
around your Jericho.

Talking too much about your affairs, scattering your forces, brings you
up against a high wall. I knew a man of brains and ability, who was a
complete failure.

He lived with his mother and aunt, and I found that every night when he
went home to dinner, he told them all that had taken place during the
day at the office; he discussed his hopes, his fears, and his failures.

I said to him, "You scatter your forces by talking about your affairs.
Don't discuss your business with your family. Silence is Golden!"

He took my lead. During dinner he refused to talk about business, His
mother and aunt were in despair: They loved to hear all about
everything; but his silence proved golden!

Not long after, he was given a position at one hundred dollars a week,
and in a few years, he had a salary of three hundred dollars a week.

*Success is not a secret, it is a System*.

Many people are up against the wall of discouragement. Courage and
endurance are part of the system. We read this in lives of all
successful men and women.

I had an amusing experience which brought this to my notice. I went to a
moving picture theatre to meet a friend.

While waiting, I stood near a young boy, selling programs.

He called to people passing, "Buy a complete program of the picture,
containing photographs of the actors and a sketch of their lives."

Most people passed by without buying. To my great surprise, he suddenly
turned to me, and said—"Say, this ain’t no racket for a guy with
ambition!"

Then he gave a discourse on success. He said, "Most people give up just
before something big is coming to them. A successful man never gives up.

Of course I was interested and said, "I'll bring you a book the next
time I come. It is called *The Game of Life and How to Play It*. You
will agree with a lot of the ideas."

A week or two later I went back with the book.

The girl at the ticket office said to him—"Let me read it, Eddie, while
you are selling programs." The man who took tickets leaned over to see
what it was about.

"The Game of Life" always gets people's interest.

I returned to the theatre in about three weeks, Eddie had gone. He had
expanded into a new job that he liked. His wall of Jericho had crumbled,
he had refused to be discouraged.

Only twice, is the word *success* mentioned in the Bible—both times in
the Book of Joshua.

"Only be strong and very courageous to observe to do according to all
the law which Moses, my servant, commanded thee: turn not from it to the
right nor to the left, that thou mayest have good success whithersoever
thou goest. This book of the law shall not depart from thy mouth, but
thou shalt meditate therein day and night, that thou mayest observe to
do all that is written therein, for then shalt thou make thy way
prosperous and thou shalt have good success. Turn not to the right nor
to the left."

The *road to success* is a *straight and narrow path; it is a road of
loving absorption, of undivided attention*.

"You attract the things you give a great deal of thought to."

So if you give a great deal of thought to lack, you attract lack, if you
give a great deal of thought to injustice, you attract more injustice.

Joshua said, "And it shall come to pass, that when they make a long
blast with the ram's horn, and when ye hear the sound of the trumpet,
all the people shall shout with a great shout: and the wall of the city
shall fall down flat, and the people shall ascend up, every man straight
before him."

The inner meaning of this story, is the power of the word, your word
which dissolves obstacles, and removes barriers.

When the people shouted the walls fell down.

We find in folk-lore and fairy stories, which come down from legends
founded on Truth, the same idea—a word opens a door or cleaves a rock.

We have it again in the Arabian Night's Story, "Ali Baba and The Forty
Thieves." I saw it made into a moving picture.

Ali Baba has a secret hiding place, hidden somewhere behind rocks and
mountains, the entrance may only be gained by speaking a secret word.—It
is "Open Sesame!"

Ali Baba faces the mountain and cries—"Open Sesame!" and the rocks slide
apart.

It is very inspiring, for it gives you the realization of how YOUR own
rocks and barriers, *will part at the right word*.

 

*So let us now take the statement—The walls of lack and delay now
crumble away, and I enter my Promised Land, under grace*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bricks Without Straw](sds02.md)
