[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sds04)  [Next](sds06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE LONG ARM OF GOD

 

<div align="center">

|                                                                                       |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "The Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms."—Deut. 33:27 |

</div>

 

In the bible, the arm of God always symbolizes protection. The writers
of the bible knew the power of a symbol. It brings a picture which
impresses the subconscious mind. They used the symbols of the rock,
sheep, shepherds, vineyard, lamp, and hundreds of others. It would be
interesting to know how many symbols are used in the bible. The arm also
symbolizes strength.

"The eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms:
and he shall thrust out the enemy from before thee; and shall say,
Destroy them."

Who is the enemy "before thee." The negative thought-forms which you
have built up in your subconscious mind. A man's enemies are only those
of his own household. The everlasting arms thrust out these enemy
thoughts and destroy them.

Have you ever felt the relief of getting out some negative thought-form?
Perhaps you have built up a thought-form of resentment, until you are
always boiling with anger about something. You resent people you know,
people you don't know—people in the past and people in the present; and
you may be sure that the people in the future won't escape your wrath.

All the organs of the body are affected by resentment—for when you
resent, you resent with every organ of the body. You pay the penalty
with rheumatism, arthritis, neuritis, etc., for acid thoughts produce
acid in the blood. All this trouble comes because you are fighting the
battle, not leaving it to the long arm of God.

I have given the following statement to many of my students. *The long
arm of God reaches out over people and conditions, controlling this
situation and protecting my interests*.

This brings a picture of a long arm symbolizing strength and protection.
With the realization of the power of the long arm of God, you would no
longer resist or resent. You would relax and let go. The enemy thoughts
within you would be destroyed, therefore, *the adverse conditions would
disappear*.

Spiritual development means the ability to stand still, or stand aside,
and let Infinite Intelligence lift your burdens and fight your battles.
When the burden of resentment is lifted, you experience a sense of
relief! You have a kindly feeling for everyone, and all the organs of
your body begin to function properly.

A clipping quoting Albert Edward Day, D.D. reads, "That loving our
enemies is good for our spiritual health is widely known and accepted.
But that negation and poisonous emotions destroy physical health, is a
relatively new discovery. The problem of health is often an emotional
one. Wrong emotions entertained and repeated are potent causes of
illness. When the preacher talks about loving your enemies, the man on
the street is apt to dismiss the idea as unendurable and pious. But the
fact is, the preacher is telling you something which is one of the first
laws of hygiene, as well as ethics. No man even for his body's sake can
afford to indulge in hatred. It is like repeated doses of poison. When
you are urged to get rid of fear, you are not listening to a moon-struck
idealist; rather you are hearing counsel that is as significant for
health as advice about diet."

We hear so much about a balanced diet, but without a balanced mind you
can't digest what you eat, calories or no calories.

Non-resistance is an art. When acquired, The World is Yours! So many
people are trying to force situations. Your lasting good will never come
through forcing personal will.

"Flee from the things which flee from thee,  
 Seek nothing, fortune seeketh thee.  
 Behold his shadow on the floor!  
 Behold him standing at the door!"

I do not know the author of these lines. Lovelock, the celebrated
English athlete, was asked how to attain his speed and endurance in
running. He replied, "Learn to relax." Let us attain this rest in
action. He was most relaxed when running the fastest.

Your big opportunity and big success usually *slide in*, when you least
expect it. You have to let go long enough for the *great law of
attraction to operate. You never saw a worried and anxious magnet*. It
stands up straight and hasn't a care in the world, because it knows the
needles can't help jumping to it. The things we rightly desire come to
pass when we have taken the clutch off.

I say in my correspondence course, "*Do not let your heart's desire
become a heart's disease*." *You are completely demagnetized when you
desire something too intensely*. You worry, fear, and agonize. There is
an occult law of indifference: "None of these things move me." *Your
ships come in over a don't care sea*.

Many people in Truth antagonize friends, because they are too anxious
for them to read the books and go to the lectures. They meet opposition.

A friend took my book, "The Game of Life and How to Play It" to her
brother's house to read. The young men of the family refused to read it.
No "nut stuff" for them. One of these young men drives a taxi cab. One
night he drove a taxi which belonged to another man. In going over the
car he found a book stuffed away somewhere. It was "The Game of Life and
How to Play It." The next day he said to his aunt, "I found Mrs. Shinn's
book in the taxi last night. I read it and it's great! There's a lot of
good reading in it. Why doesn't she write another book?" God works in
roundabout ways, His wonders to perform.

I meet unhappy people and a few grateful and contented people. A man
said to me one day, "I have a great deal to be thankful for. I have good
health, enough money and I'm still single!"

The eighty-ninth psalm is very interesting, for we find that two
individuals take part; the man who sings the psalm (for all psalms are
songs or poems), and the Lord God of Hosts answers him. It is a song of
praise and thanksgiving, extolling the strong arm of God.

"I will sing of the mercies of the Lord forever!"

"O Lord God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee?"

"Thou hast a mighty arm: strong is thy hand, and high is thy right
hand."

Then the Lord of Hosts replies.

"With whom my hand shall be established: mine arm also shall strengthen
him."

"My mercy will I keep for him for evermore, and my covenant shall stand
fast with him."

We only hear the words "for evermore" in the bible and in fairy-tales.
In the absolute, man is outside of time and space. His good is "from
everlasting to everlasting." The fairy-tales came down from the old
Persian legends which were founded upon Truth.

Aladdin and His Wonderful Lamp is the out-picturing of the Word. Aladdin
rubbed the lamp and all his desires came to pass. Your word is your
lamp. Words and thoughts are a form of radio activity and do not return
void. A scientist has said that words are clothed in light. *You are
continually reaping the fruits of your words*.

A friend in one of my meeting said that she had brought a man to my
class who had been out of work for a year or more. I gave the statement:
*Now is the appointed time. Today is the day of my amazing good
fortune*. It clicked in his consciousness. Soon after, he was given a
position which paid him nine thousand dollars a year.

A woman told me that when I blessed the offering I said that each
offering would return a thousandfold. She had put a dollar in the
collection. She said with great realization, "That dollar is blessed and
returns a thousand dollars." She received a thousand dollars a short
time afterwards, in a most unexpected way.

Why do some people demonstrate this Truth so much more quickly than
others? It is because they have the ears that hear. Jesus Christ tells
the parable of the man who sowed the seed and it fell upon good ground.
The seed is the word. I say, "*Listen for the statement that clicks; the
statement that gives you realization. That statement will bear fruit*."

The other day I went into a shop where I know the employer quite well. I
had given one of his employees an affirmation card. I said to him,
jokingly, "I wouldn't waste an affirmation card on you. You wouldn't use
it." He replied, "Oh, sure, give me one. I'll use it." The following
week I gave him a card. Before I left he rushed up to me excitedly and
said, "I made that statement and two new customers walked in." It was:
"Now is the appointed time; today is the day of my amazing good
fortune." It had clicked.

So many people use their words in exaggerated and reckless statements. I
find a great deal of material for my talks in the beauty parlor. A young
girl wanted a magazine to read. She called to the operator, "Give me
something terribly new and frightfully exciting." All she wanted was the
latest moving picture magazine. You hear people say, "I wish something
terribly exciting would happen." They are inviting some unhappy, but
exciting, experience into their lives. Then they wonder why it happened
to them.

There should be a chair of metaphysics in all colleges. *Metaphysics is
the wisdom of the ages*. It is the ancient wisdom taught all through the
centuries in India and Egypt and Greece. Hermes Trismegistus was a great
teacher of Egypt. His teachings were closely guarded and have come down
to us over ten centuries. He lived in Egypt in the days when the present
race of men was in its infancy. But if you read the "Kybalion"
carefully, you will find that he taught just what we are teaching today.
He said that all mental states were accompanied by vibrations. You
combine with what you vibrate to, so let us all now vibrate to success,
happiness and abundance.

 

*Now is the appointed time. Today is the day of my amazing good
fortune*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Fork In the Road](sds06.md)
