[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](sds09)  [Next](sds11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### I SHALL NEVER WANT

"The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall not want." Psalms 23:1

The 23rd Psalm is the best known of all the Psalms—we might say that it
is the keynote to the message of the Bible.

It tells man he shall never want, when he has the realization (or
conviction) that the Lord is his Shepherd: the *realization* that
Infinite Intelligence supplies every need.

If you get this conviction today, every need will be met now and
forever-more; you will draw, instantly, from the abundance of the
spheres, whatever you desire or require; for what you need is *already
on your pathway*.

A woman suddenly had the realization: "The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall
never want." She seemed to be touching her invisible supply, she felt
outside of Time and Space, she no longer relied on the external.

Her first demonstration was a small, but necessary one. She needed at
once, some large paperclips, but had no time to go to a stationer's to
buy them.

In looking for something else, she opened a little-used chest, and in
it, she found, about a dozen large paper-clips. She felt that the law
was working, and gave thanks; then some needed money appeared, things
large and small came her way.

Since then she has relied upon the statement: "The Lord is my Shepherd,
I shall never want."

We used to hear people say, "I do not think it is right to ask God for
money or things."

They did not realize that this Creative Principle is within each
man.—(The Father within). True Spirituality is proving God as your
supply, daily—not just once in a while.

Jesus Christ knew this law, for whatever He desired or required,
appeared immediately on His pathway, the loaves and fishes and money
from the fish's mouth.

With this realization, all hoarding and saving would disappear.

This does not mean that you should not have a big bank account, and
investments, but it does mean that you should not depend upon them, for
if you had a loss in one direction, you would have a gain in another.

Always "your barns would be full and your cup flow over."

Now, how does one make this contact with his invisible supply? By taking
a statement of Truth which clicks and gives him realization.

This is not open to a chosen few, "Whosoever calleth on the name of the
Lord shall be delivered." The Lord is *your* shepherd and *my* shepherd
and everybody's shepherd.

God is the Supreme Intelligence devoted to supplying man's need; the
explanation is, that man is God in action. Jesus Christ said, "I and the
Father are one.

We might paraphrase the statement and say, I and the great Creative
Principle of the Universe, are one and the same.

Man only lacks when he loses his contact with this Creative Principle,
which must be fully trusted, for it is Pure Intelligence and knows the
way of Fulfillment.

*The reasoning mind and personal will, cause a short circuit*.

"Trust in me and I will bring it to pass."

Most people are filled with apprehension and dread, when there is
nothing to cling to on the external.

A woman came to a practitioner and said, "I'm only a poor little woman
with no one but God back of me." The practitioner said,—"You need not
worry if you have God back of you," for "all that the Kingdom affords is
yours."

A woman called me on the phone and said, almost in tears, "I'm so
worried about the business situation." I replied, "The situation with
God remains the same: The Lord is your Shepherd: you shall not want."
"If one door shuts, another door opens."

A very successful business-man who conducts all affairs on Truth
methods, said, "The trouble with most people is, that they get to
relying on certain conditions. They haven't enough imagination to go
forward—to open new channels."

*Nearly every big success is built upon a failure*.

I was told that Edgar Bergen lost his part in a Broadway production
because they did not want any more dummies. Noel Coward got him on the
Rudy Vallee radio hour, and he and Charlie McCarthy became famous over
night.

I told the story, at one of my meetings, of a man who was so poor and
discouraged, that he ended it all. A few days later, came a letter
notifying him that he had inherited a large fortune.

A man in the meeting said: "That means, when you want to be dead, your
demonstration is three days off." Yes, *do not be fooled by the darkness
before the dawn*.

It is a good thing to see the dawn once in a while, to convince you how
unfailing it is. It reminds me of an experience of several years ago.

I had a friend who lived in Brooklyn near Prospect Park. She liked to do
unusual things and said to me: "Come to visit me and we'll get up early
and see the sun-rise in Prospect Park."

At first I refused, and then came the hunch that it would be an
interesting experience.

It was in the summer. We got up about four o'clock,—my friend, her
little daughter and myself. It was pitch dark, but we sallied forth down
the street, to the entrance of the Park.

Some policemen eyed us curiously, but my friend said to them with
dignity, "We are going to see the sun-rise;" and it seemed to satisfy
them. We walked through the Park to the beautiful rose-garden.

A faint pink streak appeared in the East, then suddenly, we heard a most
tremendous uproar. We were near the Zoo and all the animals were
greeting the dawn.

The lions and tigers roared, the hyenas laughed, there were shrieks and
howls: every animal had something to say, for a new day was at hand.

It was indeed, most inspiring. The light slanted through the trees;
everything had an unearthly aspect.

Then, as it grew lighter, our shadows were in front instead of behind
us. The dawn of a new day!

This is the wonderful dawn which comes to each one of us, after some
darkness.

Your dawn of Success, Happiness and Abundance is sure to come.

Every day is important, for we read in the wonderful Sanskrit poem,
"Look well, therefore, to this day, such is the salutation of the dawn."

*This day* the Lord is your Shepherd! This day, you shall not want; as
you and this great Creative Principle are one and the same.

The 34th Psalm is also a Psalm of security. It starts with a blessing
for the Lord, "I will bless the Lord at all times: His praise shall
continually be in my mouth."

"They that seek the Lord shall not want any good thing." Seeking the
Lord means that man must make the first move. "Draw near to me and I
will draw near to thee, saith the Lord."

You seek the Lord by making your affirmation, expecting and preparing
for your good.

If you ask for success and prepare for failure, you will receive the
thing you have prepared for.

I tell in my book, "The Game of Life and How to Play It," of a man who
asked me to speak the word that all his debts be wiped out.

After the treatment, he said, "Now I'm thinking what I'll say to the
people when I haven't the money to pay them." A treatment won't help you
if you haven't faith in it, for faith and expectancy impress the
subconscious mind with the picture of fulfillment.

In the 23rd Psalm we read, "He restoreth my soul." Your soul is your
subconscious mind and must be re-stored with the right ideas.

Whatever you feel deeply is impressed upon the subconscious, and
manifests in your affairs.

If you are convinced that you are a failure, you will be a failure,
until you impress the subconscious with the conviction you are a
success.

This is done by making an affirmation which "clicks."

A friend in a meeting said that I had given her the statement as she was
leaving the room—"*The ground you are on is harvest ground*." Things
with her, had been very dull; but this statement clicked.

"*Harvest Ground, Harvest Ground*," rang in her ears. Good things
immediately commenced to come to her, and happy surprises.

The reason it is necessary to make an affirmation is because repetition
impresses the subconscious. You cannot control your thoughts at first,
but you can control your words, and Jesus Christ said: "By your *words*
you are justified and by your words you are condemned."

Every day, choose the right words; the right thoughts!

The Imaging faculty is the creative faculty: "Out of the imaginations of
the heart come the issues of life."

We have all a bank we can draw upon, the Bank of the Imagination.

Let us imagine ourselves rich, well and happy: imagine all our affairs
in divine order; but leave the way of fulfillment to Infinite
Intelligence.

"He has weapons ye know not of," He has channels which will surprise
you.

One of the most important passages in the 23rd Psalm is—"Thou preparest
a table before me in the presence of mine enemies."

*This means that even in the presence of the enemy situation, brought on
by your doubts, fears or resentments, a way out is prepared for you*.

 

*The Lord is my Shepherd; I shall never want*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Look With Wonder](sds11.md)
