[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [New
Thought](../../index)  [Shinn](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](sds10)  [Next](sds12) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0875166105/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

![](../tnshinn.jpg)  
*The Secret Door to Success*, by Florence Scovel Shinn, \[1941\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### LOOK WITH WONDER

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                  |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| "I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy wonders of old."—Psalms 77:11 |

</div>

 

The words wonder and wonderful are used many times in the Bible. In the
dictionary the word wonder is defined as, "a cause for surprise,
astonishment, a miracle, a marvel."

Ouspensky, in his book, "Tertium Organum," calls the 4th dimensional
world, the "World of the Wondrous." He has figured out mathematically,
that there is a realm where all conditions are perfect. Jesus Christ
called it the Kingdom.

We might say, "Seek ye first the world of the wondrous, and all things
shall be added unto you."

It can only be reached through a state of consciousness.

Jesus Christ said, to enter the Kingdom, we must become "as a little
child." Children are continually in a state of joy and wonder!

The future holds promises of mysterious good. Anything can happen over
night.

Robert Louis Stevenson, in "A Child's Garden of Verses" says: "The world
is so full of a number of things, I'm sure we should all be as happy as
kings."

So let us look with wonder at that which is before us; that statement
was given me a number of years ago, I mention it in my book, "The Game
of Life and How To Play It."

I had missed an opportunity and felt that I should have been more awake
to my good. The next day, I took the statement early in the morning, "I
look with wonder at that which is before me."

At noon the phone rang, and the proposition was put to me again. This
time I grasped it: I did indeed, look with wonder for I never expected
the opportunity to come to me again.

A friend in one of my meetings said the other day, that this statement
had brought her wonderful results. It fills the consciousness with happy
expectancy.

Children are filled with happy expectancy until grown-up people, and
unhappy experiences bring them out of the world of the wondrous!

Let us look back and remember some of the gloomy ideas which were given
us: "Eat the speckled apples first." "Don't expect too much, then you
won't be disappointed." "You can't have everything in this life."
"Childhood is your happiest time." "No one knows what the future will
bring." What a start in life!

These are some of the impressions I picked up in early childhood.

At the age of six I had a great sense of responsibility. Instead of
looking with wonder at that which was before me, I looked with fear and
suspicion. I feel much younger now than I did when I was six.

I have an early photograph taken about that time, grasping a flower, but
with a careworn and hopeless expression.

I had left the world of the wondrous behind me! I was now living in the
world of realities, as my elders told me, and it was far from wondrous.

It is a great privilege for children to live in this age, when they are
taught Truth from their birth. Even if they are not taught actual
metaphysics, the ethers are filled with joyous expectancy.

You may become a Shirley Temple or a Freddy Bartholomew or a great
pianist at the age of six, and go on a concert tour.

We are all now, back in the world of the wondrous, where anything can
happen over-night, for when miracles do come, they come quickly!

So let us become *Miracle Conscious:* prepare for miracles, expect
miracles, and we are then inviting them into our lives.

Maybe you need a financial miracle! There is a supply for every demand.
Through active faith, the word, and intuition, we release this invisible
supply.

I will give an example: One of my students found herself almost without
funds, she needed one thousand dollars, and she had had plenty of money
at one time and beautiful possessions, but had nothing left but an
ermine wrap. No fur dealer would give her much for it.

I spoke the word that it would be sold to the right person for the right
price, or that the supply would come in some other way. It was necessary
that the money manifest at once, it was no time to worry or reason.

She was on the street making her affirmations. It was a stormy day—She
said to herself, "I'm going to show active faith in my invisible supply
by taking a taxi cab:" it was a very strong hunch. As she got out of the
taxi, at her destination, a woman stood waiting to get in.

It was an old friend: a very very kind friend. It was the first time in
her life she had ever taken a taxi, but her Rolls Royce was out of
commission that afternoon.

They talked, and my friend told her about the ermine wrap; "Why," her
friend said, "I will give you a thousand dollars for it." And that
afternoon she had the cheque.

*God's ways are ingenious, His methods are sure*.

A student wrote me the other day, that she was using that
statement—*God's ways are ingenious, His methods are sure*. A series of
unexpected contacts brought about a situation she had been desiring. She
looked with wonder at the working of the law.

Our demonstrations usually come within a "split second." All is timed
with amazing accuracy in Divine Mind.

My student left the taxi, just as her friend stopped to enter; a second
later, she would have hailed another taxi.

Man's part is to be wide awake to his leads and hunches; for on the
magic path of Intuition is all that he desires or requires.

In Moulton's Modern Reader's Bible, the book of Psalms is recognized as
the perfection of lyric poetry.

"The musical meditation which is the essence of lyrics can find no
higher field than the devout spirit which at once raises itself to the
service of God, and overflows on the various sides of active and
contemplative life."

The Psalms are also human documents, and I have selected the 77th Psalm
because it gives the picture of a man in despair, but as he contemplates
the wonders of God, faith and assurance are restored to him.

"I cried unto God with my voice, even unto God with my voice; and He
gave ear unto me.

In the day of my trouble I sought the Lord: my soul refused to be
comforted.

Will the Lord cast off forever? and will he be favourable no more?

Hath God forgotten to be gracious? hath he in anger shut up his tender
mercies?

And I said, This is my infirmity: but I will remember the years of the
right hand of the Most High.

I will remember the works of the Lord; surely I will remember thy
wonders of old.

I will meditate also of all thy work, and talk of thy doings.

Thy way, O God, is in the sanctuary: who is so great a God as our God!

Thou art the God that doest wonders.

Thou hast with thine arm redeemed thy people."

This is a picture of what the average Truth student goes through, when
confronted with a problem; he is assailed by thoughts of doubt, fear and
despair.

Then some statement of Truth will flash into his consciousness—"God's
ways are ingenious, His methods are sure!" He remembers other
difficulties which have been overcome, his confidence in God returns. He
thinks, "*what God has done before, He will do for me and more!*"

I was talking to a friend not long ago who said: "I would be pretty dumb
if I didn't believe God could solve my problem. So many times before,
wonderful things have come to me, I know they will come again!"

So the summing up of the 77th Psalm is, "What God has done before, He
now does for me and more!"

It is a good thing to say when you think of your past success, happiness
or wealth: all loss comes from your own vain imaginings, fear of loss
crept into your consciousness, you carried burdens and fought battles,
you reasoned instead of sticking to the magic path of intuition.

But in the twinkling of an eye, all will be restored to you—for as they
say in the East—"What Allah has given, cannot be diminished."

Now to go back to the child's state of consciousness, you should be
filled with wonder, but be careful not to live in your past childhood.

I know people who can only think about their happy childhood days: they
remember what they wore! No skies have since been so blue, or grass so
green. They therefore miss the opportunities of the wonderful now.

I will tell an amusing story of a friend who lived in a town when she
was very young, then moved away to another city. She always looked back
to the house they first lived in; to her it was an enchanted palace:
large, spacious and glamorous.

Many years after, when she had grown up, she had an opportunity of
visiting this house. She was disillusioned: she found it small, stuffy
and ugly. Her idea of beauty had entirely changed, for in the front yard
was an iron dog.

If you went back to your past, it would not be the same. So in this
friend's family, they called living in the past, "iron-dogging."

Her sister told me a story of some "iron-dogging" she had done. When she
was about sixteen, she met abroad, a very dashing and romantic young
man, an artist. This romance didn't last long, but she talked about it a
lot to the man she afterwards married.

Years rolled by, the dashing and romantic young man, had become a
well-known artist; and came to this country to have an exhibition of his
pictures. My friend was filled with excitement, and hunted him up to
renew their friendship. She went to his exhibition, and in walked a
portly business man—no trace was left of the dashing romantic youth!
When she told her husband, all he said was, "iron-dogging."

Remember, *now* is the appointed time! *Today* is the day! *And your
good can happen over night*.

Look with wonder at that which is before you!

We are filled with divine expectancy: "I will restore to you the years
which the locusts have eaten!"

Now let each one think of the good which seems so difficult to attain;
it may be health, wealth, happiness or perfect self-expression.

Do not think *how* your good can be accomplished, just give thanks that
you have already received on the invisible plane, "therefore the steps
leading up to it are secured also."

Be wide awake to your intuitive leads, and suddenly, you find yourself
in your Promised Land.

 

"*I look with wonder at that which is before me*."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Catch Up With Your Good](sds12)
