[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic07)  [Next](tic09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

# THE THIRD MANSIONS

### CHAPTER I.

TREATS OF THE INSECURITY OF LIFE IN THIS EXILE, HOWEVER HIGH WE MAY BE
RAISED, AND OF HOW WE MUST ALWAYS WALK IN FEAR. CONTAINS SOME GOOD
POINTS.

*1. Souls in the Third Mansions. 2. Insecurity of this life. 3. Our
danger of falling from grace. 4. The Saint bewails her past life. 5. Our
Lady's patronage. 6. Fear necessary even for religious. 7. St. Teresa's
contrition. 8. Characteristics of those in the Third Mansions. 9. The
rich young man in the Gospel. 10. Reason of aridities in prayer. 11.
Humility. 12. Tepidity. 13. We must give all to God. 14. Our debt. 15.
Consolations and aridities*.

1\. As for those who, by the mercy of God, have vanquished in these
combats and persevered until they reached the third mansions, what can
we say to them but 'Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord'? <span
id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_85.md) It is no small favour from God that I
should be able to translate this verse into Spanish so as to explain its
meaning, considering how dense I usually am in such matters. We may well
call these souls blessed, for, as far as we can tell, unless they turn
back in their course they are on the safe road to salvation. Now, my
sisters, you see how important it is for them to conquer in their former
struggles, for I am convinced that our Lord will

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

henceforth never cease to keep them in security of conscience, which is
no small boon.

2\. I am wrong in saying 'security,' for there is no security in this
life; understand that in such cases I always imply: 'If they do not
cease to continue as they have begun.' What misery to live in this
world! We are like men whose enemies are at the door, who must not lay
aside their arms, even while sleeping or eating, and are always in dread
lest the foe should enter the fortress by some breach in the walls. O my
Lord and my all! How canst Thou wish us to prize such a wretched
existence? We could not desist from longing and begging Thee to take us
from it, were it not for the hope of losing it for Thy sake or devoting
it entirely to Thy service--and above all. because we know it is Thy
will that we should live. Since it is so, 'Let us die with Thee!' <span
id="fr_86"></span>[2](#fn_86.md) as St. Thomas said, for to be away from
Thee is but to die again and again, haunted as we are by the dread of
losing Thee for ever!

3\. This is why I say, daughters, that we ought to ask our Lord as our
boon to grant us one day to dwell in safety with the Saints, for with
such fears, what pleasure can she enjoy whose only pleasure is to please
God? Remember, many Saints have felt this as we do, and were even far
more fervent, yet fell into grave sin, and we cannot be sure that God
would stretch forth His hand to raise us from sin again to do such
penance as they performed. This applies to extraordinary grace. <span
id="fr_87"></span>[3](#fn_87.md) Truly, my

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

daughters, I feel such terror as I tell you this, that I know not how to
write it, nor even how to go on living, when I reflect upon it as I very
often do. Beg of His Majesty, my daughters, to abide within me, for
otherwise, what security could I feel, after a life so badly spent as
mine has been?

4\. Do not grieve at knowing this. I have often seen you troubled when I
spoke about it, for you wish that my past had been a very holy one, in
which you are right--indeed, I wish the same myself. But what can be
done, now that I have wasted it entirely through my own fault? I have no
right to complain that God withheld the aid I needed to fulfil your
wishes. It is impossible for me to write this without tears and great
shame, when I see that I am explaining these matters to those capable of
teaching me. What a hard task has obedience laid, upon me! God grant
that, as I do it for Him, it may be of some service to you; therefore
beg Him to pardon me for my miserable presumption.

5\. His Majesty knows that I have nothing to rely upon but His mercy; as
I cannot cancel the past, I have no other remedy but to flee to Him, and
to confide in the merits of His Son and of His Virgin Mother, whose
habit, unworthy as I am, I wear as you do also. Praise Him, then, my
daughters, for making you truly daughters of our Lady, so that you need
not blush for my wickedness as you have such a good Mother. Imitate her;
think how great she must be and what a blessing it is for you to have
her for a patroness, since my sins and evil

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

character have brought no tarnish on the lustre of our holy Order.

6\. Still I must give you one warning: be not too confident because you
are nuns and the daughters of such a Mother. David was very holy, yet
you know what Solomon became. <span id="fr_88"></span>[4](#fn_88.md)
Therefore do not rely on your enclosure, on your penitential life, nor
on your continual exercise of prayer and constant communion with God,
nor trust in having left the world or in the idea that you hold its ways
in horror. All this is good, but is not enough, as I have already said,
to remove all fear; therefore meditate on this text and often recall it:
'Blessed is the man that feareth the Lord.' <span
id="fr_89"></span>[5](#fn_89.md)

7\. I do not recollect what I was saying, and have digressed very much:
for when I think of myself my mind cannot soar to higher things but is
like a bird with broken wings; so I will leave this subject for the
present.

8\. To return to what I began to explain about the souls which have
entered the third mansions. God has shown them no small favour, but a
very great one, in enabling them to pass through the first difficulties.
Thanks to His mercy I believe there are many such people in the world:
they are very desirous not to offend His Majesty even by venial sins,
they love penance and spend hours in meditation, they employ their time
well, exercise themselves in works of charity to their neighbours, are
well-ordered in their conversation and dress,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

and those who own a household govern it well. This is certainly to be
desired, and there appears no reason to forbid their entrance to the
last mansions; nor will our Lord deny it them if they desire it, for
this is the right disposition for receiving all His favours.

9\. O Jesus! can any one declare that he does not desire this great
blessing, especially after he has passed through the chief difficulties?
No; no one can! We all say we desire it, but there is need of more than
that for the Lord to possess entire dominion over the soul. It is not
enough to say so, any more than it was enough for the young man when our
Lord told him what he must do if he desired to be perfect. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[6](#fn_90.md) Since I began to speak of these
dwelling-rooms I have him constantly before my mind, for we are exactly
like him; this very frequently produces the great dryness we feel in
prayer, though sometimes it proceeds from other causes as well. I am not
speaking of certain interior sufferings which give intolerable pain to
many devout souls through no fault of their own; from these trials,
however, our Lord always delivers them with much profit to themselves. I
also except people who suffer from melancholy and other infirmities. But
in these cases, as in all others, we must leave aside the judgments of
God.

10\. I hold that these effects usually result from the first cause I
mentioned; such souls know that nothing would induce them to commit a
sin (many of them would not even commit a venial sin

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

advertently), and that they employ their life and riches well. They
cannot, therefore, patiently endure to be excluded from the presence of
our King, Whose vassals they consider themselves, as indeed they are. An
earthly king may have many subjects yet all do not enter his court.
Enter then, enter, my daughters, into your interior; pass beyond the
thought of your own petty works, which are no more, nor even as much, as
Christians are bound to perform: let it suffice that you are God's
servants, do not pursue so much as to catch nothing. <span
id="fr_91"></span>[7](#fn_91.md) Think of the saints, who have entered the
Divine Presence, and you will see the difference between them and
ourselves.

11\. Do not ask for what you do not deserve, nor should we ever think,
however much we may have done for God, that we merit the reward of the
saints, for we have offended Him. Oh, humility, humility! I know not
why, but I am always tempted to think that persons who complain so much
of aridities must be a little wanting in this virtue. However, I am not
speaking of severe interior sufferings, which are far worse than a want
of devotion.

12\. Let us try ourselves, my sisters, or let our Lord try us; He knows
well how to do so (although we often pretend to misunderstand Him). We
will now speak of these well-ordered souls. Let us consider what they do
for God and we shall see at once what little right we have to murmur
against His Majesty. If we turn our backs on Him and go away sorrowfully
like the youth in the Gospel <span id="fr_92"></span>[8](#fn_92.md)

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

when He tells us what to do to be perfect, what can God do? for He must
proportion the reward to our love for Him. This love, my daughters, must
not be the fabric of our imagination; we must prove it by our works. Yet
do not suppose that our Lord has need of any works of ours; He only
expels us to manifest our goodwill. <span id="fr_93"></span>[9](#fn_93.md)

13\. It seems to us we have done everything by taking the religious
habit of our own will, and renouncing worldly things and all our
possessions for God (although they may have been but the nets of St.
Peter, <span id="fr_94"></span>[10](#fn_94.md) yet they seemed much to us,
for they were our all). This is an excellent disposition: if we continue
in it and do not return, even in desire, to the company of the reptiles
of the first rooms, doubtless, by persevering in this poverty and
detachment of soul, we shall obtain all for which we strive. But, mark
this--it must be on one condition--that we 'hold ourselves for
unprofitable servants,' <span id="fr_95"></span>[11](#fn_95.md) as we are
told either by St. Paul or by Christ, and that we do not consider that
our Lord is bound to grant us any favours, but that, as we have received
more from Him, we are the deeper in His debt.

14.. How little is all we can do for so generous a God, Who died for us,
Who created us, Who gives us being, that we should not think ourselves
happy to be able to acquit ourselves of part of the debt we owe Him for
having served us, without asking Him for fresh mercies and favours? I am
loth to

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

use this expression, yet so it is, for He did nothing else during the
whole time He lived in this world but serve us.

15\. Think well my daughters, over some of the points I have treated,
although confusedly, for I do not know how to explain them better. Our
Lord will make you understand them, that you may reap humility from your
dryness, instead of the disquietude the devil strives to cause by it. I
believe that where true humility exists, although God should never
bestow consolations, yet He gives a peace and resignation which make the
soul happier than are others with sensible devotion. These consolations,
as you have read, are often given by the Divine Majesty to the weakest
souls who, I suppose would not exchange them for the fortitude of
Christians serving God in aridities: we love consolations better than
the cross! Do Thou, O Lord, Who knowest all truth, so prove us that we
may know ourselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_85"></span>[70:1](tic08.htm#fr_85.md) Ps. cxi: 1. 'Beatus vir
qui timet Dominum.'

<span id="fn_86"></span>[71:2](tic08.htm#fr_86.md) St. John xi. 16: 'Eamus
et nos ut moriamur cum eo.'

<span id="fn_87"></span>[71:3](tic08.htm#fr_87.md) These last words, in the
margin, but in the handwriting of the Saint, were scored through by one
of the censors, but Fr. Luis de Leon wrote <span id="page_72">p.
72</span> underneath, (as he did in other cases) 'Nothing to be crossed
out.'

<span id="fn_88"></span>[73:4](tic08.htm#fr_88.md) St. Teresa wrote
'Solomon'; Father Gracian corrected 'Absalom,' and Fr. Luis de Leon
restored the original text.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[73:5](tic08.htm#fr_89.md) Ps. cxi. 1.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[74:6](tic08.htm#fr_90.md) Matt. xix. 21.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[75:7](tic08.htm#fr_91.md) Proverbially, like
'having too many irons in the fire.'

<span id="fn_92"></span>[75:8](tic08.htm#fr_92.md) St. Mark. x. 22. *Way of
Perf*. ch. xvii. 5.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[76:9](tic08.htm#fr_93.md) *Rel*. ix. 15.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[76:10](tic08.htm#fr_94.md) St. Matt. iv. 20:
'Relictis retibus secuti sunt eum.'

<span id="fn_95"></span>[76:11](tic08.htm#fr_95.md) St. Luke xvii. 10:
'Servi inutiles sumus: quod debuimus facere fecimus.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Aridity in Prayer](tic09.md)
