[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic02)  [Next](tic04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

###### THE

# INTERIOR CASTLE

###### OR

## THE MANSIONS

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

<div align="center">

|                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          |
|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| *The Benedictines of Stanbrook desire to express their gratitude to the very Rev. Benedict Zimmerman for having kindly revised the translation of the 'Interior Castle' and also for the Introduction, Notes, and Index which he has added to the book*. |

</div>

 

 

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# INTRODUCTION

SAINT TERESA began to write the *Interior Castle* on June 2, 1577,
Trinity Sunday, and completed it on the eve of St. Andrew, November 29,
of the same year. But there was a long interruption of five
months, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) so that the actual time spent
in the composition of this work was reduced to about four weeks--a
fortnight for the first, and another fortnight for the second half of
the book. The rapidity with which it was written is easily explained by
the fact that the Saint had conceived its plan some time previously. On
January 17, 1577, she had written to her brother, Don Lorenzo de Cepeda,
at Avila: 'I have asked the bishop--Don Alvaro Mendoza--for my book (the
*Life*) because I shall perhaps complete it by adding those new favours
our Lord has lately granted me. With these one may even compose a new
work of considerable size, provided God grants me the grace of
explaining myself; otherwise the loss will be of small account.' <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1.md) She never asked for permission to write
anything, but waited until she received a command from her superiors,
which, in this case, came from

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Father Jerome
Gracian, superior of the Discalced J. Carmelites of the Provinces of
Andalusia and Castille, and from Don Alonso Velasquez, canon of Toledo,
afterwards bishop of Osma. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2.md) The Saint
was not in good health at the time; she repeatedly complains of noises
in the head and other infirmities, but, worst of all, she was weighed
down by troubles and anxieties resulting from the action of the
superiors of the Order and of the Papal Nuncio against the nuns and
friars of the Reform. Matters became even more serious when, in October,
the nuns of the Incarnation of Avila proceeded to the election of a new
prioress. Notwithstanding the prohibition of the provincial, fifty-five
electors recorded their votes in favour of the Saint and were
immediately declared excommunicated. The whole work of the Reform seemed
on the brink of ruin, the Saint, as well as all her friends, was in
disgrace, subject to obloquy and ill-treatment.

No trace of these trials is to be found in the *Interior Castle*. Saint
Teresa possessed the power of concentration of thought in a marvellous
degree. The early mornings and late evenings were devoted to the
composition of the book, while the rest of the day was taken up by the
affairs of the Order. Mother Mary of the Nativity, a member of the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

community of Toledo, where the book was begun, declared
afterwards, <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3.md) that she often saw her
writing, generally after Holy Communion, her face resplendent, with such
rapidity and so absorbed in her occupation that she seemed undisturbed
by, and in fact quite unconscious of, any noise that was made. Mother
Mariana of the Angels <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4.md) reports having
heard from the same witness, that entering her cell one day to deliver a
message, the holy Mother was just beginning a new sheet of her book.
While taking off her spectacles to listen to the message she was seized
by a trance in which she remained for several hours. The nun, terrified
at this, did not stir, but kept her eyes steadily on the Saint. When she
came to, it was seen that the paper, previously blank, was covered with
writing. Noticing that her visitor had discovered it, Saint Teresa put
the paper quietly in the box.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Another nun, Mary of St. Francis, left the following declaration: 'I
know that our holy Mother wrote four books, the *Life*, the *Way of
Perfection*, the *Foundations*, and the *Mansions*, which I have seen
her writing. Once, while she was composing the last-named work, I
entered to deliver a message, and found her so absorbed that she did not
notice me; her face seemed quite illuminated and most beautiful. After
having listened to me she said: "Sit down, my child, and let me write
what our Lord has told me ere I forget it," and she went on writing with
great rapidity and without stopping.' <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5.md)

Mary of St. Joseph says she heard from Mary of the Nativity that Father
Jerome Gracian commanded the Saint to write the *Mansions*; she,
however, begged to be excused, because so many books having been written
by holy and learned men, there remained nothing for a woman to write. At
length she yielded under obedience. This nun (Mary of the Nativity) was
frequently in the Saint's cell while she was writing and she noticed her
resplendent face and the almost preternatural velocity with which her
hand travelled over the paper. <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6.md)

Writing to Mother Mary of St. Joseph, Prioress of Seville, November 8,
1581, St. Teresa gives her a message for Father Rodrigo Alvarez, S. J.:
'Our Father (Jerome Gracian, then provincial) tells me that he has
handed you a book written by me,

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

which perhaps you do not feel inclined to read yourself. Kindly read to
Father Rodrigo Alvarez, at his next visit, the last Mansion, but under
the seal of confession, as he asks this in his superior wisdom. This is
only for you two. Tell him that the person he knows has arrived at this
Mansion and enjoys the peace there described; that she is entirely at
rest, and that some grave theologians have assured her that she is on a
safe road. In case you could not read these pages to him do not send him
the book, for it might lead to unpleasantness. Until I have his answer
on this matter I will not write to him. Give him my compliments.'

At the end of the original manuscript, before the epilogue (marked with
Ihs.) there is a notice in Father Alvarez' hand-writing to this effect:
'The Mother Prioress of the convent of Seville has read to me this
seventh Mansion, whither a soul may arrive in the present life. Let all
the saints praise the infinite goodness of God, Who communicates Himself
to His creatures so that they truly seek His glory and the salvation of
their neighbour. What I feel and judge of this matter is, that
everything that has been read to me is conformable to Catholic truth and
in accordance with Holy Scripture and the teaching of the Saints.
Whosoever has read the doctrine of the Saints, such as the books of St.
Gertrude, St. Catharine of Siena, or St. Bridget of Sweden, and other
saints and spiritual writers,

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

will clearly understand that the spirit of Mother Tireza (*sic*) of
Jesus is true, since it leads to the same effects as are to be found in
the saints; and because this is in truth my judgment and opinion, I have
hereunto set my name, this, the 22nd day of February, 1582. P. Rodrigo
Alvarez.' <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7.md)

The work was copied, probably under the supervision of the Saint, who
introduced many changes; when completed the original was handed to
Father Jerome Gracian and to the Dominican, Fray Diego de Yanguas, for
approval. Both, particularly the former, made numerous corrections,
which Fuente, not without reason, calls impertinent, scratching out
whole sentences and adding others. The book thus revised must have
enjoyed a certain celebrity, though not to the same extent as the
*Life*, to which St. Teresa herself preferred it. Scarcely a week after
its completion she wrote to Father Salazar, S.J.: 'If Señor Carillo
\[Salazar himself\] came, the person in question \[the Saint\] thinks he
would find another jewel which in her opinion is superior to the former
\[the *Life*\]. This one reflects nothing foreign to itself, but is
resplendent in its own beauty. It is enriched with more delicate enamels
than the former, the workmanship, too, is more perfect. For, as the
person in question says, the jeweller was less experienced when he
fashioned the previous one. Moreover, the gold of the new

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

one is of better quality than that of the former, though the precious
stones are not so well set. It has been done, as might be expected,
according to the designs of the Jeweller Himself.' <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8.md) Later on she wrote to Father Jerome Gracian:
The book I have written since seems to me superior \[to the *Life*\]; at
least I had more experience when I wrote it.' <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9.md)

One day, speaking with Mother Mary of Jesus on spiritual matters, she
said that our Lord had communicated so much to her since she had reached
what she described in the seventh Mansion,--the spiritual
Marriage,--that she did not consider it possible to advance further in
this life, in the way of prayer, nor even to wish to do so. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10.md)

The book was eagerly read by those who were able to obtain copies. At
the archiepiscopal Seminary at Salamanca it was read publicly after
dinner; the students, contrary to custom, sacrificing the recreation
rather than miss so edifying an instruction. The result was that several
entered the religious life, one becoming a Franciscan, two others, who
had already taken their degrees, joining the Discalced Carmelites. <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11.md) We also know of a lady who became a Poor
Clare through reading the *Interior Castle*. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12.md) The process of Beatification contains the
following evidence of Don Francisco de Mora, architect to Philip III:
'The same prioress (of a

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

convent of Dominican nuns) being concerned about my salvation gave me a
book in manuscript, called *The Mansions*, by Mother Teresa, hoping I
should derive some benefit from it. I fear this was not the case, but it
made me acquainted with Teresa of Jesus, the foundress of the Discalced
Carmelite nuns, of whom I had not yet heard, but for whom I now felt
devotion.' <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13.md)

In August 1586 it was decided to print Saint Teresa's works, the
Augustinian Fray Luis de Leon being selected as editor, as he was
unconcerned in the quarrels raging round the Reform. Accordingly, the
manuscript of the *Interior Castle* was handed to him. On the first leaf
he wrote the following note:

'Many passages of this book written by the holy Mother have been scored
through, other words being substituted or notes being added in the
margin. Most of these corrections are badly done, the original text
being much better. It will be noticed that the holy Mother's sentences
are superior and agree with the context, which is not the case with the
corrections. These improvements and glosses may therefore be dispensed
with. Having myself read and considered everything with great care, it
appears to me that the reader, too, should have before him the words of
the author who knew best what to say; for this reason I have left out
the additions, and have restored what has been changed, excepting only a

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

few corrections made by the writer herself. I beg of the reader that he
would in charity reverence the words and even the letters traced by so
holy a hand, and strive to understand what has been written. He will
then see that there was no need for corrections; should he fail to
understand her, let him believe that the writer knew what she said, and
that her words cannot be tampered with if they are not to lose their
meaning; otherwise what was to the point will seem out of place. This is
how books become corrupted, useless, and are finally lost.' <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14.md)

When Luis de Leon undertook the editing of St. Teresa's writings he
received a long letter from Don Diego de Yepes, afterwards Bishop of
Tarazona, a former friend and confessor of the Saint, in which he
records his personal recollections. I shall only insert here what he
says about the *Interior Castle*:

'This holy Mother desired to see the beauty of a soul in the state of
grace, a thing greatly to be coveted both for the sake of seeing and of
possessing it. While this desire lasted, she was commanded to write a
treatise on prayer, of which she had much personal experience. On the
eve of the Blessed Trinity, while considering what subject to choose for
this treatise, God, Who disposes everything in due season, fulfilled her
wish and furnished a suitable subject. He showed her a most beautiful
globe

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of crystal, in the shape of a castle, with seven rooms, the seventh,
situated in the centre, being occupied by the King of glory, resplendent
with the most exquisite brilliancy, which shone through and adorned the
remaining rooms. The nearer these lay to the centre, the more did they
partake of that wondrous light. It did not, however, penetrate beyond
the crystal, for everything round about was a mass of darkness and
impurity, full of toads and vipers and other venomous animals.

She was still admiring this beauty which, by the grace of God dwells in
the soul, when, to! the light suddenly disappeared, and the crystal,
wherein the King of glory was still residing, became opaque and as dark
as coal, emitting an intolerable odour; the venomous animals, formerly
held in check outside, obtained admittance into the castle. The holy
Mother wished that every one should behold this vision, for she thought
that no one having seen the beauty and splendour of grace, which is
forfeited by sin and replaced by such repulsive misery, would ever dare
to offend God.

'She told me this vision on the same day, for in this as well as in
other things she was so communicative that on the following morning she
said to me: "How I forgot myself yesterday! I cannot think how it could
have happened. Those high aspirations of mine, and the affection I have
for you must have caused me to go beyond all reasonable

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

limits. God grant I may have derived some profit therefrom." I promised
her to say nothing about it during her lifetime, but since her death I
should like to make it known to all men. From this vision she learnt
four important matters.

'First, she came to understand this axiom, which in this form she had
never heard of in her life, <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15.md) that
God is present in all things by His essence, presence, and power. As she
was deeply humble and submissive and obedient to the doctrine of the
Church and the teaching of the learned ministers of God, she never
rested until her revelations had been approved of by her superiors and
by theologians, and were shown to be conformable to Holy Scripture. She
went so far as to say that if all the angels of heaven said one thing,
and her superiors another, though she could not doubt that the former
were true angels, yet she would hold what was told her by her superiors,
because faith comes through these and there remains no room for deceit,
whereas revelations coming from angels might be illusionary.

'With such regard for obedience, she asked me one day at
Toledo--probably at the time when she saw the vision of the
Castle--whether it was true that God was in all things by His power,
presence,

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

and essence, to which I replied in the affirmative, explaining it as
best I could on the authority of St. Paul, particularly where he says
"the sufferings of this time are not worthy to be compared with the
glory to come that shall be revealed in us," <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16.md) Laying stress on these words, "shall be
revealed in us," she was so overjoyed that I was quite astonished.
Though in a way it seemed to me a kind of curiosity, I could not help
thinking there was some mystery about it, for she said: "This is the
very thing."

'Secondly, she was greatly surprised at the malice of sin, since,
notwithstanding the presence of God in these various ways, it prevents
the soul from partaking of that powerful light.

'Thirdly, she derived such humility and self-knowledge from this vision,
that from that moment she never thought of herself in all the good she
was doing; for she learnt that all the beauty of the soul emanates from
that resplendent light, and that the powers of the soul and of the body
are enlivened and strengthened by the Power established in the centre,
whence comes all our good, so that we have but a small share in our good
works. All the good she did, she from this moment referred to God as its
principal author.

'Fourthly, she derived from it the subject of the book she was ordered
to write on prayer, comparing

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

the seven rooms of the Castle with as many degrees of prayer, whereby we
enter within ourselves and draw nearer to God. So that, penetrating to
the depths of our soul and gaining perfect self-knowledge, we reach the
seventh room where God Himself dwells, with Whom we become united by as
perfect a union as is possible in the present life, being made partakers
of His light and love.

'I will say no more of this vision and the *Mansions*, because your
Reverence must by now have seen this admirable book, and must know with
what accuracy, with what majestic doctrine, with what lucid examples she
describes the progress of the soul from the gate to the very centre. It
is clearly seen in this treatise how she communicated with our Lord, and
how His Majesty vouchsafed to place her in the centre and to unite her
with Himself, as she puts it, by the bonds of marriage and an
inseparable union.' <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17.md)

After the publication of the *Interior Castle*, in 1588 at Salamanca, it
became not only more widely known, but also more and more appreciated.
Francis Suarez, the great theologian of the Society of Jesus, says in
his deposition in the process of Beatification that he had read some of
St. Teresa's works, particularly the *Mansions*, which contain an
absolutely safe doctrine and give proof of a wonderful spirit of prayer
and contemplation. <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18.md)

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

Thomas Hurtado, professor of theology at Seville, speaks as follows:

As often as I read the books of the holy Mother, I admire the wonderful
manner in which God instructed her in mystical theology for the sake of
souls giving themselves truly to familiar intercourse with His divine
Majesty. But where I most regret my inability of expressing in fitting
terms my sentiments towards this excellent teacher is when I look at,
and refresh myself in that Castle with its seven rooms; for there is
seen the effect of infused knowledge such as St. Denis received from St.
Hierotheus <span id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19.md) and both from St. Paul,
and which has been committed to writing in the famous book of *Mystical
Theology*. Hence comes, as from a fountain-head, notwithstanding the
obscurity (to our manner of thinking) of its language, the doctrine of
the great masters of the spiritual life such as Hugh of St. Victor, St.
Bernard, Ruysbroek, Tauler, Gerson, and many others whom I pass by.

'Nevertheless, I will boldly say that no one has given us water more
limpid from that Apostolical and Areopagitical well than the holy Mother
Teresa, who, in her books, but chiefly in the *Mansions*, has cleared up
in simple language the most difficult questions of this divine theology,
and has brought forth light from darkness, as it is

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

written: (He) commanded light to shine out of darkness.' <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20.md) Who has ever been able to show as clearly
as our Saint how God takes possession of the soul, how He unites Himself
with its substance, whence comes to the intellect the light of faith, to
the will the ardour of love, and to the senses the jubilation over His
works? No one has ever turned theory into practice in a more convincing
or more catholic manner. The most profound secrets of this supernatural
wisdom are here treated with such ease, so amiably, so delightfully,
they are illustrated by such nice and homely examples, that instead of
awe-inspiring obscurity, we find lovely flowers and the sweetness of
love, through which, as through an avenue, the soul passes onwards. When
God made known His exalted doctrine to St. Dionysius and other mystical
writers, He made use of their own language and pen. But St. Teresa in
the *Mansions* is like the light of dawn whose rays are not intercepted
by the clouds of this world; like a soft rain from above, whereby the
soul grows and profits by its communications with God. Until the
teaching of this great door became known it seemed as though God were
inaccessible, being surrounded by darkness, through which Moses and some
other persons had to pass when approaching Him; <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21.md) but they neither explained

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

the manner nor showed the way whereby they came to the enjoyment of the
sweetness of the Spouse. Now, however, this way is clear and patent to
all, having been pointed out in the *Mansions*, in language so straight
and so methodical, and no longer such as could not be understood, or
required further explanation. In my opinion this holy writer derived not
only the substance of her teaching from infused knowledge, but even the
words with which she explains it.' <span id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22.md)

Likewise Don Alvaro de Villegas, canon of Toledo, expressed his opinion
that the *Way of Perfection* and the *Interior Castle* contain 'heavenly
doctrine.' The weight of the subject-matter, the propriety of the
comparisons, the force of the expressions, the consistency of the
teaching, the sweetness of her well-chosen, vivid words, the clearness
of the arguments, all this proves that she was guided by her heavenly
Spouse, in Whom are hidden the treasures of the wisdom of God; and that
the Holy Ghost, Who more than once was seen resting on her head like a
dove, was dilating these works. Villegas does not believe that any one
could read them, as such books ought to be read, without becoming
himself a master of the spiritual life. For they are like heavenly dew,
rendering the soul fruitful in the matter of prayer. <span
id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23.md)

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

It would be a mistake to consider the *Interior Castle* a complete
treatise of mystical theology. Like St. Teresa's other works, it is
intensely personal: she describes the road by which she has been led,
being well aware that others may be led in a different way. In the
heavenly Father's house there are many mansions, not only seven, and
many paths lead to them. What gives the work such high value is, that it
is the result of a most searching inquiry into the various phases
whereby a soul is gradually transformed into the likeness of God
Himself. Here St. Teresa is always at her best. She takes nothing for
granted, even her own personal experiences are admitted only after
having been fully investigated and found to be consistent one with the
other, and conformable to the teaching of the Church and the words of
Holy Scripture.

Mystical theology is generally divided into three parts, respectively
called the purgative, the illuminative, and the unitive life. In the
first, man is cleansed from sin and habitual imperfection by the use of
the sacraments and by voluntary mortification of the passions. The mind
is purified by sedulous meditation on the last end and on the Life and
Passion of Christ, which must ever be the great model of the Christian.
This first portion of the way to heaven can be covered by the help of
the ordinary means of grace, without any direct and extraordinary
intervention of divine power.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

The second part differs in many ways from the first. It comprises the
passive purification of the soul and the passive enlightenment of the
mind. By sending it keen interior and exterior trials and sufferings,
God completes the cleansing of the soul in a manner far surpassing any
voluntary effort of man. By raising it to the stage of contemplation He
gives it fresh light on the mysteries of our Redemption. The mind is
then no longer compelled to strain the memory, the reason, and the will,
in order to dwell upon the great truths of religion and to derive some
personal benefit therefrom, for these truths are now more or less
permanently before it and fill it with holy thoughts, sometimes giving
it consolation in trouble, at other times striking a warning note
against imperfection. Again, the subtraction of sensible consolation,
and the interior aridity arising therefrom, leave a terrible blank in
the soul, showing it that, without God's help, it is mere nothingness.
This apparent estrangement from God is the keenest trial that can befall
a soul, but also the most powerful means of cleansing it from the least,
the most subtle imperfections.

Emerging from this state of probation, the soul enters upon the third
stage, in which, though perhaps in the midst of severe suffering and
sharp persecution, it knows itself to be a chosen child of God, to Whom
it is united by perfect conformity of the will. Such phenomena as
revelations, visions,

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

locutions, and even more wonderful manifestations, like the wound of
love, spiritual betrothal and nuptials, are incidental rather than
essential to the second and third stages. Some great contemplatives have
never experienced anything of the kind, while, on the other hand, some
of these occurrences may sometimes have been merely the work of an
exuberant imagination, or even the result of diabolical illusion. They
should therefore never be wished for, or cherished, but rather shunned
and ignored, in as far as that is possible. If they are real and come
from God, they will do their work without the co-operation of the soul.
The danger of self-deception is so great that a person labouring under
such phenomena should offer every resistance, and the spiritual director
should exercise the utmost vigilance. St. Teresa is very eloquent on
this point, and undeceived many would-be contemplatives, while her
disciple, St. John of the Cross, is even more thorough-going in the
deprecation of spiritual favours. Among the numerous marks whereby the
trained theologian may discriminate between real and imaginary
phenomena, there is one about which Saint Teresa speaks with wonderful
clearness. If they proceed from hysteria the imagination alone is active
and the higher powers of the soul are torpid; if, however, they come
from God, the intellect and the will are so intensely active,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

that the lower powers and even the body lose all strength for the time
being.

It will be noticed that the first two Mansions belong to the purgative
life, the third and fourth to the illuminative, and the remaining three
to the unitive life. Compared with similar works, the treatment of the
first stage must be called meagre. True, in her *Life* and in the *Way
of Perfection* St. Teresa has dealt with this subject somewhat more
fully. Indeed, the last-named work was designed as a treatise on
Christian Ascetics, dealing with the purgation of the soul by
mortification and the enlightenment of the mind by meditation. There,
too, appears the first idea of the *Mansions*, <span
id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24.md) and Fuente remarks that the passage in
question may be taken for the parting of the ways between the two works.
However, this is not the only, nor, indeed, the chief reason why St.
Teresa is so reticent about the preliminary stage of the contemplative
life. The fact is that she herself did not pass through these
experiences. By God's grace she was preserved from childhood from
grievous sin and gross imperfection. Though she never grows tired of
bewailing her faults and unfaithfulness, these avowals must be taken
*cum grano salis*. While yet a child, she sometimes gave way to vanity
in dress and wasted her time in reading romances. As a young religious,
she was sought after by friends and relatives who

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

took pleasure in her attractive conversation. This proved further loss
of time and caused distractions. Owing to acute suffering, she for some
years left off the practice of mental prayer, though she faithfully
performed all her religious obligations, as far as her weak state of
health allowed. This is all. The war of the flesh against the spirit,
the insubordination of the lower parts of nature, the fickleness of the
will, which so often thwart the most noble aspirations of a soul, were
unknown to her. Under these circumstances, we cannot be surprised to
find her entering upon the journey towards God at a point which in many
cases marks but the closing stage.

As to the remaining parts of this book, it will be seen from the
parallel passages that they cover much the same ground as her *Life* and
the *Relations*. With her singular gift of introspection and analysis,
the Saint studied her own case from every point of view, so as to make
sure that her extraordinary experiences were due to no illusion, and
offered no obstacle to the safety of her soul. Although the *Interior
Castle* contains little that we do not already know from her other
works, it is superior to them by reason of its logical order and the
masterly treatment of the most recondite matters of mystical theology.
While ostensibly dealing with general facts, St. Teresa in reality
records her personal experiences. How definite these were, how little
room there remained for the freaks of the imagination,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

will appear from the fact that she nearly always repeats the very words
she had used in her *Life* and in the other reports of her interior
progress, although she did not have these writings before her eyes, nor
had she ever seen them since they first left her hands. Every one of her
experiences must have produced a profound impression to be remembered so
minutely after an interval of years.

There is that in the *Interior Castle* which reminds one of Dante's
*Paradiso*. In the one and the other, the soul, purified from earthly
dross, is gradually being invested with new and glorious qualities, and
is being led through regions unknown until it arrives at the very
threshold of the throne of God. Not even the boldest imagination could
have designed so wonderful a picture of a soul adorned with graces at
once so varied and so true. In one case we know, the poet has drawn
abundantly from the treasury of the Angelical Doctor, putting in verse
the conclusions of the scholastic theologian. In the other case we can
follow, chapter by chapter, the influence of the teaching of St. Thomas
Aquinas. St. Teresa had never studied it herself, but her directors and
confessors were deeply versed in it and solved her doubts and
perplexities on the lines of the greatest of the school men. The
*Interior Castle* might almost be considered a practical illustration of
certain parts of the *Summa theologica*, <span
id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25.md)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

as it describes the progress of the soul through every stage of
perfection. When we have reached the second chapter of the seventh
Mansion, there remains but one thing: the Beatific Vision, and this is
reserved for the next life.

After the publication of the *Interior Castle* by Luis de Leon, the
manuscript came into the possession of Father Jerome Gracian, who, after
having made a copy of it which is still extant, presented the original,
on the occasion of a visit to the convent of Seville, to Don Pedro
Cereso Pardo, a great friend of the Saint, and a benefactor to the
convent. When his only daughter took the habit there, the precious
manuscript was part of her dowry. Doña Juana de Mendoza, Duchess of
Beguiar, a novice in the same convent, had it bound in silver and
precious stones. It is still there, <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26.md)
and the present writer had the privilege of seeing it. It comprises a
hundred and thirteen leaves in folio, but originally there must have
been some more leaves which at a later period were torn out. These, it
is presumed, contained the headings of the chapters. Unlike the *Life*
and the *Foundations*, the text of the *Castle* is divided only by
figures, without indication of the contents of each chapter, but the
arguments which have come down to us are so entirely
[similar](errata.htm#0.md) to those of the two works

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

named, that it is impossible to consider them otherwise than the genuine
work of the author. In the present translation they have been inserted
in their proper places.

On the occasion of the ter-centenary of Saint Teresa's death, a
photo-lithographic edition of the original was published under the
direction of Cardinal Lluch, Carmelite of the old observance, Archbishop
of Seville:

*El Castillo Ynterior ó Tratado de las Moradas,  
escrito por Sta. Teresa de Jesús.  
Litografia de Juan Moyano* (Seville) 1882.

The present translation, the third in English, <span
id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27.md) has been made directly from this
autograph edition. It has been thought advisable that, as far as the
genius of the language allows it, the wording of the author should be
strictly adhered to, and that not even a shade of her expression should
be sacrificed. For Teresa is not only a saint whose

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

every word is telling, but she is a classic in her own language who
knows how to give expression to her deepest thoughts. Having compared
word for word the translation with the original, I am in a position to
affirm that this programme has been faithfully carried out. For the
foot-notes--with few exceptions--as well as for the Index, I am
responsible. It seemed to me important to point out all the parallel
passages from the various works of the Saint. Only by this means can it
be seen how consistent Saint Teresa is in all her writings. <span
id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28.md) It would have been easy to multiply
quotations from the works of other writers on mystical theology. Thus,
the influence of the *Imitation of Christ* and of the *Life of our Lord*
by Ludolphus the Carthusian can be distinctly traced in the *Interior
Castle*. Both these works, as well as some Spanish books, were held in
such esteem by St. Teresa, that she ordered the prioress of each convent
to keep them at the disposal of the nuns. As there is a limit to
footnotes, I have contented myself with such references as seemed to me
conducive to the elucidation of the doctrine laid down in this treatise.

In conclusion I venture to express the hope that

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

this new translation will be found helpful by those who feel called to a
higher life.

BENEDICT ZIMMERMAN,  
*Prior, O.C.D*.

ST. LUKE'S PRIORY,  
   WINCANTON, SOMERSET.  
      *July*, 1, 1905, and *December* 25, 1911.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[9:1](tic03.htm#fr_0.md) *Castle*, Mansions v. ch.
iv. I.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[9:2](tic03.htm#fr_1.md) *Letters of St. Teresa*,
Vol. ii.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[10:3](tic03.htm#fr_2.md) The French Carmelite nuns
in their new translation, *Œuvres complètes de Sainte Thérèse*, t. vi,
Introduction, p. 5, quoting the *Año Teresiano*, t. vii ad 7 July, and
Father Gracian's *Dilucidario*, as well as his additions to Ribera, show
the exact share of Fr. Gracian and Dr. Velasquez in the preliminaries of
this work.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[11:4](tic03.htm#fr_3.md) Fuente, *Obras de Santa
Teresa de Jesus*. Edit. 1881, Vol. vi, p. 278.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[11:5](tic03.htm#fr_4.md) *Ibid*. p. 178. A somewhat
similar incident is reported by Mother Anne of the Incarnation (*Ibid*.
p. 213), but it appears to be wrongly brought into connection with the
composition of the *Castle*. The nun in question had belonged to the
convent of St. Joseph at Segovia at an earlier period, but there is no
evidence that St. Teresa visited this place in the course of the six
months during which she composed this work. The Bollandists, indeed,
maintain that it was commenced at Toledo, continued at Segovia and
completed at Avila (n. 1541), but their sole authority for including
Segovia is the passage in question, which, however, must refer to some
other work of the Saint. The sister, passing St. Teresa's door, saw her
writing, her face being lit up as by a bright light. She wrote very fast
without making any corrections. After an hour, it being about midnight,
she ceased and the light disappeared. The Saint then knelt down and
remained in prayer for three hours, after which she went to sleep.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12:6](tic03.htm#fr_5.md) Fuente, p. 223.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:7](tic03.htm#fr_6.md) *Ibid*. p. 255.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[14:8](tic03.htm#fr_7.md) Autograph, fol. cx.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[15:9](tic03.htm#fr_8.md) December 7, 1577.
*Letters* Vol. II.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[15:10](tic03.htm#fr_9.md) Jan. 14, 1580. Letters
Vol. IV:

<span id="fn_10"></span>[15:11](tic03.htm#fr_10.md) Fuente, *Obras*. *l.c.*
p. 275.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[15:12](tic03.htm#fr_11.md) *l.c.* p. 217.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[15:13](tic03.htm#fr_12.md) *Ibid*. p. 227.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[16:14](tic03.htm#fr_13.md) Fuente, *Obras*. p.
190.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[17:15](tic03.htm#fr_14.md) Autograph. fol. 1.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[19:16](tic03.htm#fr_15.md) See *Life*, ch. xviii.
20. *Mansions* v. ch. i. 9. The ignorance of the priest who had told her
that God was only present by His grace, made a lasting impression on St.
Teresa. She was first undeceived by a Dominican.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[20:17](tic03.htm#fr_16.md) Rom. viii. 18.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[21:18](tic03.htm#fr_17.md) Fuente; pp. 131-133.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[21:19](tic03.htm#fr_18.md) *l.c.* 184.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[22:20](tic03.htm#fr_19.md) Allusion to the famous
*Mystical Theology* attributed to Dionysius the Areopagite, and long
considered the chief authority on this subject.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[23:21](tic03.htm#fr_20.md) 2 Cor. iv. 6.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[23:22](tic03.htm#fr_21.md) The example of Moses is
scarcely to the point (cf. Exod. xxxiii. 11, and Num. xii. 7, 8).

<span id="fn_22"></span>[24:23](tic03.htm#fr_22.md) Fuente, pp. 330-332.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24:24](tic03.htm#fr_23.md) *l.c.* p. 334. These
testimonies could be easily multiplied.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[28:25](tic03.htm#fr_24.md) *Way of Perf.* ch. xx.
1

<span id="fn_25"></span>[30:26](tic03.htm#fr_25.md) S. Theol. 2da 2dæ, qq.
171-184.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[31:27](tic03.htm#fr_26.md) Bollandists, *Acta*, n.
1495. See also Impressions in Spain. By Lady Herbert. London, 1867, p,
171.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[32:28](tic03.htm#fr_27.md) The first translation
is to be found in the *Works of the Holy Mother St. Teresa of Jesus*
(third part). Printed in the year MDCLXXV, pp. 137-286. It bears the
title: *The Interiour Castle: or, Mansions*. As to the authors of this
translation--Abraham Woodhead and another, whose name is not known--see
my book *Carmel in England*, p. 342, note. It is stated there that the
third part, containing the *Way of Perfection* and the *Castle*, has no
title-page. This is true with regard to the copy I had before me when
writing that book. The one I have now is more complete.

The second translation, by the Rev. John Dalton, appeared in 1852 and
has been repeatedly reprinted. It was dedicated to Bishop Ullathorne.

Of foreign translations it will be sufficient to mention the one by
Cyprien de la Nativité, in *Œuvres de la Sainte Mère Térèse de Jésus*,
Paris, 1657, and the new one in *Œuvres* already mentioned.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[33:29](tic03.htm#fr_28.md) The present translation
ought to dispose of the reservations expressed by an able critic in his
otherwise valuable appreciation of the works of the Saint. See *Santa
Teresa*, by the late Alexander Whyte, D.D. London, 1898, p. 32.

Criticisms which have appeared in various papers, or have been privately
conveyed, have been gratefully received and acted upon in the second and
the present edition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preface](tic04.md)
