[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic10)  [Next](tic12.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

### CHAPTER II.

CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT, EXPLAINING BY A COMPARISON IN WHAT DIVINE
CONSOLATIONS CONSIST: AND HOW WE OUGHT TO TRY TO PREPARE OURSELVES TO
RECEIVE THEM, WITHOUT ENDEAVOURING TO OBTAIN THEM.

*1. Physical results of sensible devotion. 2. Effects of divine
consolations. 3. The two fountains. 4. They symbolize two kinds of
prayer. 5. Divine consolations shared by body and soul. 6. The incense
within the soul. 7. Graces received in this prayer. 8. Such favours not
to be sought after*.

1\. GOD help me! how I have wandered from my subject! I forget what I
was speaking about, for my occupations and ill-health often force me to
cease writing until some more suitable time. The sense will be very
disconnected; as my memory is extremely bad and I have no time to read
over what is written, even what I really understand is expressed very
vaguely, at least so I fear. I think I said that spiritual consolations
are occasionally connected with the passions. These feelings of devotion
produce fits of sobbing; I have even heard that sometimes they cause a
compression of the chest, and uncontrollable exterior motions violent
enough to cause bleeding at the nose and other painful effects. <span
id="fr_123"></span>[1](#fn_123.md)

2\. I can say nothing about this, never having experienced anything of
the kind myself; but there appears some cause for comfort in it,
because, as I said, all ends in the desire to please God and to

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

enjoy His presence. What I call divine consolations, or have termed
elsewhere the 'prayer of quiet,' is a very different thing, as those
will understand who, by the mercy of God, have experienced them.

3\. To make the matter clearer, let us imagine we see two fountains with
basins which fill with water. I can find no simile more appropriate than
water by which to explain spiritual things, as I am very ignorant and
have poor wits to help me. <span id="fr_124"></span>[2](#fn_124.md)
Besides, I love this element so much that I have studied it more
attentively than other things. God, Who is so great, so wise, has
doubtless hidden secrets in all things He created, which we should
greatly benefit by knowing, as those say who understand such matters.
Indeed, I believe that in each smallest creature He has made, though it
be but a tiny ant, there are more wonders than can be comprehended.
These two basins are filled in different ways; the one with water from a
distance flowing into it through many pipes and waterworks, while the
other basin is built near the source of the spring itself and fills
quite noiselessly. If the fountain is plentiful, like the one we speak
of, after the basin is full the water overflows in a great stream which
flows continually. No machinery is needed here, nor does the water run
through aqueducts.

4\. Such is the difference between the two kinds of prayer. The water
running through the aqueducts resembles sensible devotion, which is
obtained by meditation. We gain it by our thoughts, by meditating on
created things, and by the labour of

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

our minds; in short, it is the result of our endeavours, and so makes
the commotion I spoke of, while profiting the soul. <span
id="fr_125"></span>[3](#fn_125.md) The other fountain, like divine
consolations, receives the water from the source itself, which signifies
God: as usual, when His Majesty wills to bestow on us any supernatural
favours, we experience the greatest peace, calm, and sweetness in the
inmost depths of our being; I know neither where nor how.

5\. This joy is not, like earthly happiness, at once felt by the heart;
after gradually filling it to the brim, the delight overflows throughout
all the mansions and faculties, until at last it reaches the body.
Therefore, I say it arises from God and ends in ourselves, for whoever
experiences it will find that the whole physical part of our nature
shares in this delight and sweetness. While writing this I have been
thinking that the verse 'Dilatasti cor meum,' 'Thou hast dilated my
heart,' <span id="fr_126"></span>[4](#fn_126.md) declares that the heart is
dilated. This joy does not appear to me to originate in the heart, but
in some more interior part and, as it were, in the depths of our being.
I think this must be the centre of the soul, as I have since learnt and
will explain later on. I discover secrets within us which often fill me
with astonishment: how many more must there be unknown to me! O my Lord
and my God! how stupendous is Thy grandeur! We are like so many foolish
peasant lads: we think we know something of Thee, yet it must be
comparatively nothing, for there are profound secrets even in ourselves
of

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

which we know naught. I say 'comparatively nothing' in proportion with
all the secrets hidden within Thee, yet how great are Thy mysteries that
we are acquainted with and can learn even by the study of such of Thy
works as we see! <span id="fr_127"></span>[5](#fn_127.md)

6\. To return to the verse I quoted, which may help to explain the
dilation begun by the celestial waters in the depths of our being. They
appear to dilate and enlarge us internally, and benefit us in an
inexplicable manner, nor does even the soul itself understand what it
receives. It is conscious of what may be described as a certain
fragrance, as if within its inmost depths were a brazier sprinkled with
sweet perfumes. Although the spirit neither sees the flame nor knows
where it is, yet it is penetrated by the warmth, and scented fumes,
which are even sometimes perceived by the body. Understand me, the soul
does not feel any real heat or scent, but something far more subtle,
which I use this metaphor to explain. Let those who have never
experienced it believe that it really occurs to others: the soul is
conscious of it and feels it more distinctly than can be expressed. It
is not a thing we can fancy or gain by anything we can do; clearly it
does not arise from the base coin of human nature, but from the most
pure gold of Divine Wisdom. I believe that in this case the powers of
the soul are not united to God, but are absorbed and astounded at the
marvel before them. I may possibly be contradicting what I wrote
elsewhere; <span id="fr_128"></span>[6](#fn_128.md) nor would

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

this be surprising, for it was done about fifteen years ago, and perhaps
God has given me since then a clearer insight into the matter. I may be
entirely mistaken on the subject, both then and now, but never do I
wilfully say what is untrue. No; by the mercy of God, I would rather die
a thousand times than tell a falsehood: I speak of the matter as I
understand it. I believe that in this case the will must in some way be
united with that of God. The after effects on the soul, and the
subsequent behaviour of the person, show whether this prayer was genuine
or no: this is the best crucible by which to test it.

7\. Our Lord bestows a signal grace on the soul if it realizes how great
is this favour, and another greater still if it does not turn back on
the right road. You are longing, my daughters, to enter into this state
of prayer at once, and you are right, for, as I said, the soul cannot
understand the value of the graces there bestowed by God upon it, nor
the love which draws Him ever closer to it: we should certainly desire
to learn how to obtain this favour. I will tell you what I know about
it, setting aside certain cases in which God bestows these graces for no
other reason than His own choice, into which we have no right to
enquire.

8\. Practise what I advised in the preceding mansions, then--humility,
humility! for God lets Himself be vanquished by this and grants us all
we ask. <span id="fr_129"></span>[7](#fn_129.md)

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The first
proof <span id="fr_130"></span>[8](#fn_130.md) that you possess humility is
that you neither think you now deserve these graces and consolations
from God, nor that you ever will as long as you live. You ask me: 'How
shall we receive them, if we do not try to gain them?' I answer, that
there is no surer way to obtain them than the one I have told you,
therefore make no efforts to acquire them, for the following reasons.
The first is, that the chief means of obtaining them is to love God
without self-interest. The second, that it is a slight lack of humility
to think that our wretched services can win so great a reward The third,
that the real preparation for them is to desire to suffer and imitate
our Lord, rather than to receive consolations, for indeed we have all
offended Him. The fourth reason is, that His Majesty has not promised to
give us these favours in the same way as He has bound Himself to bestow
eternal glory on us if we keep His commandments. We can be saved without
these special graces; He sees better than we do what is best for us and
which of us love Him sincerely. I know for a certain truth, being
acquainted with some who walk by the way of love (and therefore only
seek to serve Jesus Christ crucified), that not only they neither ask
for nor desire consolation, but they even beg Him not to give it them
during this life: this is a fact. Fifthly, we should but labour in vain:
this water does not flow through aqueducts, like that we first spoke of,
and if the spring does not afford it, in vain shall we toil to obtain
it. I mean, that though we may meditate and try our hardest, and though
we shed

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

tears to gain it, we cannot make this water flow. God alone gives it to
whom He chooses, and often when the soul is least thinking of it. We are
His, sisters, let Him do what He will with us, and lead us where He
will. If we are really humble and annihilate ourselves, not only in our
imagination (which often deceives us), but if we truly detach ourselves
from all things, our Lord will not only grant us these favours but many
others that we do not know even how to desire. May He be for ever
praised and blessed! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[98:1](tic11.htm#fr_123.md) 'A clear description
of an attack of hysteria with the significant remark that she herself
had never experienced anything of the kind'. (Dr. Goix, quoted by P.
Grégoire, *La prétendue hystérie de Sainte Thérèse*, Lyon, Vitte, 1895,
p. 53.)

<span id="fn_124"></span>[99:2](tic11.htm#fr_124.md) *Way of Perf*. ch.
xix. 5; also St. John of the Cross, *Ascent of Mount Carmel*, bk. ii,
ch. xiv, 2, and xxi. 3.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[100:3](tic11.htm#fr_125.md) *Life*, ch. x. 2.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[100:4](tic11.htm#fr_126.md) Ps. cxviii. 32.
*Life*, ch. xvii. 14,

<span id="fn_127"></span>[101:5](tic11.htm#fr_127.md) *Life*, ch. xiv. 9.
*Way of Perf.* ch. xxviii. 11.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[101:6](tic11.htm#fr_128.md) *Life*, ch. xiv. 3:
'The faculties are not lost, neither are they asleep; the will alone is
occupied in such a way that without knowing how it has become a captive
it gives a simple consent to become the prisoner <span id="page_102">p.
102</span> of God.' *Ibid*. § 4: 'The other two faculties help the will
that it may render itself capable of the fruition of so great a good;
nevertheless, it occasionally happens even when the will is in union
that they hinder it very much.' See also *Way of Perf*. ch. xxxi. 8.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[102:7](tic11.htm#fr_129.md) *Way of Perf*. ch.
xvi. i. *Life*, ch. xxii. 16.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[103:8](tic11.htm#fr_130.md) Philippus a SS.
Trinitate, *l.c.* art. 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Prayer of Quiet](tic12.md)
