[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic09)  [Next](tic11) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

# THE FOURTH MANSIONS

### CHAPTER I.

HOW SWEETNESS AND TENDERNESS IN PRAYER DIFFER FROM CONSOLATIONS.
EXPLAINS HOW ADVANTAGEOUS IT WAS FOR ST. TERESA TO COMPREHEND THAT THE
IMAGINATION AND THE UNDERSTANDING ARE NOT THE SAME THING. THIS CHAPTER
IS USEFUL FOR THOSE WHOSE THOUGHTS WANDER MUCH DURING PRAYER.

*1. Graces received in this mansion. 2. Mystic favours. 3. Temptations
bring humility and merit. 4. Sensible devotion and natural joys. 5.
Sweetness in devotion. 6. St. Teresa's experience of it. 7. Love of God,
and how to foster it. 8. Distractions. 9. They do not destroy divine
union. 10. St. Teresa's physical distractions. 11. How to treat
distractions. 12. They should be disregarded. 13. Self-knowledge
necessary*.

1\. Now that I commence writing about the fourth mansions, it is
requisite, as I said, <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) to commend
myself to the Holy Ghost and to beg Him henceforth to speak for me, that
I may be enabled to treat these matters intelligibly. Henceforth they
begin to be supernatural and it will be most difficult to speak clearly
about them, <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107) unless His Majesty

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

undertakes it for me, as He did when I explained the subject (as far as
I understood it) somewhat about fourteen years ago. <span
id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108) I believe I now possess more light about
the favours God grants some souls, but that is different from being able
to elucidate them. <span id="fr_109"></span>[4](#fn_109) May His Majesty
enable me to do so if it would be useful, but not otherwise.

2\. As these mansions are nearer the King's dwelling they are very
beautiful, and so subtle are the things seen and heard in them, that, as
those tell us who have tried to do so, the mind cannot give a lucid idea
of them to those inexperienced in the matter. People who have enjoyed
these favours, especially if it was to any great extent, will easily
comprehend me.

3\. Apparently a person must have dwelt for a long time in the former
mansions before entering these; although in ordinary cases the soul must
have been in the last one spoken of, yet, as you must often have heard,
there is no fixed rule, for God gives when,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

how, and to whom He wills <span id="fr_110"></span>[5](#fn_110)--the
goods are His own, and His choice wrongs no one. <span
id="fr_111"></span>[6](#fn_111) The poisonous reptiles rarely come into
these rooms, and, if they enter, do more good than harm. I think it is
far better for them to get in and make war on the soul in this state of
prayer; were it not tempted, the devil might sometimes deceive it about
divine consolations, thus injuring it far more. Besides, the soul would
benefit less, because all occasions of gaining merit would be withdrawn,
were it left continually absorbed in God. I am not confident that this
absorption is genuine when it always remains in the same state, nor does
it appear to me possible for the Holy Ghost to dwell constantly within
us, to the same extent, during our earthly exile.

4\. I will now describe, as I promised, the difference between sweetness
in prayer and spiritual consolations. It appears to me that what we
acquire for ourselves in meditation and petitions to our Lord may be
termed 'sweetness in devotion.' <span id="fr_112"></span>[7](#fn_112) It
is natural, although ultimately aided by the grace of God. I must be
understood to imply this in all I say, for we can do nothing without
Him. This

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

sweetness arises principally from the good work we perform, and appears
to result from our labours: well may we feel happy at having thus spent
our time. We shall find, on consideration, that many temporal matters
give us the same pleasure--such as unexpectedly coming into a large
fortune, suddenly meeting with a dearly-loved friend, or succeeding in
any important or influential affair which makes a sensation in the
world. Again, it would be felt by one who had been told her husband,
brother, or son was dead, and who saw him return to her alive. I have
seen people weep from such happiness, as I have done myself. I consider
both these joys and those we feel in religious matters to be natural
ones. Although there is nothing wrong about the former, yet those
produced by devotion spring from a more noble source--in short, they
begin in ourselves and end in God. Spiritual consolations, on the
contrary, arise from God, and our nature feels them and rejoices as
keenly in them, and indeed far more keenly, than in the others I
described.

5\. O Jesus! how I wish I could elucidate this point! It seems to me
that I can perfectly distinguish the difference between the two joys,
yet I have not the skill to make myself understood; may God give it me!
I remember a verse we say at Prime at the end of the final Psalm; the
last words are: 'Cum dilatasti cor meum'--'When Thou didst dilate my
heart: <span id="fr_113"></span>[8](#fn_113) To those with much
experience, this suffices to show the difference between sweetness in
prayer and spiritual consolations; other people will

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

require more explanation. The sensible devotion I mentioned does not
dilate the heart, but generally appears to narrow it slightly; although
joyful at seeing herself work for God, yet such a person sheds tears of
sorrow which seem partly produced by the passions. I know little about
the passions of the soul, or I could write of them more clearly and
could better define what comes from the sensitive disposition and what
is natural, having passed through this state myself, but I am very
stupid. Knowledge and learning are a great advantage to every one.

6\. My own experience of this delight and sweetness in meditation was
that when I began to weep over the Passion I could not stop until I had
a severe headache; <span id="fr_114"></span>[9](#fn_114) the same thing
occurred when I grieved over my sins: this was a great grace from our
Lord. I do not intend to inquire now which of these states of prayer is
the better, but I wish I knew how to explain the difference between the
two. In that of which I speak, the tears and good desires are often
partly caused by the natural disposition, but although this may be the
case, yet, as I said, these feelings terminate in God. Sensible devotion
is very desirable if the soul is humble enough to understand that it is
not more holy on account of these sentiments, which cannot always with
certainty be ascribed to charity, and even then are still the gift of
God.

7\. These feelings of devotion are most common with souls in the first
three mansions, who are nearly always using their understanding and
reason

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

in making meditations. This is good for them, for they have not been
given grace for more; they should, however, try occasionally to elicit
some acts such as praising God, rejoicing in His goodness and that He is
what He is: let them desire that He may be honoured and glorified. They
must do this as best they can, for it greatly inflames the will. Let
them be very careful, when God gives these sentiments, not to set them
aside in order to finish their accustomed meditation. But, having spoken
fully on this subject elsewhere, <span id="fr_115"></span>[10](#fn_115)
I will say no more now. I only wish to warn you that to make rapid
progress and to reach the mansions we wish to enter, it is not so
essential to *think* much as to *love* much: therefore you must practise
whatever most excites you to this. Perhaps we do not know what love is,
nor does this greatly surprise me. Love does not consist in great
sweetness of devotion, but in a fervent determination to strive to
please God in all things, in avoiding, as far as possible, all that
would offend Him, and in praying for the increase of the glory and
honour of His Son and for the growth of the Catholic Church. These are
the signs of love; do not imagine that it consists in never thinking of
anything but God, and that if your thoughts wander a little all is
lost. <span id="fr_116"></span>[11](#fn_116)

8\. I, myself, have sometimes been troubled by this turmoil of thoughts.
I learnt by experience, but little more than four years ago, that our
thoughts, or it is clearer to call it our imagination, are not

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

the same thing as the understanding. I questioned a theologian on the
subject; he told me it was the fact, which consoled me not a little. As
the understanding is one of the powers of the soul, it puzzled me to see
it so sluggish at times, while, as a rule, the imagination takes flight
at once, so that God alone can control it by so uniting us to
Himself <span id="fr_117"></span>[12](#fn_117) that we seem, in a
manner, detached from our bodies. It puzzled me to see that while to all
appearance the powers of the soul were occupied with God and recollected
in Him, the imagination was wandering elsewhere.

9\. Do Thou, O Lord, take into account all that we suffer in this way
through our ignorance. We err in thinking that we need only know that we
must keep our thoughts fixed on Thee. We do not understand that we
should consult those better instructed than ourselves, nor are we aware
that there is anything for us to learn. We pass through terrible trials,
on account of not understanding our own nature and take what is not
merely harmless, but good, for a grave fault. This causes the sufferings
felt by many people, particularly by the unlearned, who practise prayer.
They complain of interior trials, become melancholy, lose their health,
and even give up prayer altogether for want of recognizing that we have
within ourselves as it were, an interior world. We cannot stop the
revolution of the heavens as they rush with velocity upon their course,
neither can we control our imagination. When this wanders we at once
imagine that all the powers of the soul follow it; we think everything

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

is lost, and that the time spent in God's presence is wasted. Meanwhile,
the soul is perhaps entirely united to Him in the innermost mansions,
while the imagination is in the precincts of the castle, struggling with
a thousand wild and venomous creatures and gaining merit by its warfare.
Therefore we need not let ourselves be disturbed, nor give up prayer, as
the devil is striving to persuade us. As a rule, all our anxieties and
troubles come from misunderstanding our own nature.

10\. Whilst writing this I am thinking of the loud noise in my head
which I mentioned in the Introduction, and which has made it almost
impossible to obey the command given me to write this. It sounds as if
there were a number of rushing waterfalls within my brain, while in
other parts, drowned by the sound of the waters, are the voices of birds
singing and whistling. This tumult is not in my ears, but in the upper
part of my head, where, they say, is placed the superior part of the
soul. I have long thought that this must be so because the flight of the
spirit seems to take place from this part with great velocity. <span
id="fr_118"></span>[13](#fn_118) Please God I may recollect to explain
the cause when writing of the latter mansions, this not being the proper
place for it. It may be that God has sent this suffering in my head to
help me to understand the matter, for all this tumult in my brain does
not interfere with my prayer, nor with my speaking to you, but the great
calm and love and desires in my soul remain undisturbed and my mind is
clear.

11\. How, then, can the superior part of the soul

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

remain undisturbed if it resides in the upper part of the brain? I
cannot account for it, but am sure that I am speaking the truth. This
noise disturbs my prayer when unaccompanied with ecstasy, but when it is
ecstatic I do not feel any pain, however great. I should suffer keenly
were I forced to cease praying on account of these infirmities. We
should not be distressed by reason of our thoughts, nor allow ourselves
to be worried by them: if they come from the devil, he will let us alone
if we take no notice of them; and if they are, as often happens, one of
the many frailties entailed by Adam's sin, let us be patient and suffer
them for the love of God. Likewise, since we must eat and sleep without
being able to avoid it, much to our grief, let us acknowledge that we
are human, and long to be where no one may despise us. <span
id="fr_119"></span>[14](#fn_119) Sometimes I recall these words, spoken
by the Spouse in the Canticle; <span id="fr_120"></span>[15](#fn_120)
truly never in our lives have we better reason to say them, for I think
no earthly scorn or suffering can try us so severely as these struggles
within our souls. All uneasiness or conflict can be borne while we have
peace in ourselves, as I said; but if, while seeking for rest amidst the
thousand trials of the world--knowing that God has prepared this rest
for us--the obstacle is found in ourselves, the trial must needs prove
painful and almost insufferable.

12\. Take us therefore, O Lord, to where these miseries can no longer
cause us to be despised, for

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

sometimes it seems as if they mocked our souls. Even in this life God
delivers us from them when we reach the last mansion, as by His grace I
will show you. Everybody is not so violently distressed and assaulted by
these weaknesses as I have been for many years, <span
id="fr_121"></span>[16](#fn_121) on account of my wickedness, so that it
seems as if I strove to take vengeance on myself. <span
id="fr_122"></span>[17](#fn_122) Since I suffer so much in this way,
perhaps you may do the same, so I shall continue to explain the subject
to you in different ways, in order to find some means of making it
clear. The thing is inevitable, therefore do not let it disturb or
grieve you, but let the mill clack on while we grind our wheat; that is,
let us continue to work with our will and intellect.

13\. These troubles annoy us more or less according to the state of our
health or in different circumstances. The poor soul suffers; although
not now to blame, it has sinned at other times, and must be patient. We
are so ignorant that what we have read and been told has not sufficed to
teach us to disregard wandering thoughts, therefore I shall not be
wasting time in instructing and consoling you about these trials.
However, this will help you but little until God chooses to enlighten
you, and additional measures are needed: His Majesty wishes us to learn
by ordinary means to understand ourselves and to recognize the share
taken in these troubles by our wandering imagination, our nature, and
the devil's temptations, instead of laying all the blame on our souls.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[88:1](tic10.htm#fr_106) First Mansions, ch. i.
1.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[88:2](tic10.htm#fr_107) There are two kinds of
contemplation: acquired or natural, and infused or supernatural. In
their widest sense, including many remarkable phenomena of Natural
religion, and, of course, the most wonderful manifestations recorded in
the Old Testament, they form the system <span id="page_89">p. 89</span>
called Mysticism and are the proper object of Mystical theology. Natural
or acquired contemplation is based upon an idealistic turn of mind which
enables the soul to gaze upon the Godhead (simple gaze, as St. Teresa
calls it) without approaching Him by the laborious process of reasoning,
and in so doing embraces Him with its affective powers; like a person
who, devoid of technical skill, takes in and is enamoured by, the beauty
of a painting. Infused contemplation is the highest act of the Gifts of
the Holy Ghost of Knowledge and Wisdom. It is often impossible, nor is
it always essential, to determine where acquired contemplation ends and
infused contemplation begins. But it should be borne in mind that both
the one and the other are operations and not merely a passive state or
mere fruition. Even the highest form of contemplation, the Beatific
Vision, is a supernatural act of the soul, an operation of unending
duration. A ship moved by a gentle breeze is rightly said to be actually
sailing though the rowers are at rest.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[89:3](tic10.htm#fr_108) *Life*, ch. xii. 11.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[89:4](tic10.htm#fr_109) *Life*, ch. xvii. 7.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[90:5](tic10.htm#fr_110) Philippus a SS.
Trinitate, *Summa Tleologiæ Mysticæ*, pars iii. tract. i. disc. iii.
art. 2. *Life*, ch. xv. 11, xxii. 22, 23. *Way of Perf.* ch. xvi. 4,
xli. 2. *Concep*. ch. v. 3.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[90:6](tic10.htm#fr_111) S. Matt. xx. 15: 'Aut
non licet mihi quod volo facere?'

<span id="fn_112"></span>[90:7](tic10.htm#fr_112) *Way of Perf*., ch.
xix. 8. *Castle*, M. iv. ch. ii. 4. The first three mansions of the
Interior Castle correspond with the 'first water,' or the prayer of
Meditation, explained in ch. xi-xiii. of the Life; the fourth mansion,
or the prayer of Quiet, with the 'second water,' Life, ch. xiv. and xv.;
the fifth mansion, or the prayer of Union, with the 'third water,' Life,
ch. xvi. and xvii.; and the sixth mansion, ecstasy, etc., with the
'fourth water,' Life, ch. xviii.-xxi.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[91:8](tic10.htm#fr_113) Ps. cxviii. 32. *Way
of Perf*. ch. xxviii. 11.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[92:9](tic10.htm#fr_114) *Life*, ch. iii. 1.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[93:10](tic10.htm#fr_115) *Life*, ch. xii.
2-4..

<span id="fn_116"></span>[93:11](tic10.htm#fr_116) *Found*. ch. v. 2.
*Way of Perf.* ch. xxxi. 6, 12. *Life*, ch. xv, 16, ch. XXX. 19.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[94:12](tic10.htm#fr_117) *Life*, ch. xv. 9,
10.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[95:13](tic10.htm#fr_118) Second Relation
addressed to Fr. Rodrigo Alvarez.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[96:14](tic10.htm#fr_119) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xxxiii. 8. *Life*, ch. xxi. S. Rel. ii. 12.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[96:15](tic10.htm#fr_120) According to Fr.
Gracian the Saint here refers to Cant. viii. 1: 'Et jam me nemo
despiciat.'

<span id="fn_121"></span>[97:16](tic10.htm#fr_121) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xvii. 2.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[97:17](tic10.htm#fr_122) *Way of Perf.* ch,
xxxi. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Divine Consolations](tic11)
