[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic13)  [Next](tic15.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

### CHAPTER II.

CONTINUES THE SAME SUBJECT: EXPLAINS THE PRAYER OF UNION BY A DELICATE
COMPARISON AND SPEAKS OF THE EFFECTS IT LEAVES UPON THE SOUL. THIS
CHAPTER SHOULD RECEIVE GREAT ATTENTION.

*1. The soul compared to a butterfly. 2. The grandeurs of creation. 3.
Symbol of the soul and the silkworm. 4. Preparation of the soul for
God's indwelling. 5. Mystic death of the silkworm. 6. Effects of divine
union. 7. Increase of fervour and detachment. 8. Trials succeeding the
prayer of union. 9. Longing for death and zeal for God's honour. 10.
This zeal supernatural. 11. God alone works this grace. 12. The same
zeal as that felt by our Lord on earth. 13. Christ's keenest suffering*.

1\. You may imagine that there is no more left to be described of the
contents of this mansion, but a great deal remains to be told, for as I
said, it contains favours of various degrees. I think there is nothing
to add about the prayer of union, but when the soul on which God bestows
this grace disposes itself for their reception, I could tell you much
about the marvels our Lord works in it. I will describe some of them in
my own way, also the state in which they leave the soul, and will use a
suitable comparison to elucidate the matter, explaining that though we
can take no active part in this work of God within us, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[1](#fn_172.md) yet we may do much to prepare ourselves
to receive this grace. You have heard how wonderfully silk is made--in a
way such as God alone could plan--how it all comes from an egg
resembling a tiny pepper-corn. Not having seen it myself, I only know of
it by hearsay, so if the facts are inaccurate the fault will not be
mine. When, in the warm weather, the mulberry trees

<span id="page_130">p. 130</span>

come into leaf, the little egg which was lifeless before its food was
ready, begins to live. The caterpillar nourishes itself upon the
mulberry leaves until, when it has grown large, people place near it
small twigs upon which, of its own accord, it spins silk from its tiny
mouth until it has made a narrow little cocoon in which it buries
itself. Then this large and ugly worm leaves the cocoon as a lovely
little white butterfly.

2\. If we had not seen this but had only heard of it as an old legend,
who could believe it? Could we persuade ourselves that insects so
utterly without the use of reason as a silkworm or a bee would work with
such industry and skill in our service that the poor little silkworm
loses its life over the task? This would suffice for a short meditation,
sisters, without my adding more, for you may learn from it the wonders
and the wisdom of God. How if we knew the properties of all things? It
is most profitable to ponder over the grandeurs of creation and to exult
in being the brides of such a wise and mighty King.

3\. Let us return to our subject. The silkworm symbolizes the soul which
begins to live when, kindled by the Holy Spirit, it commences using the
ordinary aids given by God to all, and applies the remedies left by Him
in His Church, such as regular confession, religious hooks, and sermons;
these are the cure for a soul dead in its negligence and sins and liable
to fall into temptation. Then it comes to life and continues nourishing
itself on this food and on devout meditation until it has attained full
vigour, which is the essential point,

<span id="page_131">p. 131</span>

for I attach no importance to the rest. When the silkworm is full-grown
as I told you in the first part of this chapter, it begins to spin silk
and to build the house wherein it must die. By this house, when speaking
of the soul, I mean Christ. I think I read or heard somewhere, either
that our life is hid in Christ, or in God (which means the same thing)
or that Christ is our life. <span id="fr_173"></span>[2](#fn_173.md) It
makes little difference to my meaning which of these quotations is
correct.

4\. This shows, my daughters, how much, by God's grace, we can do, by
preparing this home for ourselves, towards making Him our dwelling-place
as He is in the prayer of union. You will suppose that I mean we can
take away from or add something to God when I say that He is our home,
and that we can make this home and dwell in it by our own power. Indeed
we can: though we can neither deprive God of anything nor add aught to
Him, yet we can take away from and add to ourselves, like the silkworms.
The little we can do will hardly have been accomplished when this
insignificant work of ours, which amounts to nothing at all, will be
united by God to His greatness and thus enhanced with such immense value
that our Lord Himself will be the reward of our toil. Although He has
had the greatest share in it, He will join our trifling pains to the
bitter sufferings He endured for us and make them one.

5\. Forward then, my daughters! hasten over your work and build the
little cocoon. Let us renounce

<span id="page_132">p. 132</span>

self-love and self-will, <span id="fr_174"></span>[3](#fn_174.md) care for
nothing earthly, do penance, pray, mortify ourselves, be obedient, and
perform all the other good works of which you know. Act up to your
light; you have been taught your duties. Die! die as the silkworm does
when it has fulfilled the office of its creation, and you will see God
and be immersed in His greatness, as the little silkworm is enveloped in
its cocoon. Understand that when I say 'you will see God,' I mean in the
manner described, in which He manifests Himself in this kind of union.

6\. Now let us see what becomes of the 'silkworm,' for all I have been
saying leads to this. As soon as, by means of this prayer, the soul has
become entirely dead to the world, it comes forth like a lovely little
white butterfly! <span id="fr_175"></span>[4](#fn_175.md) Oh, how great God
is! How beautiful is the soul after having been immersed in God's
grandeur and united closely to Him for but a short time! Indeed, I do
not think it is ever as long as half an hour. <span
id="fr_176"></span>[5](#fn_176.md) Truly, the spirit does not recognize
itself, being as different from what it was as is the white butterfly
from the repulsive caterpillar. It does not know how it can have merited
so great a good, or rather, whence this grace came <span
id="fr_177"></span>[6](#fn_177.md) which it well knows it merits not. The
soul desires to praise our Lord God and longs to sacrifice itself and
die a thousand deaths for Him. It feels an unconquerable desire for
great

<span id="page_133">p. 133</span>

crosses and would like to perform the most severe penances; it sighs for
solitude and would have all men know God, while it is bitterly grieved
at seeing them offend Him. These matters will be described more fully in
the next mansion; there they are of the same nature, yet in a more
advanced state the effects are far stronger, because, as I told you, if;
after the soul has received these favours, it strives to make still
farther progress, it will experience great things. Oh, to see the
restlessness of this charming little butterfly, although never in its
life has it been more tranquil and at peace! May God be praised! It
knows not where to stay nor take its rest; everything on earth disgusts
it after what it has experienced, particularly when God has often given
it this wine which leaves fresh graces behind it at every draught.

7\. It despises the work it did while yet a caterpillar--the slow
weaving of its cocoon thread by thread--its wings have grown and it can
fly; could it be content to crawl? All that it can do for God seems
nothing to the soul compared with its desire. It no longer wonders at
what the saints bore for Him, knowing by experience how our Lord aids
and transforms the soul until it no longer seems the same in character
and appearance. Formerly it feared penance, now it is strong: it wanted
courage to forsake relations, friends, or possessions: neither its
actions, its resolutions, nor separation from those it loved could
detach the soul, but rather seemed to increase its fondness. Now it
finds even their rightful claims a burden, <span
id="fr_178"></span>[7](#fn_178.md) fearing contact with

<span id="page_134">p. 134</span>

them lest it should offend God. It wearies of everything, realizing that
no true rest can be found in creatures.

8\. I seem to have enlarged on this subject, yet far more might be said
about it; those who have received this favour will think I have treated
it too briefly. No wonder this pretty butterfly, estranged from earthly
things, seeks repose elsewhere. Where can the poor little creature go?
It cannot return to whence it came, for as I told you, that is not in
the soul's power, do what it will, but depends upon God's pleasure.
Alas, what fresh trials begin to afflict the mind! Who would expect this
after such a sublime grace? <span id="fr_179"></span>[8](#fn_179.md) In
fact in one way or another we must carry the cross all our lives. If
people told me that ever since attaining to the prayer of union they had
enjoyed constant peace and consolation, I should reply that they could
never have reached that state, but that, at the most, if they had
arrived as far as the last mansion, their emotion must have been some
spiritual satisfaction joined to physical debility. It might even have
been a false sweetness caused by the devil, who gives peace for a time
only to wage far fiercer war later on. I do not mean that those who
reach this stage possess no peace; they do so in a very high degree, for
their sorrows, though extremely severe, are so beneficial and proceed
from so good a source as to procure both peace and happiness.

9\. Discontent with this world gives such a painful longing to quit it
that, if the heart finds comfort,

<span id="page_135">p. 135</span>

it is solely from the thought that God wishes it to remain here in
banishment. Even this is not enough to reconcile it to fate, for after
all the gifts received, it is not yet so entirely surrendered to the
will of God as it afterwards becomes. Here, although conformed to His
will, the soul feels an unconquerable reluctance to submit, for our Lord
has not given it higher grace. During prayer this grief breaks forth in
floods of tears, probably from the great pain felt at seeing God
offended and at thinking how many souls, both heretics and heathens, are
lost eternally, and keenest grief of all, Christians also! The soul
realizes the greatness of God's mercy and knows that however wicked men
are, they may still repent and be saved; yet it fears that many
precipitate themselves into hell.

10\. Oh, infinite greatness of God! A few years ago--indeed, perhaps but
a few days--this soul thought of nothing but itself. Who has made it
feel such tormenting cares? If we tried for many years to obtain such
sorrow by means of meditation, we could not succeed.

11\. God help me! If for long days and years I considered how great a
wrong it is that God should be offended, and that lost souls are His
children and my brethren; if I pondered over the dangers of this world
and how blessed it would be to leave this wretched life, would not that
suffice? No, daughters, the pain would not be the same. for this, by the
help of God, we can obtain by such meditation; but it does not seem to
penetrate the very depths of our being like the other which

<span id="page_136">p. 136</span>

appears to cut the soul to pieces and grind it to powder through no
action--even sometimes with no wish--of its own. What is this sorrow,
then? Whence does it come? I will tell you. Have you not heard (I quoted
the words to you just now, but did not apply to them this meaning) <span
id="fr_180"></span>[9](#fn_180.md) how the Bride says that God 'brought her
into the cellar of wine and set in order charity in her'? <span
id="fr_181"></span>[10](#fn_181.md) This is what happens here. The soul has
so entirely yielded itself into His hands and is so subdued by love for
Him that it knows or cares for nothing but that God should dispose of it
according to His will. I believe that He only bestows this grace on
those He takes entirely for His own. He desires that, without knowing
how, the spirit should come forth stamped with His seal for indeed it
does no more than does the wax when impressed with the signet. It does
not mould itself but need only be in a fit condition--soft and pliable;
even then it does not soften itself but must merely remain still and
submit to the impression.

12\. How good Thou art, O God! All is done for us by Thee, Who dost but
ask us to give our wills to Thee that we may be plastic as wax in Thy
hands. You see, sisters, what God does to this soul so that it may know
that it is His. He gives it something of His own--that which His Son
possessed when living on earth--He could bestow on greater gift on us.
Who could ever have longed more eagerly to leave this life than did
Christ?

<span id="page_137">p. 137</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> As He said at the
Last Supper: 'With desire have I desired' <span
id="fr_182"></span>[11](#fn_182.md) this. O Lord! does not that bitter
death Thou art to undergo present itself before Thine eyes in all its
pain and horror? 'No, for My ardent love and My desire to save souls are
immeasurably stronger than the torments. This deeper sorrow I have
suffered and still suffer while living here on earth, makes other pain
seem as nothing in comparison.'

13\. I have often meditated on this and I know that the torture a friend
of mine <span id="fr_183"></span>[12](#fn_183.md) has felt, and still
feels, at seeing our Lord sinned against is so unbearable that she would
far rather die than continue in such anguish. Then I thought that if a
soul whose charity is so weak compared to that of Christ--indeed, in
comparison with His this charity might be said not to exist--experiences
this insufferable grief, what must have been the feelings of our Lord
Jesus Christ and what must His life have been? for all things were
present before His eyes and He was the constant witness of the great
offences committed against His Father. I believe without doubt that this
pained Him far more than His most sacred Passion. There, at least, He
found the end of all His trials, while His agony was allayed by the
consolation of gaining our salvation through His death and of proving
how He loved His Father by suffering for Him. Thus, people who, urged by
fervent love, perform great penances

<span id="page_138">p. 138</span>

hardly feel them but want to do still more and count even that as
little. What, then, must His Majesty have felt at thus publicly
manifesting His perfect obedience to His Father and His love for His
brethren? What joy to suffer in doing God's will! Yet I think the
constant sight of the many sins committed against God and of the
numberless souls on their way to hell must have caused Him such anguish
that, had He not been more than man, one day of such torment would have
destroyed not only His life but many more lives, had they been His.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_172"></span>[129:1](tic14.htm#fr_172.md) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xxv. 3.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[131:2](tic14.htm#fr_173.md) Col. iii. 3: 'Vita
vestra est abscondita cum Christo in Deo.' Gal. ii. w: 'Vivo autem, jam
on ego; vivit vero in me Christus.'

<span id="fn_174"></span>[132:3](tic14.htm#fr_174.md) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xxxi. i 1.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[132:4](tic14.htm#fr_175.md) St. Teresa must have
been thinking of this simile when she chose 'butterflies' as the
pseudonym for her nuns in her letters at the time when she was obliged
to be cautious on account of the troubles of the Reform.

<span id="fn_176"></span>[132:5](tic14.htm#fr_176.md) *Life*, ch. xviii.
16.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[132:6](tic14.htm#fr_177.md) *Life*, ch. xviii.
5-7.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[133:7](tic14.htm#fr_178.md) *Rel*. ix, 11.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[134:8](tic14.htm#fr_179.md) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xviii. 1-4. *Castle*, M. vi ch. i. 3, *sqq*. M. vii. ch. iv. 7.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[136:9](tic14.htm#fr_180.md) Fifth Mansions, ch.
i. 10.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[136:10](tic14.htm#fr_181.md) *Cant*. ii. 4.
'Introduxit me in cellam vinariam, ordinavit in me caritatem.'

<span id="fn_182"></span>[137:11](tic14.htm#fr_182.md) St. Luke xxii. 15:
'Desiderio desideravi hoc pascha manducare vobiscum, antequam patiar.'

<span id="fn_183"></span>[137:12](tic14.htm#fr_183.md) This friend is, of
course, St. Teresa herself. See *Life*, ch. xiii. 14; xxxii. 9. *Way of
Perf*. ch. i. 3. *Castle*, M. vii. ch. i. 5, 6. *Excl*. x. 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Cause of Union](tic15.md)
