[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tic27)  [Next](tic29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B00267RV6Q/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Interior Castle*, by St. Teresa of Avila, \[1921\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

### CHAPTER XI.

TREATS OF HOW GOD INSPIRES THE SOUL WITH SUCH VEHEMENT AND IMPETUOUS
DESIRES OF SEEING HIM AS TO ENDANGER LIFE. THE BENEFITS RESULTING FROM
THIS DIVINE GRACE.

*1. Favours increase the soul's desire for God. 2. The dart of love. 3.
Spiritual sufferings produced. 4. Its physical effects. S. Torture of
the desire for God. 6. These sufferings are a purgatory. 7. The torments
of hell. 8. St. Teresa's painful desire after God. 9. This suffering
irresistible. 10. Effects of the dart of love. 11. Two spiritual dangers
to life. 12. Courage needed here and given by our Lord*.

1\. WILL all these graces bestowed by the Spouse upon the soul suffice
to content this little dove or butterfly (you see I have not forgotten
her after all!) so that she may settle down and rest in the place where
she is to die? No indeed: her state is far worse than ever; although she
has been receiving these favours for many years past, she still sighs
and weeps because each grace augments her pain. She sees herself still
far away from God, yet with her increased knowledge of His attributes
her longing and her love for Him grow ever stronger as she learns more
fully how this great God and Sovereign deserves to be loved. As, year by
year her yearning after Him gradually becomes keener, she experiences
the bitter suffering I am about to describe. I speak of 'years' because
relating what happened to the person I mentioned, though I know well
that with God time has no limits and in a single moment He can raise a
soul to the most sublime state I have described. His Majesty has the
power to do all He wishes and He wishes to do much for us. These
longings, tears, sighs, and

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

violent and impetuous desires and strong feelings, which seem to proceed
from our vehement love, are yet as nothing compared with what I am about
to describe and seem but a smouldering fire, the heat of which, though
painful, is yet tolerable.

2\. While the soul is thus inflamed with love, i t often happens that,
from a passing thought or spoken word of how death delays its coming,
the heart receives, it knows not how or whence, a blow as from a fiery
dart. <span id="fr_377"></span>[1](#fn_377) I do not say that this
actually is a 'dart,' but, whatever it may be, decidedly it does not
come from any part of our being. <span id="fr_378"></span>[2](#fn_378)
Neither is it really a 'blow' though I call it one, but it wounds us
severely--not, I think, in that part of our nature subject to physical
pain but in the very depths and centre of the soul, where this,
thunderbolt, in its rapid course, reduces all the earthly part of our
nature to powder. At the time we cannot even remember our own existence,
for in an instant, the faculties of the soul are so fettered as to be
incapable of any action except the power they retain of increasing our
torture. Do not think I am exaggerating; indeed I fall short of
explaining what happens which cannot be described.

3\. This is a trance of the senses and faculties except as regards what
helps to make the agony more intense. The understanding realizes acutely
what cause there is for grief in separation from God and His Majesty now
augments this sorrow by a vivid manifestation of Himself. This increases
the anguish to such a degree that the sufferer gives vent

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

to loud cries which she cannot stifle, however patient and accustomed to
pain she may be, because this torture is not corporal but attacks the
innermost recesses of the soul. The person I speak of learnt from this
how much more acutely the spirit is capable of suffering than the body;
she understood that this resembled the pains of purgatory, where the
absence of the flesh does not prevent the torture's being far worse than
any we can feel in this world.

4\. I saw some one in this condition who I really thought would have
died, nor would it have been surprising, for there is great danger of
death in this state. Short as is the time it lasts, it leaves the limbs
all disjointed and the pulse as feeble as if the soul were on the point
of departure, which is indeed the case, for the natural heat fails,
while that which is supernatural so burns the frame that were it
increased ever so little God would satisfy the soul's desire for death.
Not that any pain is felt by the body at the moment, although, as I
said, all the joints are dislocated so that for two or three days
afterwards the suffering is too severe for the person to have even the
strength to hold a pen; <span id="fr_379"></span>[3](#fn_379) indeed I
believe that the health becomes permanently enfeebled in consequence. At
the time this is not felt, probably because the spiritual torments are
so much more keen that the bodily ones remain unnoticed; just as when
there is very

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

severe pain in one part, slighter aches elsewhere are hardly perceived,
as I know by experience. During this favour there is no physical
suffering either great or small, nor do I think the person would feel it
were she torn to pieces.

5\. Perhaps you will say this is an imperfection, and you may ask why
she does not conform herself to the will of God since she has so
completely surrendered herself to it. Hitherto she has been able to do
so and she consecrated her life to it; but now she cannot because her
reason is reduced to such a state that she is no longer mistress of
herself; nor can she think of anything but what tends to increase her
torment--for why should she seek to live apart from her only Good? She
feels a strange loneliness, finding no companionship in any earthly
creature; nor could she, I believe, among those who dwell in heaven,
since they are not her Beloved: meanwhile all society is a torture to
her. She is like one suspended in mid-air, who can neither touch the
earth nor mount to heaven; she is unable to reach the water while
parched with thirst and this is not a thirst that can be borne, but one
which nothing will quench nor would she have it quenched save with that
water of which our Lord spoke to the Samaritan woman, but this is not
given to her. <span id="fr_380"></span>[4](#fn_380)

6\. Alas, O Lord, to what a state dost Thou bring those who love Thee!
Yet these sufferings are as nothing compared with the reward Thou wilt
give for them. It is right that great riches should be

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

dearly bought. Moreover, her pains purify her soul so that it may enter
the seventh mansion, as purgatory cleanses spirits which are to enter
heaven: <span id="fr_381"></span>[5](#fn_381) then indeed these trials
will appear like a drop of water compared to the sea. Though this
torment and grief could not, I think, be surpassed by any earthly cross
(so at least this person said and she had endured much both in body and
mind), yet they appeared to her as nothing in comparison with their
recompense. The soul realizes that it has not merited anguish which is
of such measureless value. This conviction, although bringing no relief;
enables the sufferer to bear her trials willingly--for her entire
lifetime, if God so wills,--although instead of dying once for all, this
would be but a living death, for truly it is nothing else.

7\. Let us remember, sisters, how those who are in hell lack this
submission to the divine will and the resignation and consolation God
gives such a soul and the solace of knowing that their pains benefit
them, for the damned will continually suffer more and more; (more and
more, I mean in regard to accidental pains <span
id="fr_382"></span>[6](#fn_382)) . The soul feels far more keenly than
the body and the torments I have

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

just described are incomparably less severe than those endured by the
lost, who also know that their anguish will last for ever: what, then,
will become of these miserable souls? What can we do or suffer during
our short lives which is worth reckoning if it will free us from such
terrible and endless torments? I assure you that, unless you have
learned by experience, it would be impossible to make you realize how
acute are spiritual pangs and how different from physical pain. Our Lord
wishes us to understand this, so that we may realize what gratitude we
owe Him for having called us to a state where we may hope, by His mercy,
to be freed from and forgiven our sins.

8\. Let us return to the soul we left in such cruel torment. This agony
does not continue for long in its full violence--never, I believe,
longer than three or four hours; were it prolonged, the weakness of our
nature could not endure it except by a miracle. In one case, where it
lasted only a quarter of an hour, the sufferer was left utterly
exhausted; indeed, so violent was the attack that she completely lost
consciousness. This occurred when she unexpectedly heard some verses to
the effete that life seemed unending; she was engaged in conversation at
the time, which was on the last day of Easter. All Eastertide she had
suffered such aridity as hardly to realize what mystery was being
celebrated. <span id="fr_383"></span>[7](#fn_383)

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

9\. It is as impossible to resist this suffering as it would be to
prevent the flame's having heat enough to burn us if we were thrown into
a fire. These feelings cannot be concealed: all who are present
recognize the dangerous condition of such a person although they are
unable to see what is passing within her. True, she knows her friends
are near, but they and all earthly things seem to her but shadows. To
show you that, should you ever be in this state, it is possible for your
weakness and human nature to be of help to you, I may tell you that at
times, when a person seems dying from her desire for death <span
id="fr_384"></span>[8](#fn_384) which so oppresses her soul with grief
that it appears on the point of leaving her body, yet her mind,
terrified at the thought, tries to still its pain so as to keep death at
bay. Evidently this fear arises from human infirmity, for the soul's
longings for death do not abate meanwhile nor can its sorrows be stilled
or allayed until God brings it comfort. <span
id="fr_385"></span>[9](#fn_385) This He usually does by a deep trance or
by some vision whereby the true Comforter consoles and strengthens the
heart, which thus becomes resigned to live as long as He wills. <span
id="fr_386"></span>[10](#fn_386)

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

10\. This favour entails great suffering but leaves most precious graces
within the soul, which loses all fear of any crosses it may henceforth
meet with, for in comparison with the acute anguish it has gone through
all else seems nothing. Seeing what she has gained, the sufferer would
gladly endure frequently the same pains <span
id="fr_387"></span>[11](#fn_387) but can do nothing to help herself in
the matter. There are no means of reaching that state again until God
chooses to decree it, when neither resistance nor escape is possible.
The mind feels far deeper contempt for the world than before, realizing
that nothing earthly can succour it in its torture; it is also much more
detached from creatures, having learnt that no one but its Creator can
bring it consolation and strength. It is more anxious and careful not to
offend God, seeing that He can torment as well as comfort. <span
id="fr_388"></span>[12](#fn_388)

11\. Two things in this spiritual state seem to me to endanger
life,--one is that of which I have just spoken which is a real peril and
no small one; the other an excessive gladness and a delight so extreme
that the soul appears to swoon away and seems on the point of leaving
the body, which indeed would bring it no small joy.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

12\. Now you see. sisters, whether I had not reason to tell you that
courage was needed for these favours and that when any one asks for them
from our Lord He may well reply, as He did to the sons of Zebedee: 'Can
you drink the chalice that I shall drink?' <span
id="fr_389"></span>[13](#fn_389) I believe, sisters, we should all
answer 'Yes'--and we should be perfectly right for His Majesty gives
strength when He sees it needed: He ever defends such souls and answers
for them when they are persecuted and slandered as He did for the
Magdalen--if not in words, at least in deeds. <span
id="fr_390"></span>[14](#fn_390) At last, ah, at last! before they die
He repays them for all they have suffered, as you shall now learn. May
He be for ever blessed and may all creatures praise Him! Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_377"></span>[253:1](tic28.htm#fr_377) *Life*, ch. xxix. 17.
(Transverberation.)

<span id="fn_378"></span>[253:2](tic28.htm#fr_378) *Ibid*. ch. xxix. 13,
14. *Rel*. viii. 16-19.

<span id="fn_379"></span>[254:3](tic28.htm#fr_379) St. John of the
Cross, *Obscure Night*, bk. ii. ch. i. (*in fine*); *Spiritual
Canticle*, stanza xiii; xiv-xv. (*in fine*). When this happened to St.
Teresa she was unable to write for twelve days. Ribera, *Acta SS*. p.
555 (*in fine*). *Rel*. viii. 13. *Life*, ch. xx. 16.

<span id="fn_380"></span>[255:4](tic28.htm#fr_380) St. John iv. 15.
*Life*, ch. xxx. 24. *Way of Perf.* ch. xix. 4 *sqq*. *Concept*. ch.
vii. 7, 8. *Found*. ch. xxxi. 42. See note, *Life*, ch. i. 6.

<span id="fn_381"></span>[256:5](tic28.htm#fr_381) St. John of the
Cross, *Obscure Night*, bk. ii. ch. xii.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[256:6](tic28.htm#fr_382) Marginal note in the
Saint's handwriting. The 'substantial' pain of hell consists in the
irrevocable loss of God, our last end and supreme Good; this is incurred
from the first moment in its fullest intensity and therefore cannot
increase. The physical pain with which the bodies will be afflicted when
united to the souls after the general resurrection may vary, but will
neither increase nor abate. The 'accidental' pain of the damned arises
from various causes, for instance from the ever-increasing effects of
evil actions, and therefore increases in the same proportion. Thus a
heresiarch will suffer keener accidental pain as more and more souls are
lost through his false teaching.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[257:7](tic28.htm#fr_383) *Rel*. iv. 1.
*Concept*. ch. vii. 2. Isabel of Jesus, in her deposition in the Acts of
Canonisation (Fuente, *Obras*, vol. vi. 316) declares that she was the
singer. The words were:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Véante mis ojos,  
Dulce Jesús bueno:  
Véante mis ojos,  
Y muérame yo luégo.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fuente, *l.c.*
vol. v. 143, note 1. *Œuvres*, ii. 231. (Poem 36, English version.)
There is a slight difference in the two relations of this occurrence. In
*Rel*. iv. St. Teresa seems to imply that it happened on Easter Sunday
evening, but here she says distinctly: 'Pascua de Resurreccion, el
postrer dia,' that is, on Easter Tuesday, April 17, 1571, at Salamanca.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[258:8](tic28.htm#fr_384) Compare the words
'Que muero porque no muero' in the *Glosa* of St. Teresa. *Way of Perf*.
ch. xlii . 2. *Castle*, M. vii. ch. iii. 14.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[258:9](tic28.htm#fr_385) *Way of Perf.* ch.
xix. 10. *Excl*. vi.; xii. a.; xiv.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[258:10](tic28.htm#fr_386) See the two versions
of the poems written by the Saint on her recovery from the trance into
which she was thrown, beginning 'Vivir sin vivir in me' and the poem,
'Cuan triste es, Dios mio' (Poems 2, 3, and 4, English version). See
also St. Teresa's poem, 'Ya toda me <span id="page_259">p. 259</span>
entregué y dí.' (Poem 7, English version).

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

Struck by the gentle Hunter  
   And overthrown,  
Within the arms of Love  
   My soul lay prone.  
Raised to new life at last,  
This contract ’tween us passed,  
That the Beloved should be mine own,  
   I His alone.

</div>

<span id="fn_387"></span>[259:11](tic28.htm#fr_387) *Rel*. viii. 17.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[259:12](tic28.htm#fr_388) *Acta SS*. p. 64, n.
229.

<span id="fn_389"></span>[260:13](tic28.htm#fr_389) St. Matt. xx. 22:
'Potestis bibere calicem quem ego bibiturus sum?'

<span id="fn_390"></span>[260:14](tic28.htm#fr_390) St. Matt. xxvi. to:
St. Mark xiv. 6; St. John xii. 7. *Way of Perf*. ch. xvi. 7; xvii. 4.
*Excl*. v. 2-4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. God's Presence Chamber](tic29)
