[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we03)  [Next](we05.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

# CHAPTER I.

### THE EMPIRE'S AGE AND SCOPE.

The excavations of Petrie revealed in Egypt the remains of a distinct
race that preceeded the historic Egyptians. The earliest civilization
was higher than that of the later dynasties. Its purer art represents an
"Old Race" that fills all the background of the pre-historic ages. It
colonized the first civilized centers of the primitive world. The
ancients called this pioneer ram which lit the torch of art and science,
Cushite Ethiopians, the founders of primeval cities and civilized life.
The wonders of India, to which Europe sought a passage in the age of
Columbus, the costly products and coveted merchandise of Babylon, and
the amazing prehistoric civilization of Asia Minor, sprang from this
little recognized source. The achievements of this race in early ages
were the result of co-operation. Cushites reached the true zenith of
democracy. Their skillful hands raised Cyclopean walls dug out mighty
lakes and laid imperishable roads that have endured throughout the ages.
This was the uniform testimony of ancient records. Modern writers seem
of superficial research, either being unaware of these facts, or
knowing, purposely ignore them. Archaeologists dig up the proofs,

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

ethnologists announce their origin, but history refuses to change its
antiquated and exploded theories.

General history informs us that when the curtain of history was lifted,
the civilization of Egypt was hoary with age. It was a culture that must
have developed from thousands of years of growth. Why is the scholarship
of the world so silent Is to what lay behind historic Egypt? No nation
throughout the ages has "as Athene sprung full fledged into knowledge of
all the arts and sciences." The story of what lay behind Egypt
fascinated the whole ancient world. The culture of Egypt did not
originate upon the Lower Nile. Who then was her teacher? It was the
ancient Cushite empire of Ethiopians, which weighty authorities tell us
ruled over three continents for thousands of years. Should the world
wait longer to test the truth of these ancient witnesses? Beside, these
gigantic achievements, the petty conquests of Alexander the Great,
Julius Caesar, and of Napoleon Bonaparte, fade into insignificance.
There seems to be fear to tell about these ancients, who built mighty
cities, the ruins of which extend in uninterrupted succession around the
shores of the Mediterranean Sea. Traces of this hoary empire, works
appearing to have been wrought by giants, hearing marks of Cushite
genius, have been found by scientists all over the primitive world.

We marvel at the wonders recently unearthed in Egypt. Let us look behind
her through the glasses of science at the "Old Race" of which

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

she was in her beginning, only a colony. Ethiopia was the source of all
that Egypt knew and transmitted to Greece and Rome. We are accustomed to
think of Ethiopia as a restricted country in Africa but this was not
true. The study of ancient maps and the descriptions of the geographers
of old, reveals that the ancient Land of Cush was a very widespread and
powerful empire. Rosenmuller shows us that the Hebrew scholars called
Cush, all the countries of the torrid zone. It was the race that Huxley
saw akin to the Dravidians of India, stretching in an empire from India
to Spain. The Greeks described Ethiopia as the country around the Indus
and Ganges. (*Rosenmuller's Biblical Geography*, Bk. III, p. 154.)

H. G. Wells says that the Hamitic tongue was a much wider and more
varied language than the Semitic or Aryan in ancient days. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) It was the language of the Neolithic peoples
who occupied most of western and southern Asia, who may have been
related to the Dravidians of India and the people of George Elliot's
Heliolithic culture. Sir H. H. Johnson says that this lost Hamitic
language was represented by the scattered branches of Crete, Lydia, the
Basques, the Caucasian-Dravidian group, the ancient Sumerian and the
Elamite. The peoples of this race were the first to give the world ideas
of government. Stephanus of Byzantium, voicing the universal testimony
of antiquity wrote, "Ethiopia was the

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

first established country on earth and the Ethiopians were the first to
set up the worship of the gods and to establish laws." The later ages
gained from this ancient empire, the fundamental principles upon which
republican governments are founded. The basic stones of that wonderful
dominion were equality, temperence, industry, intelligence and justice.

The average historical book ignores this testimony and disputes in its
theories the records and monuments of Egypt and Chaldea. They group the
races in utter contradiction to the records of the Greeks and Hebrews.
In the light of reason, who would know about the ethnic relations of the
ancients, the scholars and historians of Egypt, Chaldea and Greece, who
are more and more corroborated by the findings of science, or the
theories of the men of today? The modern writer whose research has been
superficial does not know that before the days of Grecian and Roman
ascendency, the entire circle of the Mediterranean and her islands was
dotted with the magic cities and the world-wide trade of Ethiopians. The
gods and goddesses of the Greeks and Romans were but the borrowed kings
and queens of this Cushite empire of Ethiopians. So marvelous had been
their achievements in primitive ages, that in later days, they were
worshipped as immortals by the people of India, Egypt, old Ethiopia,
Asia Minor and the Mediterranean world.

Rawlinson, after his exhaustive research into the life of ancient
nations, says, "For the last

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

three thousand years the world has been mainly indebted to the Semitic
and Indo-European races for its advancement, but it was otherwise in the
first ages. Egypt and Babylon, Mizraim and Nimrod, both descendants of
Ham, led the way and acted as the pioneers of mankind in the various
untrodden fields of art, science and literature. Alphabetical writings,
astronomy, history, chronology, architecture, plastic art, sculpture,
navigation, agriculture and textile industries seem to have had their
origin in one. or the other of these countries." (Rawlinson's *Ancient
Monarchies*, Vol. I.) The taming of the animals was the gift to us of
these prehistoric men. By skill and perseverence they developed from
wild plants the wheat, oats and rye that are the foundation of our
agriculture. This work was done so many ages ago, that their wild origin
has disappeared. The average man little realizes the gifts of the
prehistoric ages, or how helpless we would be without them today.

Rawlinson continues, "The first inventors, of any art are among the
greatest benefactors of mankind and the bold steps they take from the
known to the unknown, from blank ignorance, to discovery, are equal to
many subsequent steps of progress." Bunsen says in his *Philosophy of
Ancient History*, "The Hamitic family as Rawlinson proves must be given
the credit for being the fountainhead of civilization. This family
comprised the ancient Ethiopians, the Egyptians, the original Canaanites
and the old Chaldeans. The inscriptions of the Chaldean monuments

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

prove their race affinity. The Bible proves their relationship. It names
the sons of Ham as Cush, Mizraim, Phut and the race of Canaan. Mizraim
peopled Egypt and Canaan the land later possessed by the Hebrews. Phut
located in Africa and Cush extended his colonies over a wide domain."
(*Philosophy of Ancient History*, Bunsen, p. 51)

Bunsen concludes by saying, "Cushite colonies were all along the
southern shores of Asia and Africa and by the archaeological remains,
along the southern and eastern coasts of Arabia. The name Cush was given
to four great areas, Media, Persia, Susiana and Aria, or the whole
territory between the Indus and Tigris in prehistoric times. In Africa
the Ethiopians, the Egyptians, the Libyans, the Canaanites and
Phoenicians were all descendants of Ham. They were a black or dark
colored race and the pioneers of our civilization. They were
emphatically the monument builders on the plains of Shinar and the
valley of the Nile from Meroe to Memphis. In southern Arabia they
erected wonderful edifices. They were responsible for the monuments that
dot southern Siberia and in America along the valley of the Mississippi
down to Mexico and in Peru their images and monuments stand a "voiceless
witnesses." This was the ancient Cushite Empire of Ethiopians that
covered three worlds. Some of our later books recognizing their
indisputable influence in primitive culture, speak of them as a brunet
brown race representing a mysterious Heliolithic culture.

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

Wells testifying from researches of Eliot Smith admits that this culture
may have been oozing round the world from 1500 B.C. to 1000 B.C. He
calls it the highest early culture of the world. It sustained the
largest and most highly developed communities, but as in other modern
books there is failure to give us clearer light upon this ancient
culture and its origin. Baldwin speaking more frankly affirms that
Hebrew writers describe these first inhabitants of cities and civilized
life as Cushites. "The foundations of ancient religions, mythology,
institutions and customs all had the same source. He considered the
Egyptian and Chaldean civilizations as very old but the culture and
political organization of Ethiopia was much older. They belonged to what
Egyptians and Chaldeans regarded as real antiquity, ages shrouded in
doubt because they were so remote. The oldest nations mentioned in
history did not originate civilization, the traditions of Asia bring
civilization from the south, connecting it with the Erythraean Sea.
These traditions are confirmed by the inscriptions found upon the old
ruins of Chaldea." (*Prehistoric Nations*, Baldwin.)

Wilford, that eminent student of the literature of India, found that
Ethiopia was often mentioned in the Sanskrit writings of the people of
India. The world according to the Puranas, ancient historical books, was
divided into seven dwipas or divisions. Ethiopia was Cusha-Dwipa which
included Arabia, Asia Minor, Syria, Nubia, Armenia, Mesopotamia, and an
extended region

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

in Africa. These Sanskrit writings prove that in remote ages these
regions were the most powerful richest and most enlightened part of the
world. From these authoritative records and the conclusions drawn by
historians of deeper research we would decide that many ancient peoples,
who have been assigned to other races in the average historical book of
modern times, were in reality Ethiopians. There were nations that called
themselves Cushites who never knew themselves under the titles and
classifications that superficial students have given them. The
Phoenicians in the days of Christ called themselves Ethiopians. The
Scriptures and ancient records called the Samaritans Cushites. To create
a true story of the ages the entire fabric of the ethnological
relationship of the races will have to be torn down to be more honestly
laid.

This Ethiopia, which existed for long ages before its wonderful power
was broken, cannot be limited to the short chronological period of
history, that, the facts of geology prove to be in error. The Bible
gives no figures for the epochs of time. It speaks of Creation and its
after periods in God cycles that we cannot resolve into figures. We read
in *Prehistoric Nations*, "In the oldest recorded traditions, Cushite
colonies were established in the valley of the Nile, Barabra and
Chaldea. This beginning must have been not later than 7000 or 8000 B. C.
or perhaps earlier. They brought to development astronomy and the other
sciences, which have come down to us. The vast commercial system by
which they

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

joined together the "ends of the earth" was created and manufacturing
skill established. The great period of Cushite control had closed many
ages prior to Homer, although separate communities remained not only in
Egypt but in southern Arabia, Phoenicia and elsewhere." (*Prehistoric
Nations*, pp. 95, 96.)

Baldwin continues, "5000 B. C. Egypt and Chaldea became separate. The
Cushites were still unrivaled. 3500 to 3000 B. C. the kingdom divided
again. We do not know what caused the breaking up of the old empire,
which for thousands of years had held imperial sway." It may have been
that the first cities and civilization extended beyond the "Deluge." The
Sabaeans, Himyarites, and Ethiopians maintained supremacy almost to
modern times; but the ancient glory had departed previous to the rise of
Assyria 1300 B. C. Not long before the Arabian peninsula had been
overrun by Semites, chiefly nomads, who became the permanent
inhabitants. The previous conquests of the ancient world denominated by
modern books as Semitic were Cushite Arabian and not of the later
Semitic Arabian race. Through this error many ancient branches of the
Hamitic race are lined up its Semitic. After the rise of Assyria, tire
Ethiopians above Egypt became the central representatives of that power
that had exercised world empire for thousands of years. What kind of
race could this have been that could throw such giant shadows upon
time's dawn?

The stories of the "*Arabian Nights*," which

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

so enthralled us in childhood and to which the childhood of the world
clings as though they were true has this historic basis. They picture
the activities and world wide scope, of Cushite civilization in the
declining days of Ethiopian glory. Its scenes represent India, Persia,
Arabia and Chaldea, which were primitively Cushite, in the decline of
the Gold and Silver Ages of ancient tradition. Archaeological research
and findings are proving that there wore such ages. The tales of the
Arabian Nights, so marvelous and gripping in interest, did not spring
from mere fancy alone, and because of this have for mankind an alluring
and undying fascination. These tales minus their genii and fairies form
an imperishable book picturing a far distant but powerful civilization.
In the land of the ancient Chaldean, in Egypt, in happy "Araby the
Blest," and along the shores of the Mediterranean, the evidences of this
prehistoric civilization are being dug up in wonder by the
archaeologists of the civilized nations to-day. Relics in their way as
wonderful as the gems called up by Alladin's Lamp, hidden just as were
his finds in chambers of the earth.

Heeren, whose researches furnish invaluable information to the later
historians says, "From the remotest times to the present, the Ethiopians
have been the most celebrated and yet the most mysterious of nations. In
the earliest traditions of the more civilized nations of antiquity, the
name of this most distant people is found. The annals of the Egyptian
priests were full of them, and the nations of inner Asia on the
Euphrates

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

and the Tigris have woven the fictions of the Ethiopians with their own
traditions of the wars and conquests of their heroes; and at a period
equally remote they glimmer in Greek mythology." Dionysus, Hercules,
Saturn, Osiris, Zeus and Apollo were Cushite kings of the prehistoric
ages. Around these and other Ethiopian deities the people of the
Mediterranean and the Orient wove their mythologies. Prejudice and
ignorance may have marked their deeds as fabulous but the imperishable
monuments that they left are not imaginary. They are the realistic
reminders of a people who deeply impressed and colored the life, art and
literature of the ancient world.

The prehistoric achievements of Cushite heroes were the theme of ancient
sculpture, painting and drama. They were the object of worship of all
the nations that appear civilized at the dawn of history. The literature
and music of Greece and Rome was permeated by this deep Ethiopian
strain. These classic forms and ideals maintain supremacy in the art of
modern times. Heeren continues, "When the Greeks scarcely knew Italy and
Sicily by name, the Ethiopians were celebrated in the poems of their
bards. They were the remotest nation, the most just of men, the
favorites of the gods. The lofty inhabitants of Olympus journey to them
and take part in their feasts. Their sacrifices are the most agreeable
that mortals can offer and when the faint beams of tradition give way to
the clear light of history, the lusture of the Ethiopians is not
diminished. They still continue to be objects

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

of curiosity and admiration; and the pens of cautious and clear sighted
historians often place them in the highest rank of knowledge and
civilization."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[17:1](we04.htm#fr_0.md) *Outline of History*, Vol.
I, p. 158. Wells.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. Old Ethiopia--Its People](we05.md)
