[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we04)  [Next](we06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### OLD ETHIOPIA--ITS PEOPLE.

Because of the great lapse. of time, it seems almost impossible to
locate the original seat of the old Ethiopian empire. Bochart thought it
was "Happy Araby," that from this central point the Cushite race spread
eastward and westward. Some authorities like Gesenius thought it was
Africa. The Greeks looked to old Ethiopia and called the Upper Nile the
common cradle of mankind. Toward the rich luxurience of this region they
looked for the "Garden of Eden." From these people of the Upper Nile
arose the oldest traditions and rites and from them sprang the first
colonies and arts of antiquity. The Greeks also said that Egyptians
derived their civilization and religion from Ethiopia. "Egyptian
religion was not an original conception, for three thousand years ago
she had lost all true sense of its real meaning among even the
priesthood." (Budge, *Osiris and the Egyptian Resurrection*--Preface.)
Yet Egyptian forms of worship are understood and practiced among the
Ethiopians of Nubia today. The common people of Egypt never truly
understood their religion, this was why it so easily became debased.

Ptolemaic writers said that Egypt was formed of the mud carried down,
from Ethiopia, that

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Ethiopians were the first men that ever lived,
the only truly autochthonous race and the first to institute the worship
of the gods and the rites of sacrifice. Egypt itself was a colony of
Ethiopia and the laws and script of both lands were naturally the same;
but the hieroglyphic script was more widely known to the vulgar in
Ethiopia than in Egypt. (Diodorus Siculus, bk. iii, ch. 3.) This
knowledge of writing was universal in Ethiopia but was confined to the
priestly classes alone in Egypt. This was because the Egyptian
priesthood was Ethiopian. The highly developed Merodic inscriptions are
not found in Egypt north of the first cataract or in Nubia south of
Soba. These are differences we would expect to find between a colony and
a parent body. Herodotus (bk. ii, p. 29) says that Meroe was a great
city and metropolis, most of its buildings were of red brick. 800 B. C.
at Napata, the buildings were of hard stone. (*Meroe*--Crowfoot, pp. 6,
30.)

The *Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature* says, "There is every reason to
conclude that the separate colonies of priestcraft spread from Meroe
into Egypt; and the primeval monuments in Ethiopia strongly confirm the
native traditions, reported by Diodorus Siculus, that the worship of
Zeus-Ammon originated in Meroe, also the worship of Osiris. This would
render highly probable the opinion that commerce, science and art
descended into Egypt from the Upper Nile. Herodotus called the
Ethiopians "Wisemen occupying the Upper Nile, men of long life, whose
manners and customs pertain to the Golden Age,

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

those virtuous mortals, whose feasts and banquets are honored by Jupiter
himself." In Greek times, the Egyptians depicted Ethiopia as an ideal
state. The Puranas, the ancient historical books of India, speak of the
civilization of Ethiopia as being older than that of Egypt. These
Sanskrit books mention the names of old Cushite kings that were
worshipped in India and who were adopted and changed to suit the fancy
of the later people of Greece and Rome.

The Hindu Puranas speak of the Cushites going to India before they went
to Egypt, proving Hindu civilization coeval with that of Chaldea and the
country of the Nile. These ancients record that the Egyptians were a
colony drawn out from Cusha-Dwipa and that the Palli, another colony
that made the Phoenicians followed them from the land of Cush. In those
primitive days, the central seat of Ethiopia was not the Meroe of our
day, which is very ancient, but a kingdom that preceeded it by many
ages; that was called Meru. Lenormant spoke of the first men of the
ancient world as "Men of Meru." Sanskrit writers called Indra, chief god
of the Hindu, king of Meru. He was deified and became the chief
representative of the supreme being. Thus was primitive India settled by
colonists from Ethiopia. Early writers said there was very little
difference in the color or features of the people of the two countries.

Ancient traditions told of the deeds of Deva Nahusha, another sovereign
of Meru, who extended his empire over three worlds. The lost

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

literature of Asia Minor dealt with this extension of the Ethiopian
domain. An old poem "Phrygia," was a history of Dionysus, one of the
most celebrated of the old Ethiopians. It was written in a very old
language and character. He preceeded Menes by many ages. Baldwin says
that the authentic books that would have given us the true history
concerning him, perished long before the Hellenes. The Greeks of
historical times distorted the story of Dionysus and converted him into
their drunken god of wine. "They misconstrued and misused the old
Cushite mythology, wherever they failed to understand it, and sought to
appropriate it entirely to themselves." One of the poetical versions of
the taking of Troy, on the coast of Asia Minor, was entitled "The
Æthiops," because the inhabitants of Troy, as we shall prove later, who
fought so valiantly in the Trojan war, were Cushite Ethiopians. This
version presented the conflict as an Egyptian war.

In those early ages Egypt was under Ethiopian domination. In proof of
this fact, the Cyclopedia of Biblical Literature says, "Isaiah often
mentions Ethiopia and Egypt in close political relations. In fine the
name of Ethiopia chiefly stood as the name of the national and royal
family of Egypt. In the beginning Egypt was ruled from Ethiopia.
Ethiopia was ruined by her wars with Egypt, which she sometimes subdued
and sometimes served." Modern books contain but little information about
the country of the Upper Nile, but archaic books were full of the story
of the

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

wonderful Ethiopians. The ancients said that they settled Egypt. Is it
possible that we could know more about the origin of this nation than
they? Reclus says, "The people occupying the plateau of the Blue Nile,
are conscious of a glorious past and proudly call themselves
Ethiopians." He calls the whole triangular space between the Nile and
the Red Sea, Ethiopia proper. This vast highland constituted a world
apart. From it went forth the inspiration and light now bearing its
fruit in the life of younger nations.

[Heeren](errata.htm#7.md) thought, that excepting the Egyptians, no
aboriginal people of Africa so claim our attention as the Ethiopians. He
asks, "To what shall we attribute the renown of this one of the most
distant nations of the earth? How did the fame of her name permeate the
terrible deserts that surrounded her: and even yet form an insuperable
bar to all who approach. A great many nations distant and different from
one another are called Ethiopians. Africa contains the greater number of
them and a considerable tract in Asia was occupied by this race. The
Ethiopians were distinguished from the other races by a very dark or
completely black skin. " (Heeren's Historical Researches--*Ethiopian
Nations*. Ch. 1, p. 46) Existing monuments confirm the high antiquity of
Meroe. In the Persian period Ethiopia was an important and independent
state, which Cambyses vainly attempted to subdue. Rosellini thinks that
the right of Sabaco and Tirhakah, Ethiopian kings, who sat upon the
throne of Egypt in the latter days, must have been more by right of
descent

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

than by usurpation or force of arms. "This may be judged," he says, "by
the respect paid to their monuments by their successors."

The pictures on the Egyptian monuments reveal that Ethiopians were the
builders. They, not the Egyptians, were the master-craftsmen of the
earlier ages. The first courses of the pyramids were built of Ethiopian
stone. The Cushites were a sacerdotal or priestly race. There was a
religious and astronomical significance in the position and shape of the
pyramids. Dubois points to the fact that in Upper Egypt there were
pictured black priests who were conferring upon red Egyptians, the
instruments and symbols of priesthood. Ethiopians in very early ages had
an original and astounding religion, which included the rite of human
sacrifice. It lingered on in the early life of Greece and Home. Dowd
explains this rite in this way: "The African offered his nearest and
dearest, not from depravity but from a greater love for the supreme
being." The priestly caste was more influencial upon the Upper Nile than
in Egypt. With the withdrawal of the Ethiopian priesthood from Egypt to
Napata, the people of the Lower Nile lost the sense of the real meaning
of their religion, which steadily deteriorated with their language after
their separation from Ethiopia.

If we visit Nubia, modern Ethiopia today, we can plainly see in the
inhabitants their superiority to the common Egyptian type. The Barabra
or Nile Nubians are on a footing of perfect equality in Egypt because
that was their plane in ancient

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

 

<span id="img_03300"></span>

[![RACE TYPE OF THE EARLY DYNASTIES.&lt;br&gt; (From Ridpath's
History.)](tn/03300.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03300.jpg.md)  
RACE TYPE OF THE EARLY DYNASTIES.  
(From Ridpath's History.)  

 

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

days. Baedecker describes them as strong, muscular, agricultural and
more warlike and energetic than Egyptians. Keane says the Nubians excel
in moral qualities. They are by his description obviously Negroid, very
dark with full lips and dreamy eyes. They have the narrow heads which
are the cranial formation of Ethiopia. Race may be told by shape of the
skull far better than by color or feature, which are modified by
climate. The members of the Tartar race have perfectly rounded skulls.
The head of the Ethiopian races is very elongated. Europeans have an
intermediate skull. The cranial formation of unmixed races never
changes. Keane concludes by saying, "All Barbara have wooly hair with
scant beards like the figures of Negroes on the walls of the Egyptian
temples." The race of the Old Empire approached closely to this type.

Strabo mentions the Nubians as a great race west of the Nile. They came
originally from Kordofan, whence they emigrated two thousand years ago.
They have rejected the name Nubas as it has become synonymous with
slave. They call themselves Barabra, their ancient race name. Sanskrit
historians call the Old Race of the Upper Nile Barabra. These Nubians
have become slightly modified but are still plainly Negroid. They look
like the Wawa on the Egyptian monuments. The Retu type number one was
the ancient Egyptian, the Retu type number two was in feature an
intermingling of the Ethiopian and Egyptian types. The Wawa were
Cushites and the name occurs in the mural inscriptions five

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

thousands years ago. Both people were much intermingled six thousand
years ago. The faces of the Egyptians of the Old Monarchy are Ethiopian
but as the ages went on they altered from the constant intermingling
with Asiatic types. Also the intense furnace-like heat of Upper Egypt
tended to change the features and darken the skin.

In the inscriptions relative to the campaigns of Pepi I, Negroes are
represented as immediately adjoining the Egyptian frontier. This seems
to perplex some authors. They had always been there. This was the Old
Race of predynastic Egypt--the primitive Cushite type. This was the
aboriginal race of Abyssinia. It was symbolized by the Great Sphinx and
the marvelous face of Cheops. Take any book of Egyptian history
containing authentic cuts and examine the faces of the first pharaohs,
they are distinctively Ethiopian. The "Agu" of the monuments represented
this aboriginal race. They were the ancestors of the Nubians. and were
the ruling race of Egypt. Petrie in 1892 exhibited before the British
Association, some skulls of the Third and Fourth Dynasties, showing
distinct Negroid characteristics. They were dolichocephalic or long
skulled. The findings of archaeology more and more reveal that Egypt was
Cushite in her beginning and that Ethiopians were not a branch of the
Japheth race in the sense that they are so represented in the average
ethnological classifications of today.

Egyptians said that they and their religion had come from the land of
Punt. Punt is generally accepted today to have been Somaliland south of

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Nubia. On the pictured plates at Deir-el-Baheri,
the huts of the people of Punt were like the Toquls of the modern
Sudanese, being built on piles approached by ladders. The birds were
like a species common among the Somali. The fishes were not like those
of Egypt. The wife of the king of Punt appears with a form like the
Bongo women with exaggerated organs of maternity. This was a distinctive
Ethiopian form. The king had the Cushite profile. The products carried
by the wooly haired porters were ebony, piles of elephant tusks, all
African products and trays of massive gold rings. Punt is mentioned in
the inscriptions as a land of wonders. We find marvelous ruins in
southeastern Africa that substantiate these reports. The inscription in
the rocky valley of Hammat tells how 2000 B. C. a force gathered in the
Thebaid to go on an expedition to Punt to bring back the products that
made the costly incense of the ancients. The Stage Temple at Thebes
showed in gorgeous pictures another expedition in 1600 B. C. We now know
that Somaliland yielded the frankincense of ancient commerce, which was
used in the ceremonials of all ancient kingdoms. Punt was called the
"Holy Land" by the Egyptians.

In Egypt today, the most effective battalions are those commanded by
black Nubians. In ancient ages the Egyptians followed the lead of the
Ethiopian to battle and it is instinctive in them to do so today.
Cushites were the backbone of the armies in the earliest ages. The
Egyptian has no warlike qualities. It was the Cushite

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

who was the head and brains of the foreign conquests. It was the Cushite
element of the Old Empire that extended itself in foreign colonization
eastward and westward around the world. Across Arabia and southwestern
Asia, even to the central highlands, inscriptions and massive images in
stone stand as voiceless witnesses that they were the commanders of the
Egyptian armies and that the Ethiopian masses accompanied the soldiers
as trusted allies and not as driven slaves. We must remember that in the
early ages they were not a subject race but that their power as a great
empire was at its zenith.

The Egyptian of today much changed from the ancient whom Herodotus
called black, is content to live in a mud hut beside his beloved Nile.
He is despised by the prouder Nubian, who saves his earnings to buy a
home and piece of ground in his native Ethiopia. Reclus tells us that
the dislike between Egyptians and Nubians is carried to such a great
extent that the Nubians even in Egypt will not marry an Egyptian woman
and that he refuses his daughter in marriage to the Egyptian and Arab.
This could have come down alone front an age-old consciousness of
superiority. He knows the proud traditions of his race. In books
careless of ethnography, we find the Nubian classed with Semitic stock.
They have no affinities at all with this race. Nubians are never able to
speak the Arabic tongues gramatically. Nubian women are seldom seen in
Egypt. They are the most faithful to the manners and customs of the Old
Race. The Egyptian of today makes

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

little showings of ambition or the spirit for great deeds. He squanders
his earnings upon trinkets and seems content in the same mud hovel in
which the masses of Egyptians primitively lived.

Prichard recognizes two branches of the Nubians, the Nubians of the Nile
and those of the Red Sea. In the age of Herodotus, the countries known
as Nubia and Senaar were occupied by two different races, one of which
he includes under the name Ethiopian; the other was a pastorial race of
Semitic decent which led a migratory life. This distinction continues to
the present day. The Red Sea nomadic tribes are extremely savage and
inhospitable. The Nile Nubas or Barabra are the original Ethiopians.
They are [agricultural](errata.htm#8.md) and have the old Hamitic traits.
They plant date trees and set up wheels for irrigation. These are the
Ethiopians mentioned in chronicles as possessing war chariots. Their
allies were the Libyans. Semites at that age of the world had no
possession of iron vehicles. Heeren says "that the ancestors of these
Ethiopians had long lived in cities and had erected magnificent temples
and edifices, that they possessed law and government, and that the fame
of their progress in knowledge and the social arts had spread in the
earliest ages to a considerable part of the world."

Maurice, that reliable authority on ancient remains, declares, "The
ancient Ethiopians were the architectural giants of the past. When the
daring Cushite genius was in the full career of its glory, it was the
peculiar delight of this enterprising race to erect stupendous edifices,
excavate

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

long subterranean passages in the living rock, form vast lakes and
extend over the hollows of adjoining mountains magnificent arches for
aqueducts and bridges. It was they who built the tower of Babel or Belus
and raised the pyramids or Egypt; it was they who formed the grottoes
near the Nile and scooped the caverns of Salsette end Elephante. (These
latter are wonders of Hindu architecture.) Their skill in mechanical
powers astonishes posterity, who are unable to conceive by what means
stones thirty, forty and even sixty feet in length from twelve to twenty
in depth could ever be raised to the point of elevation at which they
are seen in the ruined temples of Belbec and Thebais. Those comprising
the pagodas of India are scarcely less wonderful in point of elevation
and magnitude." (*Maurice's Ancient History of Hindustan*.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Ancient Ethiopia, The Land](we06.md)
