[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we07)  [Next](we09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

# CHAPTER V.

### PREHISTORIC EGYPT, THE LAND OF WONDERS.

The native name of Egypt was Khem, the black land. The name came not so
much from the color of the soil as the hue of the inhabitants. Egypt was
called the "Gift of the Nile," because Lower Egypt was formed out of
soil brought down by the mighty river. Without the Nile, Egypt would be
but a desert. The ancient peoples seemed to know more about the sources
of the Nile than later nations. In our age Livingston explored the
branches of the White and Blue Nile far into the highlands of the
equator. The land through the ages has been raised by the deposits left
by each annual overflow. Failure of the river to rise means drouth and
famine. At the time of overflow Egypt is a vast sea with her cities on
the tops, of continuous natural mounds. Numerous canals traverse the
country connecting the natural channels. Egypt was inhabited in ancient
days by two races or two distinct divisions of one race. Ancient records
all testify that the ruling class in those times was the Ethiopian. They
founded the powerful priest caste. "This priesthood included the judges,
physicians, astrologers, architects--in a word they united within
themselves all the highest culture and the most distinguished offices of
the land." (*Biblical Literature*.)

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

Calumet testifies, that from ancient accounts and from all recent
research, culture and civilization spread into Egypt from the south and
especially from Meroe. Egypt, ruled at first by several contemporary
kings, was finally united into one great kingdom. A priesthood seemed to
have governed the land. The head of the state was a priest. The sacred
books of the Hindu speak of an "Old Race," that came down from Upper
Egypt and peopled the delta. They mentioned the Mountains of the Moon
and the Nile flowing through Barabra. Herodotus says in his Second Book,
"They say that in the time of Menes all Egypt except the district of
Thebes was a morass, and that no part of the land now existing below
Lake Myris was then above water. To this place from the sea is seven
days passage up the river." Diodorus Siculus says in Book Three, "The
Ethiopians say that the Egyptians are a colony drawn out of them by
Osiris; and that Egypt was formerly no part of the continent; but a sea
at the beginning of the world, and that it was afterwards made land by
the river Nile."

This testimony is corroborated by geology. Rennel after scientific
investigation says, "The configuration and composition of the low lands
of Egypt leave no room to doubt that the sea once washed the base of the
rocks on which the pyramids of Memphis stand; the present base of which
is, reached by the inundations of the Nile at an elevation of seventy or
eighty feet above the Mediterranean." How remote, must be the period
when Egypt was not the gift of the Nile. Renan

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

declares that Egypt had no infancy because, its first colonists had been
civilized in Ethiopia.

Sayce thinks Egypt did not begin with Menes, that when Abraham went down
in Egypt 4000 years ago, the origin and meaning of the Sphinx was lost
in mystery.

The [Sphinx](errata.htm#17) and the pyramids were symbols of some form
of religion of the Old Race. Baldwin quotes from Diodorus Siculus, "The
laws, customs, religious observances and letters of the ancient
Egyptians closely resembled the Ethiopians, the colony still observing
the customs of their ancestors." Egyptians in later days affirmed, that
they and their civilization came from the black tribes of Punt. Some
scholars seek to derive Egyptian civilization from some Oriental source.
There is evidence that the culture of Egypt was not developed in Egypt
from their traditions and their earliest remains. It did not come from
the north or east but must have been imported from the south for as
Budge affirms, Egyptians had all the characteristics of an African race.
Sergi shows that the discoveries of Flinders Petrie and De Morgan prove
that prehistoric Egypt was not influenced by any Oriental civilization.

The primitive people of Egypt, as revealed by archaeology, dressed in
skins and used rude stone implements of the stone age men. They lived in
mud and reed buts and hunted wild animals. We do not And any such rude
beginnings for the race of the Soudan. From these people of Punt, came
Cushite colonists bearing to the children of Mizraim

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

knowledge of copper, bronze, cereals, oxen, sheep, goats, and
brickmaking. The historic Egyptian rose probably from the union of the
aborigines and the invaders. Sayce says that the ancient Egyptians had
the elongated type of skull. With the intermixture of later times the
heads of the Egyptians have widened. The race of today has returned to
the aboriginal mud hut on the bank of the Nile. In the days of Egyptian
supremacy the cranial formation was Ethiopian. James Henry Breasted,
world famous archaeologist, discovered in Egypt the studio of an
Egyptian sculptor of 1400 B. C. It was called the house of the chief
sculptor Thutmos. All the portraits were remarkable in that they were
unmistakably African.

The early population of Thebes was Nubian. The reign of Menes was no
nearer our time than 4000 B. C. One of the temple records call him a
Theban. Thebes was settled from Meroe. Menes had been a priest of Upper
Egypt, the older of the two countries. He made a change in the channel
of the Nile. Many ages of civilization had preceded him. Bunsen believed
that the time preceeding Menes was greater than since. Lepius says,
"Under the Fourth Dynasty, six thousand years ago, the nation had
approached the highest development at which we find her, of which the
ruins still bear witness. The admirable system of monumental writings
showed its highest perfection in the oldest ruins. This certainly
indicated a long previous development." This was the age when Egypt was
under domination

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

of the Ethiopians. The farther back we go the more perfect the art and
the purer the ideals. The ancient temples were almost covered with
inscriptions. So universal was education that even workmen wrote upon
the stones.

Chronology as we have computed it, makes no allowance for the many ages
through which Egypt must have passed to have reached the high stage of
culture which she had obtained at the dawn of recorded history. The
chronology of Berosos, Mantheo, and the Hindu sages, include ages of
which other races possess no history and seem incomprehensible to us.
These were Cushite races, the first men, and bring over a record of ages
preceeding the Deluge. Their chronology is backed by the findings of
science, which has shown that the earth is older than the puny period
allowed by *Usher's Chronology*. The Bible says that a thousand years
with our God is as a day. Examination of prehistoric culture, reveals
bat the rich languages, complex systems of religion, and astounding
architectural achievements, which appear when the curtain of history was
lifted, are proof that the earth is older than we perceive.

The priests of Sais said to Solon, "You Greeks are novices in all the
knowledge of antiquity. You are ignorant of what passed here or among
yourselves in the days of old. The history of eight thousand years is
deposited in our sacred books, but we can ascend to much higher
antiquity and tell you what our fathers have done for nine thousand
years. I mean their institutions, their

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

laws, and their brilliant accomplishments." Baldwin points out that
neither Solon nor Plato thought this improbable. The Greeks could tell
nothing of their progenitors and but little of the Pelasgian race that
preceded them in Hellenic lands. "There can be no doubt," says Baldwin,
"that the Egyptians preserved old records of the early period of their
history extending beyond Menes." This knowledge was lost to our times by
the destruction of the Alexandrian library and the fanatical zeal which
destroyed all pagan manuscripts.

Again the significant questions arise, why were the Greeks so ignorant
as to their ancestors, and why did Egypt hold the knowledge of earlier
Hellenic life? It must have been that the historic Greeks were but
emigrants into Hellenic lands; that in prehistoric ages had been filled
with the rich culture of another race Akin to the Egyptians. That the
deluge did not reach this portion of the human race, may be the reason
why Ethiopia was able to introduce civilization to the other races. All
of the races of the earth have their traditions of a universal deluge
but the African. They may have brought over to us the knowledge of the
arts and wisdom of the ante-diluvian world.. Reclus also declares, "All
the marvels of Egypt were not tire work of the Retu. Neither Usher's.
chronology nor the little country Phoenicia can suffice to explain that
mighty and widespread influence of the Cushite race in human affairs,
whose traces are visible from Farther India to Norway."

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

Egypt falls into natural divisions, Lower and Upper. Lower Egypt
stretches from the Mediterranean to the limit of the Delta. Upper Egypt
extends six hundred miles south of the Delta to the first cataract. The
broad plains of the Delta and the comparatively narrow valley higher up,
make up the divisions of Egypt. In the primitive days Upper Egypt was
wholly Ethiopian. Bunsen says that the early monuments reveal the
primitive Egyptian, with head low and elongated, the forehead not amply
developed, the nose short, thick, the lips full and large, the chin
short and receding. In those days the rulers of Egypt were wholly
Ethiopian. Look at authentic plates of early Egyptian Pharaohs, they are
undeniably Cushite. The Great Sphinx, emblematic of an earlier king, is
the full featured Ethiopian type. Look at the astounding countenance of
Cheops. The counterpart of such a face can only be found among
Ethiopians today. He is a perfect representation of the Cushite
Ethiopian race, that cast such giant shadows on time's dawn.

The Delta is a rich cultivated plain, which travelers describe as dotted
with lofty mounds, under which lie buried cities. Here and there on the
mounds are villages in groves of palm, where they may be above the flood
waters of the Nile. Dews as well as rains are more copious toward the
sea. At Alexandria, after sunset, clothes exposed to the dew become
soaked as if it had rained. When rain falls in Lower Egypt there is
general rejoicing. The people assemble in the streets and sing. From the
middle of spring one

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

sees nothing but grey dusty soil full of cracks and chasms. At the time
of the autumnal equinox, the whole country presents an immeasurable
surface of reddish yellow water out of which rises date trees and
villages. After the water retreats, we may see only black and slimy mud.
In winter nature puts on all her splendor. Egypt is then a beautiful
garden, a verdant meadow, sown with fields of waving grain.

Upper Egypt is a rich narrow valley hemmed in by mountains. It has a
clear dry climate and is much healthier than Lower Egypt. The atmosphere
has a brilliance, which is almost intolerable, and the torrid sun is
unrelieved by any shade. This is all right for the races that can bear
great heat. Rain rarely ever falls up the Nile valley. Because of this
scarcity of moisture, agriculture depends upon canals much below the
level of the land. Their greatest need lies in proper machines by which
the water may be lifted. This extreme difference in Upper and Lower
Egypt accounts for the physical difference in [the](errata.htm#18) two
race types of the land. The bronzed hues are in the Delta but the black
hues are under the brazen skies of Upper Egypt. In the Delta many
diseases are prevalent, due to the weakness and poverty of the people
and the insufficient food because of the exploitation of a rapacious
government. The plague and dissentry cause many deaths. In Upper Egypt
all is different. Disease is not prevalent and the natives are comely,
kindly and thrifty.

The Egyptian in general is simple, cheerful and

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

hospitable. These are genuine African traits. The fellahs are a quiet,
contented, submissive race. Amrou says, that they have always been
toiling for others never for themselves. The love of the fellah for his
native Egypt is deep and absorbing. Remove him and he perishes. He would
rather die than revolt. The whole family fortune is lavished upon
diadems and necklaces of true or false gems. They have no other wealth.
The Egyptian was made for peace, not for war, though his patriotism is
intense, he has no spirit for conquest. The miseries of soldiers is a
favorite subject for satire with Egyptian literary men. At the first
rumor of war, half the tribe takes refuge in the mountains, until the
recruiting agents are gone. The armies of ancient Egypt were led and
very largely manned in the days of her [supremacy](errata.htm#19) by the
Ethiopian element, which today is much more warlike than the fellah.
Egyptians make themselves cripples to escape military service. This
would also lead us to decide that it was the Old Race, not these, who
extended themselves over so great an area of the ancient world.

Because of mistreatment the Egyptian of today resorts to fraud,
trickery, and subterfuge, that is easily detected. Nubians are frank and
honest. We have every reason to see why the nature of the Egyptian can
be no better. Niebhur says, "When we reflect that Egypt has been
successively subdued by Persians, Greeks, Romans, Arabians, and Turks,
and has enjoyed no interval of tranquility or freedom but has been

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

constantly oppressed and pillaged, we need not be surprised that
agriculture has been ruined or that her cities have declined. The
population is decreasing and the inhabitants of this fertile country are
miserably poor. The exactions of the government leave him nothing
remaining to lay out in the improvement or culture of his land, and many
unhappy restraints render it impossible for him to engage in any
lucrative occupation. They are reduced to a small number compared to the
Arabs who have poured like a flood over the country." The mass of
Egyptians live in a mere hut or heap of clods dug out of a neighboring
ditch. A few cakes of durrah suffice to nourish him. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

Reclus says, "The Retu still greatly resemble their fathers, in spite of
interminglings, the Copts are still known as the people of Pharaoh.
Under the Ptolemies they must have been greatly mixed. The Copts
concentrate chiefly in Upper Egypt. They possess whole villages to
themselves. In the towns they are artizans, money changers, and
employers. They marry later than other Egyptians and regard more the
family ties and their children. The old Coptic language, key to the
hieroglyphics, is no longer spoken anywhere. Since the seventeenth
century, Arabic is the general language throughout Egypt, simply the
language imposed upon them by conquerors. Scribes and notaries are found
among the Copts. They constitute the lower official class, and are

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

decidedly voracious and more corrupt than the Turkish officials
themselves. Copts are somewhat darker than Arabs. Their hair is of a
soft wooly texture, their noses short and their lips wide. They are
supposed to be the direct descendants of the Pharaohs and are about one
sixteenth of the population of Egypt. Reclus thinks they do but little
credit to those ancient sovereigns. (*Africa*, Vol. I, Reclus.)

Modern research is leading us to the belief that culture was spread in
Egypt from the south, especially from Meroe. The country was first ruled
over by contemporary kings, who were at war with each other. At last the
common difficulties in harnessing the Nile united them under Menes 5500
years B. C. For a thousand years the capital remained at Memphis. This
was the Old Kingdom, the period of the Pyramid builders. Sayce found the
shape of the skulls subsequent to the Sixth Dynasty different from those
that preceded it. This was a period of absolute decadence and must
represent the domination of some other race in which time the monuments
are silent as to any true achievement. It must have been during this
silent period that Ethiopia turned from continued colonization in Egypt
to send her swarms westward into the European continent and spread out
into that broad band of nations that extended from India to Spain and in
whom Huxley said there was a common origin. Sayce tells us in Ancient
Empires that with the passing of the Old Empire the religion of Egypt

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

became gloomy and that in art the light-hearted freedom of the Ethiopian
was gone.

2400 to 2000 B. C. was the beginning of the, Middle Kingdom. This period
is represented by the rise of Thebes, with its magnificent temples and
its introduction of mysteries. A new deity Amen-Ra, god of Thebes
presides. It had been thought that Amen was not one of the gods of Egypt
until this 11th Dynasty, but when the pyramids of the 5th and 6th
Dynasties were opened Amen was there. The Pharaohs claimed to be literal
and lineally descended from Amen-Ra. This was implicitly believed by
their subjects. Let us seek to trace who Amen-Ra was. He was originally
the god of Ethiopia. Amen-Ra was Cush, the son of Ham from whom the
Cushites sprang. He was not one of the oldest deities of Egypt because
he was preceeded by the gods of the ages of Noah (Saturn) and Ham. About
the time of the rise of Thebes his name from his worldwide conquests
must have been entered into the cycle of gods; for Africans deified
their dead kings. Undoubtedly descendants of the great Cush sat upon the
throne of Egypt This is why his name and form appear in the 11th Dynasty
and its line of kings assumed his name.

His became the predominent shrine of Egypt and its enrichment became the
chief object of the Pharaohs. Amen or Cush was recognized by Egypt as
its chief god. All the mummery of the world which tries to resolve the
gods of old into anything else presents the [height](errata.htm#20) of
folly. The ancients looked upon Zeus, Apollo and

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Osiris as persons. Amen-Ra was the Zeus of
Greece, that was why they said the gods banqueted with the Ethiopians.
He was the Jupiter of Rome. Zeus was king of kings because he was chief
ruler in Ethiopia and over the lesser kings in his wide domains
stretching from India to farther Norway. Horus, Apollo, Belus and Nimrod
his son, were recognized and worshipped by all Cushite colonies. In the
sculptures the Negro types of Africa are the assistants at the festivals
in Amen's honor. He, himself, was of the same ancestry. In the later
chapters of the Egyptian ritual his name is in the language of the
Negroes of Punt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[75:1](we08.htm#fr_1) *Niebhur's Travels*, Vol.
1, p. 104.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Egypt and Her ''Golden Age.''](we09)
