[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Africa](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](we16)  [Next](we18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

# CHAPTER XV.

### THE CIVILIZATION OF INDIA.

Asia is a continent in which republics were unusual in early ages. Here
history reveals monarchies under despotic rulers, who were worshipped as
though the subjects were mere slaves. India until late ages was under a
very different form of government. In early Buddhist times we find the
land full of aristocratic republics. This was the same form of
government to be found on other Cushite sites. Here in a more isolated
clime, remote from outside influences, the old Cushite communal form of
government has come on down to our times. Much can be gained from a
study of this unique system. Out of it came the gentleness of the Hindu
and it was the environment that nourished his exalted mental
attainments. Again it is too lightly considered, when we remember that
this form of life produced artists and craftsmen who brought into
existence lost arts and a skill and originality that we do not today
attain. It is a common error to suppose that the tribes that the Aryan
invaders found were savages. Ancient annals represented the Cushite Indi
as wise and skillful. Heeren said that these writings represented the
early Hindu as a commercial people, that their merchants could travel
from one

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

of the Nile flowing through Barabra (Ethiopia) and the mountains of the
Moon.

Even the name Hindu is Ethiopian. Ancient records of authority made Hind
and Sind sons of Cush. Philostratus. in Vit. Apollon (Lib. II), says,
"The Indi are the wisest of mankind. The Ethiopians are a colony of
them, and they inherit the wisdom of their fathers." The separation of
India from the parent Cushite stock was in ages long before the rise of
the so-called Aryans in India. The older Greeks always associated the
sacred waves of the Indian Sea with the wonderful Ethiopians. Ephorus
stated that they occupied all the southern coasts of Asia and Africa. As
in Chaldea they brought to the aboriginal tribes of India the knowledge
of metals to take the place of stone implements, they brought the
knowledge of the arts. Their funeral remains all over India reveal the
stone circles and upright massive menhirs of North Africa. They
understood in those far distant ages how to make hard earthenware, iron
weapons and ornaments of gold. Today in a state of degenerated art, Sind
is the only province where the potters craft is artistic. Before
Megathenes, a Greek ambassador to the court of the non-Aryan Chandra
Gupta, about 300 B. C., the Greeks mentioned as Indi only the Cushites
of the areas between the Hindu Kush and Persia.

The name India means black, and Condor thinks that it was employed only
to designate the home of the Asiatic Ethiopians. Let us look for a brief
space at the land. India has often been described

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

as almost a continent of itself, surrounded as it is by high mountain
ranges to the north with the spurs stretching out to east and west,
leaving only two natural passages down into the peninsula. India has a
rich and varied climate and landscape. First come the Himalayas with
their colder atmosphere, then the vast, fertile, densely populated
plains of northern India watered by the Indus, the great Ganges and the
Bramaputra. These have the greatest volume of any rivers of the world.
South of the great northern plain is the elevated plateau of Decan. The
Ganges has meant so much to the life and development of the country that
it is a sacred river to the Hindu. Almost all the traffic of the country
passes up and down this river. Southern India has a tropical climate.
The Indian plains are sultry but Decan and the slopes of the Himalayas
enjoy a temperate climate. There are two annual seasons the rainy and
the dry.

Modern books deal with forest destruction in India and the wearing out
of the land. These are the result of conquest and the crowding back of
tribes upon the more waste areas. The great Indian rivers cause terrible
disasters through floods that sweep off cattle, grain, stores and
houses. The mighty currents undermine and carry away soil to build up
monstrous deltas. Still with all these disasters India has an age old
system of agriculture and we see everywhere the evidences of a people
long skilled in agriculture. Northern India produces the plants of the
temperate zone in profusion. Southern India abounds

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

in tropical [verdure](errata.htm#133). Two harvests are sometimes reaped
in one year. Rice grows in the irrigated districts. Many think that
cotton was first developed in India and that many other important plants
found there their origin. We find indigo, jute, tobacco, sugar cane,
cocoa, the date and other palms. Among the tropical fruits are the
orange, lime, citron, melon, pineapple, fig and other fruits. The dense
growth of tropical woods affords some of the world's most important
plants. Here we find resins, gums, perfumes and varnishes with hundreds
of other articles of commerce or luxury.

These wonderful and useful plains and fruits of India are not the result
of accident, but are the fruit of the genius of some continuously
agricultural race. These products were the foundation of the age old art
and commerce of the Indies, that in the days of Columbus made the route
to India the world sought quest of western nations. Nearly every article
that produces commerce abounds in India. All the shrubs and herbs needed
for the healing of the nations may be found there and are used as native
medicines. Rice and millet are the staple foods, though sweet potatoes,
onions, barley and garlic are much used. The vast forests are densely
populated with wild animals and birds. The leopard, wolf, tiger, hyena,
fox and jackal abound, the lion is extinct. Snakes and reptiles cause
innumerable death. The tiger is in every part of the country. One tiger
in the course of three years killed one hundred and eight persons and
another caused thirteen

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

villages to be abandoned. There is a government price on the tiger's
head. The tamer animals are deer, sheep, goats, antelope, oxen, camels,
mules, horses and many birds. With this rich flora and fauna a
distinctive ancient life developed and flowered as gorgeously in
religion and art.

A glance at India today reveals a great difference from the old
condition of opulence. The country has grown overpopulated. Many
districts are so overcrowded that the natives can hardly secure land to
cultivate. Life in the British Isles is very
[congested](errata.htm#134), the population being about 213 to a square
mile, but in India we find 271 to the square mile. In England the people
support themselves by working in the industries. India has very few
large towns. Millions are struggling to live and support themselves on
half an acre. If the rains fall short by only a few inches, there is
terrible [scarcity](errata.htm#135) of food and thousands die. This
condition is due to the fact also that the old industrial system of the
Hindu has been destroyed. Once they manufactured in their homes and thus
kept themselves from want. During the centuries of misrule after the
various conquests of India, the land became full of robbers and armed
bands. Since introduction of railroads by the English, the natives are
slowly moving from the [congested](errata.htm#136) districts to the few
remaining spare lands. In ancient days each rural family was rooted to
the spot of its ancestry.

The first glimpses that we catch of the Hindu in historical times we
find a people of varied

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

ethnology. The popular theory emphasizes an Aryan invasion that took
place in late ages, compared to the primitive times when the deeds of
the Indian epics were, enacted. As late as the authoritative records of
history, the most powerful kingdoms of India were ruled over by
non-Aryan princes. These were the Indi of the ancient records. This
ruling race had produced the culture that passed down, and just as
across all the wide belt of the equator the civilization of the ancient
Cushite was appropriated--here it was not destroyed. So intermixed are
all the classes of the Hindu today that all Brahmin, and Soudra have
identically the same formation of skull, the old formation of Ethiopia.
This later Brahmic type which has only ruled India in the Christian Era
is Turanian in the same sense that the races of western Europe may be so
called. These Turanians entering India were inferior in culture to the
Indi. Today after continued conquest, we find great peoples using
literary languages among the Dravidians who represent the primitive
Cushite stock. Such are the [Tamils](errata.htm#137), Telugu, Malayalam
and Kanarese. Authorities dispute the claim that the black Rajputs were
the same race as the invading Turanians. The ancient books read without
prejudice reveal a deadly contest between Brahmins and the Kshattriyas,
the original royal stock.

The literature reveals that this hostility did not come to an end until
the Brahmins gave up the hope of holding the sovereignty and took over
the custody of the ancient books and the

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

priesthood. We read in *Buddhist India*, p. 44, that it is a common
error to suppose that the tribes with whom the so-called Aryans came in
contact were savages. Some were, but there were also settled communities
with a highly developed social organization, wealthy enough to excite
the cupidity of invaders. These people were too much addicted to peace
to be able to offer prolonged resistance, but they were strong enough to
impose many of their ideas and institutions upon their conquerors. On
page 59 we read, "It is now generally admitted that there are no pure
Aryans in India, in spite of the theoretical
[restrictions](errata.htm#138) on intermarriage. Aryan, Kolarin and
Dravidian could not at the time of the rise of Buddah be recognized.
Long before the theory of caste had been brought into working order a
fusion sufficient at least to obliterate completely the old landmarks
had been accomplished." In the ancient books of India there is, no
mention of caste. Long before the time of Alexander all the Hindu were a
dark race.

Baldwin declares that Indo-Aryans were but a small proportion of the
whole population of India. All over the country are masses, whose
dialects reveal that they did not belong to the Indo-European group.
Cushites entering India in primitive ages perhaps found aboriginal
Malays. They did not exterminate them but conciliated, civilized and to
some extent absorbed them. This was the Ethiopian custom over their wide
domains. In the central provinces an aboriginal Malay race forms a large
proportion of the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

population, showing that the Cushites may have refused to intermix. The
struggle represented as taking place between these Cushites and their
conquerors might have been but a later emigration of their race as the
Cassite invaders of Chaldea. We would think this from the identity of
skull formation of all the racial divisions of India. The hill people of
the Himalayas have always been fair, as we find Cushite people on all
the continents where they were not exposed to the torrid rays of the
sun. The Casdim or Cassites of ancient days occupied the highlands of
southwestern Asia from Caucasus to the highlands of India. Does it not
seem more reasonable that this learned race as proved by the Chaldeans
and Elamites sent the type into India that made her ruling class.

5000 years ago we have shown there was no branch of the Aryan race that
could have produced the Rig-Veda. 5000 years ago no Japhethic nation
possessed blacksmiths, chariots, and the civilization that the Rig-Veda
reveals. It seems to be the story of the passage to the southwest of
Hindu colonists from the mountains of Hindu-Kush (Cush) down into the
plains of India. Note the name of the region from which they came. In
the beginning these invaders took [Dravidian](errata.htm#139) wives
because most probably they, were primarily of the same stock. 3000 to
4500 B. C. the father is represented with the ancient Cushite traits in
all their glory. He was priest of the family. He conducted human
sacrifice, for which the horse sacrifice was substituted in later

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

ages. There was no burning of widows and woman enjoyed a high position.
The Rig-Veda represents these people at this far distant age as
blacksmiths, barbers, coppersmiths, goldsmiths, carpenters and
husbandmen. They fought from chariots as did all Cushite nations. They
settled down as husbandmen to till the fields. Unlike the modern Hindu
they ate beef. They adored gods identical with those of Egypt, Chaldea
and Ethiopia. Who were these people who 4500 B. C. possessed towns and
built ships? Semites and Turanians had no such arts.

When the Hebrews left Egypt they did not understand the art of welding
iron. Persians in late ages used Egyptians as their carpenters. The
historic Greek and Roman at this early age had not emerged from caves
and use of rude stone tools. Let us glance at the Goths as they appeared
on the plains of western Europe as late as the Christian Era and see if
we find the race traits that the Rig-Veda reveals. They possessed no
knowledge of metals. They scorned images and temples, therefore they had
no priests. The name of not a single Gothic deity has come down to us.
They showed not the faintest glimmer of the mentality and austerity of
life of the Buddhist. They were coarse and gluttonous. They loved strong
drink and would lay for days in drunken stupor in the ashes of their
hearths. They appropriated the gods of the long headed race of western
Europe, Odin and Thor. They knew nothing of agriculture being a nomadic
race fitted for conquest. They had no communal interests

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

as the people of India, they were extreme individualists. They battered
down the grand structures of antiquity, they did not create them and
smashed the art treasures of ages. Even in the Middle Ages they had
developed none of the traits of the gentle Hindu and regarded not the
rights of others unless compelled to do so by the sword.

Beside this picture let us line the Hindu priest. His is a type that
early was devoted to ceremony. His whole life was mapped out for stages
of discipline. When he had reared a family and gained a practical
knowledge of the world, he retired into the forest as a recluse, using
nature's wild foods. Here he practiced religious duties with increased
devotion. Next he entered upon an ascetic and rigorous self-denial,
wandering as a religious mendicant, wholly withdrawn from joy or pain,
wholly absorbed in final absorption into the deity. He ate nothing but
what was given him unasked, remained not more than one day in a village.
Throughout his life he took no wine, curbed desire, shut out tumults of
war, his duty was to pray and not to fight, to study-and practice self
restraint. The Brahmin represents a race in India that holds supremacy
not by force of arms but by vigor of hereditary culture and temperence.
Dynasties have fallen, religions have spread themselves over the land
and disappeared, but since the dawn of history the Brahmin has calmly
ruled.

As late as the Græco-Bactrian and Scythian inroads 327 B. C. to 544 A.
D. we find the fairest

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

districts of northern India still in possession of Cushites. In almost
every part of Oudh and the northwestern provinces are to be found ruins
ascribed to this race, which reigned at different periods from the fifth
to the eleventh centuries A. D. The early invaders found as the Vedas
describe, these people in possession of wealth, having cattle, cities
and forts. The literature represents them as making alliances with the
native Cushite princes, this would have been impossible if they had not
been of the same race. The Nubians (Cushites) of old Ethiopia will not
intermarry with Arabs or Egyptians. Some superficial interpretations of
the Vedas attempt to make out the Dravidian Cushites as disturbers of
sacrifices, lawless, without gods, and without rites. This would not
describe Cushites anywhere in the world. For at no stage of their
development do they seem to be without sacrifice, law and religion,
which rites they gave to the ancient world. That section of the Vedas
describes Cushites finding the aborigines of the country without these
rites, which they naturally at first opposed.

To those who read the Rig-Veda intelligently and without the confusing
glasses of prejudice, these mutilated and interpolated writings are but
a description of the familiar traits and customs of Cushite Ethiopians.
The Brahmins were probably a much later and intermixed branch of the
inhabitants of Hindu-Kush. That they were intermixed we can tell by
their cruelty. Full blooded Cushites are very gentle. The fact that the
Brahmins altered the Sanskrit writings to such great

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

extent is proof itself that they were not the original authors of these
works. They took over and appropriated much from Buddhism that would
appeal to the masses when they found it otherwise impossible for them to
sit in the saddle of the priesthood. An ancient treatise tells us of the
early Cushite element, that they adorned their dead with gifts, with
raiment, and ornaments, [imagining](errata.htm#140) thereby that they
shall attain the world to come. Their ornaments were bronze, copper and
gold. One non-Aryan chief described this race as of fearful swiftness,
unyielding in battle, in color like a dark blue cloud. This old type is
represented today by the compact masses at the south. These Dravidians
constitute forty-six millions of southern Indians today. They represent
the unmixed Cushite type. All the rest of the blood of India is heavily
mixed with this strain.

These Dravidians that the untruthful book seeks to represent today as
despised outcasts when they are still a very important division of the
Hindu population, entered India in primitive times by the northwest
passage. They were a part of that advancing wave of the Old Race that
swept eastward and westward, peopling primitive Arabia, Egypt and
Chaldea. The rich merchants of the ancient Indian commerce had been
Dravidians. One of their greatest kingdoms was Pandya so noted in the
Sanskrit writings. The Nandas in Behar of whom the great Chandra Gupta
sprang and his greater grandson Asoka, were non-Aryan. These were of the
supposed-to-be degraded Sudra. The Takshak and Naga nations

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

who figure so largely in Sanskrit traditions are words purely African.
Koch or Kush (Cush) form the masses of Bengal and Behar. By virtue of
their descent from the old dominant race they retain their name of
Kshattriya and call themselves Rajbansis a term exactly corresponding to
Rajput. The rajas of Kuch Behar claim a divine descent. The name Rajput
means of royal descent. It was the title of the old conquering class of
the ancient Cushites. There was alliance between them and the Brahmins.
We find distinguished bodies of the Kshattriyan so-called caste received
into the Brahmin caste and for the same reason sections of aboriginal
races manufactured into Brahmins.

In the Hindu Puranas the Dravidian kingdom of Pandya was given two
dynasties. The first had seventy-three kings, the second forty-three
kings. The last king of the second dynasty was overthrown 1324 A. D. by
the Mohammedans. No other Dravidian kingdom can boast so continuous a
succession as the kings of Madura. The chronicles enumerate fifty Chara
kings and fifty-six Chola kings as well as many minor dynasties. Dr.
Deiche and Isaac Taylor thought the Hindu alphabet derived from the
south Arabian and adopted a thousand years later by the Brahmins. The
early history of the Dravidians is yet to be deciphered from mouldering
palm leaves and more trustworthy inscriptions on copper and stone. Like
the Minoan script of Crete and the Merotic of Ethiopia this is a third
of the Ethiopic stem the has not been interpreted. In the

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

territory of the Dravidians, we find extensive ruins of ancient temples,
fortifications, tanks, bridges and vast remains.

The Dravidians in ethnic type are Ethiopian and are the race of India
from which her civilization originated. Megathenes said that the
[natives](errata.htm#141) of India and Ethiopia were not much different
in complexion or feature. Dravidians are short like the race of the
Mediterranean called Iberians and the Chaldeans. Their complexions are
black or very dark. Their hair is plentiful and crispy. Their heads are
elongated with the nose very broad. They occupy the oldest geological
formation of India. They are descendants of that race of black men with
short woolly hair that were the primitive inhabitants of ancient Media,
Susiana and Persia, mentioned repeatedly in the Iranian legends, and
whose faces look out at us from the sculptures of Babylon and Nineveh
Dravidian is spoken by forty-six millions of India, not including the
numerous uncultivated hill tribes and retired communities. A form of
speech similar to it is spoken in Beluchistan, which originally was
Cushite. In all the political changes that come to India, the communal
type of life to which these natives cling never changes.

In ancient times India was ruled by Rajas, who were assisted by a
council of elders. Sometimes the Raja was influenced by a queen mother
or dowager. In Cushite races lineage was traced through the mother. The
succession of the Rajah was traced in the same way. This was changed
upon the ascendency of the Brahmins. Turanians

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

trace lineage from the father's side. Some authors have sought to prove
that the metronymic system or inheritance through the female line is
evidence of promiscuity in the beginning of human life. In savage life
men and women pair in mating, also among anthropoid apes proving that
this instinct is as old as the human species. The spirit of the Cushite
was to honor and exalt woman, therefore lineage was thus traced. Nephews
when born of sisters were treated as sons and inherited the property to
the exclusion of sons. Devalle described the queen of Ilaza as a black
Ethiopian. He said she ruled like a woman of judgment. Marco Polo
described the inhabitants of India as black and adorned with massive
gold bracelets and strings of rare and precious gems. They had temples
and priests. Vasco de Gama while circumnavigating the globe found the
inhabitants black.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Ancient India the Land of Mystery](we18)
