[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29192)  [Next](sbe29194) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KA*ND*IKÂ 3.

1 <span id="fr_877"></span>[1](#fn_876). After the Âgrahâya*n*î (full
moon follow) the three Ash*t*akâs.

2 <span id="fr_878"></span>[2](#fn_877). (The Ash*t*akâ is) sacred to
Indra, to the Vi*s*ve devâs, to Pra*g*âpati, and to the Fathers.

3 <span id="fr_879"></span>[3](#fn_878). (The oblations are made) with
cakes, flesh, and vegetables, according to the order (of the three
Ash*t*akâs).

4\. The first Ash*t*akâ (is celebrated) on the eighth day of the
fortnight.

5 <span id="fr_880"></span>[5](#fn_879). Having cooked a mess of
sacrificial food and having sacrificed the two Â*g*ya portions, he
sacrifices Â*g*ya oblations with (the texts):

(a <span id="fr_881"></span>[a](#fn_880)) 'Thirty sisters go to the
appointed place,

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

putting on the same badge. They spread out the seasons, the knowing
sages; having the metres in their midst they walk around, the brilliant
ones. Svâhâ!

\(b\) 'The shining one clothes herself with clouds, with the ways of the
sun, the divine night: manifold animals which are born, look about in
this mother's lap. Svâhâ!

\(c\) 'The Ekâsh*t*akâ, devoting herself to austerities, has given birth
to a child, to the majesty of Indra. Through him the gods have conquered
the hostile tribes; he became the killer of the Asuras through his
(divine) powers. Svâhâ!

(d <span id="fr_882"></span>[d](#fn_881)) 'You have made me who am not
the younger (sister), the younger; speaking the truth I desire this: may
I be in his (i.e. the sacrificer's?) favour, as you are; may none of you
supplant the other in her work.

\(e\) 'In my favour dwelt the omniscient one; he has found a firm
standing; he has got a footing. May I be in his (i.e. the sacrificer's?)
favour, as you are; may none of you supplant the other in her work.

(f <span id="fr_883"></span>[f](#fn_882)) 'On the five dawns follows the
fivefold milking; on the cow with the five names, the rive seasons. The
five regions (of the sky) are established

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

through the fifteenfold (Stoma); with one common face (they look over)
the one world. Svâhâ!

\(g\) 'She who shone forth as the first, is the child of truth. One (of
them) bears the majesty of the waters; one wanders in the courses of the
sun; one (in those) of the heat; Savit*ri* shall govern one. Svâhâ!

\(h\) 'She who shone forth as the first has become a cow in Yama's
realm. Give us milk, thou who art rich in milk, year by year. Svâhâ!

(i <span id="fr_884"></span>[i](#fn_883)) 'She, the owner of bright
bulls, has come to us with clouds and with light, she who has all
shapes, the motley one, whose banner is fire. Carrying on the common
work, leading us to old age, come to us thou who art exempt from old
age, Ushas! Svâhâ!

\(k\) 'The consort of the seasons, the first one has come to us, the
leader of days, the producer of offspring. Being one, thou shinest
manifold, Ushas. Being free from old age, thou leadest to old age
everything else. Svâhâ!'

6 <span id="fr_885"></span>[6](#fn_884). He makes offerings of the mess
of cooked food with (the verses):

'May the earth be peaceful, the air friendly to us;

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

may the heavens give us bliss and safety. May the points (of the
horizon), the intermediate points, the upper points give us bliss, and
may day and night create long life for us. Svâhâ!

'May the waters, the rays protect us from all sides; may the creator,
may the ocean turn away evil. The present and the future, may all be
safe for me. Protected by Brahman, may I be well guarded. Svâhâ!

'May all Âdityas and the divine Vasus, may the Rudras and Maruts be our
protectors. May Pra*g*âpati, the highest lord, bestow on us vigour,
offspring, immortality, long life. Svâhâ!'

7\. And with (the formula), 'To the Ash*t*akâ Svâhâ!'

8\. The middle Ash*t*akâ (is celebrated) with (the sacrifice of) a cow.

9\. He sacrifices the omentum of that (cow) with (the verse), 'Carry the
omentum, O *G*âtavedas, to the fathers' (Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XXXV, 20).

10\. On the day following each (Ash*t*akâ), the Anvash*t*akâ day, (he
brings a sacrifice) with the left ribs and the left thigh, in an
enclosure, according to (the ritual of) the Pi*nd*apit*ri*ya*gñ*a.

11\. Also to the female (ancestors he makes Pi*nd*a offerings) and pours
(for them) strong liquor and water oblations into pits, and (offers)
collyrium, salves, and garlands.

12\. (He may also make oblations), if he likes, to the teacher and to
the pupils who have no children.

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

13 <span id="fr_886"></span>[13](#fn_885). And in the middle of the
rainy season (there is) a fourth Ash*t*akâ on which vegetables are
offered.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_875"></span>[341:14](sbe29192.htm#fr_876) The verse occurs,
with a few differences, in the Kâ*n*va *S*âkhâ of the Vâ*g*. Sa*m*hitâ,
II, 7, 5.

<span id="fn_876"></span>[341:1](sbe29193.htm#fr_877) 3, 1. On the
Ash*t*akâs, celebrated on the eighth days of the three dark fortnights
following after the Âgrahâya*n*î full moon, see *S*âṅkhâyana III, 12
seqq.; Â*s*valâyana II, 4; Gobhila III, 10.

<span id="fn_877"></span>[341:2](sbe29193.htm#fr_878) As there are four
deities named, I think it probable that they are referred to all
Ash*t*akâs indiscriminately; comp. Â*s*valâyana II, 4, 12. Thus in the
Mantras prescribed for the first Ash*t*akâ (Sûtras 5 and 6), Indra, the
Vi*s*ve devâs, and Pra*g*âpati are named; to the Fathers belongs the
Anvash*t*akya ceremony.

<span id="fn_878"></span>[341:3](sbe29193.htm#fr_879) With regard to the
order of these substances the G*ri*hya texts differ.

<span id="fn_879"></span>[341:5](sbe29193.htm#fr_880) Comp. Taitt.
Sa*m*hitâ IV, 3, 11; Atharva-veda III, 10.

<span id="fn_880"></span>[341:a](sbe29193.htm#fr_881) (a) The thirty
sisters seem to be the days of the month. As to <span id="page_342">p.
342</span> madhye*kh*andas, comp. Taitt. Sa*m*h. loc. cit. § 1:
*kh*andasvatî ushasâ pepi*s*âne; § 2: *k*atush*t*omo abhavad yâ turîyâ
ya*gñ*asya pakshâv *ri*shayo bhavantî, gâyatrî*m* trish*t*ubha*m*
*g*agatîm anush*t*ubham b*ri*had arka*m* yu*ñg*ânâ*h* suvar
â<sup>ऽ</sup>bharann idam.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[342:d](sbe29193.htm#fr_882) (d) Probably one
Ash*t*akâ addresses the others, her sisters, as *G*ayarâma explains this
verse.

<span id="fn_882"></span>[342:f](sbe29193.htm#fr_883) (f) The
explanation by which the 'fivefold milking' is referred to what is
called in Taitt. Brâhma*n*a II, 2, 9, 'the milkings of Pra*g*âpati,'
seems to me more than doubtful, for 'the milkings <span id="page_342">p.
342</span> of Pra*g*âpati' are only four: viz. the dark night, the
moonlight, the twilight, and the day.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[343:i](sbe29193.htm#fr_884) (i)
Sukra-*ri*shabhâ cannot be translated, as Professor Stenzler does, 'die
schönste unter den Lichtern' (Mâdhava: *s*ukreshu nakshatrâdishu
*s*resh*th*â), for this meaning of *ri*shabhâ occurs only in later
texts. The word is a Bahuvrîhi compound, as the Petersburg Dictionary
explains it.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[343:6](sbe29193.htm#fr_885) In the first verse
I have omitted vya*s*navai, which impedes the construction and violates
the metre. The word has found its way into the text, no doubt, in
consequence of the phrase dîrgham âyur vya*s*navai occurring in chap. 2,
2. In the second verse <span id="page_344">p. 344</span> ak*ri*tad is
corrupt. I have translated abhayam; comp. Â*s*valâyana II, 4, 14. In the
third verse I have left out mayi, as Professor Stenzler has done in his
translation.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[345:13](sbe29193.htm#fr_886) I have stated in
the note on *S*âṅkhâyana III, 13, 1 my reasons for believing that the
true reading of this Sûtra is not madhyâvarshe (in the middle of the
rainy season), but mâghyavarshe (the festival celebrated during the
rainy season under the Nakshatra Maghâs). There are no express rules
given with regard to the third Ash*t*akâ, but I think we should
understand this Sûtra as involving a statement on that Ash*t*akâ: (The
third Ash*t*akâ) and the fourth, on the Mâghyavarsha day, are
Sâkâsh*t*akâs (Ash*t*akâs on which vegetables are offered). *S*âṅkhâyana
(G*ri*hya III, 13, 1) declares that the ritual of the fourth Ash*t*akâ
is identical with that of the second.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III, 4](sbe29194)
