[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29178)  [Next](sbe29180) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KA*ND*IKÂ 6.

1\. When he has finished the Veda, he should take the bath (by which he
becomes a Snâtaka);

2 <span id="fr_791"></span>[2](#fn_790). Or when (he has gone through) a
studentship of forty-eight years;

3 <span id="fr_792"></span>[3](#fn_791). Or also after (a studentship)
of twelve years, according to some (teachers).

4\. (Let him take the bath only) if his Guru has given his permission.

5 <span id="fr_793"></span>[5](#fn_792). Rules (regarding the
performance of sacrifices), (texts) to be used (at the sacrifices
according to those rules), and reasoning (on the meaning of the rites
and texts): that is the Veda.

6 <span id="fr_794"></span>[6](#fn_793). Some say (that the Veda should
be studied) with its six Aṅgas;

<span id="page_313">p. 313</span>

7\. Not so that he only knows the ceremonial.

8\. But optionally by one who knows the sacrifices (the bath may be
taken).

9\. (The student) after having embraced (the feet of) his teacher, and
put the pieces of wood on the fire, places himself northwards of an
enclosure, on eastward-pointed Ku*s*a grass, to the east of eight
vessels with water.

10 <span id="fr_795"></span>[10](#fn_794). 'The fires that dwell in the
waters; the fire which must be hidden, the fire which must be covered,
the ray of light, the fire which kills the mind, the unwavering one, the
pain-causing one, the destroyer of the body, the fire which kills the
organs—those I leave behind. The shining one, that I seize here'—with
(this formula) he draws water out of one (of the eight vessels);

11\. With that he besprinkles himself with (the words), 'Therewith I
besprinkle myself for the sake of prosperity, of glory, of holiness, of
holy lustre.'

12 <span id="fr_796"></span>[12](#fn_795). (A second time he draws water
out of a second of the eight vessels with the formula given in Sûtra 10,
putting instead of the words, 'The shining one, &c.,' the verse): 'By
which you have created prosperity, by which you have touched surâ, with
which you have anointed the eyes, which is your' glory, O A*s*vins.'

<span id="page_314">p. 314</span>

13\. (And he draws water out of three other vessels) with (the three
verses), 'Ye waters are' (Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XI, 50-52), verse by verse.

14\. With (water drawn out of) the three other (vessels he besprinkles
himself) silently.

15\. Having loosened his girdle with (the verse), 'The highest band'
(Vâ*g*. Sa*m*h. XII, 12), having put it down, having put on another
garment, he worships the sun—

16 <span id="fr_797"></span>[16](#fn_796). With (the formulas), 'Rising,
bearing a shining spear, Indra stands with the Maruts; he stands with
the gods who walk in the morning. Thou art a tenfold winner; make me a
tenfold winner. Make me attain to renown.

Rising, bearing a shining spear, Indra stands with the Maruts; he stands
with the gods who walk in day-time. Thou art a hundredfold winner; make
me a hundredfold winner. Make me attain to renown.

Rising, bearing a shining spear, Indra stands with the Maruts; he stands
with the gods who walk in the evening. Thou art a thousandfold winner;
make me a thousandfold winner. Make me attain to renown.'

17\. Having eaten curds or sesamum seeds, and having had his matted
hair, the hair of his body, and his nails cut, he should cleanse his
teeth with an Udumbara branch with (the verse), 'Array yourselves for
the enjoyment of food. Here has come king Soma: he will purify my mouth
with glory and fortune.'

<span id="page_315">p. 315</span>

18\. Having anointed himself and bathed again, he takes up the salve for
nose and mouth with (the words), 'Satiate my up-breathing and
down-breathing; satiate my eye; satiate my ear!'

19\. Having poured out to the south the water with which he has washed
his hands, with (the words), 'Ye fathers, become pure,' he should salve
himself and murmur, 'May I become well-looking with my eyes,
well-shining with my face, well-hearing with my ears.'

20 <span id="fr_798"></span>[20](#fn_797). He then should put on a
garment which has not yet been washed, or not been soaked in lie, with
(the formula), 'For the sake of putting on, of bringing fame, of long
life I shall reach old age. I live a hundred long autumns. For the sake
of the increase of wealth I will clothe myself.'

21\. Then the upper garment with (the verse), 'With glory (come) to me,
Heaven and Earth. With glory, Indra and B*ri*haspati! May glory and
fortune come to me! may glory be my lot!'

22 <span id="fr_799"></span>[22](#fn_798). If (he has only) one
(garment), he should cover himself (with a part of that garment as if it
were an upper garment) with the second part of the former (Mantra; Sûtra
20).

23 <span id="fr_800"></span>[23](#fn_799). He takes flowers with (the
formula), '(The

<span id="page_316">p. 316</span>

flowers) which *G*amadagni has brought for the sake of faith (has
brought to *S*raddhâ?), of love, of the senses, them I take with glory
and with fortune.'

24\. He then ties them (to his head) with (the verse), 'The high, wide
glory, which Indra has created for the Apsarases, the flowers bound up
with that, I tie on to me, to bring me glory!'

25 <span id="fr_801"></span>[25](#fn_800). He binds a turban to his head
with (the verse), 'A youth, well attired.'

26\. (He puts on) the two ear-rings with (the words), 'An ornament art
thou; may more ornaments be mine.'

27\. He salves his two eyes with (the formula), 'V*ri*tra’s' (Vâ*g*.
Sa*m*h. IV, 3 b).

28\. With (the words), 'Brilliant art thou,' he looks at his image in a
mirror.

29\. He takes a parasol with (the words), 'Thou art B*ri*haspati's
covering. Shelter me from evil. Do not shelter me from splendour and
glory.'

30\. With (the words), 'You are supports; protect me from all sides,' he
puts on the two shoes.

31\. With (the words), 'From all powers of destruction protect me on all
sides,' he takes a bamboo staff.

32\. (For) the tooth-cleaner, &c. (the Mantras stated above are to be
used) in every case; (for) the garment, the parasol, and the shoes, the
Mantra (should only be recited) if they have not been used before.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_790"></span>[312:2](sbe29179.htm#fr_791) 6, 2. See above,
chap. 5, 13.

<span id="fn_791"></span>[312:3](sbe29179.htm#fr_792) See chap. 5, 14.

<span id="fn_792"></span>[312:5](sbe29179.htm#fr_793) The expressions of
the text for the three categories are, vidhi, vidheya, tarka.

<span id="fn_793"></span>[312:6](sbe29179.htm#fr_794) I.e. with the
supplementary treatises on ritual, grammar, astronomy, etymology,
pronunciation of the Mantras, and metrics.

<span id="fn_794"></span>[313:10](sbe29179.htm#fr_795) As to the names
of the eight hostile powers of Agni, comp. *S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya V, 2;
Atharva-veda XIV, I, 38; XVI, 1; Mantrabrâhma*n*a I, 7, I.

<span id="fn_795"></span>[313:12](sbe29179.htm#fr_796) The reading of
the Mantra seems to be corrupt. Compare the form in which it is given by
Bhavadeva, quoted in Professor Stenzler's note on this Sûtra. Instead of
*s*riyam we have probably to read, as Bhavadeva has, striyam; instead of
akshyau, akshân. Professor Stenzler very pertinently compares
Atharva-veda XIV, 1, 35. 36. Comp. also Mantrabrâhma*n*a I, 7, 5.

<span id="fn_796"></span>[314:16](sbe29179.htm#fr_797) In the Mantra the
Pâraskara MSS. give bhrâ*g*abh*ri*sh*n*u*h* and bhrâ*g*abh*ri*sh*t*i*h*,
and the Gobhila MSS. (G*ri*hya III, 4) bhrâ*g*abh*ri*sh*t*ibhi*h*.
Possibly the instrumental case is right. Böhtlingk and Roth propose to
read bhrâ*g*ad*ri*sh*t*i*h*.

<span id="fn_797"></span>[315:20](sbe29179.htm#fr_798) Comp. Kâtyâyana,
*S*rauta-sûtra VII, 2, 18, to which Sûtra Professor Stenzler refers.

<span id="fn_798"></span>[315:22](sbe29179.htm#fr_799) I give this
translation merely as tentative. Professor Stenzler translates: Wenn er
nur Ein Gewand hat, so bedecke er sich (noch einmal) mit dem oberen
Theile des zuerst angelegten. *G*ayarâma (MS. Chambers 373) says: eka*m*
*k*et tatrâpi paridhânamantra*m* pa*th*itvâ vastrârdham paridhâya dvir
â*k*amya uttarârdhe g*ri*hîtvâ uttarîya*m* \[sic\] mantra*m*
pa*th*itvottarîya*m* k*ri*tvâ punar dvir â*k*amed ity artha*h*.

<span id="fn_799"></span>[315:23](sbe29179.htm#fr_800)
Hira*n*y.-G*ri*hya I, 3, 11, 4.

<span id="fn_800"></span>[316:25](sbe29179.htm#fr_801) See above, chap.
2, 9.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 7](sbe29180)
