[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29098)  [Next](sbe29100) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

# Â*S*VALÂYANA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span> <span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

## INTRODUCTION

###### TO THE

# Â*S*VALÂYANA-G*RI*HYA-SÛTRA.

MOST of the questions referring to the G*ri*hya-sûtra of Â*s*valâyana
will be treated of more conveniently in connection with the different
subjects which we shall have to discuss in our General Introduction to
the G*ri*hya-sûtras. Here I wish only to call attention to a well-known
passage of Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, in which that commentator gives some
statements on the works composed by Â*s*valâyana and by his teacher
*S*aunaka. As an important point in that passage has, as far as I can
see, been misunderstood by several eminent scholars, I may perhaps be
allowed here to try and correct that misunderstanding, though the point
stands in a less direct connection with the G*ri*hya-sûtra than with
another side of the literary activity of Â*s*valâyana.

Sha*d*guru*s*ishya <span id="fr_349"></span>[1](#fn_348), before
speaking of Â*s*valâyana, makes the following statements with regard to
Â*s*valâyana's teacher, *S*aunaka. 'There was,' he says, 'the *S*âkala
Sa*m*hitâ (of the Rig-veda), and the Bâshkala Sa*m*hitâ; following these
two Sa*m*hitâs and the twenty-one Brâhma*n*as, adopting principally the
Aitareyaka and supplementing it by the other texts, he who was revered
by the whole number of great *Ri*shis composed the first Kalpa-sûtra.'
He then goes on to speak of Â*s*valâyana—'*S*aunaka's pupil was the
venerable Â*s*valâyana. He who knew everything he had learnt from that
teacher, composed a Sûtra and announced (to *S*aunaka that he had done
so) <span id="fr_350"></span>[2](#fn_349).' *S*aunaka then destroyed his
own Sûtra, and

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

determined that Â*s*valâyana's Sûtra should be adopted by the students
of that Vedic *S*âkhâ. Thus, says Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, there were twelve
works of *S*aunaka by which a correct knowledge of the Rig-veda was
preserved, and three works of Â*s*valâyana. *S*aunaka's da*s*a granthâs
were, the five Anukrama*n*îs, the two Vidbânas, the Bârhaddaivata, the
Prâti*s*âkhya, and a Smârta work <span id="fr_351"></span>[1](#fn_350).
Â*s*valâyana, on the other hand, composed the *S*rauta-sûtra in twelve
Adhyâyas, the G*ri*hya in four Adhyâyas, and the fourth Âra*n*yaka: this
is Â*s*valâyana's great Sûtra composition <span
id="fr_352"></span>[2](#fn_351).

Here we have an interesting and important statement by which the
authorship of a part of the Aitareyâra*n*yaka, which would thus be
separated from the rest of that text, is ascribed, not to Mahidâsa
Aitareya, but to an author of what may be called the historical period
of Vedic antiquity, to Â*s*valâyana.

But what is the fourth Âra*n*yaka to which this passage refers? Is it
the text which is now set down, for instance, in Dr. Râ*g*endralâla
Mitra's edition, as the fourth Âra*n*yaka of the Aitareyinas?

Before we give an answer to this question, attention must be called to
other passages referring, as it could seem, to another part, namely, the
fifth part of the Âra*n*yaka.

Sâya*n*a, in his great commentary on the Rig-veda, very frequently
quotes the pa*ñk*amâra*n*yaka as belonging to *S*aunaka. Thus in vol. i,
p. 112, ed. Max Müller, he says: pa*ñk*amâra*n*yaka
aush*n*ihat*rik*â*s*îtir iti kha*nd*e *S*aunakena sûtrita*m*
surûpak*ri*tnum ûtaya iti trî*n*y endra sânasi*m* rayim iti dve iti.
There is indeed in the fifth Âra*n*yaka a chapter beginning with the
words aush*n*ihi t*rik*â*s*îti*h*, in which the words quoted by Sâya*n*a
occur <span id="fr_353"></span>[3](#fn_352). Similar quotations, in

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

which the fifth Âra*n*yaka is assigned to *S*aunaka, are found in
Sâya*n*a's commentary on the Âra*n*yaka itself; see, for instance, p.
97, line 19, p. 116, line 3.

Thus it seems that the authorship of both the fourth and the fifth
Âra*n*yaka was ascribed to teachers belonging to the Sûtra period of
Vedic literature, viz. to *S*aunaka and to Â*s*valâyana respectively.
And so we find the case stated by both Professor Weber, in his
'Vorlesungen über indische Literaturgeschichte <span
id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_353),' and Dr. Râ*g*endralâla Mitra, in the
Introduction to his edition of the Aitareya Âra*n*yaka <span
id="fr_355"></span>[2](#fn_354).

But we must ask ourselves: Are the two books of the Âra*n*yaka
collection, ascribed to those two authors, really two different books?
It is a surprising fact that Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, while speaking of
Â*s*valâyana's authorship of the fourth book, and while at the same time
intending, as he evidently does, to give a complete list of *S*aunaka's
compositions, does not mention the fifth Âra*n*yaka among the works of
that author. In order to account for this omission the conjecture seems
to suggest itself that Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, when speaking of the fourth
Âra*n*yaka as belonging to Â*s*valâyana, means the same work which
Sâya*n*a sets down as the fifth, and which he ascribes to *S*aunaka. At
first sight this conjecture may seem perhaps rather hazardous or
unnatural; however I believe that, if we compare the two texts
themselves which are concerned, we shall find it very probable and even
evident. What do those two Âra*n*yaka books contain? The fourth is very
short: it does not fill more than one page in the printed edition. Its
contents consist exclusively of the text of the Mahânâmnî or *S*akvarî
verses, which seem to belong to a not less remote

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

antiquity than the average of the Rig-veda hymns. They can indeed be
considered as forming part of the Rig-veda Sa*m*hitâ, and it is only on
account of the peculiar mystical holiness ascribed to these verses, that
they were not studied in the village but in the forest <span
id="fr_356"></span>[1](#fn_355), and were consequently received not into
the body of the Sa*m*hitâ itself, but into the Âra*n*yaka. They are
referred to in all Brâhma*n*a texts, and perhaps we can even go so far
as to pronounce our opinion that some passages of the Rig-veda hymns
themselves allude to the *S*akvarî verses:

ya*k* *kh*akvarîshu b*ri*hatâ rave*n*endre *s*ushmam adadhâtâ
Vasish*th*â*h* (Rig-veda VII, 33, 4).  
*ri*kâ*m* tva*h* posham âste pupushvân gâyatra*m* tvo gâyati
*s*akvarîshu (Rig-veda X, 71, 11).

So much for the fourth Âra*n*yaka. The fifth contains a description of
the Mahâvrata ceremony. To the same subject also the first book is
devoted, with the difference that the first book is composed in the
Brâhma*n*a style, the fifth in the Sûtra style <span
id="fr_357"></span>[2](#fn_356).

Now which of these two books can it be that Sha*d*guru*s*ishya reckons
as belonging to the 'Â*s*valâyanasûtraka?' It is impossible that it
should be the fourth, for the Mahânâmnî verses never were considered by
Indian theologians as the work of a human author; they shared in the
apaurusheyatva of the Veda, and to say that they have been composed by
Â*s*valâyana, would be inconsistent with the most firmly established
principles of the literary history of the Veda both as conceived by the
Indians and by ourselves. And even if we were to admit that the
Mahânâmnî verses can have been assigned, by an author like
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, to Â*s*valâyana,—and we cannot admit

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

this,—there is no possibility whatever that he can have used the
expression 'Â*s*valâyanasûtrakam' with regard to the Mahânâmnîs; to
apply the designation of a Sûtra to the Mahânâmnî hymn would be no less
absurd than to apply it to any Sûkta whatever of the *Ri*k-Sa*m*hitâ. On
the other hand, the fifth book of the Âra*n*yaka is a Sûtra; it is the
only part of the whole body of the Âra*n*yaka collection which is
composed in the Sûtra style. And it treats of a special part of the
Rig-veda ritual the rest of which is embodied in its entirety, with the
omission only of that very part, in the two great Sûtras of
Â*s*valâyana. There seems to me, therefore, to be little doubt as to the
fifth Âra*n*yaka really being the text referred to by
Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, though I do not know how to explain his setting down
this book as the fourth. And I may add that there is a passage,
hitherto, as far as I know, unnoticed, in Sâya*n*a's Sâma-veda
commentary, in which that author directly assigns the fifth Âra*n*yaka
not, as in the Rig-veda commentary, to *S*aunaka, but to Â*s*valâyana.
Sâya*n*a there says <span id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_357): yathâ
bahv*ri*kâm adhyâpakâ mahâvrataprayogapratipâdakam
Â*s*valâyananirmita*m* kalpasûtram ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>dhîyamânâ*h*
pa*ñk*amam âra*n*yakam iti vedatvena vyavaharanti.

Instead of asserting, therefore, that of the two last Âra*n*yakas of the
Aitareyinas the one is ascribed to *S*aunaka, the other to Â*s*valâyana,
we must state the case otherwise: not two Âra*n*yakas were, according to
Sâya*n*a and Sha*d*guru*s*ishya, composed by those Sûtrakâras, but one,
viz. the fifth, which forms a sort of supplement to the great body of
the Sûtras of that *K*ara*n*a, and which is ascribed either to *S*aunaka
or to Â*s*valâyana. Perhaps further research will enable us to decide
whether that Sûtra portion of the Âra*n*yaka, or we may say quite as
well, that Âra*n*yaka portion of the Sûtra, belongs to the author of the
*S*rauta-sûtra, or should be considered as a remnant of a more ancient
composition, of which the portion studied in the forest has survived,
while the portion

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

which was taught in the village was superseded by the more recent
Â*s*valâyana-sûtra.

There would be still many questions with which an Introduction to
Â*s*valâyana would have to deal; thus the relation between Â*s*valâyana
and *S*aunaka, which we had intended to treat of here with reference to
a special point, would have to be further discussed with regard to
several other of its bearings, and the results which follow therefrom as
to the position of Â*s*valâyana in the history of Vedic literature would
have to be stated. But we prefer to reserve the discussion of these
questions for the General Introduction to the G*ri*hya-sûtras.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_348"></span>[153:1](sbe29099.htm#fr_349) See Max Müller's
History of Ancient Sanskrit Literature, pp. 230 seqq.; Indische Studien,
I, 102.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[153:2](sbe29099.htm#fr_350) This seems to me
to be the meaning of sûtra*m* k*ri*tvâ nyavedayat; <span
id="page_154">p. 154</span> the case is similar to that where a pupil
goes on his rounds for alms and announces (nivedayati) to his teacher
what he has received. Prof. Max Müller translates these words
differently; according to him they mean that Â*s*valâyana 'made a Sûtra
and taught it.'

<span id="fn_350"></span>[154:1](sbe29099.htm#fr_351) Comp. Prof.
Bühler's article in the Journal As. Soc. of Bengal, 1866, pp. 149 seqq.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[154:2](sbe29099.htm#fr_352)
Dvâda*s*âdhyâyaka*m* sûtra*m* *k*atushka*m* g*ri*hyam eva *k*a
*k*aturthâra*n*yaka*m* *k*eti hy Â*s*valâyanasûtrakam.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[154:3](sbe29099.htm#fr_353) See p. 448 of Dr.
Râ*g*endralâla Mitra's edition in the Bibliotheca Indica.

<span id="fn_353"></span>[155:1](sbe29099.htm#fr_354) 2nd edition, p.
53: Obwohl wir für das vierte Buch des letztern (i.e. of the Aitareya
Âra*n*yaka) sogar die directe Nachricht haben, dass es dem Â*s*valâyana,
dem Schüler eines *S*aunaka angehört, so wie auch ferner für das fünfte
Buch desselben dieser *S*aunaka selbst als Urheber gegolten zu haben
scheint, nach dem was Colebrooke Misc. Ess. I, 47 n. darüber berichtet.

<span id="fn_354"></span>[155:2](sbe29099.htm#fr_355) P. 11: If this
assumption be admitted, the proper conclusion to be arrived at would
also be that the whole of the fifth Book belongs to *S*aunaka, and the
whole of the fourth Book to Â*s*valâyana. P. 12: The writings of both
Â*s*valâyana and *S*aunaka which occur in the Âra*n*yaka, etc.

<span id="fn_355"></span>[156:1](sbe29099.htm#fr_356) See
*S*âṅkhâyana-G*ri*hya II, 12, 13.

<span id="fn_356"></span>[156:2](sbe29099.htm#fr_357) Thus Sâya*n*a, in
his note on V, 1, 1, says: Nanu prathamâra*n*yake<sup>ऽ</sup>pi atha
mahâvratam Indro vai V*ri*tra*m* hatvetyâdinâ
mahâvrataprayogo<sup>ऽ</sup>bhihita*h*, pa*ñk*ame<sup>ऽ</sup>pi
tasyaivâbhidhâne punarukti*h* syât. nâya*m* dosha*h*,
sûtrabrâhma*n*arûpe*n*a tayor vibhedât. pa*ñk*amâra*n*yakam
*ri*shiprokta*m* sûtra*m*, prathamâra*n*yakan tv apaurusheya*m*
brâhma*n*a*m*. ata eva tatrârthavâdaprapa*ñk*ena sahitâ vidhaya*h*
*s*rûyante, pa*ñk*ame tu na ko py arthavâdo<sup>ऽ</sup>sti . . . .
ara*n*ya evaitad adhyeyam ity abhipretyâdhyetâra
âra*n*yakande<sup>ऽ</sup>ntarbhâvyâdhîyate.

<span id="fn_357"></span>[157:1](sbe29099.htm#fr_358) Sâma-veda (Bibl.
Indica), vol. i, p. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I, 1](sbe29100)
