[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](sbe29041)  [Next](sbe29043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1421228750/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Grihya Sutras, Part 1 (SBE29)*, by Hermann Oldenberg, \[1886\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### KHA*ND*A 12.

1 <span id="fr_177"></span>[1](#fn_176). After (the student) has eaten
something in the morning, in the afternoon, to the north-east—

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

2\. Having sacrificed, the teacher then asks him with regard to those
deities to whom he has been given in charge (see above, chap. 3, 1),
'Hast thou fulfilled the duties of holiness before Agni, Indra, the Sun,
and the Vi*s*ve devâs?'

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

3\. If he answers, 'I have fulfilled them, sir!'—

4\. The teacher three times envelops, from the left to the right, with a
fresh garment the face (of the student) who is standing behind the fire,
in front of the teacher, with his face to the east.

5 <span id="fr_178"></span>[5](#fn_177). He turns the skirt (of that
garment) upwards so that it cannot slip down,

6 <span id="fr_179"></span>[6](#fn_178). (And says) 'Leaving off for
three days the putting on of fuel, the going for alms, the sleeping on
the ground, and the obedience to the teacher, fast in the forest, in a
god's house or in a place where Agnihotra is performed, keeping silence,
with earnest care.'

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

7\. Here some (teachers) prescribe the same observances only for one
night, during which he is to stand.

8 <span id="fr_180"></span>[8](#fn_179). The teacher refrains from
eating flesh and from sexual intercourse.

9\. When those three days or that night has elapsed, going out from the
village he shall avoid to look at the following (persons or things) that
form impediments for the study (of the Veda):

10 <span id="fr_181"></span>[10](#fn_180). Raw flesh, a *K*a*nd*âla, a
woman that has lately been confined, or that has her courses, blood,
persons whose hands have been cut off, cemeteries, and all sorts of
corpse-like (animals?) which enter (their dens?) with the mouth first
(?), keeping them away from the place where he dwells.

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

11\. Going out (from the village) in a north-eastern direction the
teacher sits down on a clean spot. turning his face to the east.

12 <span id="fr_182"></span>[12](#fn_181). When the sun has risen, he
recites, in the way prescribed for the Veda-study, (the Âra*n*yaka texts
to the student) who is to keep silence and who wears a turban.

13 <span id="fr_183"></span>[13](#fn_182). This rule is to be observed
only for the Mahânâmnî verses.

14\. At the sections however that follow (after the Mahânâmnîs) the
other one hears while the teacher recites them for himself.

15\. He gives (to the teacher) the turban, a vessel, a good cow.

16\. (The teacher accepts the gifts) with the verses,

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Thou him'
(Rig-veda I, 18, 5), and, 'High in the sky' (Rig-veda X, 107, 2), or (he
accepts them) all with the Pra*n*ava (i.e. the syllable Om).

17\. Here some prepare a mess of rice for the Vi*s*ve devâs at all
sections (of the Âra*n*yaka);

18 <span id="fr_184"></span>[18](#fn_183). For the gods to whom he has
been given in charge, according to Mâ*nd*ûkeya.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_176"></span>[78:1](sbe29042.htm#fr_177) 12, 1 seq. The
Indian tradition (with the exception only, as far as is known to me, of
the *S*âmbavya commentary) refers the ceremonies described in this
chapter, like those treated of in chap. 11, as well to the *S*ukriya as
to the *S*âkvara and the other Vratas. This is not correct. The eleventh
chapter gives the rites common to the four Vratas; the *S*ukriya vrata
is connected with no special ceremonies beside those, so that the
exposition of this Vrata is brought to an end in that chapter. The last
Sûtra of chap. 11 marks the transition to the special rites which are
peculiar to the three other Vratas, and are connected with the character
of mystical secrecy attributed to the Âra*n*yaka, and thus it is with
the exclusion of the Sukriya that the twelfth chapter refers only to
those Vratas. The difference which we have pointed out between the two
chapters finds its characteristic expression in Sûtras 9 and 11 of chap.
11, compared with chap. 12, 13. 14; in the former Sûtras the statements
there given are expressly extended to the Sukriya, the *S*âkvara, the
Vrâtika, and the Aupanishada, while in the latter passage mention is
made first of the Mahânâmnîs, i.e. the text corresponding to the
*S*âkvara vrata, and then the uttarâ*n*i prakara*n*âni (the following
sections) are referred to, i.e. the Mahâvrata and the Upanishad, so that
the Sukriya vrata or the texts, the study of which is entered upon by
that Vrata, are left out here.

There is a good deal of confusion in the several commentaries <span
id="page_79">p. 79</span> with regard to the succession of the different
ceremonies taught in this chapter. They all agree in stating that after
the lapse of the year through which the Vrata is kept, a ceremony is
performed called Uddîksha*n*ikâ, i.e. the giving up of the Dîkshâ, or
preparatory observance. This Uddîksha*n*ikâ consists chiefly in the
teacher's ascertaining whether the student has fulfilled the duties
involved by the Vrata (see Sûtras 2 and 3). Besides that, there is no
doubt that a repetition of the Upanayana (chap. 11, 2) also formed part
of the preparatory rites for the study of the Âra*n*yaka. As to the way
in which these different ceremonies and the other rites described in
this chapter would have to be arranged according to our text, it is
perhaps best to follow the statements given in an epitome from the
bâlâvabodhanârtham *Ri*shidaivata*kh*andopaddhati (MS. Berol. Chambers,
199 a, fols. 13-16); the slight confusion therein is not difficult to
get rid of. There we read, 'The *S*âkvara, however, is to be kept one
year (chap. 11, 11). When the Uddîksha*n*ikâ has been performed, and
three nights (chap. 12, 6) or one day and one night (ibid. 7) have
elapsed, the Upanayana should be performed as above (chap. 11, 2), with
this difference that at the end of the formula mama vrate, &c. (chap. 4,
1) one should say, "May B*ri*haspati join thee to me for the holy
observance of the *S*âkvara through one year, O Devadatta!" (On this
formula, resting on a misunderstanding of chap. 4, Sûtra 2, see the
Introduction, p. 8.) The rest is the same as at the *S*ukriya. Then,
when the year (chap. 11, 11) has elapsed, and the Uddîksha*n*ikâ has
been performed, and the three days or the night have passed (chap. 12,
6. 7), he should go out of the village . . . and in the north-eastern
direction,' &c. (here follows the description of how the secret
doctrines should be taught to the student, according to *S*âṅkh. VI).
The confusion showing itself in the double mention of the
Uddîksha*n*ikâ, before and after the Upanayana, should no doubt be put
to the account of the excerptor or perhaps even of the MS.; what the
meaning of the original Paddhati was is sufficiently shown in the
remarks on the following Vratas, for instance, on the Vrâtika (fol. 16),
'Now follows the Vrâtika vrata. It lasts one year (chap. <span
id="page_80">p. 80</span> 11, 12). When the *S*âkvara has reached its
end \[here we find added at the margin of the MS.," After the
Uddîksha*n*ikâ has been performed." These words ought not to be received
into the text; in the corresponding passage on the Aupanishada vrata
they are not found\] he performs the whole ceremony, beginning from the
smearing (of the Stha*nd*ila with cow-dung), the drawing of the lines,
&c., as at the Upanayana . . . and then, when one year has elapsed, he
performs the Uddîksha*n*ikâ, and the rules \[given in chap. 12, 9 seq.\]
are observed as above.' I think that here the meaning of the text is
correctly represented; first comes the Upanayana, then follows the Vrata
lasting one year, then the Uddîksha*n*ikâ. After this ceremony the
teacher gives to the student the directions mentioned in chap. 12, 16;
then follow the three days, or the one night (chap. 12, 6. 7), and
finally they both go out of the village to the north-east, and in the
forest they recite the Rahasya.

On the whole ceremonies connected with the study of the Âra*n*yaka the
sixth book should be compared.

<span id="fn_177"></span>[80:5](sbe29042.htm#fr_178) Nârâya*n*a:
Vastrasya da*s*â*h* prântabhâga\[m\] uparish*t*ât k*ri*tvâ tathâ
badhnîyâd yathâ na sambhra*s*yeta adhastân na patati tathâ vidheya*m*.

<span id="fn_178"></span>[80:6](sbe29042.htm#fr_179) The things which
the student here is ordered to leave off for three days are the same
that are mentioned above, chap. 6, 8, as his standing duties. According
to Nârâya*n*a this would be the Âde*s*a mentioned in chap. II, 13.

<span id="fn_179"></span>[81:8](sbe29042.htm#fr_180) Comp. chap. II, 6.

<span id="fn_180"></span>[81:10](sbe29042.htm#fr_181) With Sûtikâ is
meant a woman during the first ten days after her confinement, for which
period the a*s*au*k*a lasts.—Apahasta is rendered by Nârâya*n*a by
*kh*innahasta; the comment on the *S*âmbavya-G*ri*hya mentions
âyudhâṅkitahastâ*ms* *k*a. The translation of the last words of this
Sûtra (sarvâ*n*i *k*a *s*avarûpâ*n*i yâny âsye na \[or âsyena?\]
pravi*s*eyu*h* svasya vâsân nirasan) is absolutely uncertain. Nârâya*n*a
says that such animals as lions, serpents, &c. are designated in common
use as *s*avarûpâ*n*i. (This literally means, 'having the form of a
corpse.' Immediately afterwards Nârâya*n*a gives a nearly identical
explanation of *s*avarûpa as different from the one stated first. So
perhaps we may conjecture that his first explanation rests on a reading
sarparûpâ*n*i; comp. the reading sarvarûpa of Pâraskara.) Of these the
animals entering their dwelling-places with the mouth first (âsyena) are
to be understood here as forming, when looked at, an impediment for the
study. Nârâya*n*a then says that other authorities understand *s*ava in
the sense of a dead human body; then *s*avarûpâ*n*i are beings having
the form thereof (tadrûpâ*n*i), such as dogs, jackals, &c. The words
yâny âsyena pravi*s*eyu*h* signify that the study is impeded also on the
sight of lions, tigers, &c.; for these enter their dwelling-places with
their faces first (? anumukhai*h* k*ri*tvâ). The words svasya vâsân
nirasan mean, <span id="page_82">p. 82</span> according to Nâr., 'when
he—i.e. the teacher—goes out of his dwelling-place.' Râma*k*andra says
that *s*avarûpa either means lions, snakes, and other dangerous animals,
or nails, horns, and other such things that fall off or are severed from
the body. The text of the *S*âmbavya MS. is sarvâ*n*i *k*a
*s*yâmarûpâ*n*i yâvânyâ (?) pravi*s*eyu*h*, which the commentary
explains, sarvâ*ms* *k*a bhakshyavargâ*ms* *k*a. I think there can be
little doubt that the text of *S*âṅkhâyana is correct (except that some
doubt will remain as to âsyena or âsye na), the more so as the passage
reoccurs, nearly identically, below at VI, 1, 4. 5. As to the
translation we can only go so far as to venture the opinion that the
*S*âṅkhâyana text does not admit the interpretation given by *G*ayarâma,
and accepted by Professor Stenzler (who compares Âpastamba I, 11, 27;
Gautama XVI, 41) in Pâraskara II, 11, 3 for sarvarûpa, which
consequently should, in our opinion, be rejected also in that passage of
Pâraskara. For ascertaining the true meaning of *s*avarûpa we shall have
to wait until new parallel passages have been discovered.

<span id="fn_181"></span>[82:12](sbe29042.htm#fr_182) The rules for the
Anuvâ*k*ana have been given above in chap. 7.

<span id="fn_182"></span>[82:13](sbe29042.htm#fr_183) The Mahânâmnî
verses are given in the fourth Âra*n*yaka of the Aitareyinas. See Sacred
Books of the East, I, p. xliii.

<span id="fn_183"></span>[83:18](sbe29042.htm#fr_184) Comp. the second
Sûtra of this chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: II, 13](sbe29043)
