[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Mahabharata](../maha/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](m02052) 
[Next](m02054) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SECTION LIII

"[Dhritrashtra](errata.htm#23) said,--Thou art my eldest son and born
also of my eldest wife. Therefore, O son, be not jealous of the
Pandavas. He that is jealous is always unhappy and suffereth the pangs
of death. O bull of the Bharata

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

race, Yudhishthira knoweth not deception, possesseth wealth equal unto
thine, hath thy friends for his, and is not jealous of thee. Why
shouldst thou, therefore, be jealous of him? O king, in respect of
friends and allies thou art equal unto Yudhishthira. Why shouldst thou,
therefore, covet, from folly, the property of thy brother? Be not so.
Cease to be jealous. Do not grieve. O bull of the Bharata race, it thou
covetest the dignity attaching to the performance of a sacrifice, let
the priests arrange for thee the great sacrifice, called the
*Saptatantu*. The kings of the earth will then, cheerfully and with
great respect, bring for thee also much wealth and gems and ornaments. O
child, coveting other's possessions is exceedingly mean. He, on the
other hand, enjoyeth happiness, who is content with his own being
engaged in the practices of his own order. Never striving to obtain the
wealth of others, persevering in one's own affairs, and protecting what
hath been earned,--these are the indications of true greatness. He that
is unmoved in calamity, skilled in his own business, ever exerting
vigilant and humble, always beholdeth prosperity. The sons of Pandu are
as thy arms. Do not lop off those arms of thine. Plunge not into
internal dissensions for the sake of that wealth of thy brothers. O
king, be not jealous of the sons of Pandu. Thy wealth is equal unto that
of thy brothers in his entirety. There is great sin in quarrelling with
friends. They that are thy grandsires are theirs also. Give away in
charity on occasions of sacrifices, gratify every dear object of thy
desire, disport in the company of women freely, and enjoy thou peace.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Section LIV](m02054)
