[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgm14)  [Next](tgm16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="img_06500"></span> ![](img/06500.jpg)

# 12. THE TEMPLE IN RUINS

WHEN Johanan returned to Jerusalem a few weeks after his remarkable
escape from the city, he found the Jews still holding out bravely
against the Romans. As he came close to the walls of the city, he heard
these cries:

"Pour it down."

"First see whether it is hot enough."

"No, throw down the stones."

With their last bit of strength, the Jews were pouring oil, throwing
stones and everything else they could lay hold of, over the walls.

But they could not hold out much longer. Men, women and children were
dying of hunger. The bodies of the dead were strewn all over the ground.
Imagine the Jews living amidst these stuffy odors. You surely remember
the story of the suffering at the destruction of the first Temple. But
this was worse.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

 

<span id="img_06600"></span>

[![](tn/06600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/06600.jpg.md)

 

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

The high priest, to whom the keys of the Temple were entrusted, clasped
them tightly and would let no one go near the Temple. But, alas! He
could not stop the Romans! They broke through the walls. They set the
Temple on fire. This was a terrible thing for the high priest to behold,
but still he held the keys. When, right before his eyes he saw the
Temple fall, his courage left him. What was the use of holding on to the
keys now! So first he threw the keys into the flames--and then leaped in
himself.

Nor was he the only one. Many others threw themselves into the flames
after him. Still others fell on their own swords. How could they live on
if the Temple was gone?

The Roman soldiers began to shout:

"Down with the Temple!"

"Down with Jerusalem."

"Hail, hail! All victory to the Romans!"

While from the Jews came:

"Woe, woe. The Temple has fallen!" "Jerusalem is destroyed!"

Sssss-S-S. Tz-tz-tz-tz. Came the fierce hissing of the flames. Jerusalem
destroyed! Jerusalem no more!

"Oh woe, oh woe!" shrieked the onlookers.

Sad at heart, Johanan stood by while all this was going on. But
hopefully he exclaimed:

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

"No, no I We shall not die. We shall live on. Yes, the school at Jamnia,
the little school at Jamnia will keep us alive."

Thus the second Temple was destroyed. Jerusalem was plundered. The Jews
were scattered all over the world. But they lived on!

 

<span id="img_06800"></span> ![](img/06800.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 13. A B C at Twenty-Two](tgm16.md)
