[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tgm32)  [Next](tgm34.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

<span id="img_17500"></span> ![](img/17500.jpg)

# 30. TABLES TURNED

SALADIN, the Caliph of Egypt, came to like Moses Maimonides, the
philosopher and physician, very much. Indeed, so much did the Caliph
think of him that he told Moses all the secrets of the court. Therefore,
all the courtiers became very jealous of Moses.

Now there was one courtier, Dijy, by name, who was so jealous of Moses
that he began to stir up trouble against him. One day, when Dijy was
alone with the Caliph, he began to talk about Moses in this manner:

"Your Highness," he said, "your Jewish physician may not be a traitor to
the country, but I know he has said some very unpleasant things about
you."

"Oh, Dijy, I have no time to waste listening to your nonsense," Saladin
scolded the courtier. "You don't like Moses because he is a great man, a
great philosopher, and a great physician. And what hurts

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

you courtiers most of all is that he is a Jew." As he ended his speech
the Caliph was about to go about his business. But, just then, Dijy
looked about slyly and said:

"Well, perhaps you will change your mind, when I tell you that Moses
told me that he finds it very hard to speak to you because of a bad odor
that comes from your mouth." On hearing these words, the Caliph who had
been walking down the court-room, stopped suddenly and turned pale. The
Caliph was a simple, kind man and he was deeply hurt by Dijy's words.
Flushing with anger, he commanded:

"Order Maimonides to come here at once and I will find out whether you
are telling the truth, and woe to you if you are not."

Now that same morning the mean courtier had made sure to speak to
Maimonides. To Maimonides the courtier had said:

"You think that because the Caliph has chosen you to be his physician,
and maybe tells you how much he likes your books too, he really likes
you. Well, let me tell you, you are all wrong. The other day he said to
me, 'You know, Dijy, it's becoming quite impossible to speak to
Maimonides; the odor from his mouth is so unpleasant.'" Maimonides who
had listened attentively to Dijy's words, was deeply hurt.

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

Now when the Caliph sent for Maimonides that evening, Maimonides held a
big handkerchief in front of his mouth so as not to annoy the Caliph.
But the Caliph too had prepared for Maimonides' arrival, and he, too,
had put a large handkerchief in front of his mouth.

When Maimonides entered, the Caliph thought: "Ah, so it's true! This Jew
is two-faced. There he comes with his handkerchief over his nose." (The
Caliph didn't notice that the handkerchief was over his mouth.) He grew
angrier than ever.

Seeing the Caliph holding his handkerchief to his mouth, Moses' knees
began to tremble so that he had to hold on to the furniture to keep from
tottering. At last Moses reached the throne of the Caliph. The Caliph
was so angry he could hardly speak. But he had already made his plans.
So at last he said:

"You go to the outskirts of the city where they are burning lime in the
big lime pit, and ask: 'Has the Caliph's bidding been carried out?"'

At another time Moses might have asked his friend, the Caliph, what he
meant by such a peculiar question. But now, he felt altogether too
embarrassed to say more than he had to.

The sun was setting, and it was getting dark. Many patients were waiting
for Moses at his home. Nevertheless,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

without any complaint he turned to do the bidding of the Caliph.

Meanwhile the Caliph had sent a messenger to the head of the lime pit
and ordered him to burn to death the man who would come within an hour
and ask: "Has the Caliph's bidding been carried out?"

As Maimonides went on his way, he was met by an old woman who threw
herself at his feet begging:

"Oh, please Doctor, please come in and see my daughter. She is
dangerously sick, and only you can save her."

What was Maimonides to do? He had two duties to carry out. It was his
duty to do the Caliph's bidding, but surely it was clearly his duty to
save a human life. If he carried out the Caliph's command, the woman's
daughter might die in the meantime. So what was he to do?

It did not take Moses long to make up his mind. He quickly turned to the
woman and asked her to lead him to her home. There he gave the sick girl
some medicine--and soon she was sleeping peacefully. Maimonides assured
the mother that when her daughter awoke she would be on the road to
health. This duty done, he went to the lime pit.

Meanwhile, the jealous courtier who had heard of the king's command to
kill Moses, was very impatient.

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

 

<span id="img_17900"></span>

[![](tn/17900.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/17900.jpg.md)

 

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

\[paragraph continues\] He could not stay home, and await the good news
of Maimonides' death. So, as the sun was setting, he hurriedly left for
the lime pit. Upon his arrival he asked:

"Has the Caliph's bidding been carried out yet?"

When the lime burners heard the question they quickly fell on the
courtier, tied him and threw him into the pit, where he was burnt to
death.

A short while later, Maimonides, too, reached the pit and asked:

"Has the Caliph's command been carried out?"

With a smile and a twinkle in his eye, the head of the pit answered:

"Oh, yes, and a good job it was too." Saying no more, Moses turned
homeward.

The following day Moses went to the court, as he always had done. As he
approached the Caliph, Moses noticed that Saladin was pale and
trembling.

"What is wrong, Your Majesty?" Moses asked greatly alarmed.

"Why didn't you go to the lime pit yesterday as I ordered you?" the
Caliph asked, his eyes flashing with anger.

"I did, Your Majesty," Moses replied quietly. "And they told me that
your bidding had been carried out, and that it had been a good job too."

"Oh, Allah, Allah!" the Caliph cried out. "A

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

poor innocent man must have been burnt alive--instead of you."

"Instead of me?" Moses called out in horror.

"Yes, I sent you to the lime pit yesterday to be burnt."

"You, Caliph,--me--to be burnt? Impossible! You wanted to kill me?"
(Moses didn't know just what to say--He couldn't believe it all.) "Why,
what evil have I done to Your Majesty?"

"Enough," said the Caliph. "You are not a true friend. If my mouth odor
is truly bad, why couldn't you have told me instead of mocking me behind
my back?"

A light dawned on Moses.

"Oh, was it Dijy who told you that?" he asked the Caliph.

"Yes, it was Dijy. If anyone else had told it to me, I wouldn't have
believed him. But Dijy was your friend, and so I thought he was surely
telling the truth. Then when I called for you, you came holding a
handkerchief to your nose. How could I do anything but believe him? It
was then that I made up my mind to kill you."

When Maimonides heard this he began to laugh. "Oh, that courtier is sly!
You know, O Majesty, he told me the same about you. He said you told
every

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

body that you wished you didn't have to speak to me so often, because
you couldn't bear the odor from my mouth."

"Oh, how shameful," called the Caliph, who was really a kindhearted man.
"To think that I was ready to believe him and take your life for that.
Moses, can you forgive me?" The Caliph almost cried.

"Oh, I've forgotten about it already. Only I wonder who it was that met
such a sad death at the lime pit." Moses was wrapped in thought.

"Moses," the Caliph cried, with great appreciation, "you are indeed the
great philosopher, the great Moses Maimonides," and the Caliph embraced
him affectionately.

Just then the Caliph's butler announced: "Two lime burners to see you,
Your Majesty."

"Let them come in."

And the two lime burners came in holding a ring and a watch in their
hands. The head of the lime burners spoke:

"We removed these things from the man whom you ordered to be burnt
yesterday. Here, they belong to Your Majesty." As the men held them out,
the Caliph exclaimed:

"Oh, these things belong to that jealous courtier who made me plan all
that. He wanted to hear of your

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

death and so he reached the pit before you did. By the way, Moses, where
were you then?"

"Oh, God is good," Moses smiled. "An old lady came and asked me to heal
her sick daughter. I hope Your Majesty will pardon me, I stopped to
attend the sick girl before going to the lime pit, because I feared that
she might die if I did not go immediately."

"Oh, how impossible it is for us to understand the ways of God!" the
Caliph exclaimed. Again they embraced each other, and Moses and the
Caliph remained friends for the rest of their lives.

 

<span id="img_18300"></span> ![](img/18300.jpg)

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 31. The Rabbi Wins](tgm34.md)
