[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Notes

BALOMA; THE SPIRITS OF THE DEAD IN THE TROBRIAND ISLANDS

<span id="xref_1">1</span> This article contains part of the results of
ethnographical work in British New Guinea carried on in connection with
the Robert Mond Travelling Studentship (University of London), and the
Constance Hutchinson Scholarship of the London School of Economics
(University of London), with assistance from the Commonwealth Department
of External Affairs, Melbourne.

The writer spent some ten months, May, 1915-March, 1916, at Omarakana
and the neighboring villages of Kiriwina (Trobriand Islands), where he
lived among the natives in a tent. By October, 1915, he had acquired
sufficient knowledge of the Kiriwinian language to be able to dispense
with the services of an interpreter.

The writer desires to acknowledge the assistance he has received from
Mr. Atlee Hunt, Secretary to the Commonwealth Department of External
Affairs, and from Dr. C. G. Seligman, Professor of Ethnology in the
University of London. The unfailing kindness and encouragement of Dr.
Seligman have been of the greatest assistance throughout,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

and his work, *The Melanesians of British New Guinea*, provided a solid
foundation on which to base the present investigations. Sir Baldwin
Spencer, K.C.M.G., has been kind enough to read parts of the MS. and to
give the writer his valuable advice on several important points.

<span id="xref_2">2</span> For an account of Kiriwina sociology, cf.
Seligman's work, *The Melanesians of British New Guinea*, chaps.
xlix-lii, pp. 660-707, and chap. lix for a description of the mortuary
practices. Prof. Seligman gives also an outline of the native beliefs
concerning an afterlife (chap. lv), and his data, which were collected
in a different locality of the district, will be quoted hereafter.

<span id="xref_3">3</span> Seligman, *op. cit.*, p. 733.

<span id="xref_4">4</span> *Cf.* below, where the various versions are
discussed. The nature of the *baloma* and *kosi*, and the material of
which they are built, so to speak--whether shadow or reflection or
body--will also be dealt with there. It may suffice here to say that the
*baloma* are certainly considered to retain exactly the likeness of the
living individual.

<span id="xref_5">5</span> I have been struck by the enormous difference
in this respect obtaining between the Northern Massim and the Mailu, a
tribe on the south coast of New Guinea, which I visited during a six
months stay in Papua in 1914-15. The Mailu people are conspicuously
afraid of darkness. When, towards the end of my stay, I visited Woodlark
Island, the natives there, who belong to the same group as the
Kiriwinians (a group called by Seligman the Northern Massim), differed
so obviously in that respect from the Mailu that I was struck with this
the first evening, which I spent in the village of Dikoias. *Cf.* "The
Natives of Mailu: Preliminary Results of the Robert Mond Research Work
in British New Guinea," *Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia*, vol. xxxix,
1915.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

<span id="xref_6">6</span> *Cf.* C. G. Seligman, *op. cit.*, chap.
xlvii, where similar maleficent women from another district (Southern
Massim) are described. I do not dwell here in detail on the beliefs
about the *mulukuausi*, but I am under the impression that the natives
are not quite sure whether it is a kind of "sending" or "double" that
leaves the body of the witch or whether she goes out herself on her
errand in an invisible form. *Cf.* also "The Natives of Mailu," p. 653,
and footnote on p. 648.

<span id="xref_7">7</span> The preliminary burial, as well as burying in
the middle of the village, has recently been suppressed by Government.

<span id="xref_8">8</span> It must be noted that the grave was in olden
days situated right in the middle of the village, and that a close vigil
was kept over it, having, among other motives, that of protecting the
corpse from these female ghouls. Now that the grave is outside the
village the vigil has had to be abandoned, and the *mulukuausi* can prey
on the corpse as they like. There seems to be an association between the
*mulukuausi* and the high trees on which they like to perch, so that the
present site of burial , placed as it is right among the high trees of
the grove (*weika*) surrounding each village, is specially odious to the
natives.

<span id="xref_9">9</span> This well is situated not far from the shore,
in the *raiboag*, the elevated, stony, wooded coral ridge, which runs in
a ring round almost all the smaller islands of the archipelago and the
greater part of the large island Boiowa. All the stones and the well
here mentioned are real and can be seen by mortals.

<span id="xref_10">10</span> This effect of the Gilala water was
explained by one of my informants only; the others did not know the
object of this ablution, though all affirmed its existence.

<span id="xref_11">11</span> This is a contradiction of the statement
that the

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

\[paragraph continues\] *baloma* assemble round the new arrival and help
him in wailing. See below, VIII, the remarks about such inherent
inconsistencies.

<span id="xref_12">12</span> The natives strictly distinguish between
the *vaigu'a* (valuable possessions) and *gugu'a* (the other less
valuable ornaments and objects of use). The main objects classified as
*vaigu'a* will be enumerated in this article later on.

<span id="xref_13">13</span> In practice the corpse is most carefully
stripped of all valuables just before burial, and I saw even small shell
earrings being extracted from the ear lobes, articles which the natives
would not hesitate to sell for half a stick of tobacco (three
farthings). On one occasion, when a small boy had been buried in my
presence, and a very small and poor belt of *kaloma* (shell discs) was
left on the body by mistake, there was great consternation and a serious
discussion whether the body ought to be unearthed.

<span id="xref_14">14</span> During my stay one young man committed
suicide in the *lo'u* manner in a neighboring village. Though I saw the
corpse a few hours after death, and was present at the wailing and
burial and all the mortuary ceremonies, it was only after a few months
that I learned he had committed suicide, and I never could learn his
motive. The Rev. E. S. Johns, the head of the Methodist Mission in the
Trobriands, informs me that be used at times to register as many as two
suicides a week (through poison) in Kavataria, a group of large villages
situated in the immediate neighborhood of the Mission station. Mr. Johns
tells me that suicides occur in epidemics, and that they have been
fostered by the discovery by the natives of the white man's power to
counteract the poison. The aim of the suicide is to punish the
survivors, or some of them.

<span id="xref_15">15</span> This poison is prepared from the roots of a
cultivated vine; its action is not very rapid, and if emetics be
properly administered in time life is usually saved.

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

<span id="xref_16">16</span> There seems to be some possibility of death
by old age, especially in the case of very insignificant old men and
women. Several times, when I was asking of what a man had died, I
received the answer, "He was very old and weak and he just died." But
when I asked about M'tabalu, a very old and decrepit man, the chief of
Kasana'i, whether he was going to die soon, I was told that, if no
*silami* (evil spell) were thrown on him, there was no reason why he
should not go on living. Again, it must be remembered that a *silami* is
a private thing, not to be talked about except with intimate friends. It
must be emphasized that the "ignorance of natural death" is the general
typical attitude expressed in custom and reflected in such legal and
moral institutions as exist, rather than some kind of absolute apodictic
statement, excluding any contradictions or uncertainties.

<span id="xref_17">17</span> Seligman, *op. cit.*, p. 733.

<span id="xref_18">18</span> The distinction between rank and authority
is important in Kiriwinian sociology. The members, of the Tabalu section
of the Malasi clan have the highest rank, The head of this clan wields
authority over the village of Omarakana and, in a way, over a great
portion of the main island and some adjacent islands. Whether he will
retain this authority after death in Tuma seemed doubtful to To'uluwa,
the present chief of Omarakana. But there was not the slightest doubt
that he and all the other Tabalu, as well as everyone else, would retain
their respective rank and. their membership in clan and subclan. To
understand this, cf. the excellent account of the Trobriand social
system, in Seligman, *op. cit.*, chaps. xlix-liii.

<span id="xref_19">19</span> In order to understand this statement the
reader must be acquainted with the social system of the Kiriwinians (see
Seligman, loc. cit.). There is a very close connection between every
village and a certain section of a clan. Usually, but not always, this
section is descended from an

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

ancestor, who came out of the ground in that locality. In any case, the
head of this section is always said to be the master or owner of the
land (*tolipuaipucaia*, from *toli*, a prefix denoting mastership,
ownership, and *puaipuaia*, ground, soil, land).

<span id="xref_20">20</span> This wooing in Tuma, as described to me by
my informants, corresponds to the manner in which people mate on certain
occasions called *katuyausi*. The *katuyausi* are expeditions of amorous
adventure, in which the unmarried girls of a village go en bloc to
another village and there sleep with the youths of that village. Any
single male who fancies one of the girl guests gives her (through an
intermediary) some small present (a comb, some shell discs or turtle
shell rings), which is handed over with the words "*kam paku*." If
accepted, the two belong to each other for the night. Such expeditions,
though well established and sanctioned by custom, are strongly resented
by the young men of the village from which the katuyausi starts, and
they end as a rule in a sound thrashing administered by the male to the
female youth of the village.

<span id="xref_21">21</span> A "lifetime" is undoubtedly a much less
definite period to the natives than it is to ourselves.

<span id="xref_22">22</span> Another center is the Island of Kaileula.

<span id="xref_23">23</span> Seligman, *op. cit.*, p. 734.

<span id="xref_24">24</span> Similar songs have also been brought by
other people from Tuma.

<span id="xref_25">25</span> To judge leniently such "inconsistencies"
of native belief, it is sufficient to remember that we meet the same
difficulties in our own ideas about ghosts and spirits. No one who
believes in ghosts or spirits ever doubts that they can speak, and even
act; they can rap on tables or with table legs, lift objects, etc.

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span id="xref_26">26</span> *op. cit.*, p. 733.

<span id="xref_27">27</span> *op. cit.*, p. 679.

<span id="xref_28">28</span> "Ceremonial in the narrower sense," as
opposed to the mere uttering of the spell over a certain object.

<span id="xref_29">29</span> For instance, the Mailu on the south coast.
See *Trans. Roy. Soc. South Australia*, vol. xxxix, p. 696.

<span id="xref_30">30</span> In this short, purely descriptive account
of harvesting, I have purposely avoided sociological technicalities. The
complex system of mutual gardening duties is an extremely interesting
feature of Kiriwinian social economics. It will be described in another
place.

<span id="xref_31">31</span> In this and other instances I do not dwell
upon such sociological details as do not bear directly upon the subject
of this article.

<span id="xref_32">32</span> The calendar arrangements in the Trobriand
Islands are complicated by the fact that there are four districts, each
of which places the beginning of the year, *i.e.*, the end of the
*milamala* moon--at a different time. Thus in Kitava, an island to the
east of the main island of the group, the *milamala* is celebrated some
time in June or July. Then follow in July and August the southern and
western districts of Bwoiowa, the main island, and some islands to the
west (Kaileula and others). After which the *milamala* takes place in
August or September in the central and eastern districts of the main
island, in what is called by the natives Kiriwina, and last there
follows Vakuta, the island to the south of Bwoiowa, where the *milamala*
takes place in September or October. Thus the feast, and with it the
whole calendar, is shifted over the space of four moons in one district.
It seems that the dates of the garden activities also vary, keeping time
with the calendar. This was stated by the natives with emphasis, but I
found during

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

the year I was in Bwoiowa that the gardens were more advanced in
Kiriwina than in the western district, though the latter is one moon in
advance of the former.

The dates of the moons axe fixed by the position of the stars, in which
astronomical art the natives of Wawela, a village lying on the beach in
the southern half of the main island, excel. The Rev. M. K. Gilmour told
me that the appearance of the *palolo*, the marine annelid *Eunice
viridis*, which takes place on the reef near Vakuta, is a very important
factor in regulating the native calendar, in fact, in doubtful cases it
decides the question. This worm appears on certain days towards the full
moon, falling early in November or late in October, and this is the
*milamala* time of Vakuta. In Kiriwina the natives told me, however,
that they thoroughly rely on the astronomical knowledge of the Wawela
men.

<span id="xref_33">33</span> No tokaikaya were made in Omarakana or
Olivilevi during the *milamala* I saw in those villages. The custom is
on the decline, and the erection of a *tokaikaya* necessitates a
considerable amount of labor and trouble. I saw one in the village of
Gumilababa, where there lives a chief of the highest rank (Mitakata, a
*guya'u* of the *tabalu* rank).

<span id="xref_34">34</span> How far, besides and behind this professed
aim, vanity and the aesthetic motive are at work in prompting such
displays, cannot be discussed here.

<span id="xref_35">35</span> This is one of the innumerable food
distributions (generic name *sagali*) which are connected with almost
every feature of social life in the Trobriands. It is usually one clan
(or two clans) that arranges the *sagali*, and other clans receive the
food. Thus in the *katukuala* the Malasi clan first distribute the food
and the *lukulabuta*, the *lukuasisiga* and the *lukubia* receive it.
After a few days another *katukuala* is held, with the inverse social
grouping. The dual arrangements of the clans varies according to

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

the district. In Omarakana the Malasi are so preponderant that they form
one moiety for themselves, the three remaining clans forming the other.
It is impossible to enter here into the detailed examination of the
social mechanism and of the other features of the *sagali*.

<span id="xref_36">36</span> Of course, the chiefs have as much pig as
they require before giving any to the *tokay*. But it is characteristic
that the privileges of the chief have much more to do with the liberty
to give than with the liberty to consume. Vanity is a stronger passion
than greed--though perhaps this reflection does not express the whole
truth of the matter!

<span id="xref_37">37</span> Thus dancing in general is inaugurated by
the initiation of the drums (*katuvivisa kasausa'u*), which is connected
with the *katukuala*. The *kaidebu* have to be initiated separately by a
*katuvivisa kaidebu*.

<span id="xref_38">38</span> There are names for each day about full
moon. Thus the day (and night) of the full moon are called *Yapila* or
*Kaitaulo*. One day before, *Yamkevila*; two days, *Ulakaiwa*. The day
after full moon, *Valaita*; the following one, *Woulo*. The *ioba* takes
place on the night of *Woulo*.

<span id="xref_39">39</span> The drums of the Kiriwinians consist of:
(1) the large drum (normal size of New Guinea drum) called *kasausa'u*
or *kupi* (this latter word being an obscene synonym for the *glans
penis*): and (2) the small drum, about one third the size of the larger,
called *katunenia*. All their drumbeats are a combination of the two
drums, the *kupi* and the *katunenia* leading each its separate voice.

<span id="xref_40">40</span> There are two main types of dance in
Boiowa. The circular dances, where the orchestra (the drums and the
singers) stands in the middle, and the performers go round them in a
circle, always in the opposite direction to the hands of a watch. These
dances are again subdivided into: (1) *bisila* (pandanus streamer)
dances with slow movement

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

\[paragraph continues\] (2) *kitatuva* (two bunches of leaves), with a
quick movement; and (3) *kaidebu* (wooden painted shield), dances with
the same quick movement. In the *bisila* dances women can take part
(very exceptionally), and all the performers wear women's petticoats.
The second group of dances are the *kasawaga*, where only three men
dance, always in imitation of animal movements, though these are very
conventionalized and unrealistic. These dances are not circular, there
are no songs (as a rule) to accompany them; the orchestra consists of
five *kupi* drums and one *katunenia*.

<span id="xref_41">41</span> When a village is in mourning (*bola*), and
drums are taboo, the *ioba* is performed by means of a conch shell
(*ta'uio*)--but it must not be omitted even under such circumstances.

<span id="xref_42">42</span> The dread of "leading questions," as
expressed over and over again in all instructions for ethnographical
field work is, according to my experience, one of the most misleading
prejudices. "Leading questions" are dangerous with a new informant, for
the first half hour or couple of hours, at the outside, of your work
with him. But any work done with a new, and consequently bewildered,
informant is not worth being recorded. The informant must know that you
want from him exact and detailed statements of fact. A good informant,
after a few days, will contradict and correct you even if you make a
*lapsus linguae*, and to think of any danger from leading questions in
such a case is absolutely groundless. Again, real ethnographical work
moves much more in statement of actual details, details which, as a
rule, can be checked by observation--where again there is in no case any
danger from leading questions. The only case where direct questioning is
necessary, where it is the only instrument of the ethnographist, is when
he wants to know what is the interpretation of a ceremony, what is his
informant's opinion about some state of things; then leading questions
are absolutely necessary. You might ask a native, "What is your
interpretation of such and such a ceremony?"

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

and wait for years before getting your answer (even if you know how to
word it in native language). You would more or less solicit the native
to take up your attitude, and look at things in ethnographical
perspective. Again, when dealing with facts that are just out of range
of immediate observation, like customs of war, and some of the obsolete
technological objects, it is absolutely impossible to work without
leading questions, if many important features are not to be omitted, and
as there is no earthly reason to avoid this type of questioning, it is
directly erroneous to brand the leading questions. Ethnological inquiry
and judicial examination are essentially different, in that in the
latter the witness has usually to express his personal, individual
opinion, or to relate his impressions, both of which can be easily
modified by suggestion: whereas in ethnological inquiry the informant is
expected to give such eminently crystallized and solidified items of
knowledge as an outline of certain customary activities, or a belief or
a statement of traditional opinion. In such cases a leading question is
dangerous only when dealing with a lazy, ignorant, or unscrupulous
informant--in which case the best thing is to discard him altogether.

<span id="xref_43">43</span> A characteristic fact to illustrate this
statement is furnished by a Scotchman, who has been living for years
among the natives as trader and pearl buyer. He has in no way lost the
"caste" and dignity of the white man, in fact, he is an extremely kind,
hospitable gentleman; nevertheless, be has assumed certain native
peculiarities and habits such as the chewing of areca nut, a habit
seldom adopted by white men. He is also married to a Kiriwinian. In
order to make his garden thrive, he uses the help of a native *towosi*
(garden wizard) from the next village, and that is the reason, my
informants told me, that his garden is always considerably better than
that of any other white man.

<span id="xref_44">44</span> The broad generalities given about
Kiriwinian garden magic are, of course, not to be taken even as an
outline of

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

this magic, which, it is hoped, will be described in another paper.

<span id="xref_45">45</span> It should be remembered that each village
has its own system of garden magic, intimately connected with that
village, and transmitted in the maternal line. The membership in a
village community is also transmitted in the female line.

<span id="xref_46">46</span> I cannot deal here in detail with this
rule, to which there are many apparent exceptions. This will be done in
another place. The statement in the text ought to be amended:
"hereditary in the female line in the long run." For instance, very
often a father gives the magic to his son, who practices it during his
lifetime, but this son cannot pass it on to his son unless he has
married a girl of his father's clan, so that his son belongs to the
original clan again. Cross-cousin marriage, prompted by this and similar
motives, is fairly frequent, and is considered distinctly desirable.

<span id="xref_47">47</span> Thus, for instance, the *kainagola*, one of
the most powerful *silami* (evil spells), is associated with a myth
localized in the villages of Ba'u and Buoitalu. Again, certain
canoe-building magic, called *wa'iugo*, contains references to a myth,
the scene of which is the island of Kitava. Many other examples could be
adduced.

<span id="xref_48">48</span> The native name for a subclan is *dala*,
cf. Seligman, *op. cit.*, p. 678, where the form *dalela* is *dala*,
with the pronominal suffix of the third person, "his family." The author
gives there the names of *dala* belonging to the four clans. They
include the most important *dala*, but there are many others. As
Professor Seligman says, the members of each *dala* trace their origin
to a common ancestor. Such an ancestor emerged originally out of a hole
in the earth in a given locality. And, as a rule, the *dala* lives in,
or near, that locality--very often the "hole is in the grove surrounding

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

the village, or even right in the village. These holes, called "houses"
(*buala*), are, at present, either waterholes or stone heaps, or small
shallow cavities. The hole mentioned by Professor Seligman on p. 679 is
the one out of which emerged several of the most aristocratic *dala*.
But this is an exception, the rule being one buala, one *dala*.

<span id="xref_49">49</span> I am almost certain that it is an archaic
form, connected with *vitu*, a prefix expressing causation. Thus, "to
show the way," "to explain," *vitu loki*, is composed of *vitu*, to
"cause," and *loki*, to "go there." There are a number of such causative
prefixes in Kiriwinian, each possessing a different shade of meaning. In
this place, of course, they cannot be discussed.

<span id="xref_50">50</span> This is an example of the above-mentioned
exceptions to the matrilineal descent of certain magical formulae.
Iowana, father of Bagido'u, was the son of a *tabalu* (*i.e.*, of one of
the family who "own" Omarakana). His father, Puraiasi, gave him the
magic, and as Iowana married Kadu Bulami, his cousin, a *tabalu* woman,
he could transmit the magic to his son, Bagido'u, and the office of
*towosi* (garden magician) thus returned to the *tabalu* subclan.

<span id="xref_51">51</span> As a matter of fact, this system is
imported from another village, Luebila, situated on the northern coast.
Hence its name, kailuebila. It contains only one or two references to
some places near that village, but it was not known in Omarakana whether
those places were sacred or not.

<span id="xref_52">52</span> *Ovavavala* is an archaic form of the name
Ovavavile.

<span id="xref_53">53</span> *Bom'* is abbreviated from *boma*, which
means taboo. *Likuliku* is an expression for earthquake, which is an
important item in the magical vocabulary.

<span id="xref_54">54</span> *Kamkuam*, eat; *kami*, the personal prefix
of the second

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

person plural, used with food; *nunumuaia*, plural of *numuaia*, old
woman. The two personal names of the *baloma* old women are remarkable
for beginning with *ili*, very likely derived from *ilia*-fish.
*Bualita* means sea. It seems thus possible that they are some mythical
persons, associated with fishing, concerning whom the tradition has been
lost. But such guesses have little charm, and still less value, in the
opinion of the present writer.

<span id="xref_55">55</span> The first name is that of a woman;
*iaegulo* means "I"; Iamuana is said to have been the mother of
Umnalibu. Here also the name is suggestive of some connection with the
spell, which is said over the *libu* plant. The last name but one,
Taigala, means, literally, his ear, but here it was said to stand for a
*bili baloma* name.

<span id="xref_56">56</span> It must be stated that several of these
formulae have not been translated in a satisfactory manner. It was often
impossible to secure the help of the man who recited the spell. Several
spells were collected during short visits to outlying villages. In
several cases the man was too old or too stupid to help in the, from the
native point of view, extremely difficult and puzzling task of
translating the archaic and condensed formula, and of commenting upon
all its obscurities. And, as a rule, it is no use asking anyone but the
original owner to translate or comment upon any formula. I have been
able, however, from my knowledge of the "colloquial" language to grasp
the general meaning of almost all the formulae.

<span id="xref_57">57</span> The full discussion of this subject must be
deferred to another place. It is interesting that in a certain class of
*silami* (evil spells) there is a direct invocation to a being, *tokuay*
(a wood spirit living in trees), to come and perform the evil. And
everybody agrees that it is the *tokuay* who is the *u'ula* (basis,
reason, cause) of the *silami*, that he enters the body and produces
disastrous internal disorders.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

<span id="xref_58">58</span> All these general statements must be
regarded as preliminary, they will be supported by proper documents in
the proper place.

<span id="xref_59">59</span> Compare those data with the above-discussed
"ignorance of natural death." In this ignorance there ought to be
distinguished: (1) the ignorance of the necessity of death, of the life
coming to an end; (2) ignorance of the natural causes of sickness as we
conceive it. Only the second ignorance seems to be quite prevalent, the
action of evil sorcerers being always assumed, except, perhaps, in the
above-mentioned cases of very old and insignificant folk.

<span id="xref_60">60</span> *Suma* is the root for pregnancy;
*nasusuma*, a pregnant woman; *isume*, she becomes pregnant. There is no
term denoting conception, as distinguished from pregnancy. The general
meaning of *suma* is "take," "take possession of."

<span id="xref_61">61</span> I am using here the expression "spirit
child" as a *terminus technicus*. This is the term used by Spencer and
Gillen to denote analogous beings in Australia, where this type of
reincarnation was first discovered. How far the Kiriwinian facts are
ethnographically or psychologically connected with those described by
Spencer and Gillen will not be discussed in this place.

<span id="xref_62">62</span> This information was obtained from a woman
on the west coast. I think the woman belonged to the village of
Kavataria. Mr. G. Auerbach, a pearl buyer, who resides in Sinaketa, a
coastal village on the southern half of the island, told me that there
are some stones there, to which a woman who wants to become enceinte may
have recourse. My informant was unable to tell me whether this was
ceremonial or not.

<span id="xref_63">63</span> There is a remarkable rule which compels
the woman to perform all sorts of practices in order to have her skin
quite light after childbirth; she keeps in the house, she has

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

to wear the saikeulo over her shoulders, she washes with hot water, and
frequently puts coconut cream on her skin. The degree of lightness of
skin thus achieved is remarkable. The above described ceremony is a kind
of magical inauguration of the period when she will have to keep her
skin light.

<span id="xref_64">64</span> A genealogy shows the relationship in an
instant--

 

<span id="img_chart"></span> ![](img/chart.jpg)

 

The black discs represent males, the rings, females.

<span id="xref_65">65</span> The majority of my informants were equally
positive about the rule that a *baloma* of the *veiola* must convey the
child. But I have come across one or two dissenting opinions, affirming
that the father's mother may bring the child. It was said by one man
that if the child resembles the mother it has been brought by some of
her *veiola*; if it resembles the father it has been brought by his
mother. But this opinion may be my informant's private speculation.

<span id="xref_66">66</span> In which, *nota bene*, by the *baloma* who
"gave" the child, the natives mean either the original *baloma*, who has
become the child, or the *baloma* who brought the waiwaia.

<span id="xref_67">67</span> The sexual freedom of unmarried girls is
complete. They begin intercourse with the other sex very early, at the
age of six to eight years. They change their lovers as often as they
please, until they feel inclined to marry. Then a girl settles down to a
protracted and, more or less, exclusive intrigue with one man, who,
after a time, usually becomes her husband. Illegitimate children are by
no means rare,

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

cf. the excellent description of sexual life and marriage among the
Southern Massim, who, in this respect, resemble the Kiriwinians to a
great extent, in Seligman, *op. cit.*, xxxviii, p. 499, and the short
but correct account there given of the same subject among the Northern
Massim (including the Trobriand Islanders), chap. liii, P. 708.

<span id="xref_68">68</span> A white settlement in the east end of New
Guinea.

<span id="xref_69">69</span> As I do not want to criticize particular
views, so much as to add some data bearing on this problem, I shall not
note any statements, especially from those authors whose opinions appear
to me to be untenable. The probability of a "non-recognition in early
times of the physical relation between father and child" was first
suggested by Mr. E. S. Hartland (*The Legend of Perseus*, 1894-96), and
the discoveries of Spencer and Gillen brilliantly confirmed his views.
Mr. Hartland has subsequently devoted the most exhaustive inquiry extant
to this problem (*Primitive Paternity*). Sir J. G. Frazer has also given
the support of his illustrious opinion to the view that ignorance of
physical fatherhood was universal among early mankind (*Totemism and
Exogamy*).

<span id="xref_70">70</span> *The Melanesians of British New Guinea*, p.
84.

<span id="xref_71">71</span> *Trans. of Roy. Soc. South Australia*, vol.
xxxix, 1915, p. 562.

<span id="xref_72">72</span> I Use Professor Seligman's terminology,
based on his classification of the Papuasians, *op. cit.*, pp. 1-8.

<span id="xref_73">73</span> *Cf.* Seligman, *op. cit.*, *passim*; also
chap. xlix.

<span id="xref_74">74</span> My own notes taken among the Mailu, and the
conclusion I drew from them, are typical of such a failure. As other
instances, may be quoted the denial by Strehlow and von Leonhardi of the
discoveries of Spencer and Gillen; a

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

denial which, if the argument of von Leonhardi be carefully read, and
the data given by Strehlow examined, turns out to be only a futile
controversy based upon inadequate premises, and, in fact, completely
confirms the original discoveries of Spencer and Gillen. Here the
explanation lies in the insufficient mental training of the observer
(Strehlow). You can no more expect good all-round ethnographical work
from an untrained observer than you can expect a good geological
statement from a miner, or hydrodynamic theory from a diver. It is not
enough to have the facts right in front of one, the faculty to deal with
them must be there. But lack of training and mental capacity is not the
only cause of failure. In the excellent book about the natives of New
Guinea (Goodenough Bay on the N.E. coast), written by the Rev. H.
Newton, now Bishop of Carpentaria, than whom none could be better
equipped to understand the native mind and to grasp native customs, we
read the following statement: "There may be races as ignorant \[of the
causal relation between connection and pregnancy\] as is implied \[in
Spencer and Gillen's statement\]; it is difficult to imagine such, when
marital infidelity appears to be so severely punished everywhere, and
when the responsibility of the father for the child is recognized, if
only to a small extent." (In *Far New Guinea*, p. 194.) Thus, an
excellent observer (such as the present Bishop of Carpentaria
undoubtedly is), living for years among the natives, knowing their
language, has to imagine a state of things which exists fully and
completely all round him. And his arguments for denying this state
(everywhere, not only among his tribe) is that marital jealousy and
recognition of fatherhood both exist (a recognition, which again is not
known in the tribe in question, on the physical side)! As if there were
the slightest logical nexus between jealousy (a pure instinct) and ideas
about conception; or, again, between these latter and the social ties of
the family! I have taken this statement for criticism, just because it
is found in one of the very best ethnographical books which we have
about South Sea natives. But I wish to add that my criticism

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

is in a way unfair, because Mr. Newton, as a missionary, could scarcely
discuss with the natives all the details of the question, and also
because Mr. Newton gives the reader fully to understand that he has not
inquired into the question directly, and candidly states the reasons for
his doubts. I have quoted the statement, nevertheless, in order to show
the many technical difficulties which are connected with the obtaining
of accurate information on this subject, and the many gaps through which
errors can leak into our knowledge.

<span id="xref_75">75</span> My experience in the field has persuaded me
of the complete futility of the theories which attribute to the savage a
different type of mind and different logical faculties. The native is
not "prelogical" in his beliefs, he is alogical, for belief or dogmatic
thinking does not obey the law of logic among savages any more than
among ourselves.

<span id="xref_76">76</span> To test this sociological principle on
civilized instances; when we say that the "Roman Catholics believe in
the infallibility of the Pope," we are correct only in so far as we mean
that this is the orthodox belief, enjoined on all members of that
church. The Roman Catholic Polish peasant knows as much about this dogma
as about the Infinitesimal Calculus. And if it were proposed to study
the Christian religion, not as a doctrine, but as a sociological reality
(a study which, as far as I am aware, has never yet been attempted), all
the remarks in this paragraph would apply, *mutatis mutandis*, to any
civilized community with the same strength as to the "savages' of
Kiriwina.

<span id="xref_77">77</span> 1 am purposely not using the term
"collective ideas," introduced by Professor Durkheim and his school, to
denote a conception, which in their hands, more especially in the
writings of Hubert and Mauss, has proved extremely fertile. In the first
place, I am not able to judge whether the above analysis would really
cover what that school denotes by "collective ideas." Remarkably enough,
there does not seem

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

to be anywhere a clear, candid statement of what they mean by
"collective idea," nothing approaching a definition. It is obvious that
in this discussion, and in general, I am under a great obligation to
these writers. But I am afraid that I am entirely out of touch with
Professor Durkheim's philosophical basis of sociology. It seems to me
that this philosophy involves the metaphysical postulate of a
"collective soul," which, for me, is untenable. Moreover, whatever
discussion might be carried on as to the theoretical value of the
conception of a "collective soul," in all practical sociological
investigations one would be left hopelessly in the lurch by it. In the
field, when studying a native or civilized community, one has to do with
the whole aggregate of individual souls, and the methods and theoretical
conceptions have to be framed exclusively with this multiplex material
in view. The postulate of a collective consciousness is barren and
absolutely useless for an ethnographical observer.
