[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal01)  [Next](bal03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter II.

Having dealt with the *kosi*, the frivolous and meek ghost of the
deceased who vanishes after a few days of irrelevant existence, and with
the *mulukuausi*, the ghoulish, dangerous women who feed on carrion and
attack the living, we may pass to the main form of the spirit, the
*baloma*. I call this the main form because the *baloma* leads a
positive, well-defined existence in Tuma; because be returns from time
to time to his village; because he has been visited and seen in Tuma by
men awake and men asleep, and by those who were almost dead, yet
returned to life again; because he plays a notable part in native magic,
and even receives offerings and a kind of propitiation; finally, because
he asserts his reality in the most radical manner by returning to the
place of life, by reincarnation, and thus leads a continuous existence.

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

The *baloma* leaves the body immediately after death has occurred and
goes to Tuma. The route taken and the mode of transit are essentially
the same as those which a living person would take in order to go from
his village to Tuma. Tuma is an island; one must therefore sail in a
canoe. A *baloma* from a coastal village would embark and cross over to
the island. A spirit from one of the inland villages would go to one of
the coastal villages whence it is customary to embark for Tuma. Thus
from Omarakana, a village situated almost in the center of the northern
part of Boiowa (the main island of the Trobriand group), the spirit
would go to Kaibuola, a village on the north coast, from whence it is
easy to sail to Tuma, especially during the southeast season, when the
southeast trade wind would be dead fair, and carry the canoe over in a
few hours. At Olivilevi, a large village on the east coast, which I
visited during the *milamala* (the annual feast of the spirits), the
*baloma* were supposed to be encamped on the beach, where they had
arrived in their canoes, the latter being of a "spiritual' and
"immaterial" quality, though perhaps such expressions imply more than
the natives conceive. One thing is certain, that no ordinary man under
ordinary circumstances would see such a canoe or anything belonging to a
*baloma*.

As we have seen at the outset, when a *baloma* leaves the village and
the people who wail for him, his connection with them is severed; for a
time, at least, their wailings do not reach him or in any way influence
his welfare. His own heart is sore, and he grieves for those left
behind. On the beach at Tuma there is a stone called Modawosi, on which
the spirit sits down and wails, looking back towards the shores of
Kiriwina. Soon other *baloma* hear him. All his kinsmen and friends come
towards him, squat down with him, and join in his lamentations. Their
own departure is brought home to them, and they are sorry to think of
their homes and of all those they left behind. Some of the *baloma*
wail, some sing a monotonous chant, exactly as is done during the great
mortuary vigil (*iawali*) after a man's death. Then the *baloma* goes to
a well, called Gilala, [9](bal09.htm#xref_9.md) and washes

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

his eyes, which renders him invisible. [10](bal09.htm#xref_10.md) From here
the spirit proceeds to Dukupuala, a spot in the *raiboag* where there
are two stones called Dikumaio'i. The balom knocks these two stones in
turn. The first responds with a loud sound (*kakupuana*), but when the
second is hit the earth trembles (*ioiu*). The *baloma* hear this sound,
and they all congregate round the newcomer and welcome him to
Tuma. [11](bal09.htm#xref_11.md)

Somewhere during this ingress the spirit has to face Topileta, the
headman of the villages of the dead. At what stage exactly Topileta
meets the stranger my informants were unable to say, but it must be
somewhere in the early part of his adventures in Tuma, because Topileta
lives not far from the Modawosi stone, and acts as a kind of Cerberus or
St. Peter in so far as he admits the spirit into the nether world, and
is even supposed to be able to refuse admission. His decision does not,
however, rest on moral considerations of any description: it is simply
conditioned by his satisfaction with the payment made by the newcomer.
After death the bereaved relatives adorn the corpse with all the native
ornaments which the deceased had possessed. They also put on his body
all his other *vaigu'a* (valuables), [12](bal09.htm#xref_12.md) in the
first place his ceremonial axe blades (*beku*). The spirit is supposed
to carry these away with him to Tuma--in their "spiritual" aspect, of
course. As the natives explain simply and exactly: "As the man's
*baloma* goes away and his body remains, so the *baloma* of the jewels
and axe blades go away to Tuma, though the objects
remain." [13](bal09.htm#xref_13.md) The spirit carries these valuables in a
small basket and makes an appropriate present to Topileta.

This payment is said to be made for showing the proper way to Tuma.
Topileta asks the newcomer the cause of his death. There are three
classes--death as the result of evil magic, death by poison, and death
in warfare. There are also three roads leading to Tuma, and Topileta
indicates the proper road according to the form of death suffered. There
is no special virtue attached to any of these roads, though my
informants were unanimous in saying that death

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

in war was a "good death," that by poison not so good, while death by
sorcery is the worst. These qualifications meant that a man would prefer
to die one death rather than another; and though they did not imply any
moral attribute attached to any of these forms, a certain glamor
attached to death in war, and the dread of sorcery and sickness seem
certainly to cause those preferences.

With death in warfare is classed one form of suicide, that in which a
man climbs a tree and throws himself down (native name, *lo'u*). This is
one of the two forms of suicide extant in Kiriwina, and it is practiced
by both men and women. Suicide seems to be very
common. [14](bal09.htm#xref_14.md) It is performed as an act of justice,
not upon oneself, but upon some person of near kindred who has caused
offense. As such it is one of the most important legal institutions
among these natives. The underlying psychology is, however, not so
simple, and this remarkable group of facts cannot be discussed here in
detail.

Besides the *lo'u*, suicide is also accomplished by taking poison, for
which purpose the fish poison (*tuva*) is used. [15](bal09.htm#xref_15.md)
Such people, together with those murdered by the gall bladder of the
poisonous fish, *soka*, go the second road, that of poison.

People who have died by drowning go the same road as those killed in
war, and drowning was said to be also a "good death."

Finally comes the group of all those who have been killed by evil
sorcery. The natives admit that there may be illness from natural
causes, and they distinguish it from bewitchment by evil magic. But,
according to the prevalent view, only the latter can be fatal. Thus the
third road to Tuma includes all the cases of "natural death," in our
sense of the word, of death not due to an obvious accident. To the
native minds such deaths are, as a rule, due to
sorcery. [16](bal09.htm#xref_16.md) The female spirits go the same three
ways as the male. They are shown the way by Topileta's wife, called
Bomiamuia. So much about the various classes of death.

A man or woman unable to pay the necessary fee to the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

gatekeeper of the Underworld would fare very badly. Such a spirit,
turned out of Tuma, would be banished into the sea and changed into a
*vaiaba*, a mythical fish possessing the head and tail of a shark and
the body of a stingaree. However, the danger of being turned into a
*vaiaba* does not appear to loom conspicuously in the native mind; on
the contrary, on inquiry I gathered that such a disaster rarely, if
ever, happens, and my informants were unable to quote any instance. When
asked whence they knew about such things, they gave the usual answer,
"ancient talk" (*tokunabogu livala*). Thus there are no ordeals after
death, no accounts of one's life to give to anyone, no tests to undergo,
and in general no difficulties whatever on the road from this life to
the other.

As to the nature of Topileta, Professor Seligman writes: "Topileta
resembles a man in every way except that he has huge ears, which flap
continually; he is, according to one account, of the Malasi clan, and
seems to lead very much the ordinary life of a Trobriand Islander." This
information was collected on a neighboring island, Kaileula (called by
Professor Seligman, Kadawaga), but it entirely agrees with what I was
told on Kiriwina about Topileta. Professor Seligman further writes: "He
(Topileta) has certain magical powers, causing earthquakes at will, and
when he becomes old, making medicine which restores youth to himself,
his wife and children.

"Chiefs still retain their authority in Tuma, and Topileta, though
himself the most important being in Tuma . . . is so obviously regarded
as different from all dead chiefs that he cannot, in the ordinary sense,
be said to rule over the dead; indeed, it was difficult to discover that
Topileta exerted any authority in the other
world." [17](bal09.htm#xref_17.md)

In fact, Topileta. is an intrinsic accessory of Tuma, but, beyond his
initial meeting with all spirits, he does not in any way interfere with
their doings. Chiefs do, indeed, retain their rank, though whether they
exercise any authority was not clear to my
informants. [18](bal09.htm#xref_18.md) Topileta is, moreover, the real
owner or master of the spiritland on Tuma and of the

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

villages. [19](bal09.htm#xref_19.md) There are three villages in the nether
world--Tuma proper, Wabuaima, and Walisiga. Topileta is the *tolivalu*
(master of village) of all three, but whether this is a mere title or
whether he has anything to say in important matters was not known to any
of my informants. It was also unknown whether the three villages had any
connection with the three roads leading to the nether world.

Having passed Topileta, the spirit enters the village in which he will
dwell henceforth. He always finds some of his relatives, and these may
stay with him till a house is found or built for him. The natives
imagine this exactly as happens in this world when a man has to move to
another village-a by no means rare event in the Trobriands. For a time
the stranger is very sad, and weeps. There are, however, decided
attempts on the part of the other *baloma*, especially those of the
opposite sex, to make him comfortable in his new existence, and to
induce him to form new ties and attachments and forget the old ones. My
informants (who were all men) were unanimous in declaring that a man
coming to Tuma is simply pestered by the advances of the fair, and, in
this world, bashful, sex. At first the spirit wants to weep for those
left behind; his relative *baloma* protect him, saying, "Wait, let him
have a spell; let him cry." If he has been happily married, and has left
a widow for whom he cares, he naturally wants to be left for a somewhat
longer time to his grief. All in vain! It seems (this is again the male
opinion only) that there are many more women in the other world than
men, and that they are very impatient of any prolonged mourning. If they
cannot succeed otherwise, they try magic, the all-powerful means of
gaining another person's affection. The spirit women on Tuma are not
less expert, and no more scrupulous, in using love charms than the
living women in Kiriwina. The stranger's grief is very soon overcome,
and he accepts the offering called *nabuoda'u*--a basket filled with
*bu'a* (betel nut), *mo'i* (betel pepper), and scented herbs. This is
offered to him with the words "*Kam paku*," and if accepted, the two
belong to each other. [20](bal09.htm#xref_20.md) A man may wait for his

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

widow to join him in Tuma, but my informants did not seem inclined to
think that many would do this. The blame for this rests, however,
entirely on the Tuma belles, who use such potent magic that not even the
strongest. fidelity can possibly resist it.

The spirit, in any case, settles down to a happy existence in Tuma,
where he spends another lifetime, [21](bal09.htm#xref_21.md) until he dies
again. But this new death is again not complete annihilation, as we
shall see hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](bal03.md)
