[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Pacific](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](bal06)  [Next](bal08) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# Chapter VII.

It might seem quite safe to say that the belief in reincarnation, and
the views about a spirit child being inserted into, or entering the womb
of the mother, exclude any knowledge of the physiological process of
impregnation. But any drawing of conclusions, or arguing by the law of
logical contradiction, is absolutely futile in the realm of belief,
whether savage or civilized. Two beliefs, quite contradictory to each
other on logical grounds, may coexist, while a perfectly obvious
inference from a very firm tenet may be simply ignored. Thus the only
safe way for an ethnological inquirer is to investigate every detail of
native belief, and to mistrust any conclusion obtained through inference
only.

The broad assertion that the natives are entirely ignorant of the
existence of physiological impregnation may be laid

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

down quite safely and correctly. But though the subject is undoubtedly
difficult, it is absolutely necessary to go into details in order to
avoid serious mistakes.

One distinction must be made at the outset: the distinction between
impregnation, that is the idea of the father having a share in building
up the body of the child on the one hand, and the purely physical action
of sexual intercourse on the other. Concerning the latter, the view held
by the natives may be formulated thus: it is necessary for the woman to
have gone through sexual life before she can bear a child.

I was forced to make the above distinction under the stress of the
information I was gathering, in order to explain certain contradictions
which cropped up in the course of inquiries. And it must be therefore
accepted as a "natural" distinction, as one which corresponds to and
expresses the native point of view. In fact, it was impossible to
foresee how the natives would look upon these matters, and from which
side they would approach the correct knowledge of facts. Nevertheless,
the distinction once made, its theoretical importance is obvious. It is
clear that only the knowledge of the first fact (that of the father's
share in impregnation) would have any influence in shaping native ideas
about kinship. As long as the father does nothing to form the body of
the child (in the ideas of a people), there can be no question of
consanguinity in the agnatic line. A mere mechanical share in opening up
the child's way into the womb, and out of it, is of no fundamental
importance. The state of knowledge in Kiriwina is just at the point
where there is a vague idea as to some *nexus* between sexual connection
and pregnancy, whereas there is no idea whatever concerning the man's
contribution towards the new life which is being formed in the mother's
body.

I shall sum up the data which led me to make this statement. Beginning
with ignorance of the father's share, to direct questions as to the
cause (*u'ula*) of a child being created, or a woman becoming pregnant,
I received the invariable

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

answer, "*Baloma boge isaika* \[the *baloma* gave
it\]." [66](bal09.htm#xref_66)

Of course, like all questions about the *u'ula*, this one has to be put
with patience and discrimination, and it may at times remain unanswered.
But in the many cases when I put this question bluntly and directly, and
when it was comprehended, I received this answer, though I must add here
at once that it was at times complicated in an extremely puzzling manner
by some hints about copulation. As I was puzzled by that, and as I was
very keen on getting this point clear, I discussed it whenever it could
be approached as a side issue, I put it *in abstracto*, and I discussed
it very often in concrete instances wherever any special case of
pregnancy, past or present, was the subject of conversation.

Specially interesting and crucial were the cases where the pregnant
woman was not married. [67](bal09.htm#xref_67)

When I asked who was the father of an illegitimate child, there was only
one answer, that there was no father, as the girl was not married. If,
then, I asked, in quite plain terms, who is the physiological father,
the question was not understood, and when the subject was discussed
still further, and the question put in this form: "There are plenty of
unmarried girls, why did this one get with child, and the others not,"
the answer would be: "It is a *baloma* who gave her this child." And
here again I was often puzzled by some remarks, pointing to the view
that an unmarried girl is especially exposed to the danger of being
approached by a *baloma*, if she is very unchaste. Yet the girls deem it
much better precaution to avoid directly any exposure to the *baloma* by
not bathing at high tide, etc., than indirectly to escape the danger by
being too scrupulously chaste.

Illegitimate, or according to the Kiriwinian ideas, fatherless children,
and their mothers are, however, regarded with scant favor. I remember
several instances in which girls were pointed out to me as being
undesirable, "no good," because they had children out of wedlock. If you
ask why

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

such a case is bad, there is the stereotyped answer, "Because there is
no father, there is no man to take it in his arms" (*Gala taitala
Cikopo'i*). Thus Gomaia, my interpreter, had had an intrigue, such as is
usual before marriage, with Ilamueria, a girl of a neighboring village.
He had previously wanted to marry her. She had a child subsequently, and
Gomaia married another woman. Asked why he did not marry his former
sweetheart, he replied, "She had a child, this is very bad." Yet he was
sure that she had never been unfaithful to him during the period of
their "betrothal" (Kiriwinian youths are much the prey of such
illusions). He had not the slightest idea about there being any question
of fatherhood of the child. If he had he would have acknowledged the
child as his own, because he believed in his sexual exclusiveness with
regard to the mother. But the fact that it came at an improper time was
enough to influence him. This by no means implies that a girl who has
been a mother, finds any serious difficulty in marrying afterwards.
During my stay in Omarakana, two such girls were married, without any
comment. There are no unmarried women in what might be termed the
"marriage age" (25-45 years), and when I asked whether a girl might
remain a spinster because she had a child, the answer was an emphatic
negative. All that has been said above about the *baloma* bringing a
child, and the concrete cases adduced, must also be borne in mind in
this connection.

When, instead of merely asking about the *u'ula* of pregnancy, I
directly advanced the embryological view of the matter, I found the
natives absolutely ignorant of the process suggested. To the simile of a
seed being planted in the soil and the plant growing out of the seed,
they remained quite irresponsive. They were curious, indeed, and asked
whether this was "the white man's manner of doing it," but they were
quite certain that this was not the "custom' of Kiriwina. The spermatic
fluid (*momona*) serves merely the purposes of pleasure and lubrication,
and it is characteristic that the word *momona* denotes both the male
and female discharge. Of any other properties of the same

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

they have not the slightest idea. Thus, any view of paternal
consanguinity or kinship, conceived as a bodily relation between father
and child, is completely foreign to the native mind.

The above-mentioned case of a native not being able to understand the
question, Who is the father of an unmarried woman's child? can be
supplemented by two other instances concerning married women. When I
asked my informants what would happen if a woman became pregnant in her
husband's absence, they calmly agreed that such cases might occur, and
that there would be no trouble at all. One of them (I have not noted his
name, and I do not remember it), volunteered his own case as an instance
in point. He went to Samarai [68](bal09.htm#xref_68) with his white
master, and stayed there for a year, as he said, during which time his
wife became pregnant and gave birth to a child. He returned from
Samarai, found the child, and it was all right. On further questioning,
I came to the conclusion that the man was absent for about 8-10 months,
so there is no urgent necessity to doubt the virtue of his wife, but it
is characteristic: that the husband had not the slightest tendency to
count the moons of his absence, and that he stated the broad approximate
period of one year without the slightest concern. And the native in
question was an intelligent man; he had been a long time with white men,
as a "signed-on" boy, and he seemed to be by no means of a timorous or
henpecked disposition.

Again, when I once mentioned this matter in the presence of a few white
men, resident in the Trobriands, Mr. Cameron, a planter of Kitava, told
me a case which had struck him at that time, though he had not the
slightest idea of the native ignorance of impregnation. A native of
Kitava had been away for two years, signed on to a white man on Woodlark
Island. After he came back, he found a baby born a couple of months
before his return. He cheerfully accepted it as his own, and did not
understand any taunts or allusions made by some white men, who asked him
whether he had not better repudiate, or, at least,

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

thoroughly thrash his wife. He found it not in the slightest degree
suspicious or suggestive that his wife became pregnant about a year
after his departure. These are two striking examples which I find in my
notes; but I had before me a considerable amount of corroborating
evidence derived from less telling facts, and from imaginary instances,
discussed with independent informants.

Finally, the ideas concerning the relationship between father and child,
as it is conceived by the natives, bear upon this subject. They have
only one generic term for kinship, and this is *veiola*. Now this term
means kinship in the maternal line, and does not embrace the
relationship between a father and his children, nor between any
agnatically related people. Very often, when inquiring into customs and
their social basis, I received the answer, "Oh, the father does not do
it; because he is not *veiola* to the children." The idea underlying
maternal relationship is the community of body. In all social matters
(legal, economic, ceremonial) the relationship between brothers is the
very closest, "because they are built up of the same body, the same
woman gave birth to them." Thus the line of demarcation between paternal
and agnatic relationship (which as a generic conception and term does
not exist for the natives), and maternal kinship, *veiola*, corresponds
to the division between those people who are of the same body (strictly
analogous, no doubt, to our consanguinity), and those who are not of the
same body.

But in spite of this, as far as all the minute details of daily life are
concerned, and further, in various rights and privileges, the father
stands in an extremely close relation to the child. Thus the children
enjoy membership of the father's village community, though their real
village is that of their mother. Again, in questions of inheritance they
have various privileges granted them by the father. The most important
of these is connected with the inheritance of that most valuable of all
goods, magic. Thus very often, especially in such cases as those
mentioned above (in Section v), when the father is able to do it
legally, he

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

leaves his magic to his son instead of to his brother or nephew. It is
remarkable that the father is, sentimentally, always inclined to leave
as much as possible to his children, and he does so whenever he can.

Now, such inheritance of magic from father to son shows one peculiarity:
it is given, and not sold. Magic has to be handed over during the man's
lifetime, of course, as both the formulae and the practices have to be
taught. When the man gives it to any of his *veiola*, to his younger
brother, or his maternal nephew, he receives a payment, called in this
case *pokala*, and a very considerable payment it has to be. When magic
is taught to the son, no payment whatever is levied. This, like many
features of native custom, is extremely puzzling, because the maternal
relatives have the right to the magic, and the son has really no right
whatever, and he may be, under certain circumstances, deprived of the
privilege by those entitled to it; yet he receives it free of charge,
and they have to pay for it heavily.

Forbearing other explanations, I simply state the native answer to this
puzzling question (my informants saw the contradiction quite clearly,
and perfectly well understood why I was puzzled). They said: "The man
gives it to the children of his wife. He cohabits with her, he possesses
her, she does for him all that a wife must do for a man. Whatever he
does for a child is a payment (*mapula*) for what he has received from
her." And this answer is by no means the opinion of one informant only.
It sums up the stereotyped answers given to me whenever I discussed this
matter. Thus, in the native mind, the intimate relationship between
husband and wife, and not any idea, however slight or remote, of
physical fatherhood, is the reason for all that the father does for his
children. It must be clearly understood that social and psychological
fatherhood (the sum of all the ties, emotional, legal, economic) is the
result of the man's obligations towards his wife, and physiological
fatherhood does not exist in the mind of the natives.

Let us now proceed to the discussion of the second point in the
previously made distinction: the vague ideas about

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

some connection existing between sexual intercourse and pregnancy. I
mentioned above, that in the answers given about the cause of pregnancy,
I was puzzled by the assertion that cohabitation is also the cause of
the advent of children, an assertion which ran parallel, so to speak,
with a fundamental view that the *baloma*, or reincarnating *waiwaia*,
are the real cause.

The said assertion was very much less conspicuous, in fact it was so
much overshadowed by the main view, that at first I noticed only the
latter, and was persuaded that I had obtained this information quite
smoothly and that there were no more difficulties to be cleared up. And
when I was quite satisfied that I had finally settled the matter, and
inquired into it, prompted merely by the instinct of pure pedantry, I
received a severe shock, in finding that there was a flaw in the very
foundations of my construction, which latter seemed threatened with
complete collapse. I remember being told about a very fickle young lady
of Kasanai, known by the name of Iakalusa, "*Sene nakakaita, Coge
ivalulu guadi* \[very wanton, she had a child\]." On inquiring further
into this very perplexing sentence, I found that, undoubtedly, a girl of
very loose conduct would be more likely to have a child, and that if a
girl could be found who had never had intercourse, she certainly could
have no child. The knowledge seemed to be as complete here as the
ignorance was previously, and the very same men seemed to take, in turn,
two contradictory points of view. I discussed the matter as thoroughly
as I could, and it seemed to me as if the natives would say yes or no,
according to whether the subject was approached from the side of
knowledge or of ignorance. They were puzzled at my persistence, and (I
admit with shame) impatience, and I was unable to explain to them my
difficulty, though I pointed, as it seemed to me, straight to the
contradiction.

I tried to make them compare animals with men, asking whether there is
also anything like a *baloma* bringing the small pigs to their mother. I
was told of the pigs: "*Ikaitasi ikaitasi makateki bivalulu minana*
\[they copulate, copulate,

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

presently the female will give birth\]." Thus here copulation appeared
to be the *u'ula* of pregnancy. For a time, the contradictions and
obscurities in the information appeared to me quite hopeless; I was in
one of the desperate blind alleys, so often encountered in
ethnographical field work, when one comes to suspect that the natives
are untrustworthy, that they tell tales on purpose; or that one has to
do with two sets of information, one of them distorted by white man's
influence. As a matter of fact, in this case as in most cases, nothing
of the sort was the cause of my difficulties.

The final shock my confidently constructed views about "native
ignorance" received brought also order into the chaos. In my
mythological cyclus about the hero Tudava, the story opens with his
birth. His mother, Mitigis or Bulutukua, was the only woman of all the
inhabitants of the village, Laba'i, who remained on the island. All the
others fled in fear of an ogre, Dokonikan, who used to eat men, and had
in fact almost finished off the whole population of Kiriwina. Bulutukua,
left behind by her brothers, lived alone in a grotto, in the *raiboag*
of Laba'i. One day she fell asleep in the grotto, and the water dripping
from the stalactites fell on her vulva and opened the passage. After she
became pregnant, and gave birth in succession to a fish, called
*bologu*; to a pig; to a shrub, called *kuebila* (having aromatic leaves
and much appreciated by the natives as ornament); to another fish (the
*kalala*, of which mention has been made above in Section v); to the
cockatoo (*katakela*); the parrot (*karaga*); to the bird *sikuaikua*,
to a dog (*ka'ukua*); and finally to Tudava. In this story the motive of
"artificial impregnation" was most surprising. How was it possible to
find, what appeared to be survival of a previous ignorance, among people
with whom this ignorance seemed to be still complete? And again, how was
it that the woman in the myth had several children in succession, but
had been only once under the dripping stalactite? All these were
puzzling questions for me, and I

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

put them to the natives on the chance of getting some light, but with
little hope of success.

I was, however, rewarded and received a clear and final solution of my
difficulties, a solution which has withstood a series of most pedantic
subsequent tests. I tried my best informants one after the other, and
this is their view of the matter: a woman who is a virgin (*nakapatu*;
*na*, female prefix; *kapatu*, closed, shut up) cannot give birth to a
child, nor can she conceive, because nothing can enter or come out of
her vulva. She must be opened up, or pierced through (*ibasi*, this word
is used to describe the action of the water drops on Bulutukua). Thus
the vagina of a woman who has much intercourse will be more open and
easier for a spirit child to enter. One that keeps fairly virtuous will
have much poorer chances of becoming pregnant. But copulation is quite
unnecessary except for its mechanical action. In default, any other
means of widening the passage may be used, and if the *baloma* chooses
to insert the *waiwaia*, or if one chooses to enter, the woman will
become pregnant.

That this is so is proved, beyond any doubt, to my informants by the
case of Tilapo'i, a woman living in Kabululo, a village close to
Omarakana. She is half blind, almost an idiot, and so plain that no one
would think of approaching her sexually. In fact, she is the favorite
theme of a certain class of jokes all turning on the assumption of
someone having had connection with her: jokes which are always relished
and repeated, so that "*Kuoi Tilapo'i*! \[Have connection with
Tilapo'i\]" has become a form of jocular abuse. In spite, however, of
the fact that it is supposed that she never had connection, she once
gave birth to a child, which died subsequently. A similar example,
though even more striking, is afforded by another woman in Sinaketa,
who, I was told, is so plain that any man would commit suicide, if he
were even seriously suspected of having had anything to do with her
sexually. Yet this woman has had no less than five children. In both
these cases, it is explained that pregnancy was made possible by
dilation of the vulva, due to digital manipulation. My informants dwelt
on this subject

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

with much relish, graphically and diagramatically explaining to me all
the details of the process. Their account did not leave the slightest
doubt about their sincere belief in the possibility of women becoming
pregnant without intercourse.

Thus I was taught to make the essential distinction between the idea of
the mechanical action of intercourse, which covers all the natives know
about the natural conditions of pregnancy, and the knowledge of
impregnation, of the man's share in creating the new life in the
mother's womb, a fact of which the natives have not even the slightest
glimpse. This distinction accounts for the puzzle in the Bulutukua myth,
where the woman had to be opened up, but this once done, she could bear
the whole set of children successively, without any new physiological
incident being necessary. It accounts also for the "knowledge" about
animal impregnation. In the case of the animals--and the domestic
animals such as the pig and the dog would loom most conspicuously in the
native's picture of the universe--the natives know nothing about
afterlife or spiritual existence. If asked directly, a man might answer
"yes" or "no" with regard to the existence of animal *baloma*, but this
would be his extemporized opinion and not folklore. Thus, in the case of
animals, the whole problem about reincarnation and about the formation
of new life is simply ignored. The physiological aspect, on the other
hand, is well-known. Thus when you ask about the animals, you get the
answer that it is necessary that the physiological conditions should
exist, but the other side, the real problem of how life is created in
the womb, is simply ignored. And it is no good to fret over it, because
the native never troubles about consistently carrying over his beliefs
into domains where they do not naturally belong. He does not trouble
about questions referring to animal afterlife, and he has no views about
their coming into the world. Those problems are settled with reference
to man, but that is their proper domain, and beyond that they ought not
to be extended. Even in non-savage theologies such questions (e.g., that
of

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

animal soul and animal immortality) are very puzzling, and answers to
them often are not much more consistent than those of a Papuan.

In conclusion, it may be repeated that such knowledge as the natives
have in this matter has no sociological importance, does not influence
the native ideas of kinship, nor their behavior in matters of sex.

It seems necessary to make a somewhat more general digression on this
subject after having dealt with Kiriwinian material. As is well known,
the ignorance of physical fatherhood was first discovered by Sir Baldwin
Spencer and Mr. F. Gillen among the Arunta tribe of Central Australia.
Subsequently the same state of things was found among a large number of
other Australian tribes, by the original discoverers and by some other
investigators, the area covered being practically the whole central and
northeastern portion of the Australian continent, as far as it was still
open to ethnological investigation.

The main controversial questions raised as to this discovery were:
Firstly, is this ignorance a specific feature of the Australian culture,
or even the Arunta culture, or is it a universal fact existing among
many or all of the lower race? Secondly: is this state of ignorance
primitive, is it simply the absence of knowledge, due to insufficient
observation and inference, or is it a secondary phenomenon, due to an
obscuring of the primitive knowledge by superimposed animistic ideas?
 [69](bal09.htm#xref_69)

I would not join in this controversy at all, if it were not that I
desire to state some additional facts, partly derived from work done
outside Kiriwina, partly consisting of some general observations made in
the field and bearing directly upon these problems. Therefore, I hope I
shall be excused for this digression, on the plea that it is not so much
speculation upon controversial points, as additional material bearing
upon these questions.

First of all I want to state some non-Kiriwinian observations which seem
to show that a state of ignorance similar to that found in the
Trobriands obtains among a wide

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

range of the Papuo-Melanesians of New Guinea. Prof. Seligman writes
about the Koita: "It is stated that a single sexual act is not
sufficient to produce pregnancy, to ensure which cohabitation should be
continued steadily for a month." [70](bal09.htm#xref_70) I have found a
similar state of things among the Mailu on the south coast of New
Guinea: ". . . The connection between cohabitation and conception seems
to be known among the Mailu, but to direct inquiries as to the cause of
pregnancy I did not obtain emphatic and positive answers. The
natives--of this I am positive--do not clearly grasp the idea of the
connection between the two facts. . . . Like Prof. Seligman among the
Koita, I found the firm belief that it is only continuous intercourse
for a month or more that leads to pregnancy, and that one single act is
not sufficient to produce the result." [71](bal09.htm#xref_71)

Neither of these statements is very emphatic, and in fact they do not
seem to imply a complete ignorance of physical fatherhood. Yet as
neither of the investigators seems to have gone into detail, one may *a
priori* suspect that the statements allow of some further qualification.
As a matter of fact, I was able to inquire into the matter on my second
visit to New Guinea, and I know that my statement about the Mailu is
incomplete. At the time of my visit to Mailu I was puzzled in the same
manner as in Kiriwina. I had with me in Kiriwina two boys from a
district adjacent to that of the Mailu, who gave me exactly the same
information as that gathered in Kiriwina, *i.e.*, they affirmed the
necessity of sexual intercourse before pregnancy, but were absolutely
ignorant as to impregnation. Again looking through my notes taken in the
summer of 1914 at Mailu and through some notes taken among the
Sinaugholo, a tribe closely allied to the Koita, I see that the native
statements really imply only the knowledge of the fact that a woman must
have experienced some sexual life before conceiving. And that to all
direct questions, whether there is anything in intercourse that induces
pregnancy, I received negative answers. Unfortunately, in neither place
did I directly inquire whether there are any beliefs about

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

the "supernatural cause of pregnancy." The boys from Gadogado'a (from
the district near Mailu) told me there were no such beliefs among them.
Their statement cannot, however, be considered final, as they have spent
much of their time in white man's service and might not have known much
of the traditional knowledge of their tribe. There can be no doubt,
however, that both Prof. Seligman's statement and my information
obtained in Mailu would, if developed with the help of native
informants, yield similar results to the Kiriwinian data with regard to
the ignorance of impregnation.

All these natives, the Koita, the Southern Massim of Gadogado'a, and the
Northern Massim of Kiriwina [72](bal09.htm#xref_72) are representative
of the Papuo-Melanesian stock of natives, the Kiriwinians being a very
advanced branch of that stock; in fact, as far as our present knowledge
goes, the most advanced. [74](bal09.htm#xref_74)

The existence of complete ignorance, of the type discovered by Spencer
and Gillen, among the most advanced Papuo-Melanesians, and its probable
existence among all the Papuo-Melanesians, seems to indicate a much
wider range of distribution and a much greater permanence through the
higher stages of development than could be assumed hitherto. But it must
be emphatically repeated that unless the inquiry be detailed, and
especially unless the above-made distinction be observed, there is
always the possibility of failure and of erroneous
statement. [74](bal09.htm#xref_74)

Passing to the second controversial point named above, whether the
ignorance in question may not be the secondary result of some obscuring,
superimposed, animistic ideas. The general character of the Kiriwinian
mental attitude certainly would answer this question with an emphatic
negation. The above-detailed account, if read from this point of view,
is perhaps convincing enough, but some further remarks may add
additional weight to the statement. The native. mind is absolutely blank
on this subject, and it is not as if one found very pronounced ideas
about reincarnation running parallel with some obscure knowledge.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The ideas and beliefs about reincarnation,
though undoubtedly there, are of no eminent social importance, and are
not at all to the fore in the native's store of dogmatic ideas.
Moreover, the physiological process and the part played by the *baloma*
could perfectly well be known to exist side by side, exactly as there
exist side by side ideas about the necessity of the mechanical dilation
of the vulva and the action of the spirit, or as in innumerable matters
the native considers the natural and rational (in our sense) sequence of
events and knows its causal nexus, though these run parallel with a
magical sequence and nexus.

The problem of the ignorance of impregnation is not concerned with the
psychology of belief, but with the psychology of knowledge based on
observation. Only a belief can be obscured or overshadowed by another
belief. Once a physical observation is made, once the natives have got
hold of a causal nexus, no belief or "superstition" can obscure this
knowledge, though it may run parallel with it. The garden magic does not
by any means "obscure" the natives' causal knowledge of the nexus
between proper clearing of the scrub, manuring the ground with ashes,
watering, etc. The two sets of facts run parallel in his mind, and the
one in no way "obscures" the other.

In the ignorance of physiological fatherhood we do not deal with a
positive state of mind, with a dogma leading to practices, rites, or
customs, but merely with a negative item, the absence of knowledge. Such
an absence could not possibly be brought about by a positive belief. Any
widespread gap in knowledge, any universal absence of information, any
general imperfection in observation found among native races, must,
pending contrary evidence, be considered as primitive. We might as well
argue that humanity once had a primitive knowledge of wax vestas, but
that this was obscured subsequently by the more complex and picturesque
use of the fire drill and other friction methods.

Again, to explain this ignorance by assuming that the natives "make
believe that they do not know it" seems rather a brilliant *jeu de mots*
than a serious attempt to get

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

at the bottom of things. And yet things are as simple as they can be for
anyone who for a moment stops to realize the absolutely unsurmountable
difficulties which a native "natural philosopher" would have to overcome
if he had to arrive at anything approaching our embryological knowledge.
If one realizes how complex this knowledge is, and how lately we arrived
at it, it would seem preposterous to suppose even the slightest glimmer
of it among the natives. All this might appear plausible, even to
someone who approached the subject from a merely speculative standpoint,
arguing from what probably must be the natives' point of view in this
matter. And here we have authors who, after this state of mind has been
found positively among natives, receive the news with scepticism, and
try to account for the native state of mind in the most devious manner.
The way from the absolute ignorance to the exact knowledge is far, and
must be passed gradually. There is no doubt that the Kiriwinians have
made a step on the way by acknowledging the necessity of sexual
intercourse as a preliminary condition of pregnancy, as, indeed, this
recognition, though perhaps in a less clear form, has been made by the
Arunta in Central Australia, among whom Spencer and Gillen have found
the idea that sexual intercourse prepares the woman for the reception of
a spirit child.

Another consideration which has been put forward by some authors
previously, seems to me to be very much to the point, and, what is more,
has seemed so to several of my native informants. I mean the fact that
in the majority of savage races sexual life begins very early and is
carried on very intensely, so that sexual intercourse is for them not an
outstanding rare fact, which would strike them from its singularity, and
therefore compel them to look for consequences; on the contrary, sexual
life is for them a normal state. In Kiriwina the unmarried girls from
six (*sic*) upwards are generally supposed to practice licence well-nigh
every night. It is immaterial whether this is so or not; it matters only
that for the native of Kiriwina sexual intercourse

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

is almost as common an occurrence as eating, drinking, or sleeping. What
is there to guide the native observation, to draw his attention to the
nexus between a perfectly normal, everyday occurrence, on the one band,
and an exceptional, singular event on the other? How is he to realize
that the very act which a woman performs almost as often as eating or
drinking, will, once, twice, or three times in her life, cause her to
become pregnant?

It is certain that only two outstanding, singular events easily reveal a
nexus. To find out that something extraordinary is the result of an
entirely ordinary event requires, besides a scientific mind and method,
the power of investigating, of isolating facts, of excluding the
non-essential, and experimenting with circumstances. Given such
conditions, the natives would probably have discovered the causal
connection, because the native mind works according to the same rules as
ours: his powers of observation are keen, whenever he is interested, and
the concept of cause and effect is not unknown to
him. [75](bal09.htm#xref_75) But although cause and effect in the
developed form of these conceptions are of the category of the regular,
lawful, and ordinary, in their psychological origin they are undoubtedly
of the category of the lawless, irregular, extraordinary, and singular.

Some of my native informants very clearly pointed out to me the lack of
consistency in my argument when I bluntly stated that it is not the
*baloma* that produce pregnancy, but that it is caused by something like
a seed being thrown on soil. I remember that I was almost directly
challenged to account for the discrepancy why the cause which was
repeated daily, or almost so, produced effects so rarely.

To sum up, there seems to be no doubt that if we are at all justified in
speaking of certain "primitive" conditions of mind, the ignorance in
question is such a primitive condition, and its prevalence among the
Melanesians of New Guinea seems to indicate that it is a condition
lasting right into much higher stages of development than it would have
seemed possible to assume on the basis of Australian material only. Some
knowledge of the mental mechanism of the

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

native, and of the circumstances under which he has to carry out his
observations on this subject, ought to persuade anyone that no other
state of things could exist, and that no far-fetched explanations or
theories are necessary to account for it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](bal08)
