[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp007)  [Next](vp009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_xxii">p. xxii</span>

4\. The Váyavíya Puráńa

4\. "The Puráńa in which Váyu has declared the laws of duty, in
connexion with the Sweta Kalpa, and which comprises the Máhátmya of
Rudra, is the Váyavíya Puráńa: it contains twenty-four thousand
verses <span id="fr_41"></span>[42](#fn_41)." The Śiva or Śaiva Puráńa
is, as above remarked, omitted in some of the lists; and in general,
when that is the case, it is replaced by the Váyu or Váyavíya. When the
Śiva is specified, as in the Bhágavata, then the Váyu is omitted;
intimating the possible identity of these two works. This indeed is
confirmed by the Matsya, which describes the Váyavíya Puráńa as
characterised by its account of the greatness of Rudra or Siva <span
id="fr_42"></span>[43](#fn_42); and Balambhat́t́a mentions that the
Váyavíya is also called the Śaiva, though, according to some, the latter
is the name of an Upa-puráńa. Col. Vans Kennedy observes, that in the
west of India the Śaiva is commonly considered to be an Upa or 'minor'
Puráńa <span id="fr_43"></span>[44](#fn_43).

Another proof that the same work is intended by the authorities here
followed, the Bhágavata and Matsya, under different appellations, is
their concurrence in the extent of the work, each specifying its verses
to be twenty-four thousand. A copy of the Śiva Puráńa, of which an index
and analysis have been prepared, does not contain more than about seven
thousand: it cannot therefore be the Śiva Puráńa of the Bhágavata; and
we may safely consider that to be the same as the Váyavíya of the
Matsya <span id="fr_44"></span>[45](#fn_44).

The Váyu Puráńa is narrated by Súta to the Rishis at Naimishárańya, as
it was formerly told at the same place to similar persons by Váyu; a
repetition of circumstances not uncharacteristic of the inartificial
style of this Puráńa. It is divided into four Pádas, termed severally
Prakriyá, Upodgháta, Anushanga, and Upasanhára; a classification
peculiar to this work. These are preceded by an index, or heads of
chapters, in the manner of the Mahábhárata and Rámáyańa; another
peculiarity.

The Prakriyá portion contains but a few chapters, and treats chiefly

<span id="page_xxiii">p. xxiii</span>

of elemental creation, and the first evolutions of beings, to the same
purport as the Vishńu, but in a more obscure and unmethodical style. The
Upodgháta then continues the subject of creation, and describes the
various Kalpas or periods during which the world has existed; a greater
number of which is specified by the Śaiva than by the Vaishńava Puráńas.
Thirty-three are here described, the last of which is the Sweta or
'white' Kalpa, from Śiva's being born in it of a white complexion. The
genealogies of the patriarchs, the description of the universe, and the
incidents of the first six Manwantaras, are all treated of in this part
of the work; but they are intermixed with legends and praises of Śiva,
as the sacrifice of Daksha, the Maheśwara Máhátmya, the Nilakántha
Stotra, and others. The genealogies, although in the main the same as
those in the Vaishńava Puráńas, present some variations. A long account
of the Pitris or progenitors is also peculiar to this Puráńa; as are
stories of some of the most celebrated Rishis, who were engaged in the
distribution of the Vedas.

The third division commences with an account of the seven Rishis and
their descendants, and describes the origin of the different classes of
creatures from the daughters of Daksha, with a profuse copiousness of
nomenclature, not found in any other Puráńa. With exception of the
greater minuteness of detail, the particulars agree with those of the
Vishńu P. A chapter then occurs on the worship of the Pitris; another on
Tírthas, or places sacred to them; and several on the performance of
Sráddhas, constituting the Sráddha Kalpa. After this, comes a full
account of the solar and lunar dynasties, forming a parallel to that in
the following pages, with this difference, that it is throughout in
verse, whilst that of our text, as noticed in its place, is chiefly in
prose. It is extended also by the insertion of detailed accounts of
various incidents, briefly noticed in the Vishńu, though derived
apparently from a common original. The section terminates with similar
accounts of future kings, and the same chronological calculations, that
are found in the Vishńu.

The last portion, the Upasanhára, describes briefly the future
Manwantaras, the measures of space and time, the end of the world, the

<span id="page_xxiv">p. xxiv</span>

efficacy of Yoga, and the glories of Śiva-pura, or the dwelling of Śiva,
with whom the Yogi is to be united. The manuscript concludes with a
different history of the successive teachers of the Váyu Puráńa, tracing
them from Brahmá to Váyu, from Váyu to Vrihaspati, and from him, through
various deities and sages, to Dwaipáyańa and Śúta.

The account given of this Puráńa in the Journal of the Asiatic Society
of Bengal was limited to something less than half the work, as I had not
then been able to procure a larger portion. I have now a more complete
one of my own, and there are several copies in the East India Company's
library of the like extent. One, presented by His Highness the Guicowar,
is dated Samvat 1540, or A. D. 1483, and is evidently as old as it
professes to be. The examination I have made of the work confirms the
view I formerly took of it; and from the internal evidence it affords,
it may perhaps be regarded as one of the oldest and most authentic
specimens extant of a primitive Puráńa.

It appears, however, that we have not yet a copy of the entire Váyu
Puráńa. The extent of it, as mentioned above, should be twenty-four
thousand verses. The Guicowar MS. has but twelve thousand, and is
denominated the Púrvárddha, or first portion. My copy is of the like
extent. The index also spews that several subjects remain untold; as,
subsequently to the description of the sphere of Śiva, and the
periodical dissolution of the world, the work is said to contain an
account of a succeeding creation, and of various events that occurred in
it, as the birth of several celebrated Rishis, including that of Vyása,
and a description of his distribution of the Vedas; an account of the
enmity between Vaśisht́ha and Viswámitra; and a Naimishárańya Máhátmya.
These topics are, however, of minor importance, and can scarcely carry
the Puráńa to the whole extent of the verses which it is said to
contain. If the number is accurate, the index must still omit a
considerable portion of the subsequent contents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_41"></span>[xxii:42](vp008.htm#fr_41) <span
id="img__02200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_02200.jpg)</span>

<span id="fn_42"></span>[xxii:43](vp008.htm#fr_42) Commentary on the
Mitákshará, Vyavahára Káńd́a.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[xxii:44](vp008.htm#fr_43) As. Journ., March
1837, p. 242, note.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[xxii:45](vp008.htm#fr_44) Analysis of the Váyu
Puráńa: Journ. As. Soc. of Bengal, December 1832.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 5. The Bhágavata Puráńa](vp009)
