[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp000)  [Next](vp002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

Due to the length of the preface, it has been divided into several
files, for which I have supplied section headings.--JBH

# PREFACE.

Introduction

THE literature of the Hindus has now been cultivated for many years with
singular diligence, and in many of its branches with eminent success.
There are some departments, however, which are yet but partially and
imperfectly investigated; and we are far from being in possession of
that knowledge which the authentic writings of the Hindus alone can give
us of their religion, mythology, and historical traditions.

From the materials to which we have hitherto had access, it seems
probable that there have been three principal forms in which the
religion of the Hindus has existed, at as many different periods. The
duration of those periods, the circumstances of their succession, and
the precise state of the national faith at each season, it is not
possible to trace with any approach to accuracy. The premises have been
too imperfectly determined to authorize other than conclusions of a
general and somewhat vague description, and those remain to be hereafter
confirmed or corrected by more extensive and satisfactory research.

The earliest form under which the Hindu religion appears is that taught
in the Vedas. The style of the language, and the purport of the
composition of those works, as far as we are acquainted with them,
indicate a date long anterior to that of any other class of Sanscrit
writings. It is yet, however, scarcely safe to advance an opinion of the
precise belief or philosophy which they inculcate. To enable us to judge
of their tendency, we have only a general sketch of their arrangement
and contents, with a few extracts, by Mr. Colebrooke, in the Asiatic
Researches <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0); a few incidental
observations by Mr. Ellis, in the same miscellany <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1); and a translation of the first book of the
Sanhitá, or collection of the prayers of the Rig-veda, by Dr.
Rosen <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2); and some of the Upanishads,

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

or speculative treatises, attached to, rather than part of, the Vedas,
by Rammohun Roy <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3). Of the religion
taught in the Vedas, Mr. Colebrooke's opinion will probably be received
as that which is best entitled to deference, as certainly no Sanscrit
scholar has been equally conversant with the original works. "The real
doctrine of the Indian scripture is the unity of the Deity, in whom the
universe is comprehended; and the seeming polytheism which it exhibits,
offers the elements and the stars and planets as gods. The three
principal manifestations of the divinity, with other personified
attributes and energies, and most of the other gods of Hindu mythology,
are indeed mentioned, or at least indicated, in the Veda. But the
worship of deified heroes is no part of the system; nor are the
incarnations of deities suggested in any portion of the text which I
have yet seen, though such are sometimes hinted at by the
commentators <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4)." Some of these
statements may perhaps require modification; for without a careful
examination of all the prayers of the Vedas, it would be hazardous to
assert that they contain no indication whatever of hero-worship; and
certainly they do appear to allude occasionally to the Avatáras, or
incarnations, of Vishńu. Still, however, it is true that the prevailing
character of the ritual of the Vedas is the worship of the personified
elements; of Agni, or fire; Indra, the firmament; Váyu, the air; Varuńa,
the water; of Aditya, the sun; Soma, the moon; and other elementary and
planetary personages. It is also true that the worship of the Vedas is
for the most part domestic worship, consisting of prayers and oblations
offered--in their own houses, not in temples--by individuals for
individual good, and addressed to unreal presences, not to visible
types. In a word, the religion of the Vedas was not idolatry.

It is not possible to conjecture when this more simple and primitive
form of adoration was succeeded by the worship of images and types,
representing Brahmá, Vishńu, Śiva, and other imaginary beings,
constituting a mythological pantheon of most ample extent; or when Ráma

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

and Krishńa, who appear to have been originally real and historical
characters, were elevated to the dignity of divinities. Image-worship is
alluded to by Manu in several passages <span
id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5), but with an intimation that those Brahmans
who subsist by ministering in temples are an inferior and degraded
class. The story of the Rámáyańa and Mahábhárata turns wholly upon the
doctrine of incarnations, all the chief dramatis personæ of the poems
being impersonations of gods and demigods and celestial spirits. The
ritual appears to be that of the Vedas, and it may be doubted if any
allusion to image-worship occurs; but the doctrine of propitiation by
penance and praise prevails throughout, and Vishńu and Śiva are the
especial objects of panegyric and invocation. In these two works, then,
we trace unequivocal indications of a departure from the elemental
worship of the Vedas, and the origin or elaboration of legends, which
form the great body of the mythological religion of the Hindus. How far
they only improved upon the cosmogony and chronology of their
predecessors, or in what degree the traditions of families and dynasties
may originate with them, are questions that can only be determined when
the Vedas and the two works in question shall have been more thoroughly
examined.

The different works known by the name of Puráńas are evidently derived
from the same religious system as the Rámáyańa and Mahábhárata, or from
the mytho-heroic stage of Hindu belief. They present, however,
peculiarities which designate their belonging to a later period, and to
an important modification in the progress of opinion. They repeat the
theoretical cosmogony of the two great poems; they expand and
systematize the chronological computations; and they give a more
definite and connected representation of the mythological fictions, and
the historical traditions. But besides these and other particulars,
which may be derivable from an old, if not from a primitive era, they
offer characteristic peculiarities of a more modern description, in the
paramount importance which they assign to individual divinities, in the
variety and purport of the rites and observances addressed to them, and
in the invention of new legends illustrative of the power and
graciousness of

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

those deities, and of the efficacy of implicit devotion to them. Śiva
and Vishńu, under one or other form, are almost the sole objects that
claim the homage of the Hindus in the Puráńas; departing from the
domestic and elemental ritual of the Vedas, and exhibiting a sectarial
fervour and exclusiveness not traceable in the Rámáyańa, and only to a
qualified extent in the Mahábhárata. They are no longer authorities for
Hindu belief as a whole: they are special guides for separate and
sometimes conflicting branches of it, compiled for the evident purpose
of promoting the preferential, or in some cases the sole, worship of
Vishńu or of Śiva <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6).

That the Puráńas always bore the character here given of them, may admit
of reasonable doubt; that it correctly applies to them as they now are
met with, the following pages will irrefragably substantiate. It is
possible, however, that there may have been an earlier class of Puráńas,
of which those we now have are but the partial and adulterated
representatives. The identity of the legends in many of them, and still
more the identity of the words--for in several of them long passages are
literally the same--is a sufficient proof that in all such cases they
must be copied either from some other similar work, or from a common and
prior original. It is not unusual also for a fact to be stated upon the
authority of an 'old stanza,' which is cited accordingly; shewing the
existence of an earlier source of information: and in very many
instances legends are alluded to, not told; evincing acquaintance with
their prior narration somewhere else. The name itself, Puráńa, which
implies 'old,' indicates the object of the compilation to be the
preservation of ancient traditions, a purpose in the present condition
of the Puráńas very imperfectly fulfilled. Whatever weight may be
attached to these considerations, there is no disputing evidence to the
like effect afforded by other and unquestionable authority. The
description given by Mr. Colebrooke <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) of
the contents of a Puráńa is taken from Sanscrit writers. The Lexicon of
Amara Sinha gives as a synonyme of Puráńa, Pancha-lakshanam, 'that which
has five characteristic topics:' and there is no difference of opinion
amongst the

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

scholiasts as to what these are. They are, as Mr. Colebrooke mentions,
1. Primary creation, or cosmogony; 2. Secondary creation, or the
destruction and renovation of worlds, including chronology; 3. Genealogy
of gods and patriarchs; 4. Reigns of the Manus, or periods called
Manwantaras; and 5. History, or such particulars as have been preserved
of the princes of the solar and lunar races, and of their descendants to
modern times <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8). Such, at any rate, were
the constituent and characteristic portions of a Puráńa in the days of
Amara Sinha, fifty-six years before the Christian era; and if the
Puráńas had undergone no change since his time, such we should expect to
find them still. Do they conform to this description? Not exactly in any
one instance: to some of them it is utterly inapplicable; to others it
only partially applies. There is not one to which it belongs so entirely
as to the Vishńu Puráńa, and it is one of the circumstances which gives
to this work a more authentic character than most of its fellows can
pretend to. Yet even in this instance we have a book upon the institutes
of society and obsequial rites interposed between the Manwantaras and
the genealogies of princes, and a life of Krishńa separating the latter
from an account of the end of the world, besides the insertion of
various legends of a manifestly popular and sectarial character. No
doubt many of the Puráńas, as they now are, correspond with the view
which Col. Vans Kennedy takes of their purport. "I cannot discover in
them," he remarks, "any other object than that of religious
instruction." The description of the earth and of the planetary system,
and the lists of royal races which occur in them, he asserts to be
"evidently extraneous, and not essential circumstances, as they are
entirely omitted in some Puráńas, and very concisely illustrated in
others; while, on the contrary, in all the Puráńas some or other of the
leading principles, rites, and observances of the Hindu religion are
fully dwelt upon, and illustrated either by suitable legends

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

or by prescribing the ceremonies to be practised, and the prayers and
invocations to be employed, in the worship of different deities <span
id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9)," Now, however accurate this description
may be of the Puráńas as they are, it is clear that it does not apply to
what they were when they were synonymously designated as
Pancha-lakshańas, or 'treatises on five topics;' not one of which five
is ever specified by text or comment to be "religious instruction." In
the knowledge of Amara Sinha the lists of princes were not extraneous
and unessential, and their being now so considered by a writer so well
acquainted with the contents of the Puráńas as Col. Vans Kennedy is a
decisive proof that since the days of the lexicographer they have
undergone some material alteration, and that we have not at present the
same works in all respects that were current under the denomination of
Puráńas in the century prior to Christianity.

The inference deduced from the discrepancy between the actual form and
the older definition of a Puráńa, unfavourable to the antiquity of the
extant works generally, is converted into certainty when we come to
examine them in detail; for although they have no dates attached to
them, yet circumstances are sometimes mentioned or alluded to, or
references to authorities are made, or legends are narrated, or places
are particularized, of which the comparatively recent date is
indisputable, and which enforce a corresponding reduction of the
antiquity of the work in which they are discovered. At the same time
they may be acquitted of subservience to any but sectarial imposture.
They were pious frauds for temporary purposes: they never emanated from
any impossible combination of the Brahmans to fabricate for the
antiquity of the entire Hindu system any claims which it cannot fully
support. A very great portion of the contents of many, some portion of
the contents of all, is genuine and old. The sectarial interpolation or
embellishment is always sufficiently palpable to be set aside, without
injury to the more authentic and primitive material; and the Puráńas,
although they belong especially to that stage of the Hindu religion in
which faith in some one divinity was the prevailing principle, are also
a valuable record of the form of Hindu belief

<span id="page_vii">p. vii</span>

which came next in order to that of the Vedas; which grafted
hero-worship upon the simpler ritual of the latter; and which had been
adopted, and was extensively, perhaps universally established in India
at the time of the Greek invasion. The Hercules of the Greek writers was
indubitably the Balaráma of the Hindus; and their notices of Mathurá on
the Jumna, and of the kingdom of the Suraseni and the Pandæan country,
evidence the prior currency of the traditions which constitute the
argument of the Mahábhárata, and which are constantly repeated in the
Puráńas, relating to the Pańd́ava and Yádava races, to Krishńa and his
contemporary heroes, and to the dynasties of the solar and lunar kings.

The theogony and cosmogony of the Puráńas may probably be traced to the
Vedas. They are not, as far as is yet known, described in detail in
those works, but they are frequently alluded to in a strain more or less
mystical and obscure, which indicates acquaintance with their existence,
and which seems to have supplied the Puráńas with the groundwork of
their systems. The scheme of primary or elementary creation they borrow
from the Sánkhya philosophy, which is probably one of the oldest forms
of speculation on man and nature amongst the Hindus. Agreeably, however,
to that part of the Pauráńik character which there is reason to suspect
of later origin, their inculcation of the worship of a favourite deity,
they combine the interposition of a creator with the independent
evolution of matter in a somewhat contradictory and unintelligible
style. It is evident too that their accounts of secondary creation, or
the developement of the existing forms of things, and the disposition of
the universe, are derived from several and different sources; and it
appears very likely that they are to be accused of some of the
incongruities and absurdities by which the narrative is disfigured, in
consequence of having attempted to assign reality and significancy to
what was merely metaphor or mysticism. There is, however, amidst the
unnecessary complexity of the description, a general agreement amongst
them as to the origin of things, and their final distribution; and in
many of the circumstances there is a striking concurrence with the ideas
which seem to have pervaded the whole of the ancient world, and which we
may therefore believe to be faithfully represented in the Puráńas.

<span id="page_viii">p. viii</span>

The Pantheism of the Puráńas is one of their invariable characteristics,
although the particular divinity, who is all things, from whom all
things proceed, and to whom all things return, be diversified according
to their individual sectarial bias. They seem to have derived the notion
from the Vedas: but in them the one universal Being is of a higher order
than a personification of attributes or elements, and, however
imperfectly conceived, or unworthily described, is God. In the Puráńas
the one only Supreme Being is supposed to be manifest in the person of
Śiva or Vishńu, either in the way of illusion or in sport; and one or
other of these divinities is therefore also the cause of all that is, is
himself all that exists. The identity of God and nature is not a new
notion; it was very general in the speculations of antiquity, but it
assumed a new vigour in the early ages of Christianity, and was carried
to an equal pitch of extravagance by the Platonic Christians as by the
Śaiva or Vaishńava Hindus. It seems not impossible that there was some
communication between them. We know that there was an active
communication between India and the Red sea in the early ages of the
Christian era, and that doctrines, as well as articles of merchandise,
were brought to Alexandria from the former. Epiphanius <span
id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) and Eusebius <span
id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) accuse Scythianus of having imported from
India, in the second century, books on magic, and heretical notions
leading to Manichæism; and it was at the same period that Ammonius
instituted the sect of the new Platonists at Alexandria. The basis of
his heresy was, that true philosophy derived its origin from the eastern
nations: his doctrine of the identity of God and the universe is that of
the Vedas and Puráńas; and the practices he enjoined, as well as their
object, were precisely those described in several of the Puráńas under
the name of Yoga. His disciples were taught "to extenuate by
mortification and contemplation the bodily restraints upon the immortal
spirit, so that in this life they might enjoy communion with the Supreme
Being, and ascend after death to the universal Parent <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12)." That these are Hindu tenets the
following pages <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) will testify; and
by the admission of their Alexandrian

<span id="page_ix">p. ix</span>

teacher, they originated in India. The importation was perhaps not
wholly unrequited; the loan may not have been left unpaid. It is not
impossible that the Hindu doctrines received fresh animation from their
adoption by the successors of Ammonius, and especially by the mystics,
who may have prompted, as well as employed, the expressions of the
Puráńas. Anquetil du Perron has given <span
id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14), in the introduction to his translation
of the 'Oupnekhat,' several hymns by Synesius, a bishop of the beginning
of the fifth century, which may serve as parallels to many of the hymns
and prayers addressed to Vishńu in the Vishńu Puráńa.

But the ascription to individual and personal deities of the attributes
of the one universal and spiritual Supreme Being, is an indication of a
later date than the Vedas certainly, and apparently also than the
Rámáyańa, where Ráma, although an incarnation of Vishńu, commonly
appears in his human character alone. There is something of the kind in
the Mahábhárata in respect to Krishńa, especially in the philosophical
episode known as the Bhagavad Gítá. In other places the divine nature of
Krishńa is less decidedly affirmed; in some it is disputed or denied;
and in most of the situations in which he is exhibited in action, it is
as a prince and warrior, not as a divinity. He exercises no superhuman
faculties in the defence of himself or his friends, or in the defeat and
destruction of his foes. The Mahábhárata, however, is evidently a work
of various periods, and requires to be read throughout carefully and
critically before its weight as an authority can be accurately
appreciated. As it is now in type <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)--thanks to the public spirit of the
Asiatic Society of Bengal, and their secretary Mr. J. Prinsep--it will
not be long before the Sanscrit scholars of the continent will
accurately appreciate its value.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[i:1](vp001.htm#fr_0) Vol. VIII. p. 369.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[i:2](vp001.htm#fr_1) Vol. XIV. p. 37.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[i:3](vp001.htm#fr_2) Published by the Oriental
Translation Fund Committee.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[ii:4](vp001.htm#fr_3) A translation of the
principal Upanishads was published under the title of Oupnekhat, or
Theologia Indica, by Anquetil du Perron: but it was made through the
medium of the Persian, and is very <span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>
incorrect and obscure. A translation of a very different character has
been some time in course of preparation by M. Poley.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[ii:5](vp001.htm#fr_4) As. Res. vol. VIII. p.
473.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[iii:6](vp001.htm#fr_5) B. III. 152, 164. B. IV.
214.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[iv:7](vp001.htm#fr_6) Besides the three periods
marked by the Vedas, Heroic Poems, and Puráńas, a fourth may be dated
from the influence exercised by the Tantras upon Hindu practice and
belief; but we are yet too little acquainted with those works, or their
origin, to speculate safely upon their consequences.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[iv:8](vp001.htm#fr_7) As. Res. vol. VII. p. 202.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[v:9](vp001.htm#fr_8) The following definition of
a Puráńa is constantly quoted: it is found in the Vishńu, Matsya, Váyu,
and other Puráńas: <span id="img__00500"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_00500.jpg)</span> A variation of reading in the
beginning of the second line is noticed by Rámáśrama, the scholiast on
Amara, <span id="img__00501"></span> <span align="CENTER">
[![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_00501.jpg)</span> 'Destruction of the earth and the
rest, or final dissolution:' in which case the genealogies of heroes and
princes are comprised in those of the patriarchs.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[vi:10](vp001.htm#fr_9) Researches into the
Nature and Affinity of Ancient and Hindu Mythology, p.153, and note.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[viii:11](vp001.htm#fr_10) Adv. Manichæos.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[viii:12](vp001.htm#fr_11) Hist. Evang.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[viii:13](vp001.htm#fr_12) Mosheim, vol. I.
p.173.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[viii:14](vp001.htm#fr_13) See P.
[649](vp162.htm#page_649) et seq.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[ix:15](vp001.htm#fr_14) Theologia et
Philosophia Indica, Dissert. p. xxvi.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[ix:16](vp001.htm#fr_15) Three volumes have been
printed: the fourth and last is understood to be nearly completed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Date of the Puráńas](vp002)
