[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp014)  [Next](vp016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

11\. The Linga Puráńa

11\. Linga Puráńa. "Where Maheśwara, present in the Agni Linga,
explained (the objects of life) virtue, wealth, pleasure, and final
liberation at the end of the Agni Kalpa, that Puráńa, consisting of
eleven thousand stanzas, was called the Lainga by Brahmá himself <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65)."

The Linga Puráńa conforms accurately enough to this description. The
Kalpa is said to be the Íśána, but this is the only difference. It
consists of eleven thousand stanzas. It is said to have been originally
composed by Brahmá; and the primitive Linga is a pillar of radiance,

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

in which Maheśwara is present. The work is therefore the same as that
referred to by the Matsya.

A short account is given, in the beginning, of elemental and secondary
creation, and of the patriarchal families; in which, however, Śiva takes
the place of Vishńu, as the indescribable cause of all things. Brief
accounts of Śiva's incarnations and proceedings in different Kalpas next
occur, offering no interest except as characteristic of sectarial
notions. The appearance of the great fiery Linga takes place, in the
interval of a creation, to separate Vishńu and Brahmá, who not only
dispute the palm of supremacy, but fight for it; when the Linga suddenly
springs up, and puts them both to shame; as, after travelling upwards
and downwards for a thousand years in each direction, neither can
approach to its termination. Upon the Linga the sacred monosyllable Om
is visible, and the Vedas proceed from it, by which Brahms and Vishńu
become enlightened, and acknowledge and eulogize the superior might and
glory of Śiva.

A notice of the creation in the Padma Kalpa then follows, and this leads
to praises of Śiva by Vishńu and Brahmá. Śiva repeats the story of his
incarnations, twenty-eight in number; intended as a counterpart, no
doubt, to the twenty-four Avatáras of Vishńu, as described in the
Bhágavata; and both being amplifications of the original ten Avatáras,
and of much less merit as fictions. Another instance of rivalry occurs
in the legend of Dadhíchi, a Muni and worshipper of Śiva. In the
Bhágavata there is a story of Ambarísha being defended against Durvásas
by the discus of Vishńu, against which that Śaiva sage is helpless: here
Vishńu hurls his discus at Dadhíchi, but it falls blunted to the ground,
and a conflict ensues, in which Vishńu and his partisans are all
overthrown by the Muni.

A description of the universe, and of the regal dynasties of the
Vaivaswata Manwantara to the time of Krishńa, runs through a number of
chapters, in substance, and very commonly in words, the same as in other
Puráńas. After which, the work resumes its proper character, narrating
legends, and enjoining rites, and reciting prayers, intending to do
honour to Śiva under various forms. Although, however, the Linga

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

holds a prominent place amongst them, the spirit of the worship is as
little influenced by the character of the type as can well be imagined.
There is nothing like the phallic orgies of antiquity: it is all
mystical and spiritual. The Linga is twofold, external and internal. The
ignorant, who need a visible sign, worship Śiva through a 'mark' or
'type'--which is the proper meaning of the word 'Linga'--of wood or
stone; but the wise look upon this outward emblem as nothing, and
contemplate in their minds the invisible, inscrutable type, which is
Śiva himself. Whatever may have been the origin of this form of worship
in India, the notions upon which it was founded, according to the impure
fancies of European writers, are not to be traced in even the Śaiva
Puráńas.

Data for conjecturing the era of this work are defective, but it is more
of a ritual than a Puráńa, and the Pauráńik chapters which it has
inserted, in order to keep up something of its character, have been
evidently borrowed for the purpose. The incarnations of Śiva, and their
'pupils,' as specified in one place, and the importance attached to the
practice of the Yoga, render it possible that under the former are
intended those teachers of the Śaiva religion who belong to the Yoga
school <span id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66), which seems to have
flourished about the eighth or ninth centuries. It is not likely that
the work is earlier, it may be considerably later. It has preserved
apparently some Śaiva legends of an early date, but the greater part is
ritual and mysticism of comparatively recent introduction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xlii:66](vp015.htm#fr_65) <span
id="img__04200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_04200.jpg)</span>

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xliv:67](vp015.htm#fr_66) See Asiatic
Researches, vol. XVII. p. 287.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 12. The Varáha Puráńa](vp016)
