[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp019)  [Next](vp021) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Matsya Puráńa

16\. Matsya Puráńa. "That in which, for the sake of promulgating the
Vedas, Vishńu, in the beginning of a Kalpa, related to Manu the story of
Narasinha and the events of seven Kalpas, that, O sages, know to be the
Mátsya Puráńa, containing twenty thousand stanzas <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77)."

We might, it is to be supposed, admit the description which the Matsya
gives of itself to be correct, and yet as regards the number of verses
there seems to be a mistatement. Three very good copies, one in my
possession, one in the Company's library, and one in the Radcliffe
library, concur in all respects, and in containing no more than between
fourteen and fifteen thousand stanzas: in this case the Bhágavata is
nearer the truth, when it assigns to it fourteen thousand. We may
conclude, therefore, that the reading of the passage is in this respect
erroneous. It is correctly said that the subjects of the Puráńa were
communicated by Vishńu, in the form of a fish, to Manu.

The Puráńa, after the usual prologue of Súta and the Rishis, opens with
the account of the Matsya or 'fish' Avatára of Vishńu, in which he
preserves a king named Manu, with the seeds of all things, in an ark,
from the waters of that inundation which in the season of a Pralaya
overspreads the world. This story is told in the Mahábhárata, with
reference to the Matsya as its authority; from which it might be
inferred that the Puráńa was prior to the poem. This of course is
consistent with the tradition that the Puráńas were first composed by
Vyása; but there can be no doubt that the greater part of the
Mahábhárata is much older than any extant Puráńa. The present instance
is itself a proof; for the primitive simplicity with which the story of
the fish Avatára is told in the Mahábhárata is of a much more antique
complexion than the mysticism and extravagance of the actual Matsya
Puráńa. In the former, Manu collects the seeds of existing things in the
ark, it is not said how: in the latter, he brings them all together by
the power of Yoga.

<span id="page_lii">p. lii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> In the latter, the
great serpents come to the king, to serve as cords wherewith to fasten
the ark to the horn of the fish: in the former, a cable made of ropes is
more intelligibly employed for the purpose.

Whilst the ark floats, fastened to the fish, Manu enters into
conversation with him; and his questions, and the replies of Vishńu,
form the main substance of the compilation. The first subject is the
creation, which is that of Brahmá and the patriarchs. Some of the
details are the usual ones; others are peculiar, especially those
relating to the Pitris, or progenitors. The regal dynasties are next
described; and then follow chapters on the duties of the different
orders. It is in relating those of the householder, in which the duty of
making gifts to Brahmans is comprehended, that we have the specification
of the extent and subjects of the Puráńas. It is meritorious to have
copies made of them, and to give these away on particular occasions.
Thus it is said of the Matsya; "Whoever gives it away at either equinox,
along with a golden fish and a milch cow, gives away the whole earth;"
that is, he reaps a like reward in his next migration. Special duties of
the householder--Vratas, or occasional acts of piety--are then described
at considerable length, with legendary illustrations. The account of the
universe is given in the usual strain. Śaiva legends ensue; as, the
destruction of Tripurásura; the war of the gods with Táraka and the
Daityas, and the consequent birth of Kártikeya, with the various
circumstances of Umá's birth and marriage, the burning of Kámadeva, and
other events involved in that narrative; the destruction of the Asuras
Maya and Andhaka; the origin of the Mátris, and the like; interspersed
with the Vaishńava legends of the Avatáras. Some Máhátmyas are also
introduced; one of which, the Narmada Máhátmya, contains some
interesting particulars. There are various chapters on law and morals;
and one which furnishes directions for building houses, and making
images. We then have an account of the kings of future periods; and the
Puráńa concludes with a chapter on gifts.

The Matsya Puráńa, it will be seen even from this brief sketch of its
contents, is a miscellaneous compilation, but including in its contents
the elements of a genuine Puráńa. At the same time it is of too mixed a

<span id="page_liii">p. liii</span>

character to be considered as a genuine work of the Pauráńik class; and
upon examining it carefully, it may be suspected that it is indebted to
various works, not only for its matter, but for its words. The
genealogical and historical chapters are much the same as those of the
Vishńu; and many chapters, as those on the Pitris and Sráddhas, are
precisely the same as those of the Srisht́i Khańd́a of the Padma Puráńa.
It has drawn largely also from the Mahábhárata: amongst other instances,
it is sufficient to quote the story of Sávitrí, the devoted wife of
Satyavat, which is given in the Matsya in the same manner, but
considerably abridged.

Although a Śaiva work, it is not exclusively so, and it has no such
sectarial absurdities as the Kúrma and Linga. It is a composition of
considerable interest; but if it has extracted its materials from the
Padma, which it also quotes on one occasion, the specification of the
Upa-puráńas, it is subsequent to that work, and therefore not very
ancient.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_77"></span>[li:78](vp020.htm#fr_77) <span
id="img__05100"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![](tn/generic.jpg)  
Click to view](img/_05100.jpg)</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 17. The Gárud́a Puráńa](vp021)
