[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp022)  [Next](vp024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Upa-puráńas

The Upa-puráńas, in the few instances which are known, differ little in
extent or subject from some of those to which the title of Puráńa is
ascribed. The Matsya enumerates but four; but the Deví Bhágavata has a
more complete list, and specifies eighteen. They are, 1. The
Sanatkumára, 2. Nárasinha, 3. Náradíya, 4. Śiva, 5. Durvásasa, g.
Kápila, 7. Mánava, 8. Auśanaśa, 9. Varuńa, 10. Káliká, 11. Śámba, 12.
Nandi, 13. Saura, 14. Páráśara, 15. Áditya, 16. Máheśwara, 17.
Bhágavata, 18. Vaśisht́ha. The Matsya observes of the second, that it is
named in the Padma Puráńa, and contains eighteen thousand verses. The
Nandi it calls Nandá, and says that Kártikeya tells in it the story of
Nandá. A rather different list is given in the Revá Khańd́a; or, 1.
Sanatkumára, 2. Nárasinha, 3. Nandá, 4. Śivadharma, 5. Durvásasa, 6.
Bhavishya, related by Nárada or Náradíya, 7. Kápila, 8. Mánava, 9.
Auśanaśa, 10. Brahmáńd́a, 11. Váruńa, 12. Káliká, 13. Máheśwara, 14.
Śámba, 15. Saura, 16. Páráśara, 17. Bhágavata, 18. Kaurma. These
authorities, however, are of questionable weight, having in view, no
doubt, the pretensions of the Deví Bhágavata to be considered as the
authentic Bhágavata.

Of these Upa-puráńas few are to be procured. Those in my possession

<span id="page_lvi">p. lvi</span>

are the Śiva, considered as distinct from the Váyu; the Káliká, and
perhaps one of the Náradíyas, as noticed above. I have also three of the
Skandhas of the Deví Bhágavata, which most undoubtedly is not the real
Bhágavata, supposing that any Puráńa so named preceded the work of
Vopadeva. There can be no doubt that in any authentic list the name of
Bhágavata does not occur amongst the Upa-puráńas: it has been put there
to prove that there are two works so entitled, of which the Puráńa is
the Deví Bhágavata, the Upa-puráńa the Śrí Bhágavata. The true reading
should be Bhárgava, the Puráńa of Bhrigu; and the Deví Bhágavata is not
even an Upa-puráńa. It is very questionable if the entire work, which as
far as it extends is eminently a Sákta composition, ever had existence.

The Śiva Upa-puráńa contains about six thousand stanzas, distributed
into two parts. It is related by Sanatkumára to Vyása and the Rishis at
Naimishárańya, and its character may be judged of from the questions to
which it is a reply. "Teach us," said the Rishis, "the rules of
worshipping the Linga, and of the god of gods adored under that type;
describe to us his various forms, the places sanctified by him, and the
prayers with which he is to be addressed." In answer, Sanatkumára
repeats the Śiva Puráńa, containing the birth of Vishńu and Brahmá; the
creation and divisions of the universe; the origin of all things from
the Linga; the rules of worshipping it and Śiva; the sanctity of times,
places, and things, dedicated to him; the delusion of Brahmá and Vishńu
by the Linga; the rewards of offering flowers and the like to a Linga;
rules for various observances in honour of Mahádeva; the mode of
practising the Yoga; the glory of Benares and other Śaiva Tírthas; and
the perfection of the objects of life by union with Maheśwara. These
subjects are illustrated in the first part with very few legends; but
the second is made up almost wholly of Śaiva stories, as the defeat of
Tripurásura; the sacrifice of Daksha; the births of Kártikeya and Ganeśa
the sons of Śiva, and Nandi and Bhringaríti his attendants and others;
together with descriptions of Benares and other places of pilgrimage,
and rules for observing such festivals as the Śivaratri. This work is a
Śaiva manual, not a Puráńa.

<span id="page_lvii">p. lvii</span>

The Káliká Puráńa contains about nine thousand stanzas in ninety-eight
chapters, and is the only work of the series dedicated to recommend the
worship of the bride of Śiva, in one or other of her manifold forms, as
Girijá, Deví, Bhadrakálí, Kálí, Mahámáyá. It belongs therefore to the
Sákta modification of Hindu belief, or the worship of the female powers
of the deities. The influence of this worship spews itself in the very
first pages of the work, which relate the incestuous passion of Brahmá
for his daughter Sandhyá, in a strain that has nothing analogous to it
in the Váyu, Linga, or Śiva Puráńas.

The marriage of Śiva and Párvati is a subject early described, with the
sacrifice of Daksha, and the death of Sati: and this work is authority
for Śiva's carrying the dead body about the world, and the origin of the
Píthasthánas, or places where the different members of it were
scattered, and where Lingas were consequently erected. A legend follows
of the births of Bhairava and Vetála, whose devotion to different forms
of Deví furnishes occasion to describe in great detail the rites and
formulæ of which her worship consists, including the chapters on
sanguinary sacrifices, translated in the Asiatic Researches. Another
peculiarity in this work is afforded by very prolix descriptions of a
number of rivers and mountains at Kámarúpa-tírtha in Asam, and rendered
holy ground by the celebrated temple of Durgá in that country, as
Kámákśhí or Kámákhyá. It is a singular, and yet uninvestigated
circumstance, that Asam, or at least the north-east of Bengal, seems to
have been in a great degree the source from which the Tántrika and Śákta
corruptions of the religion of the Vedas and Puráńas proceeded.

The specification of the Upa-puráńas, whilst it names several of which
the existence is problematical, omits other works, bearing the same
designation, which are sometimes met with. Thus in the collection of
Col. Mackenzie <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) we have a portion of
the Bhárgava, and a Mudgala Puráńa, which is probably the same with the
Ganeśa Upa-puráńa, cited by Col. Vans Kennedy <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82). I have also a copy of the Ganeśa Puráńa,
which seems to agree with that of which he speaks; the second portion
being entitled the Kríd́á Khańd́a, in which the pastimes of Ganeśa,
including

<span id="page_lviii">p. lviii</span>

a variety of legendary matters, are described. The main subject of the
work is the greatness of Ganeśa, and prayers and formulæ appropriate to
him are abundantly detailed. It appears to be a work originating with
the Gánapatya sect, or worshippers of Ganeśa. There is also a minor
Puráńa called Ádi, or 'first,' not included in the list. This is a work,
however, of no great extent or importance, and is confined to a detail
of the sports of the juvenile Krishńa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_81"></span>[lvii:82](vp023.htm#fr_81) Mackenzie Collection,
1. 50, 51.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[lvii:83](vp023.htm#fr_82) Anc. and Hindu
Mythology, p. 251.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Synopsis of the Vishńu Puráńa](vp024)
