[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp037)  [Next](vp039) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

### CHAP. IV.

Náráyańa's appearance, in the beginning of the Kalpa, as the Varsha or
boar: Prithiví (Earth) addresses him: he raises the world from beneath
the waters: hymned by Sanandana and the Yogis. The earth floats on the
ocean: divided into seven zones. The lower spheres of the universe
restored. Creation renewed.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, mighty sage, how, in the commencement of the
(present) Kalpa, Náráyańa, who is named Brahmá, created all existent
things <span id="fr_159"></span>[1](#fn_159).

PARÁŚARA.--In what manner the divine Brahmá, who is one with Náráyańa,
created progeny, and is thence named the lord of progeny (Prajápati),
the lord god, you shall hear.

At the close of the past (or Pádma) Kalpa, the divine Brahmá, endowed
with the quality of goodness, awoke from his night of sleep, and beheld
the universe void. He, the supreme Náráyańa, the incomprehensible, the
sovereign of all creatures, invested with the form of Brahmá, the god
without beginning, the creator of all things; of whom, with respect to
his name Náráyańa, the god who has the form of Brahmá, the imperishable
origin of the world, this verse is repeated, "The waters are called
Nárá, because they were the offspring of Nara (the supreme spirit); and
as in them his first (Ayana) progress (in the character of Brahmá) took
place, he is thence named Náráyańa (he whose place of moving was the
waters) <span id="fr_160"></span>[2](#fn_160)." He, the lord, concluding
that within the waters lay the

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

earth, and being desirous to raise it up, created another form for that
purpose; and as in preceding Kalpas he had assumed the shape of a fish
or a tortoise, so in this he took the figure of a boar. Having adopted a
form composed of the sacrifices of the Vedas <span
id="fr_161"></span>[3](#fn_161), for the preservation of the whole
earth, the eternal, supreme, and universal soul, the great progenitor of
created beings, eulogized by Sanaka and the other

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

saints who dwell in the sphere of holy men (Janaloka); he, the supporter
of spiritual and material being, plunged into the ocean. The goddess
Earth, beholding him thus descending to the subterrene regions, bowed in
devout adoration, and thus glorified the god:--

*Príthiví* (Earth).--Hail to thee, who art all creatures; to thee, the
holder of the mace and shell: elevate me now from this place, as thou
hast upraised me in days of old. From thee have I proceeded; of thee do
I consist; as do the skies, and all other existing things. Hail to thee,
spirit of the supreme spirit; to thee, soul of soul; to thee, who art
discrete and indiscrete matter; who art one with the elements and with
time. Thou art the creator of all things, their preserver, and their
destroyer, in the forms, oh lord, of Brahmá, Vishńu, and Rudra, at the
seasons of creation, duration, and dissolution. When thou hast devoured
all things, thou reposest on the ocean that sweeps over the world,
meditated upon, oh Govinda, by the wise. No one knoweth thy true nature,
and the gods adore thee only in the forms it bath pleased thee to
assume. They who are desirous of final liberation, worship thee as the
supreme Brahmá; and who that adores not Vásudeva, shall obtain
emancipation? Whatever may be apprehended by the mind, whatever may be
perceived by the senses, whatever may he discerned by the intellect, all
is but a form of thee. I am of thee, upheld by thee; thou art my
creator, and to thee I fly for refuge: hence, in this universe, Mádhaví
(the bride of Mádhava or Vishńu) is my designation. Triumph to the
essence of all wisdom, to the unchangeable, the imperishable: triumph to
the eternal; to the indiscrete, to the essence of discrete things: to
him who is both cause and effect; who is the universe; the sinless lord
of sacrifice <span id="fr_162"></span>[4](#fn_162); triumph. Thou art
sacrifice; thou art the oblation; thou art the mystic Omkára; thou art
the sacrificial fires; thou art the Vedas, and their dependent sciences;
thou art, Hari, the object of all worship <span
id="fr_163"></span>[5](#fn_163). The sun, the stars, the planets, the
whole world; all that is formless, or that has form; all that is
visible, or invisible; all, Purushottama, that I have said,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

or left unsaid; all this, Supreme, thou art. Hail to thee, again and
again! hail! all hail!

PARÁŚARA.--The auspicious supporter of the world, being thus hymned by
the earth, emitted a low murmuring sound, like the chanting of the Sáma
veda; and the mighty boar, whose eyes were like the lotus, and whose
body, vast as the Níla mountain, was of the dark colour of the lotus
leaves <span id="fr_164"></span>[6](#fn_164), uplifted upon his ample
tusks the earth from the lowest regions. As he reared up his head, the
waters shed from his brow purified the great sages, Sanandana and
others, residing in the sphere of the saints. Through the indentations
made by his hoofs, the waters rushed into the lower worlds with a
thundering noise. Before his breath, the pious denizens of Janaloka were
scattered, and the Munis sought for shelter amongst the bristles upon
the scriptural body of the boar, trembling

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

as he rose up, supporting the earth, and dripping with moisture. Then
the great sages, Sanandana and the rest, residing continually in the
sphere of saints, were inspired with delight, and bowing lowly they
praised the stern-eyed upholder of the earth.

*The Yogis*.--Triumph, lord of lords supreme; Keśava, sovereign of the
earth, the wielder of the mace, the shell, the discus, and the sword:
cause of production, destruction, and existence. THOU ART, oh god: there
is no other supreme condition, but thou. Thou, lord, art the person of
sacrifice: for thy feet are the Vedas; thy tusks are the stake to which
the victim is bound; in thy teeth are the offerings; thy mouth is the
altar; thy tongue is the fire; and the hairs of thy body are the
sacrificial grass. Thine eyes, oh omnipotent, are day and night; thy
head is the seat of all, the place of Brahma; thy mane is all the hymns
of the Vedas; thy nostrils are all oblations: oh thou, whose snout is
the ladle of oblation; whose deep voice is the chanting of the Sáma
veda; whose body is the hall of sacrifice; whose joints are the
different ceremonies; and whose ears have the properties of both
voluntary and obligatory rites <span id="fr_165"></span>[7](#fn_165): do
thou, who art eternal, who art in size a mountain, be propitious. We
acknowledge thee, who hast traversed the world, oh universal form, to be
the beginning, the continuance, and the destruction of all things: thou
art the supreme god. Have pity on us, oh lord of conscious and
unconscious beings. The orb of the earth is seen seated on the tip of
thy tusks, as if thou hadst been sporting amidst a lake where the lotus
floats, and hadst borne away the leaves covered with soil. The space
between heaven and earth is occupied by thy body, oh thou of unequalled
glory, resplendent with the power of pervading the universe, oh lord,
for the benefit of all. Thou art the aim of all: there is none other
than thee, sovereign of the world: this is thy might, by which all
things, fixed or movable, are pervaded. This form, which is now beheld,
is thy form, as one essentially with wisdom. Those who have not
practised devotion, conceive erroneously of the nature of the world. The
ignorant,

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

who do not perceive that this universe is of the nature of wisdom, and
judge of it as an object of perception only, are lost in the ocean of
spiritual ignorance. But they who know true wisdom, and whose minds are
pure, behold this whole world as one with divine knowledge, as one with
thee, oh god. Be favourable, oh universal spirit: raise up this earth,
for the habitation of created beings. Inscrutable deity, whose eyes are
like lotuses, give us felicity. Oh lord, thou art endowed with the
quality of goodness: raise up, Govinda, this earth, for the general
good. Grant us happiness, oh lotus-eyed. May this, thy activity in
creation, be beneficial to the earth. Salutation to thee. Grant us
happiness, oh lotus-eyed.

PARÁŚARA.--The supreme being thus eulogized, upholding the earth, raised
it quickly, and placed it on the summit of the ocean, where it floats
like a mighty vessel, and from its expansive surface does not sink
beneath the waters. Then, having levelled the earth, the great eternal
deity divided it into portions, by mountains: he who never wills in
vain, created, by his irresistible power, those mountains again upon the
earth which had been consumed at the destruction of the world. Having
then divided the earth into seven great portions or continents, as it
was before, he constructed in like manner the four (lower) spheres,
earth, sky, heaven, and the sphere of the sages (Maharloka). Thus Hari,
the four-faced god, invested with the quality of activity, and taking
the form of Brahmá, accomplished the creation: but he (Brahmá) is only
the instrumental cause of things to be created; the things that are
capable of being created arise from nature as a common material cause:
with exception of one instrumental cause alone, there is no need of any
other cause, for (imperceptible) substance becomes perceptible substance
according to the powers with which it is originally imbued <span
id="fr_166"></span>[8](#fn_166).

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

This page consists solely of footnotes

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_159"></span>[27:1](vp038.htm#fr_159) This creation is of
the secondary order, or Pratiserga; water, and even the earth, being in
existence, and consequently having been preceded by the creation of
Mahat and the elements. It is also a different Pratiserga from that
described by Manu, in which Swayambhu first creates the waters, then the
egg: one of the simplest forms, and perhaps therefore one of the
earliest in which the tradition occurs.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[27:2](vp038.htm#fr_160) This is the well known
verse of Menu, I. 8, rendered by Sir Wm. Jones, "The waters are called
Nárá, because they were the production of Nara, or 'the spirit' of God;
and since they were his first Ayana, or place of motion, he thence is
named Náráyańa, or 'moving on the waters.'" Now although there can be
little doubt that this tradition is in substance the same as that of
Genesis, the language of the translation is perhaps more scriptural than
<span id="page_28">p. 28</span> is quite warranted. The waters, it is
said in the text of Manu, were the progeny of Nara, which Kullúka Bhat́t́a
explains Paramátmá, the supreme soul; that is, they were the first
productions of God in creation. Ayana, instead of 'place of motion,' is
explained by Ásraya, place of abiding.' Náráyańa means, therefore, he
whose place of abiding was the deep. The verse occurs in several of the
Puráńas, in general in nearly the same words, and almost always as a
quotation, as in our text The Linga, Váyu, and Márkańd́eya Puráńas,
citing the same, have a somewhat different reading; or, 'Ápa (is the
same as) Nárá, or bodies (Tanava); such, we have heard (from the Vedas),
is the meaning of Apa. He who sleeps in them, is thence called
Náráyańa.' The ordinary sense of Tanu is either 'minute' or 'body,' nor
does it occur amongst the synonymes of water in the Nirukta of the
Vedas. It may perhaps be intended to say, that Nárá or Apa has the
meaning of 'bodily forms,' in which spirit is enshrined, and of which
the waters, with Vishńu resting upon them, are a type; for there is much
mysticism in the Puráńas in which the passage thus occurs. Even in them,
however, it is introduced in the usual manner, by describing the world
as water alone, and Vishńu reposing upon the deep: \#\#\# Váyu P. The
Bhágavata has evidently attempted to explain the ancient text: 'When the
embodied god in the beginning divided the mundane egg, and issued forth,
then, requiring an abiding-place, he created the waters: the pure
created the pure. In them, his own created, he abode for a thousand
years, and thence received the name of Náráyańa: the waters being the
product of the embodied deity:' i. e. they were the product of Nara or
Vishńu, as the first male or Virát, and were therefore termed Nára: and
from there being his Ayana or Sthána, his 'abiding place,' comes his
epithet of Náráyańa.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[28:3](vp038.htm#fr_161) The Varáha form was
chosen, says the Váyu P., because it is an animal delighting to sport in
water, but it is described in many Puráńas, as it is in the Vishńu, as a
type of the ritual of the Vedas, as we shall have further occasion to
remark. The elevation of the earth from beneath the ocean in this form,
was, therefore, probably at first an allegorical representation of the
extrication of the world from a deluge of iniquity by the rites of
religion. Geologists may perhaps suspect, in the original and
unmystified tradition, an allusion to a geological fact, or the
existence of lacustrine mammalia in the early periods of the earth.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[29:4](vp038.htm#fr_162) Yajnapati, 'the
bestower of the beneficial results of sacrifices.'

<span id="fn_163"></span>[29:5](vp038.htm#fr_163) Yajnapurusha, 'the
male or soul of sacrifice;' explained by Yajnamúrtti, 'the form or
personification of sacrifice;' or Yajnárádhya 'he who is to be
propitiated by it.'

<span id="fn_164"></span>[30:6](vp038.htm#fr_164) Varáha Avatára. The
description of the figure of the boar is much more particularly detailed
in other Puráńas. As in the Váyu: "The boar was ten Yojanas in breadth,
a thousand Yojanas high; of the colour of a dark cloud; and his roar was
like thunder; his bulk was vast as a mountain; his tusks were white,
sharp, and fearful; fire flashed from his eyes like lightning, and he
was radiant as the sun; his shoulders were round, flit, and large; he
strode along like a powerful lion; his haunches were fat, his loins were
slender, and his body was smooth and beautiful." The Matsya P. describes
the Varáha in the same words, with one or two unimportant varieties. The
Bhágavata indulges in that amplification which marks its more recent
composition, and describes the Varáha as issuing from the nostrils of
Brahmá, at first of the size of the thumb, or an inch long, and
presently increasing to the stature of an elephant. That work also
subjoins a legend of the death of the demon Hiranyáksha, who in a
preceding existence was one of Vishńu's doorkeepers, at his palace in
Vaikuntha. Having refused admission to a party of Munis, they cursed
him, and he was in consequence born as one of the sons of Diti. When the
earth, oppressed by the weight of the mountains, sunk down into the
waters, Vishńu was beheld in the subterrene regions, or Rasátala, by
Hiranyáksha in the act of carrying it off. The demon claimed the earth,
and defied Vishńu to combat; and a conflict took place, in which
Hiranyáksha was slain. This legend has not been met with in any other
Puráńa, and certainly does not occur in the chief of them, any more than
in our text. In the Moksha Dherma of the Mahábhárata, e.35, Vishńu
destroys the demons in the form of the Varáha, but no particular
individual is specified, nor does the elevation of the earth depend upon
their discomfiture. The Káliká Upapuráńa has an absurd legend of a
conflict between Śiva as a Sarabha, a fabulous animal, and Vishńu as the
Varáha, in which the latter suffers himself and his offspring begotten
upon earth to be slain.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[31:7](vp038.htm#fr_165) This, which is nothing
more than the developement of the notion that the Varáha incarnation
typifies the ritual of the Vedas, is repeated in most of the Puráńas in
the same or nearly the same words.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[32:8](vp038.htm#fr_166) This seems equivalent
to the ancient notion of a plastic nature: "All parts of matter, by
reason of a certain life in them, being supposed able to form themselves
artificially and methodically to the greatest advantage of their present
respective capabilities." This, which Cudworth (c. III.) calls
hylozoism, is not incompatible with an active creator: "not that he
should, αὐτουργεῖν ἅπαντα, set his own hand to every work, which, as
Aristotle says, would be, ἀπρεπὲς τῷ θεῷ, unbecoming God; but, as in the
case of Brahmá and other subordinate agents, that they should occasion
<span id="page_33">p. 33</span> the various developments of crude nature
to take place, by supplying that will, of which nature itself is
incapable. Action being once instituted by an instrumental medium, or by
the will of an intellectual agent, it is continued by powers or a
vitality inherent in nature or the matter of creation itself. The
efficiency of such subordinate causes was advocated by Plato, Aristotle,
and others; and the opinion of Zeno, as stated by Laertius, might be
taken for a translation of some such passage as that in our text: Ἔστι
δὲ φύσις ἕξις ἐξ αὐτῆς κινουμένη κατὰ σπερματικοὺς λόγους, ἀποτελοῦσά τε
καὶ συνέχουσα τὰ ἐξ αὐτῆς ἐν ὡριοσμένοις χρόνοις, καὶ τοιαῦτα δρῶσα ἀφ᾽
οἵων ἀπεκρίθη· 'Nature is a habit moved from itself, according to
seminal principles; perfecting and containing those several things which
in determinate times are produced from it, and acting agreeably to that
from which it was secreted.' Intell. System, I. 328. 'So the commentator
illustrates our text by observing that the cause of the budding of rice
is in its own seed, and its developement is from itself; though its
growth takes place only at a determinate season, in consequence of the
instrumental agency of the rain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](vp039)
