[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp039)  [Next](vp041) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

### CHAP. VI.

Origin of the four castes: their primitive state. Progress of society.
Different kinds of grain. Efficacy of sacrifice. Duties of men: regions
assigned them after death.

MAITREYA.--Thou hast briefly noticed, illustrious sage, the creation
termed Arváksrotas, or that of mankind: now explain to me more fully how
Brahmá accomplished it; how he created the four different castes; what
duties he assigned to the Brahmans and the rest <span
id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_188).

PARÁŚARA.--Formerly, oh best of Brahmans, when the truth-meditating
Brahmá was desirous of creating the world, there sprang from his mouth
beings especially endowed with the quality of goodness; others from his
breast, pervaded by the quality of foulness; others from his thighs, in
whom foulness and darkness prevailed; and others from his feet, in whom
the quality of darkness predominated. These were, in succession, beings
of the several castes, Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vaisyas, and Śúdras,
produced from the mouth, the breast, the thighs, and the feet of
Brahmá <span id="fr_189"></span>[2](#fn_189). These he created for the
performance of sacrifices, the four castes being the fit instruments of
their celebration. By sacrifices, oh thou who knowest the truth, the
gods are nourished; and by the rain which they bestow, mankind are
supported <span id="fr_190"></span>[3](#fn_190): and thus sacrifices,
the source of happiness, are performed by pious men, attached to their
duties, attentive to prescribed obligations, and walking in the paths of
virtue. Men acquire (by them) heavenly fruition, or final felicity: they
go, after death, to whatever sphere they aspire to, as the consequence
of their human

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

nature. The beings who were created by Brahmá, of these four castes,
were at first endowed with righteousness and perfect faith; they abode
wherever they pleased, unchecked by any impediment; their hearts were
free from guile; they were pure, made free from soil, by observance of
sacred institutes. In their sanctified minds Hari dwelt; and they were
filled with perfect wisdom, by which they contemplated the glory of
Vishńu <span id="fr_191"></span>[4](#fn_191). After a while (after the
Tretá age had continued for some period), that portion of Hari which has
been described as one with Kála (time) infused into created beings sin,
as yet feeble though formidable, or passion and the like: the impediment
of soul's liberation, the seed of iniquity, sprung from darkness and
desire. The innate perfectness of human nature was then no more evolved:
the eight kinds of perfection, Rasollásá and the rest, were
impaired <span id="fr_192"></span>[5](#fn_192); and these being
enfeebled, and sin gaining strength, mortals were afflicted with pain,
arising from susceptibility to contrasts, as heat and cold, and the
like. They therefore constructed places of refuge, protected by trees,
by mountains, or by water; surrounded them by a ditch or a wall, and
formed villages and cities; and in them erected appropriate dwellings,
as defences against the sun and the cold <span
id="fr_193"></span>[6](#fn_193). Having thus provided security against

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

the weather, men next began to employ themselves in manual labour, as a
means of livelihood, (and cultivated) the seventeen kinds of useful
grain--rice, barley, wheat, millet, sesamum, panic, and various sorts of
lentils, beans, and pease <span id="fr_194"></span>[7](#fn_194). These
are the kinds cultivated for domestic

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

use: but there are fourteen kinds which may be offered in sacrifice;
they are, rice, barley, Másha, wheat, millet, and sesamum; Priyangu is
the seventh, and kulattha, pulse, the eighth: the others are, Syámáka, a
sort of panic; Nívára, uncultivated rice; Jarttila, wild sesamum;
Gaveduká (coix); Markata, wild panic; and (a plant called) the seed or
barley of the Bambu (Venu-yava). These, cultivated or wild, are the
fourteen grains that were produced for purposes of offering in
sacrifice; and sacrifice (the cause of rain) is their origin also: they
again, with sacrifice, are the great cause of the perpetuation of the
human race, as those understand who can discriminate cause and effect.
Thence sacrifices were offered daily; the performance of which, oh best
of Munis, is of essential service to mankind, and expiates the offences
of those by whom they are observed. Those, however, in whose hearts the
dross of sin derived from Time (Kála) was still more developed, assented
not to sacrifices, but reviled both them and all that resulted from
them, the gods, and the followers of the Vedas. Those abusers of the
Vedas, of evil disposition and conduct, and seceders from the path of
enjoined duties, were plunged in wickedness <span
id="fr_195"></span>[8](#fn_195).

The means of subsistence having been provided for the beings he had
created, Brahmá prescribed laws suited to their station and faculties,
the duties of the several castes and orders <span
id="fr_196"></span>[9](#fn_196), and the regions of those of the
different castes who were observant of their duties. The heaven of the
Pitris is the region of devout Brahmans. The sphere of Indra, of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kshetriyas who fly
not from the field. The region of the winds is assigned to the Vaisyas
who are diligent in their occupations and submissive. Śúdras are
elevated to the sphere of the Gandharbas. Those Brahmans who lead
religious lives go to the world of the eighty-eight thousand saints: and
that of the seven Rishis is the seat of pious anchorets and hermits. The
world of ancestors is that of respectable householders: and the region
of Brahmá is the asylum of religious mendicants <span
id="fr_197"></span>[10](#fn_197). The imperishable region of the Yogis
is the highest seat of Vishńu, where they perpetually meditate upon the
supreme being, with minds intent on him alone: the sphere where they
reside, the gods themselves cannot behold. The sun, the moon, the
planets, shall repeatedly be, and cease to be; but those who internally
repeat the mystic adoration of the divinity, shall never know decay. For
those who neglect their duties, who revile the Vedas, and obstruct
religious rites, the places assigned after death are the terrific
regions of darkness, of deep gloom, of fear, and of great terror; the
fearful hell of sharp swords, the hell of scourges and of a waveless
sea <span id="fr_198"></span>[11](#fn_198).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_188"></span>[44:1](vp040.htm#fr_188) The creation of
mankind here described is rather out of its place, as it precedes the
birth of the Prajápatis, or their progenitors: but this want of method
is common to the Puráńas, and is evidence of their being compilations
from various sources.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[44:2](vp040.htm#fr_189) This original of the
four castes is given in Manu, and in most of the Puráńas. We shall see,
however, that the distinctions are subsequently ascribed to voluntary
election, to accident, or to positive institutions.

<span id="fn_190"></span>[44:3](vp040.htm#fr_190) According to Manu,
oblations ascend to and nourish the sun; whence the rain falls upon
earth, and causes the growth of corn: burnt-offerings are therefore the
final causes of the support of mankind.

<span id="fn_191"></span>[45:4](vp040.htm#fr_191) This description of a
pure race of beings is not of general occurrence in the Puráńas. It
seems here to be abridged from a much more detailed account in the
Brahmáńd́a, Váyu, and Márkańd́eya Puráńas. In those works Brahmá is said
to create, in the beginning of the Kalpa, a thousand pairs of each of
the four classes of mankind, who enjoy perfect happiness during the
Krita age, and only gradually become subject to infirmities as the Tretá
or second age advances.

<span id="fn_192"></span>[45:5](vp040.htm#fr_192) These eight
perfections, or Siddhis, are not the supernatural faculties obtained by
the performance of the Yoga. They are described, the commentator says,
in the Skánda and other works; and from them he extracts their
description: 1. Rasollásá, the spontaneous or prompt evolution of the
juices of the body, independently of nutriment from without: 2. Tripti,
mental satisfaction, or freedom from sensual desire: 3. Sámya, sameness
of degree: 4. Tulyatá, similarity of life, form, and feature: 5. Visoká,
exemption alike from infirmity or grief: 6. Consummation of penance and
meditation, by attainment of true knowledge: 7. The power of going every
where at will: 8. The faculty of reposing at any time or in any place.
These attributes are alluded to, though obscurely, in the Váyu, and are
partly specified in the Márkańd́eya Puráńa.

<span id="fn_193"></span>[45:6](vp040.htm#fr_193) In the other three
Puráńas, in which this legend has been found, the different kinds of
inhabited places are specified and <span id="page_46">p. 46</span>
introduced by a series of land measures. Thus the Márkańd́eya states,
that 10 Paramáńus = 1 Parasúkshma; 10 Parasúkshmas = 1 Trasareńu; 10
Trasareńus = 1 particle of dust, or Mahírajas; 10 Mahírajasas = 1
Bálágra, 'hair's point;' 10 Bálágras = 1 Likhyá; 10 Likhyás= 1 Yúka; to
Yúkas = 1 heart of barley (Yavodara); 10 Yavodaras = 1 grain of barley
of middle size; 10 barley grains = 1 finger, or inch; 6 fingers = a
Pada, or foot (the breadth of it); 2 Padas = 1 Vitasti, or span; 2 spans
= 1 Hasta, or cubit; 4 Hastas = a Dhanu, a Danda, or staff, or 2
Nárikás; 2000 Dhanus = a Gavyúti; 4 Gavyútis = a Yojana. The measurement
of the Brahmáńd́a is less detailed. A span from the thumb to the first
finger is a Pradeśa; to the middle finger, a Nála; to the third finger,
a Gokerna; and to the little finger, a Vitasti, which is equal to twelve
Angulas, or fingers; understanding thereby, according to the Váyu, a
joint of the finger; according to other authorities, it is the breadth
of the thumb at the tip. (A. R. 5. 104.) The Váyu, giving similar
measurements upon the authority of Manu, although such a statement does
not occur in the Manu Sanhitá, adds, that 21 fingers= 1 Ratni; 24
fingers = 1 Hasta, or cubit; 2 Ratnis = 1 Kishku; 4 Hastas = 1 Dhanu;
2000 Dhanus = l Gavyúti; and 8000 Dhanus = 1 Yojana. Durgas, or strong
holds, are of four kinds; three of which are natural, from, their
situation in mountains, amidst water, or in other inaccessible spots;
the fourth is the artificial defences of a village (Gráma), a hamlet
(Khet́aka), or a city (Pura or Nagara), which are severally half the size
of the next in the series. The best kind of city is one which is about a
mile long by half a mile broad, built in the form of a parallelogram,
facing the northeast, and surrounded by a high wall and ditch. A hamlet
should be a Yojana distant from a city: a village half a Yojana from a
hamlet. The roads leading to the cardinal points from a city should be
twenty Dhanus (above too feet) broad: a village road should be the same:
a boundary road ten Dhanus: a royal or principal road or street should
be ten Dhanus (above fifty feet) broad: a cross or branch road should be
four Dhanus. Lanes and paths amongst the houses are two Dhanus in
breadth: footpaths four cubits: the entrance of a house three cubits:
the private entrances and paths about the mansion of still narrower
dimensions. Such were the measurements adopted by the first builders of
cities, according to the Puráńas specified.

<span id="fn_194"></span>[46:7](vp040.htm#fr_194) These are enumerated
in the text, as well as in the Váyu and Márkańd́eya P., and are, Udára, a
sort of grain with long stalks (perhaps a holcus); Kodrava (Paspalum
kora); Chínaka, a sort of panic (P. miliaceum); Másha, kidney bean
(Phaseolus radiatus); Mudga (Phaseolus mungo); Masúra, lentil (Ervum
hirsutum); Nishpáva, a sort of pulse; Kulattha (Dolithos <span
id="page_47">p. 47</span> biflorus); Arhaki (Cytisus Cajan); Chanaka,
chick pea (Cicer arietinum); and Sana (Crotolaria).

<span id="fn_195"></span>[47:8](vp040.htm#fr_195) This allusion to the
sects hostile to the Vedas, Buddhists or Jains, does not occur in the
parallel passages of the Váyu and Márkańd́eya Puráńas.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[47:9](vp040.htm#fr_196) The Váyu goes farther
than this, and states that the castes were now first divided according
to their occupations; having, indeed, previously stated that there was
no such distinction in the Krita age: 'Brahmá now appointed those who
were robust and violent to be Kshetriyas, to protect the rest; those who
were pure and pious he made Brahmans; those who were of less power, but
industrious, and addicted to cultivate the ground, he made Vaisyas;
whilst the feeble and poor of spirit were constituted Śúdras: and he
assigned them their several occupations, to prevent that interference
with one another which had occurred as long as they recognised no duties
peculiar to castes.

<span id="fn_197"></span>[48:10](vp040.htm#fr_197) These worlds, some of
which will be more particularly described in a different section, are
the seven Lokas or spheres above the earth: 1. Prájápatya or Pitri loka:
2. Indra loka or Swerga: 3. Marut loka or Diva loka, heaven: 4.
Gandharba loka, the region of celestial spirits; also called Maharloka:
5. Janaloka, or the sphere of saints; some copies read eighteen
thousand; others, as in the text, which is also the reading of the Padma
Puráńa: 6. Tapaloka, the world of the seven sages: and 7. Brahma loka or
Satya loka, the world of infinite wisdom and truth. The eighth, or high
world of Vishńu, is a sectarial addition, which in the Bhágavata is
called Vaikuntha, and in the Brahma Vaivartta, Goloka; both apparently,
and most certainly the last, modern inventions.

<span id="fn_198"></span>[48:11](vp040.htm#fr_198) The divisions of
Naraka, or hell, here named, are again more particularly enumerated, b.
II. c. 6.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](vp041)
