[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp048)  [Next](vp050) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

### CHAP. XIV.

Descendants of Prithu. Legend of the Prachetasas: they are desired by
their father to multiply mankind, by worshipping Vishńu: they plunge
into the sea, and meditate on and praise him: he appears, and grants
their wishes.

PRITHU had two valiant sons, Antarddhi and Pálí <span
id="fr_275"></span>[1](#fn_275). The son of Antarddhána, by his wife
Sikhańd́ińí, was Havirdhána, to whom Dhishańá, a princess of the race of
Agni, bore six sons, Práchínaverhis, Śukra, Gaya, Krishńa, Vraja, and
Ajina <span id="fr_276"></span>[2](#fn_276). The first of these was a
mighty prince and patriarch, by whom mankind was multiplied after the
death of Havirdhána. He was called Práchínaverhis from his placing upon
the earth the sacred grass, pointing to the east <span
id="fr_277"></span>[3](#fn_277). At the termination of a

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

rigid penance the married Savarńá, the daughter of the ocean, who had
been previously betrothed to him, and who had by the king ten sons, who
were all styled Prachetasas, and were skilled in military science: they
all observed the same duties, practised religious austerities, and
remained immersed in the bed of the sea for ten thousand years.

MAITREYA.--You can inform me, great sage, why the magnanimous
Prachetasas engaged in penance in the waters of the sea.

PARÁŚARA.--The sons of Práchínaverhis were originally informed by their
father, who had been appointed as a patriarch, and whose mind was intent
on multiplying mankind, that the had been respectfully enjoined by
Brahmá, the god of gods, to labour to this end, and that he had promised
obedience: "now therefore," continued he, "do you, my sons, to oblige
me, diligently promote the increase of the people, for the orders of the
father of all creatures are entitled to respect." The sons of the king,
having heard their father's words, replied, "So be it;" but they then
inquired of him, as he could best explain it, by what means they might
accomplish the augmentation of mankind. He said to them; "Whoever
worships Vishńu, the bestower of good, attains undoubtedly the object of
his desires: there is no other mode. What further can I tell you? Adore
therefore Govinda, who is Hari, the lord of all beings, in order to
effect the increase of the human race, if you wish to succeed.

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The eternal
Purushottama is to be propitiated by him who wishes for virtue, wealth,
enjoyment, or liberation. Adore him, the imperishable, by whom, when
propitiated, the world was first created, and mankind will assuredly be
multiplied."

Thus instructed by their father, the ten Prachetasas plunged into the
depths of the ocean, and with minds wholly devoted to Náráyańa, the
sovereign of the universe, who is beyond all worlds, were engrossed by
religious austerity for ten thousand years: remaining there, they with
fixed thoughts praised Hari, who, when propitiated, confers on those who
praise him all that they desire.

MAITREYA.--The excellent praises that the Prachetasas addressed to
Vishńu, whilst they stood in the deep, you, oh best of Munis, are
qualified to repeat to me.

PARÁŚARA.--Hear, Maitreya, the hymn which the Prachetasas, as they stood
in the waters of the sea, sang of old to Govinda, their nature being
identified with him:--

"We bow to him whose glory is the perpetual theme of every speech; him
first, him last; the supreme lord of the boundless world; who is
primeval light; who is without his like; indivisible and infinite; the
origin of all existent things, movable or stationary. To that supreme
being who is one with time, whose first forms, though he be without
form, are day and evening and night, be adoration. Glory to him, the
life of all living things, who is the same with the moon, the receptacle
of ambrosia, drunk daily by the gods and progenitors: to him who is one
with the sun, the cause of heat and cold and rain, who dissipates the
gloom, and illuminates the sky with his radiance: to him who is one with
earth, all-pervading, and the asylum of smell and other objects of
sense, supporting the whole world by its solidity. We adore that form of
the deity Hari which is water, the womb of the world, the seed of all
living beings. Glory to the mouth of the gods, the eater of the Havya;
to the eater of the Kavya, the mouth of the progenitors; to Vishńu, who
is identical with fire; to him who is one with air, the origin of ether,
existing as the five vital airs in the body, causing constant vital
action; to him who is identical with the atmosphere, pure, illimitable,
shapeless,

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

separating all creatures. Glory to Krishńa, who is Brahmá in the form of
sensible objects, who is ever the direction of the faculties of sense.
We offer salutation to that supreme Hari who is one with the senses,
both subtle and substantial, the recipient of all impressions, the root
of all knowledge: to the universal soul, who, as internal intellect,
delivers the impressions received by the senses to soul: to him who has
the properties of Prakriti; in whom, without end, rest all things; from
whom all things proceed; and who is that into which all things resolve.
We worship that Purushottoma, the god who is pure spirit, and who,
without qualities, is ignorantly considered as endowed with qualities.
We adore that supreme Brahma, the ultimate condition of Vishńu,
unproductive, unborn, pure, void of qualities, and free from accidents;
who is neither high nor low, neither bulky nor minute, has neither
shape, nor colour, nor shadow, nor substance, nor affection, nor body;
who is neither etherial nor susceptible of contact, smell, or taste; who
has neither eyes, nor ears, nor motion, nor speech, nor breath, nor
mind, nor name, nor race, nor enjoyment, nor splendour; who is without
cause, without fear, without error, without fault, undecaying, immortal,
free from passion, without sound, imperceptible, inactive, independent
of place or time, detached from all investing properties; but
(illusively) exercising irresistible might, and identified with all
beings, dependent upon none. Glory to that nature of Vishńu which tongue
can not tell, nor has eye beheld."

Thus glorifying Vishńu, and intent in meditation on him, the Prachetasas
passed ten thousand years of austerity in the vast ocean; on which Hari,
being pleased with them, appeared to them amidst the waters, of the
complexion of the full-blown lotus leaf. Beholding him mounted on the
king of birds, Garud́a, the Prachetasas bowed down their heads in devout
homage; when Vishńu said to them, "Receive the boon you have desired;
for I, the giver of good, am content with you, and am present." The
Prachetasas replied to him with reverence, and told him that the cause
of their devotions was the command of their father to effect the
multiplication of mankind. The god, having accordingly granted to them
the object of their prayers, disappeared, and they came up from the
water.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_275"></span>[106:1](vp049.htm#fr_275) The text of the Váyu
and Bráhma (or Hari Vanśa) read, like that of the Vishńu, \#\#\#. Mons.
Langlois understands the two last words as a compound epithet; "Se
jouirent dupouvoir de se rendre invisibles." The construction would
admit of such a sense, but it seems more probable that they are intended
for names. The lineage of Prithu is immediately continued through one of
them, Antarddhána, which is the same as Antarddhi; as the commentator
states with regard to that appellation, \#\#\#, and as the commentator
on the Hari Vanśa remarks of the succeeding name, 'one of the brothers
being called Antarddhána or Antarddhi,' leaves no other sense for Pálin
but that of a proper name. The Bhágavata gives Prithu five sons,
Vijitáswa, Haryyaksha, Dhumrakésa, Vrika, and Dravina, and adds that the
elder was also named Antarddhána, in consequence of having obtained from
Indra the power of making himself invisible.

<span id="fn_276"></span>[106:2](vp049.htm#fr_276) The Bhágavata, as
usual, modifies this genealogy; Antarddhána has by Sikhańd́ińí three
sons, who were the three fires, Pávaka, Pavamána, and Suchi, condemned
by a curse of Vaśisht́ha to be born again: by another wife, Nabhaswatí,
he has Havirddhána, whose sons are the same as those of the text, only
giving another name, Varhishad as well as Práchínaverhis, to the first.
According to the Mahábhárata (Moksha Dharma), which has been followed by
the Padma P., Práchinavarhis was born in the family of Atri.

<span id="fn_277"></span>[106:3](vp049.htm#fr_277) The text is, \#\#\#.
Kuśa or varhis is properly 'sacrificial grass' (Poa); and Práchinágra,
literally, 'having its tips towards the east;' the direction in which it
should be placed upon the ground, as a seat for the gods on occasion of
offerings made to them. The name therefore intimates, either that the
practice originated with him, or, as the commentator explains it, that
he was exceedingly devout, offering sacrifices or invoking <span
id="page_107">p. 107</span> the gods every where. The Hari Vanśa adds a
verse to that of our text, reading, \#\#\#, which Mons. Langlois has
rendered, 'Quand il marchoit sur la terre les pointes de cousa etoient
courbées vers l’Orient;' which he supposes to mean, 'Que ce prince avait
tourné ses pensées et porté sa domination vers l’Orient:' a supposition
that might have been obviated by a little further consideration of the
verse of Manu to which he refers. "If he have sitten on culms of grass
with their points towards the east," &c. The commentary explains the
passage as above, referring \#\#\# to \#\#\# not to \#\#\# as, \#\#\#.
'He was called Práchinavarhis, because his sacred grass, pointing east,
was going upon the very earth, or was spread over the whole earth.' The
text of the Bhágavata also explains clearly what is meant: 'By whose
sacred grass, pointing to the east, as he performed sacrifice after
sacrifice, the whole earth, his sacrificial ground, was overspread.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](vp050)
