[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp043)  [Next](vp045) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

### CHAP. IX.

Legend of Lakshmí. Durvásas gives a garland to Indra: he treats it
disrespectfully, and is cursed by the Muni. The power of the gods
impaired: they are oppressed by the Dánavas, and have recourse to
Vishńu. The churning of the ocean. Praises of Śrí.

PARÁŚARA.--But with respect to the question thou hast asked me,
Maitreya, relating to the history of Śrí, hear from me the tale as it
was told to me by Maríchi.

Durvásas, a portion of Śankara (Śiva) <span
id="fr_229"></span>[1](#fn_229), was wandering over the earth; when be
beheld, in the hands of a nymph of air <span
id="fr_230"></span>[2](#fn_230), a garland of flowers culled from the
trees of heaven, the fragrant odour of which spread throughout the
forest, and enraptured all who dwelt beneath its shade. The sage, who
was then possessed by religious phrensy <span
id="fr_231"></span>[3](#fn_231), when he beheld that garland, demanded
it of the graceful and full-eyed nymph, who, bowing to him
reverentially, immediately presented it to him. He, as one frantic,
placed the chaplet upon his brow, and thus decorated resumed his path;
when he beheld (Indra) the husband of Śachí, the ruler of the three
worlds, approach, seated on his infuriated elephant Airávata, and
attended by the gods. The phrensied sage, taking from his head the
garland of flowers, amidst which the bees collected ambrosia, threw it
to the king of the gods, who caught it, and suspended it on the brow of
Airávata, where it shone like the river Jáhnaví, glittering on the dark
summit of the mountain Kailása. The elephant, whose eyes were dim with
inebriety, and attracted by the smell, took hold of the garland with his
trunk, and cast it on the earth. That chief of sages, Durvásas, was

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

highly incensed at this disrespectful treatment of his gift, and thus
angrily addressed the sovereign of the immortals: "Inflated with the
intoxication of power, Vásava, vile of spirit, thou art an idiot not to
respect the garland I presented to thee, which was the dwelling of
Fortune (Śrí). Thou hast not acknowledged it as a largess; thou hast not
bowed thyself before me; thou hast not placed the wreath upon thy head,
with thy countenance expanding with delight. Now, fool, for that thou
hast not infinitely prized the garland that I gave thee, thy sovereignty
over the three worlds shall be subverted. Thou confoundest me, Śakra,
with other Brahmans, and hence I have suffered disrespect from thy
arrogance: but in like manner as thou hast cast the garland I gave thee
down on the ground, so shall thy dominion over the universe be whelmed
in ruin. Thou hast offended one whose wrath is dreaded by all created
things, king of the gods, even me, by thine excessive pride."

Descending hastily from his elephant, Mahendra endeavoured to appease
the sinless Durvásas: but to the excuses and prostrations of the
thousand-eyed, the Muni answered, "I am not of a compassionate heart,
nor is forgiveness congenial to my nature. Other Munis may relent; but
know me, Śakra, to be Durvásas. Thou hast in vain been rendered insolent
by Gautama and others; for know me, Indra, to be Durvásas, whose nature
is a stranger to remorse. Thou hast been flattered by Vaśisht́ha and
other tender-hearted saints, whose loud praises (lave made thee so
arrogant, that thou hast insulted me. But who is there in the universe
that can behold my countenance, dark with frowns, and surrounded by my
blazing hair, and not tremble? What need of words? I will not forgive,
whatever semblance of humility thou mayest assume."

Having thus spoken, the Brahman went his way; and the king of the gods,
remounting his elephant, returned to his capital Amarávati.
Thenceforward, Maitreya, the three worlds and Śakra lost their vigour,
and all vegetable products, plants, and herbs were withered and died;
sacrifices were no longer offered; devout exercises no longer practised;
men were no more addicted to charity, or any moral or religious
obligation;

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

all beings became devoid of steadiness <span
id="fr_232"></span>[4](#fn_232); all the faculties of sense were
obstructed by cupidity; and men's desires were excited by frivolous
objects. Where there is energy, there is prosperity; and upon prosperity
energy depends. How can those abandoned by prosperity be possessed of
energy; and without energy, where is excellence? Without excellence
there can be no vigour nor heroism amongst men: he who has neither
courage nor strength, will be spurned by all: and he who is universally
treated with disgrace, must suffer abasement of his intellectual
faculties.

The three regions being thus wholly divested of prosperity, and deprived
of energy, the Dánavas and sons of Diti, the enemies of the gods, who
were incapable of steadiness, and agitated by ambition, put forth their
strength against the gods. They engaged in war with the feeble and
unfortunate divinities; and Indra and the rest, being overcome in fight,
fled for refuge to Brahmá, preceded by the god of flame (Hutáśana). When
the great father of the universe had heard all that had come to pass, he
said to the deities, "Repair for protection to the god of high and low;
the tamer of the demons; the causeless cause of creation, preservation,
and destruction; the progenitor of the progenitors; the immortal,
unconquerable Vishńu; the cause of matter and spirit, of his
unengendered products; the remover of the grief of all who humble
themselves before him: he will give you aid." Having thus spoken to the
deities, Brahmá proceeded along with them to the northern shore of the
sea of milk; and with reverential words thus prayed to the supreme
Hari:--

"We glorify him who is all things; the lord supreme over all; unborn,
imperishable; the protector of the mighty ones of creation; the
unperceived, indivisible Náráyańa; the smallest of the smallest, the
largest of the largest, of the elements; in whom are all things, from
whom are all things; who was before existence; the god who is all
beings; who is the end of ultimate objects; who is beyond final spirit,
and is one with supreme soul; who is contemplated as the cause of final
liberation by

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

sages anxious to be free; in whom are not the qualities of goodness,
foulness, or darkness, that belong to undeveloped nature. May that
purest of all pure spirits this day be propitious to us. May that Hari
be propitious to us, whose inherent might is not an object of the
progressive chain of moments or of days, that make up time. May he who
is called the supreme god, who is not in need of assistance, Hari, the
soul of all embodied substance, be favourable unto us. May that Hari,
who is both cause and effect; who is the cause of cause, the effect of
effect; he who is the effect of successive effect; who is the effect of
the effect of the effect himself; the product of the effect of the
effect of the effect, or elemental substance; to him I bow <span
id="fr_233"></span>[5](#fn_233). The cause of the cause; the cause of
the cause of the cause; the cause of them all; to him I bow. To him who
is the enjoyer and thing to be enjoyed; the creator and thing to be
created; who is the agent and the effect; to that supreme being I bow.
The infinite nature of Vishńu is pure, intelligent, perpetual, unborn,
undecayable, inexhaustible, inscrutable, immutable; it is neither gross
nor subtile, nor capable of being defined: to that ever holy nature of
Vishńu I bow. To him whose faculty to create the universe abides in but
a part of but the ten-millionth part of him; to him who is one with the
inexhaustible supreme spirit, I bow: and to the glorious nature of the
supreme Vishńu, which nor gods, nor sages, nor I, nor Śankara apprehend;
that nature which the Yogis, after incessant effort, effacing both moral
merit and demerit, behold to be contemplated in the mystical
monosyllable Om: the supreme glory of Vishńu, who is the first of all;
of whom, one only god, the triple energy is the same with Brahmá,
Vishńu, and Śiva: oh lord of all, great soul of all, asylum of all,
undecayable, have pity upon thy servants; oh Vishńu, be manifest unto
us."

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

Paráśara continued.--The gods, having heard this prayer uttered by
Brahmá, bowed down, and cried, "Be favourable to us; be present to our
sight: we bow down to that glorious nature which the mighty Brahmá does
not know; that which is thy nature, oh imperishable, in whom the
universe abides." Then the gods having ended, Vrihaspati and the divine
Rishis thus prayed: "We bow down to the being entitled to adoration; who
is the first object of sacrifice; who was before the first of things;
the creator of the creator of the world; the undefinable: oh lord of all
that has been or is to be; imperishable type of sacrifice; have pity
upon thy worshippers; appear to them, prostrate before thee. Here is
Brahmá; here is Trilochana (the three-eyed Śiva), with the Rudras;
Pushá, (the sun), with the Ádityas; and Fire, with all the mighty
luminaries: here are the sons of Aswiní (the two Aswiní Kumáras), the
Vasus and all the winds, the Sádhyas, the Viśwadevas, and Indra the king
of the gods: all of whom bow lowly before thee: all the tribes of the
immortals, vanquished by the demon host, have fled to thee for succour."

Thus prayed to, the supreme deity, the mighty holder of the conch and
discus, shewed himself to them: and beholding the lord of gods, bearing
a shell, a discus, and a mace, the assemblage of primeval form, and
radiant with embodied light, Pitámahá and the other deities, their eyes
moistened with rapture, first paid him homage, and then thus addressed
him: "Repeated salutation to thee, who art indefinable: thou art Brahmá;
thou art the wielder of the Pináka bow (Śiva); thou art Indra; thou art
fire, air, the god of waters, the sun, the king of death (Yama), the
Vasus, the Máruts (the winds), the Sádhyas, and Viśwadevas. This
assembly of divinities, that now has come before thee, thou art; for,
the creator of the world, thou art every where. Thou art the sacrifice,
the prayer of oblation, the mystic syllable Om, the sovereign of all
creatures: thou art all that is to be known, or to be unknown: oh
universal soul, the whole world consists of thee. We, discomfited by the
Daityas, have fled to thee, oh Vishńu, for refuge. Spirit of all, have
compassion upon us; defend us with thy mighty power. There will be
affliction, desire, trouble, and grief, until thy protection is
obtained: but thou art the remover of all sins. Do thou then, oh pure of
spirit, shew favour unto

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

us, who have fled to thee: oh lord of all, protect us with thy great
power, in union with the goddess who is thy strength <span
id="fr_234"></span>[6](#fn_234)." Hari, the creator of the universe,
being thus prayed to by the prostrate divinities, smiled, and thus
spake: "With renovated energy, oh gods, I will restore your strength. Do
you act as I enjoin. Let all the gods, associated with the Asuras, cast
all sorts of medicinal herbs into the sea of milk; and then taking the
mountain Mandara for the churning-stick, the serpent Vásuki for the
rope, churn the ocean together for ambrosia; depending upon my aid. To
secure the assistance of the Daityas, you must be at peace with them,
and engage to give them an equal portion of the fruit of your associated
toil; promising them, that by drinking the Amrita that shall be produced
from the agitated ocean, they shall become mighty and immortal. I will
take care that the enemies of the gods shall not partake of the precious
draught; that they shall share in the labour alone."

Being thus instructed by the god of gods, the divinities entered into
alliance with the demons, and they jointly undertook the acquirement of
the beverage of immortality. They collected various kinds of medicinal
herbs, and cast them into the sea of milk, the waters of which were
radiant as the thin and shining clouds of autumn. They then took the
mountain Mandara for the staff; the serpent Vásuki for the cord; and
commenced to churn the ocean for the Amrita. The assembled gods were
stationed by Krishńa at the tail of the serpent; the Daityas and Dánavas
at its head and neck. Scorched by the flames emitted from his inflated
hood, the demons were shorn of their glory; whilst the clouds driven
towards his tail by the breath of his mouth, refreshed the gods with
revivifying showers. In the midst of the milky sea, Hari himself, in the
form of a tortoise, served as a pivot for the mountain, as it was
whirled around. The holder of the mace and discus was present in other
forms amongst the gods and demons, and assisted to drag the monarch of
the serpent race: and in another vast body he sat upon the summit of the
mountain. With one portion of his energy, unseen by gods or demons, he
sustained the serpent king; and with another, infused vigour into the
gods.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

From the ocean, thus churned by the gods and Dánavas, first uprose the
cow Surabhi, the fountain of milk and curds, worshipped by the
divinities, and beheld by them and their associates with minds
disturbed, and eyes glistening with delight. Then, as the holy Siddhas
in the sky wondered what this could be, appeared the goddess Váruní (the
deity of wine), her eyes rolling with intoxication. Next, from the
whirlpool of the deep, sprang the celestial Párijáta tree, the delight
of the nymphs of heaven, perfuming the world with its blossoms. The
troop of Ápsarasas, the nymphs of heaven, were then produced, of
surprising loveliness, endowed with beauty and with taste. The
cool-rayed moon next rose, and was seized by Mahádeva: and then poison
was engendered from the sea, of which the snake gods (Nágas) took
possession. Dhanwantari, robed in white, and bearing in his hand the cup
of Amrita, next came forth: beholding which, the sons of Diti and of
Danu, as well as the Munis, were filled with satisfaction and delight.
Then, seated on a full-blown lotus, and holding a water-lily in her
hand, the goddess Śrí, radiant with beauty, rose from the waves. The
great sages, enraptured, hymned her with the song dedicated to her
praise <span id="fr_235"></span>[7](#fn_235). Viśwavasu and other
heavenly quiristers sang, and Ghritáchí and other celestial nymphs
danced before her. Gangá and other holy streams attended for her
ablutions; and the elephants of the skies, taking up their pure waters
in vases of gold, poured them over the goddess, the queen of the
universal world. The sea of milk in person presented her with a wreath
of never-fading flowers; and the artist of the gods (Viswakermá)
decorated her person with heavenly ornaments. Thus bathed, attired, and
adorned, the goddess, in the view of the celestials, cast herself upon
the breast of Hari; and there reclining, turned her eyes upon the
deities, who were inspired with rapture by her gaze. Not so the Daityas,
who, with Viprachitti at their head, were filled with indignation, as
Vishńu turned away from them, and they were abandoned by the goddess of
prosperity (Lakshmí.)

The powerful and indignant Daityas then forcibly seized the Amrita-cup,
that was in the hand of Dhanwantari: but Vishńu, assuming a female form,
fascinated and deluded them; and recovering the Amrita

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

from them, delivered it to the gods. Śakra and the other deities quaffed
the ambrosia. The incensed demons, grasping their weapons, fell upon
them; but the gods, into whom the ambrosial draught had infused new
vigour, defeated and put their host to flight, and they fled through the
regions of space, and plunged into the subterraneous realms of Pátála.
The gods thereat greatly rejoiced, did homage to the holder of the
discus and mace, and resumed their reign in heaven. The sun shone with
renovated splendour, and again discharged his appointed task; and the
celestial luminaries again circled, oh best of Munis, in their
respective orbits. Fire once more blazed aloft, beautiful in splendour;
and the minds of all beings were animated by devotion. The three worlds
again were rendered happy by prosperity; and Indra, the chief of the
gods, was restored to power <span id="fr_236"></span>[8](#fn_236).
Seated upon his throne, and once more in

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

heaven, exercising sovereignty over the gods, Śakra thus eulogized the
goddess who bears a lotus in her hand:--

"I bow down to Śrí, the mother of all beings, seated on her lotus
throne, with eyes like full-blown lotuses, reclining on the breast of
Vishńu. Thou art Siddhi (superhuman power): thou art Swadhá and Swáhá:
thou art ambrosia (Sudhá), the purifier of the universe: thou art
evening, night, and dawn: thou art power, faith, intellect: thou art the
goddess of letters (Saraswatí). Thou, beautiful goddess, art knowledge
of devotion,

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

great knowledge, mystic knowledge, and spiritual knowledge <span
id="fr_237"></span>[9](#fn_237); which confers eternal liberation. Thou
art the science of reasoning, the three Vedas, the arts and
sciences <span id="fr_238"></span>[10](#fn_238): thou art moral and
political science. The world is peopled by thee with pleasing or
displeasing forms. Who else than thou, oh goddess, is seated on that
person of the god of gods, the wielder of the mace, which is made up of
sacrifice, and contemplated by holy ascetics? Abandoned by thee, the
three worlds were on the brink of ruin; but they have been reanimated by
thee. From thy propitious gaze, oh mighty goddess, men obtain wives,
children, dwellings, friends, harvests, wealth. Health and strength,
power, victory, happiness, are easy of attainment to those upon whom
thou smilest. Thou art the mother of all beings, as the god of gods,
Hari, is their father; and this world, whether animate or inanimate, is
pervaded by thee and Vishńu. Oh thou who purifiest all things, forsake
not our treasures, our granaries, our dwellings, our dependants, our
persons, our wives: abandon not our children, our friends, our lineage,
our jewels, oh thou who abidest on the bosom of the god of gods. They
whom thou desertest are forsaken by truth, by purity, and goodness, by
every amiable and excellent quality; whilst the base and worthless upon
whom thou lookest favourably become immediately endowed with all
excellent qualifications, with families, and with power. He on whom thy
countenance is turned is honourable, amiable, prosperous, wise, and of
exalted birth; a hero of irresistible prowess: but all his merits and
his advantages are converted into worthlessness from whom, beloved of
Vishńu, mother of the world, thou avertest thy face. The tongues of
Brahmá, are unequal to celebrate thy excellence. Be propitious to me, oh
goddess, lotus-eyed, and never forsake me more."

Being thus praised, the gratified Śrí, abiding in all creatures, and

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

heard by all beings, replied to the god of a hundred rites (Śatakratu);
"I am pleased, monarch of the gods, by thine adoration. Demand from me
what thou desirest: I have come to fulfil thy wishes." "If, goddess,"
replied Indra, "thou wilt grant my prayers; if I am worthy of thy
bounty; be this my first request, that the three worlds may never again
be deprived of thy presence. My second supplication, daughter of ocean,
is, that thou wilt not forsake him who shall celebrate thy praises in
the words I have addressed to thee." "I will not abandon," the goddess
answered, "the three worlds again: this thy first boon is granted; for I
am gratified by thy praises: and further, I will never turn my face away
from that mortal who morning and evening shall repeat the hymn with
which thou hast addressed me."

Paráśara proceeded.--Thus, Maitreya, in former times the goddess Śrí
conferred these boons upon the king of the gods, being pleased by his
adorations; but her first birth was as the daughter of Bhrigu by Khyáti:
it was at a subsequent period that she was produced from the sea, at the
churning of the ocean by the demons and the gods, to obtain
ambrosia <span id="fr_239"></span>[11](#fn_239). For in like manner as
the lord of the world, the god of gods, Janárddana, descends amongst
mankind (in various shapes), so does his coadjutrix Śrí. Thus when Hari
was born as a dwarf, the son of Adití, Lakshmí appeared from a lotus (as
Padmá, or Kamalá); when he was born as Ráma, of the race of Bhrigu (or
Paraśuráma), she was Dharańí; when he was Rághava (Rámachandra), she was
Sítá; and when he was Krishńa, she became Rukminí. In the other descents
of Vishńu, she is his associate. If he takes a celestial form, she
appears as divine; if a mortal, she becomes a mortal too, transforming
her own person agreeably to whatever character it pleases Vishńu to put
on. Whosoever hears this

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

account of the birth of Lakshmí, whosoever reads it, shall never lose
the goddess Fortune from his dwelling for three generations; and
misfortune, the fountain of strife, shall never enter into those houses
in which the hymns to Śrí are repeated.

Thus, Brahman, have I narrated to thee, in answer to thy question, how
Lakshmí, formerly the daughter of Bhrigu, sprang from the sea of milk;
and misfortune shall never visit those amongst mankind who daily recite
the praises of Lakshmí uttered by Indra, which are the origin and cause
of all prosperity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_229"></span>[70:1](vp044.htm#fr_229) Durvásas was the son
of Atri by Anasúyá, and was an incarnation of a portion of Śiva.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[70:2](vp044.htm#fr_230) Vidyádharí. These
beings, male and female, are spirits of an inferior order, tenanting the
middle regions of the atmosphere. According to the Váyu, the garland was
given to the nymph by Deví.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[70:3](vp044.htm#fr_231) He observed the Vrata,
or vow of insanity; equivalent to the ecstasies of some religious
fanatics. In this state,' says the commentator, 'even saints are
devils.'

<span id="fn_232"></span>[72:4](vp044.htm#fr_232) They became Nih-satwa;
and Satwa is explained throughout by Dhairyya, 'steadiness,'
'fortitude.'

<span id="fn_233"></span>[73:5](vp044.htm#fr_233) The first effect of
primary cause is nature, or Prakriti: the effect of the effect, or of
Prakriti, is Mahat: effect in the third degree is Ahankára: in the
fourth, or the effect of the effect (Ahankára) of the effect (Mahat) of
the effect (Prakriti), is elementary substance, or Bhúta. Vishńu is each
and all. So in the succeeding ascending scale, Brahmá is the cause of
mortal life; the cause of Brahmá is the egg, or aggregate elementary
matter: its cause is, therefore, elementary matter; the cause of which
is subtile or rudimental matter, which originates from Ahankára, and so
on. Vishńu is also each and all of these.

<span id="fn_234"></span>[75:6](vp044.htm#fr_234) With thy Śakti, or the
goddess Śrí or Lakshmí.

<span id="fn_235"></span>[76:7](vp044.htm#fr_235) Or with the Súkta, or
hymn of the Vedas, commencing, "Hiranya vernám," &c.

<span id="fn_236"></span>[77:8](vp044.htm#fr_236) The churning of the
ocean does not occur in several of the Puráńas, and is but cursorily
alluded to in the Śiva, Linga, and Kúrma Puráńas. The Váyu and Padma
have much the same narrative as that of our text; and so have the Agni
and Bhágavata, except that they refer only briefly to the anger of
Durvásas, without narrating the circumstances; indicating their being
posterior, therefore, to the original tale. The part, however, assigned
to Durvásas appears to be an embellishment added to the original, for no
mention of him occurs in the Matsya P. nor even in the Hari Vanśa,
neither does it occur in what may be considered the oldest extant
versions of the story, those of the Rámáyana and Mahábhárata: both these
ascribe the occurrence to the desire of the gods and Daityas to become
immortal. The Matsya assigns a similar motive to the gods, instigated by
observing that the Daityas slain by them in battle were restored to life
by Śukra with the Sanjíviní, or herb of immortality, which he had
discovered. The account in the Hari Vanśa is brief and obscure, and is
explained by the commentator as an allegory, in which the churning of
the ocean typifies ascetic penance, and the ambrosia is final
liberation: but this is mere mystification. The legend of the Rámáyana
is translated, vol. I. p. 410. of the Serampore edition; and that of the
Mahábhárata by Sir C. Wilkins, in the notes to his translation of the
Bhágavata Gítá. See also the original text, Cal. ed. p. 40. It has been
presented to general readers in a more attractive form by my friend H.
M. Parker, in his Draught of Immortality, printed with other poems,
Lond. 1827. The Matsya P. has many of the stanzas of the Mahábhárata
interspersed with others. There is some variety in the order and number
of articles produced from the ocean. As I have observed elsewhere (Hindu
Theatre, I. 59. Lond. ed.), the popular enumeration is fourteen; but the
Rámáyana specifies but nine; the Mahábhárata, nine; the Bhágavata, ten;
the Padma, nine; the Váyu, twelve; the <span id="page_78">p. 78</span>
Matsya, perhaps, gives the whole number. Those in which most agree, are,
1. the Háláhala or Kálakúta poison, swallowed by Śiva: 2. Váruní or
Surá, the goddess of wine, who being taken by the gods, and rejected by
the Daityas, the former were termed Suras, and the latter Asuras: 3. the
horse Uchchaiśśravas, taken by Indra: 4. Kaustubha, the jewel worn by
Vishńu: 5. the moon: 6. Dhanwantari, with the Amrita in his Kamańd́alu,
or vase; and these two articles are in the Váyu considered as distinct
products: 7. the goddess Padmá or Śrí: 8. the Apsarasas, or nymphs of
heaven: 9. Surabhi, or the cow of plenty: 10. the Párijáta tree, or tree
of heaven: 11. Airávata, the elephant taken by Indra. The Matsya adds,
12. the umbrella taken by Varuna: 13. the earrings taken by Indra, and
given to Adití: and apparently another horse, the white horse of the
sun: or the number may be completed by counting the Amrita separately
from Dhanwantari. The number is made up in the popular lists by adding
the bow and the conch of Vishńu; but there does not seem to be any good
authority for this, and the addition is a sectarial one: so is that of
the Tulaśí tree, a plant sacred to Krishńa, which is one of the twelve
specified by the Váyu P. The Uttara Khanda of the Padma P. has a
peculiar enumeration, or, Poison; Jyesht́há or Alakshmí, the goddess of
misfortune, the elder born to fortune; the goddess of wine; Nidrá, or
sloth; the Apsarasas; the elephant of Indra; Lakshmí; the moon; and the
Tulaśí plant. The reference to Mohiní, the female form assumed by
Vishńu, is very brief in our text; and no notice is taken of the story
told in the Mahábhárata and some of the Puráńas, of the Daitya Ráhu's
insinuating himself amongst the gods, and obtaining a portion of the
Amrita: being beheaded for this by Vishńu, the head became immortal, in
consequence of the Amrita having reached the throat, and was transferred
as a constellation to the skies; and as the sun and moon detected his
presence amongst the gods, Ráhu pursues them with implacable hatred, and
his efforts to seize them are the causes of eclipses; Ráhu typifying the
ascending and descending nodes. This seems to be the simplest and oldest
form of the legend. The equal immortality of the body, under the name
Ketu, and his being the cause of meteorical phenomena, seems to have
been an after-thought. In the Padma and Bhágavata, Ráhu and Ketu are the
sons of Sinhiká, the wife of the Dánava Viprachitti.

<span id="fn_237"></span>[79:9](vp044.htm#fr_237) The four Vidyás, or
branches of knowledge, are said to be, Yajna vidyá, knowledge or
performance of religious rites; Mahá vidyá, great knowledge, the worship
of the female principle, or Tántrika worship; Guhya vidyá, knowledge of
mantras, mystical prayers, and incantations; and Átma vidyá, knowledge
of soul, true wisdom.

<span id="fn_238"></span>[79:10](vp044.htm#fr_238) Or Várttá, explained
to mean the Śilpa śástra, mechanics, sculpture, and architecture;
Áyur-veda, medicine, &c.

<span id="fn_239"></span>[80:11](vp044.htm#fr_239) The cause of this,
however, is left unexplained. The Padma P. inserts a legend to account
for the temporary separation of Lakshmí from Vishńu, which appears to be
peculiar to that work. Bhrigu was lord of Lakshmípur, a city on the
Narmadá, given him by Brahmá. His daughter Lakshmí instigated her
husband to request its being conceded to her, which offending Bhrigu, he
cursed Vishńu to be born upon earth ten times, to be separated from his
wife, and to have no children. The legend is an insipid modern
embellishment.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](vp045)
