[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp050)  [Next](vp052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

### CHAP. XVI.

Inquiries of Maitreya respecting the history of Prahláda.

MAITREYA.--Venerable Muni, you have described to me the races of human
beings, and the eternal Vishńu, the cause of this world; but who was
this mighty Prahláda, of whom you have last spoken; whom fire could not
burn; who died not, when pierced by weapons; at whose presence in the
waters earth trembled, shaken by his movements, even though in bonds;
and who, overwhelmed with rocks, remained unhurt. I am desirous to hear
an account of the unequalled might of that sage worshipper of Vishńu, to
whose marvellous history you have alluded. Why was he assailed by the
weapons of the sons of Diti? why was so righteous a person thrown into
the sea? wherefore was he overwhelmed with rocks? why bitten by venomous
snakes? why hurled from the mountain crest? why cast into the flames?
why was he made a mark for the tusks of the elephants of the spheres?
wherefore was the blast of death directed against him by the enemies of
the gods? why did the priests of the Daityas practise ceremonies for his
destruction? why were the thousand illusions of Samvara exercised upon
him? and for what purpose was deadly poison administered to him by the
servants of the king, but which was innocuous as food to his sagacious
son? All this I am anxious to hear: the history of the magnanimous
Prahláda; a legend of great marvels. Not that it is a wonder that he
should have been uninjured by the Daityas; for who can injure the man
that fixes his whole heart on Vishńu? but it is strange that such
inveterate hatred should have been shewn, by his own kin, to one so
virtuous, so unweariedly occupied in worshipping Vishńu. You can explain
to me for what reason the sons of Diti offered violence to one so pious,
so illustrious, so attached to Vishńu, so free from guile. Generous
enemies wage no war with such as he was, full of sanctity and every
excellence; how should his own father thus behave towards him? Tell me
therefore, most illustrious Muni, the whole story in detail: I wish to
hear the entire narrative of the sovereign of the Daitya race.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](vp052)
