[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp066)  [Next](vp068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

### CHAP. IX.

Planetary system, under the type of a Śiśumára or porpoise. The earth
nourished by the sun. Of rain whilst the sun shines. Of rain from
clouds. Rain the support, of vegetation, and thence of animal life.
Náráyańa the support of all beings.

THE form of the mighty Hari which is present in heaven, consisting of
the constellations, is that of a porpoise, with Dhruva situated in the
tail. As Dhruva revolves, it causes the moon, sun, and stars to turn
round also; and the lunar asterisms follow in its circular path; for all
the celestial luminaries are in fact bound to the polar-star by aerial
cords. The porpoise-like figure of the celestial sphere is upheld by
Náráyańa, who himself, in planetary radiance, is seated in its heart;
whilst the son of Uttanápáda, Dhruva, in consequence of his adoration of
the lord of the world, shines in the tail of the stellar porpoise <span
id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_709). The upholder of the porpoise-shaped
sphere is the sovereign of all, Janárddana. This sphere is the supporter
of Dhruva; and by Dhruva the sun is upstayed. Upon the sun depends this
world, with its gods, demons, and men. In what manner the world depends
upon the sun, be attentive, and you shall hear.

During eight months of the year the sun attracts the waters, which are
the essence of all fluids, and then pours them upon earths (during the
other four months) as rain <span id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_710): from
rain grows corn; and by corn the whole world subsists. The sun with his
scorching rays absorbs the moisture of the earth, and with them
nourishes the moon. The moon communicates, through tubes of air, its
dews to the clouds, which, being composed of smoke, fire, and wind (or
vapour), can retain the waters with which they are charged: they are
therefore called Abhras, because their contents are not dispersed <span
id="fr_711"></span>[3](#fn_711). When however they are broken to

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

pieces by the wind, then watery stores descend, bland, and freed front
every impurity by the sweetening process of time. The sun, Maitreya,
exhales watery fluids from four sources, seas, rivers, the earth, and
living creatures. The water that the sun has drawn up from the Gangá of
the skies he quickly pours down with his rays, and without a cloud; and
men who are touched by this pure rain are cleansed from the soil of sin,
and never see hell: this is termed celestial ablution. That rain which
falls whilst the sun is shining, and without a cloud in the sky, is the
water of the heavenly Ganges, shed by the solar rays. If, however, rain
falls from a bright and cloudless sky whilst the sun is in the mansion
of Krittiká and the other asterisms counted by odd numbers, as the
third, fifth, &c., the water, although that of the Gangá of the sky, is
scattered, by the elephants of the quarters, not by the rays of the sun:
it is only when such rain falls, and the sun is in the even asterisms,
that it is distributed by his beams <span
id="fr_712"></span>[4](#fn_712).

The water which the clouds shed upon earth is in truth the ambrosia of
living beings, for it gives fertility to the plants which are the
support of their existence. By this all vegetables grow and are matured,
and become the means of maintaining life. With them, again, those men

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

who take the law for their light perform daily sacrifices, and through
them give nourishment to the gods. And thus sacrifices, the Vedas, the
font' castes, with the Brahmans at their head, all the residences of the
gods, all the tribes of animals, the whole world, all are supported by
the rains by which food is produced. But the rain is evolved by the sun;
the sun is sustained by Dhruva; and Dhruva is supported by the celestial
porpoise-shaped sphere, which is one with Náráyańa. Náráyańa, the
primeval existent, and eternally enduring, seated in the heart of the
stellar sphere, is the supporter of all beings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_709"></span>[230:1](vp067.htm#fr_709) A more particular
description of this porpoise occurs farther on.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[230:2](vp067.htm#fr_710) Consequently, the
Linga P. observes, there is no waste of water in the universe, as it is
in constant circulation.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[230:3](vp067.htm#fr_711) The theory of the
clouds is more fully detailed in the Váyu, Linga, and Matsya <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> Puráńas: it is the same in its general
tenor, but comprises additional circumstances. Clouds, according to
those authorities, are of three classes: 1. Ágneya, originating from
fire or heat, or in other words evaporation: they are charged with wind
and rain, and are of various orders, amongst which are those called
Jímúta, from their supporting life; 2. Brahmaja, born from the breath of
Brahmá: these are the clouds whence thunder and lightning proceed: and
3. Pakshaja, or clouds which were originally the wings of the mountains,
and which were cut off by Indra: these are also termed
Pushkáravarttakas, from their including water in their vortices: they
are the largest and most formidable of all, and are those which, at the
end of the Yugas and Kalpas, poor down the waters of the deluge. The
shell of the egg of Brahmá, or of the universe, is formed of the
primitive clouds.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[231:4](vp067.htm#fr_712) According to the
Váyu, the water scattered by the elephants of the quarters is in summer
dew, and in winter snow; or the latter is brought by the winds from a
city called Puńd́ra, which lies between the Himavat and Hemakuta
mountains, and falls down upon the former. In like manner, also, as heat
radiates from the sun, so cold radiates from the moon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](vp068)
