[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp061)  [Next](vp063) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

### CHAP. IV.

Account of kings, divisions, mountains, rivers, and inhabitants of the
other Dwípas, viz. Plaksha, Śálmala, Kuśa, Krauncha, Śáka, and Pushkara:
of the oceans separating them: of the tides: of the confines of the
earth: the Lokáloka mountain. Extent of the whole.

IN the same manner as Jambu-dwípa is girt round about by the ocean of
salt water, so that ocean is surrounded by the insular continent of
Plaksha; the extent of which is twice that of Jambu-dwípa.

Medhatithi, who was made sovereign of Plaksha, had seven sons,
Śántabhaya, Śiśira, Sukhodaya, Ánanda, Śiva, Kshemaka, and Dhruva; and
the Dwípa was divided amongst them, and each division was named after
the prince to whom it was subject. The several kingdoms were bounded by
as many ranges of mountains, named severally Gomeda, Chandra, Nárada,
Dundubhi, Somaka, Sumanas, and Vaibhrája. In these mountains the sinless
inhabitants ever dwell along with celestial spirits and gods: in them
are many holy places; and the people there live for a long period,
exempt from care and pain, and enjoying uninterrupted felicity. There
are also, in the seven divisions of Plaksha, seven rivers, flowing to
the sea, whose names alone are sufficient to take away sin: they are the
Anutaptá, Śikhí, Vipásá, Tridivá, Kramu, Amritá, and Sukritá. These are
the chief rivers and mountains of Plaksha-dwípa, which I have enumerated
to you; but there are thousands of others of inferior magnitude. The
people who drink of the waters of those rivers are always contented and
happy, and there is neither decrease nor increase amongst them <span
id="fr_642"></span>[1](#fn_642), neither are the revolutions of the four
ages known in these Varshas: the character of the time is there
uniformly that of

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

the Treta (or silver) age. In the five Dwípas, worthy Brahman, from
Plaksha to Śáka, the length of life is five thousand years, and
religious merit is divided amongst the several castes and orders of the
people. The castes are called Áryaka, Kuru, Vivása, and Bháví,
corresponding severally with Brahman, Kshetriya, Vaiśya, and Śúdra. In
this Dwípa is a large fig-tree (F. religiosa), of similar size as the
Jambu-tree of Jambu-dwípa; and this Dwípa is called Plaksha, after the
name of the tree. Hari, who is all, and the creator of all, is
worshipped in this continent in the form of Soma (the moon).
Plaksha-dwípa is surrounded, as by a disc, by the sea of molasses, of
the same extent as the land. Such, Maitreya, is a brief description of
Plaksha-dwípa.

The hero Vapushmat was king of the next or Śálmala-dwípa, whose seven
sons also gave designations to seven Varshas, or divisions. Their names
were Śweta, Háríta, Jímúta, Rohita, Vaidyuta, Mánasa, and Suprabha. The
Ikshu sea is encompassed by the continent of Sálmala, which is twice its
extent. There are seven principal mountain ranges, abounding in precious
gems, and dividing the Varshas from each other; and there are also seven
chief rivers. The mountains are called Kumuda, Unnata, Valáhaka, Drona,
fertile in medicinal herbs, Kanka, Mahisha, and Kakkudwat. The rivers
are Yauní, Toyá, Vitrishńá, Chandrá, Śuklá, Vimochaní, and Nivritti; all
whose waters cleanse away sins. The Brahmans, Kshetriyas, Vaiśyas, and
Śúdras of this Dwípa, called severally Kapilas, Arunas, Pítas, and
Rohitas (or tawny, purple, yellow, and red), worship the imperishable
soul of all things, Vishńu, in the form of Váyu (wind), with pious
rites, and enjoy frequent association with the gods. A large Śálmalí
(silk-cotton) tree grows in this Dwípa, and gives it its name. The Dwípa
is surrounded by the Surá sea (sea of wine), of the same extent as
itself.

The Surá sea is entirely encircled by Kuśa-dwípa, which is every way
twice the size of the preceding continent. The king, Jyotishmat, had
seven sons, Udbhida, Venumán, Swairatha, Lavana, Dhriti, Prabhákara, and
Kapila, after whom the seven portions or Varshas of the island were
called Udbhida, &c. There reside mankind along with Daityas and Dánavas,
as well as with spirits of heaven and gods. The four

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

castes, assiduously devoted to their respective duties, are termed
Dámís, Śushmis, Snehas, and Mandehas, who, in order to be relieved of
the obligations imposed upon them in the discharge of their several
functions, worship Janárddana, in the form of Brahmá, and thus get rid
of the unpleasant duties which lead to temporal rewards. The seven
principal mountains in this Dwípa are named Vidruma, Hemaśaila,
Dyutimán, Pushpaván, Kuśeśaya, Hari, and Mandara; and the seven rivers
are Dhútapápá, Śiva, Pavitrá, Sammati, Vidyudambhá, Mahhvanyá,
Sarvapápahará: besides these, there are numerous rivers and mountains of
less importance. Kuśa-dwípa is so named from a clump of Kuśa grass (Poa)
growing there. It is surrounded by the Ghrita sea (the sea of butter),
of the same size as the continent.

The sea of Ghrita is encompassed by Krauncha-dwípa, which is twice as
large as Kuśa-dwípa. The king of this Dwípa was Dyutimán, whose sons,
and the seven Varshas named after them, were Kuśala, Mallaga, Ushńa,
Pívara, Andhakáraka, Muni, and Dundubhi. The seven boundary mountains,
pleasing to gods and celestial spirits, are Krauncha, Vámana,
Andhakáraka, Devavrit, Puńd́aríkaván, Dundubhi, and Mahaśaila; each of
which is in succession twice as lofty as the series that precedes it, in
the same manner as each Dwípa is twice as extensive as the one before
it. The inhabitants reside there without apprehension, associating with
the bands of divinities. The Brahmans are called Pushkaras; the
Kshetriyas, Pushkalas: the Vaiśyas are termed Dhanyas; and the Śúdras,
Tishyas. They drink of countless streams, of which the principal are
denominated Gaurí, Kumudwatí, Sandhyá, Rátri, Manojavá, Kshánti, and
Puńd́aríká. The divine Vishńu, the protector of mankind, is worshipped
there by the people, with holy rites, in the form of Rudra. Krauncha is
surrounded by the sea of curds, of a similar extent; and that again is
encompassed by Śáka-dwípa.

The sons of Bhavya, the king of Śáka-dwípa, after whom its Varshas were
denominated, were Jalada, Kumára, Sukumára, Maníchaka, Kusumoda,
Maudákí, and Mahádruma. The seven mountains separating the countries
were Udayagiri, Jaládhára, Raivataka, Śyáma, Ámbikeya, Ramya, and
Keśarí. There grows a large Sáka (Teak) tree, frequented

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

by the Siddhas and Gandharbas, the wind from which, as produced by its
fluttering leaves, diffuses delight. The sacred lands of this continent
are peopled by the four castes. Its seven holy rivers, that wash away
all sin, are the Sukumárí, Kumárí, Naliní, Dhenuká, Ikshu, Venuká, and
Gabhastí. There are also hundreds and thousands of minor streams and
mountains in this Dwípa: and the inhabitants of Jalada and the other
divisions drink of those waters with pleasure, after they have returned
to earth from Indra's heaven. In those seven districts there is no
dereliction of virtue; there is no contention; there is no deviation
from rectitude. The caste of Mriga is that of the Brahman; the Mágadha,
of the Kshetriya; the Mánasa, of the Vaiśya; and the Mandaga of the
Śúdra: and by these Vishńu is devoutly worshipped as the sun, with
appropriate ceremonies. Śáka-dwípa is encircled by the sea of milk, as
by an armlet, and the sea is of the same breadth as the continent which
it embraces <span id="fr_643"></span>[2](#fn_643)

The Kshíroda ocean (or sea of milk) is encompassed by the seventh Dwípa,
or Pushkara, which is twice the size of Sáka-dwípa. Savana, who was made
its sovereign, had but two sons, Mahávíra and Dhátakí, after whom the
two Varshas of Pushkara were so named. These are divided by one mighty
range of mountains, called Mánasottara, which runs in a circular
direction (forming an outer and an inner circle). This mountain is fifty
thousand Yojanas in height, and as many in its breadth; dividing the
Dwípa in the middle, as if with a bracelet, into two divisions, which
are also of a circular form, like the mountain that separates them. Of
these two, the Mahávíra-varsha is exterior to the circumference of
Mánasottara, and Dhátakí lies within the circle; and both are frequented
by heavenly spirits and gods. There are no other mountains in Pushkara,
neither are there any rivers <span id="fr_644"></span>[3](#fn_644). Men
in this Dwípa live a thousand years, free from sickness and sorrow, and
unruffled by anger or affection.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> There is neither
virtue nor vice, killer nor slain: there is no jealousy, envy, fear,
hatred, covetousness, nor any moral defect: neither is there truth or
falsehood. Food is spontaneously produced there, and all the inhabitants
feed upon viands of every flavour. Men there are indeed of the same
nature with gods, and of the same form and habits. There is no
distinction of caste or order; there are no fixed institutes; nor are
rites performed for the sake of advantage. The three Vedas, the Puráńas,
ethics, and polity, and the laws of service, are unknown. Pushkara is in
fact, in both its divisions, a terrestrial paradise, where time yields
happiness to all its inhabitants, who are exempt from sickness and
decay. A Nyagrodha-tree (Ficus indica) grows on this Dwípa, which is the
especial abode of Brahmá, and he resides in it, adored by the gods and
demons. Pushkara is surrounded by the sea of fresh water, which is of
equal extent with the continent it invests <span
id="fr_645"></span>[4](#fn_645).

In this manner the seven island continents are encompassed successively
by the seven oceans, and each ocean and continent is respectively of
twice the extent of that which precedes it. In all the oceans the water
remains at all times the same in quantity, and never, increases or
diminishes; but like the water in a caldron, which, in consequence of

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

its combination with heat, expands, so the waters of the ocean swell
with the increase of the moon. The waters, although really neither more
nor less, dilate or contract as the moon increases or wanes in the light
and dark fortnights. The rise and fall of the waters of the different
seas is five hundred and ten inches <span
id="fr_646"></span>[5](#fn_646).

Beyond the sea of fresh water is a region of twice its extent, where the
land is of gold, and where no living beings reside. Thence extends the
Lokáloka mountain, which is ten thousand Yojanas in breadth, and as many
in height; and beyond it perpetual darkness invests the mountain all
around; which darkness is again encompassed by the shell of the
egg <span id="fr_647"></span>[6](#fn_647).

Such, Maitreya, is the earth, which with its continents, mountains,
oceans, and exterior shell, is fifty crores (five hundred millions) of

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Yojanas in
extent <span id="fr_648"></span>[7](#fn_648). It is the mother and nurse
of all creatures, the foundation of all worlds, and the chief of the
elements.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_642"></span>[197:1](vp062.htm#fr_642) So the commentator
explains the terms Avasarpińí and Utsarpińí; but these words most
commonly designate divisions of time peculiar to the Jainas; during the
former of which men are supposed to decline from extreme felicity to
extreme distress; and in the latter, to ascend from misery to happiness.
The author of the text had possibly the Jaina use of these terms in
view; and if so, wrote after their system was promulgated.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[200:2](vp062.htm#fr_643) The Kúrma is the only
Puráńa in which the white island, Śweta-dwípa, the abode of Vishńu, is
included in the geography of the world: an incidental description of it
is quoted by Col. Wilford from the Uttara Khańd́a of the Padma Puráńa
(As. Res. XI. 99); and it is in this and in the Brahma Vaivartta that
allusions to it are most frequent and copious.

<span id="fn_644"></span>[200:3](vp062.htm#fr_644) A slight alteration
has been here made in the order of the description.

<span id="fn_645"></span>[201:4](vp062.htm#fr_645) The description of
the Dwípas in the Agni, Bráhma, Kúrma, and Váyu Puráńas agrees with that
of our text. The Márkańd́eya, Linga, and Matsya contain no details. The
Bhágavata and Padma follow the same order as the Vishńu, &c. but alter
all the names, and, many of the measurements. The account of the
Mahábhárata is very irregular and confused. The variations throw no
additional light upon the geographical system of the Puráńas. Some
traces of this appear discoverable in the west; and the seven Dwípas,
with their surrounding seas, may have some connexion with the notion of
the seven climates, as Col. Wilford has supposed. That learned, but
fanciful writer bestowed great pains upon the verification of these
fictions, and imagined the different Dwípas to represent actual
divisions of the globe: Jambu being India; Kuśa, the Kush of Scripture,
or the countries between Mesopotamia and India: Plaksha being Asia
Minor; Śálmali, eastern Europe; Krauncha, Germany; Śáka, the British
isles; and Pushkara, Iceland. The white or silver island, or island of
the moon, was also, according to him, the island of Great Britain.
Whatever may be thought of his conclusions, his essays on these
subjects, particularly in the eighth, tenth, and eleventh volumes of the
Asiatic Researches, contain much curious and interesting matter.

<span id="fn_646"></span>[202:5](vp062.htm#fr_646) Although the Hindus
seem to have had a notion of the cause of the tides, they were not very
accurate observers of the effect. The extreme rise of the tide in the
Hugli river has never exceeded twenty feet, and its average is about
fifteen. (As. Res. vol. XVIII. Kyd on the Tides of the Hugli.)

<span id="fn_647"></span>[202:6](vp062.htm#fr_647) The Ańd́a kat́áha. The
Kat́áha is properly a shallow hemispherical vessel, a saucer; but
compounded in this form, implies the shell of the mundane egg. The
Bhágavata thus describes these portions of the world: "Beyond the sea of
fresh water is the mountain belt, called Lokáloka, the circular boundary
between the world and void space. The interval between Meru and
Mánasottara is the land of living beings. Beyond the fresh water sea is
the region of gold, which shines like the bright surface of a mirror,
but from which no sensible object presented to it is ever reflected, and
consequently it is avoided by living creatures. The mountain range by
which it is encircled is termed Lokáloka, because the world is separated
by it from that which is not world; for which purpose it was placed by
Íśwara on the limit of the three worlds; and its height and breadth are
such that the rays of the heavenly luminaries, from the sun to the
polar-star, which spread over the regions within the mountain, cannot
penetrate beyond it." According to Col. Wilford, however, there is a
chasm in the belt, and a sea beyond it, where Vishńu abides; but he has
not given his authorities for this. (As. Res. XI. 54.) The Mohammedan
legends of Koh Kaf, 'the stony girdle that surrounds the world,' are
evidently connected with the Lokáloka of the Hindus. According to the
Śiva Tantra, the El Dorado, at the foot of the Lokáloka mountains, is
the play-ground of the gods.

<span id="fn_648"></span>[203:7](vp062.htm#fr_648) This comprises the
planetary spheres; for the diameter of the seven zones and oceans--each
ocean being of the same diameter as the continent it encloses, and each
successive continent being twice the diameter of that which precedes
it--amounts to but two crones and fifty-four lacs. The golden land is
twice the diameter of Pushkara, or two crones and fifty-six lacs; and
the Lokáloka is but ten thousand Yojanas. So that the whole is five
crores ten lacs and ten thousand (5.10.10.000). According to the Śiva
Tantra, the golden land is ten crores of Yojanas, making, with the seven
continents, one fourth of the whole measurement. Other calculations
occur, the incompatibility of which is said by the commentators on our
text, and on that of the Bhágavata, to arise from reference being made
to different Kalpas, and they quote the same stanza to this effect:
'Whenever any contradictions in different Puráńas are observed, they are
ascribed by the pious to differences of Kalpas and the like.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](vp063)
