[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp065)  [Next](vp067) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

### CHAP. VIII.

Description of the sun: his chariot; its two axles: his horses. The
cities of the regents of the cardinal points. The sun's course: nature
of his rays: his path along the ecliptic. Length of day and night.
Divisions of time: equinoxes and solstices, months, years, the cyclical
Yuga, or age of five years. Northern and southern declinations. Saints
on the Lokáloka mountain. Celestial paths of the Pitris, gods, Vishńu.
Origin of Gangá, and separation, on the top of Meru, into four great
rivers.

PARÁŚARA.--Having thus described to you the system of the world in
general, I will now explain to you the dimensions and situations of the
sun and other luminaries.

The chariot of the sun is nine thousand leagues in length, and the pole
is of twice that longitude <span id="fr_680"></span>[1](#fn_680); the
axle is fifteen millions and seven hundred thousand leagues long <span
id="fr_681"></span>[2](#fn_681); on which is fixed a wheel with three
naves, five spokes, and six peripheries, consisting of the ever-during
year; the whole constituting the circle or wheel of time <span
id="fr_682"></span>[3](#fn_682). The chariot has another axle, which is
forty-five thousand five hundred leagues long <span
id="fr_683"></span>[4](#fn_683).

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The two halves of
the yoke are of the same length respectively as the two axles (the
longer and the shorter). The short axle, with the short yoke, are
supported by the pole-star: the end of the longer axle, to which the
wheel of the car is attached, moves on the Mánasa mountain <span
id="fr_684"></span>[5](#fn_684). The seven horses of the sun's car are
the metres of the Vedas, Gáyatrí, Vrihatí, Ushńih, Jayatí, Trisht́ubh,
Anusht́ubh, and Pankti.

The city of Indra is situated on the eastern side of the Mánasottara
mountain; that of Yama on the southern face; that of Varuńa on the west;
and that of Soma on the north: named severally Vaswokasárá, Samyamaní,
Mukhyá, and Vibhávarí <span id="fr_685"></span>[6](#fn_685).

The glorious sun, Maitreya, darts like an arrow on his southern course,
attended by the constellations of the Zodiac. He causes the difference
between day and night, and is the divine vehicle and path of the sages
who have overcome the inflictions of the world. Whilst the sun, who is
the discriminator of all hours, shines in one continent in midday, in
the opposite Dwípas, Maitreya, it will be midnight: rising and setting
are at all seasons, and are always (relatively) opposed in the different
cardinal and intermediate points of the horizon. When the sun becomes
visible to any people, to them he is said to rise; when he disappears
from their

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

view, that is called his setting. There is in truth neither rising nor
setting of the sun, for he is always; and these terms merely imply his
presence and his disappearance.

When the sun (at midday) passes over either of the cities of the gods,
on the Mánasottara mountain (at the cardinal points), his light extends
to three cities and two intermediate points: when situated in an
intermediate point, he illuminates two of the cities and three
intermediate. points (in either case one hemisphere). From the period of
his rise the sun moves with increasing rays until noon, when he proceeds
towards his setting with rays diminishing (that is, his heat increases
or diminishes in proportion as he advances to, or recedes from, the
meridian of any place). The east and west quarters are so called from
the sun's rising and setting there <span
id="fr_686"></span>[7](#fn_686). As far as the sun shines in front, so
far he shines behind and on either hand, illuminating all places except
the summit of Meru, the mountain of the immortals; for when his rays
reach the court of Brahmá, which is there situated, they are repelled
and driven back by the overpowering radiance which there prevails:
consequently there is always the alternation of day and night, according
as the divisions of the continent lie in the northern (or southern)
quarter, or inasmuch as they are situated north (or south) of Meru <span
id="fr_687"></span>[8](#fn_687).

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

The radiance of the solar orb, when the sun has set, is accumulated in
fire, and hence fire is visible at a greater distance by night than by
day: during the latter a fourth of the rays of fire blend with those of
the sun, and from their union the sun shines with greater intensity by
day. Elemental light, and heat derived from the sun or from fire,
blending with each other, mutually prevail in various proportions, both
by day and night. When the sun is present either in the southern or the
northern hemisphere, day or night retires into the waters, according as
they are invaded by darkness or light: it is from this cause that the
waters look dark by day, because night is within them; and they look
white by night, because at the setting of the sun the light of day takes
refuge in their bosom <span id="fr_688"></span>[9](#fn_688).

When the sun has travelled in the centre of Pushkara a thirtieth part of
the circumference of the globe, his course is equal in time to one
Muhúrtta <span id="fr_689"></span>[10](#fn_689); and whirling round like
the circumference of the wheel of a potter, he distributes day and night
upon the earth. In the commencement of his northern course, the sun
passes to Capricornus, thence to Aquarius, thence to Pisces, going
successively from one sign of the Zodiac to another. After he has passed
through these, the sun attains his equinoctial movement (the vernal
equinox), when he makes the day and night of equal duration.
Thenceforward the length of the night decreases, and the day becomes
longer, until the sun reaches the end of Gemini, when he pursues a
different direction, and, entering Cancer, begins his declension to the
south. As the circumference of a potter's

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

wheel revolves most rapidly, so the sun travels rapidly on his southern
journey: he flies along his path with the velocity of wind, and
traverses a great distance in a short time. In twelve Muhúrttas he
passes through thirteen lunar asterisms and a half during the day; and
during the night he passes through the same distance, only in eighteen
Muhúrttas. As the centre of the potter's wheel revolves more slowly than
the circumference, so the sun in his northern path again revolves with
less rapidity, and moves over a less space of the earth in a longer
time, until, at the end of his northern route, the day is again eighteen
Muhúrttas, and the night twelve; the sun passing through half the lunar
mansions by day and by night in those periods respectively. As the lump
of clay on the centre of the potter's wheel moves most slowly, so the
polar-star, which is in the centre of the zodiacal wheel, revolves very
tardily, and ever remains in the centre, as the clay continues in the
centre of the wheel of the potter.

The relative length of the day or night depends upon the greater or less
velocity with which the sun revolves through the degrees between the two
points of the horizon. In the solstitial period, in which his diurnal
path is quickest, his nocturnal is slowest; and in that in which he
moves quick by night, he travels slowly by day. The extent of his
journey is in either case the same; for in the course of the day and
night he passes through all the signs of the Zodiac, or six by night,
and the same number by day: the length and shortness of the day are
measured by the extent of the signs; and the duration of day and night
by the period which the sun takes to pass through them <span
id="fr_690"></span>[11](#fn_690). In his northern

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

declination the sun moves quickest by night, and slowest by day; in his
southern declination the reverse is the case.

The night is called Ushá, and the day is denominated Vyusht́a, and the
interval between them is called Sandhya. On the occurrence of the awful
Sandhya, the terrific fiends termed Mandehas attempt to devour the sun;
for Brahmá denounced this curse upon them, that, without the power to
perish, they should die every day (and revive by night), and therefore a
fierce contest occurs daily between them and the sun <span
id="fr_691"></span>[12](#fn_691). At this season pious Brahmans scatter
water, purified by the mystical Omkára, and consecrated by the
Gáyatri <span id="fr_692"></span>[13](#fn_692); and by this water, as by
a thunderbolt, the foul fiends are consumed. When the first oblation is
offered with solemn invocations in the morning rite <span
id="fr_693"></span>[14](#fn_693), the thousand-rayed deity shines forth
with unclouded splendour. Omkára is Vishńu the mighty, the substance of
the three Vedas, the lord of speech; and by its enunciation those
Rákshasas are destroyed. The sun is a principal part of Vishńu, and
light is his immutable essence, the active manifestation of which is
excited by the mystic syllable Om. Light effused by the utterance of
Omkára becomes radiant, and burns up entirely the Rákshasas called
Mandehas. The performance of the Sandhya (the morning) sacrifice must
never therefore be delayed, for he who neglects it is guilty of the
murder of the sun. Protected thus by the Brahmans and the pigmy sages
called Bálakhilyas, the sun goes on his course to give light to the
world.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

Fifteen twinklings of the eye (Nimeshas) make a Kásht́há; thirty
Kásht́hás, a Kalá; thirty Kalás, a Muhúrtta (forty-eight minutes); and
thirty Muhúrttas, a day and night: the portions of the day are longer or
shorter, as has been explained; but the Sandhyá is always the same in
increase or decrease, being only one Muhúrtta <span
id="fr_694"></span>[15](#fn_694). From the period that a line may be
drawn across the sun (or that half his orb is visible) to the expiration
of three Muhúrttas (two hours and twenty-four minutes), that interval is
called Prátar (morning), forming a fifth portion of the day. The next
portion, or three Muhúrttas from morning, is termed Sangava (forenoon):
the three next Muhúrttas constitute mid-day: the afternoon comprises the
next three Muhúrttas: the three Muhúrttas following are considered as
the evening: and the fifteen Muhúrttas of the day are thus classed in
five portions of three each. But the day consists of fifteen Muhúrttas
only at the equinoxes, increasing or diminishing in number in the
northern and southern declinations of the sun, when the day encroaches
on the night, or the night upon the day. The equinoxes occur in the
seasons of spring and autumn, when the sun enters the signs of Aries and
Libra. When the sun enters Capricorn (the winter solstice), his northern
progress commences; and his southern when he enters Cancer (the summer
solstice).

Fifteen days of thirty Muhúrttas each are called a Paksha (a lunar
fortnight); two of these make a month; and two months, a solar season;
three seasons a northern or southern declination (Ayana); and those two
compose a year. Years, made up of four kinds of months <span
id="fr_695"></span>[16](#fn_695), are distinguished

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

into five kinds; and an aggregate of all the varieties of time is termed
a Yoga, or cycle. The years are severally called Samvatsara,
Parivatsara, Idvatsara, Anuvatsara, and Vatsara. This is the time called
a Yuga <span id="fr_696"></span>[17](#fn_696).

The mountain range that lies most to the north (in Bhárata-varsha) is
called Śringaván (the horned), from its having three principal
elevations (horns or peaks), one to the north, one to the south, and one
in the centre; the last is called the equinoctial, for the sun arrives
there in the middle of the two seasons of spring and autumn, entering
the equinoctial points in the first degree of Aries and of Libra, and
making day and night of equal duration, or fifteen Muhúrttas each. When
the sun, most excellent sage, is in the first degree of the lunar
mansion, Krittiká, and the moon is in the. fourth of Viśákhá, or when
the sun is in the third

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

degree of Viśákhá, and the moon is in the head of Krittiká (these
positions being cotemporary with the equinoxes), that equinoctial season
is holy (and is styled the Mahávishubha, or the great equinox) <span
id="fr_697"></span>[18](#fn_697). At this time offerings are to be
presented to the gods and to the manes, and gifts are to be made to the
Brahmans by serious persons; for such donations are productive of
happiness. Liberality at the equinoxes is always advantageous to the
donor: and day and night; seconds, minutes, and hours; intercalary
months; the day of full moon (Paurnamásí); the day of conjunction
(Amávásya), when the moon rises invisible; the day when it is first seen
(Śiniválí); the day when it first disappears (Kuhú); the day when the
moon is quite round (Ráká); and the day when one digit is deficient
(Anumati), are all seasons when gifts are meritorious.

The sun is in his northern declination in the months Tapas, Tapasya,
Madhu, Mádhava, Śukra, and Śuchi; and in his southern in those of
Nabhas, Nabhasya, Isha, Úrja, Sahas, Sahasya <span
id="fr_698"></span>[19](#fn_698).

On the Lokáloka mountain, which I have formerly described to you,

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

reside the four holy protectors of the world; or Sudháman and Sankhapád,
the two sons of Kardama, and Hirańyaroman, and Ketumat <span
id="fr_699"></span>[20](#fn_699). Unaffected by the contrasts of
existence, void of selfishness, active, and unencumbered by dependants,
they take charge of the spheres, themselves abiding on the four cardinal
points of the Lokáloka mountain.

On the north of Agastya, and south of the line of the Goat, exterior to
the Vaiswánara path, lies the road of the Pitris <span
id="fr_700"></span>[21](#fn_700). There dwell the great

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rishis, the
offerers of oblations with fire, reverencing the Vedas, after whose
injunctions creation commenced, and who were discharging the duties of
ministrant priests: for as the worlds are destroyed and renewed, they
institute new rules of conduct, and reestablish the interrupted ritual
of the Vedas. Mutually descending from each other, progenitor springing
from descendant, and descendant from progenitor, in the alternating
succession of births, they repeatedly appear in different housed and
races along with their posterity, devout practices and instituted
observances, residing to the south of the solar orb, as long as the moon
and stars endure <span id="fr_701"></span>[22](#fn_701).

The path of the gods lies to the north of the solar sphere, north of the
Nágavithi <span id="fr_702"></span>[23](#fn_702), and south of the seven
Rishis. There dwell the Siddhas, of subdued senses, continent and pure,
undesirous of progeny, and therefore victorious over death: eighty-eight
thousand of these chaste beings tenant the regions of the sky, north of
the sun, until the destruction of the universe: they enjoy immortality,
for that they are holy; exempt from covetousness and concupiscence, love
and hatred; taking no part in the procreation of living beings, and
detecting the unreality of the properties of elementary matter. By
immortality is meant existence to the end of the Kalpa: life as long as
the three regions (earth, sky, and heaven) last is called exemption from
(reiterated) death <span id="fr_703"></span>[24](#fn_703). The
consequences of acts of iniquity or piety, such as Brahmanicide or an
Aśwamedha, endure for a similar period, or until the end of a
Kalpa <span id="fr_704"></span>[25](#fn_704), when all within the
interval between Dhruva and the earth is destroyed.

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

The space between the seven Rishis and Dhruva <span
id="fr_705"></span>[26](#fn_705), the third region of the sky, is the
splendid celestial path of Vishńu (Vishńupada), and the abode of those
sanctified ascetics who are cleansed from every soil, and in whom virtue
and vice are annihilated. This is that excellent place of Vishńu to
which those repair in whom all sources of pain are extinct, in
consequence of the cessation of the consequences of piety or iniquity,
and where they never sorrow more. There abide Dharma, Dhruva, and other
spectators of the world, radiant with the superhuman faculties of
Vishńu, acquired through religious meditation; and there are fastened
and inwoven to all that is, and all that shall ever be, animate or
inanimate. The seat of Vishńu is contemplated by the wisdom of the
Yogis, identified with supreme light, as the radiant eye of heaven. In
this portion of the heavens the splendid Dhruva is stationed, and serves
for the pivot of the atmosphere. On Dhruva rest the seven great planets,
and on them depend the clouds. The rains are suspended in the clouds,
and from the rains come the water which is the nutriment and delight of
all, the gods and the rest; and they, the gods, who are the receivers of
oblations, being nourished by burnt-offerings, cause the rain to fall
for the support of created beings. This sacred station of Vishńu,
therefore, is the support of the three worlds, as it is the source of
rain.

From that third region of the atmosphere, or seat of Vishńu, proceeds
the stream that washes away all sin, the river Gangá, embrowned with the
unguents of the nymphs of heaven, who have sported in her waters. Having
her source in the nail of the great toe of Vishńu's left foot,
Dhruva <span id="fr_706"></span>[27](#fn_706) receives her, and sustains
her day and night devoutly on his head; and thence the seven Rishis
practise the exercises of austerity in her waters, wreathing their
braided locks with her waves. The orb of the moon, encompassed by her
accumulated current, derives augmented lustre from her contact. Falling
from on high, as she issues from the moon; she alights on the summit of
Meru, and thence flows to the four

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

quarters of the earth, for its purification. The Śítá, Alakanandá,
Chakshu, and Bhadrá are four branches of but one river, divided
according to the regions towards which it proceeds. The branch that is
known as the Alakanandá was borne affectionately by Mahádeva, upon his
head, for more than a hundred years, and was the river which raised to
heaven the sinful sons of Sagara, by washing their ashes <span
id="fr_707"></span>[28](#fn_707). The offences of any man who bathes in
this river are immediately expiated, and unprecedented virtue is
engendered. Its waters, offered by sons to their ancestors in faith for
three years, yield to the latter rarely attainable gratification. Men of
the twice-born orders, who offer sacrifice in this river to the lord of
sacrifice, Purushottama, obtain whatever they desire, either here or in
heaven. Saints who are purified from all soil by bathing in its waters,
and whose minds are intent on Keśava, acquire thereby final liberation.
This sacred stream, heard of, desired, seen, touched, bathed in, or
hymned, day by day, sanctifies all beings; and those who, even at a
distance of a hundred leagues, exclaim "Gangá, Gangá," atone for the
sins committed during three previous lives. The place whence this river
proceeds, for the purification of the three worlds, is the third
division of the celestial regions, the seat of Vishńu <span
id="fr_708"></span>[29](#fn_708).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_680"></span>[217:1](vp066.htm#fr_680) The sun's car is
10.000 Yojanas broad, and as many deep, according to the Váyu and
Matsya. The Bhágavata makes it thirty-six hundred thousand long, and one
fourth that broad. The Linga agrees with the text.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[217:2](vp066.htm#fr_681) There is no great
difference in this number in other accounts. The length of this axle,
which extends from Meru to Mánasa, is nearly equal to the semidiameter
of the earth, which, according to the Matsya P., is 18.950.000 Yojanas.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[217:3](vp066.htm#fr_682) The three naves are
the three divisions of the day, morning, noon, and night; the five
spokes are the five cyclic years; and the six peripheries are the six
seasons. The Bhágavata explains the three naves to be three periods of
the year, of four months each, and gives twelves spokes as types of the
twelve months. The Váyu, Matsya, and Bhavishya Puráńas enter into much
more detail. According to them, the parts of the wheel are the same as
above described: the body of the car is the year; its upper and lower
half are the two solstices; Dharma is its flag; Artha and Káma the pins
of the yoke and axle; night is its fender; Nimeshas form its floor; a
moment is the axle-tree; an instant the pole; minutes are its
attendants; and hours its harness.

<span id="fn_683"></span>[217:4](vp066.htm#fr_683) This shorter axle is,
according to the Bhágavata, one fourth of the longer.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[218:5](vp066.htm#fr_684) We are to understand
here, both in the axle and yoke, two levers, one horizontal, the other
perpendicular. The horizontal arm of the axle has a wheel at one end;
the other extremity is connected with the perpendicular arm. To the
horizontal arm of the yoke are harnessed the horses; and its inner or
right extremity is secured to the perpendicular. The upper ends of both
perpendiculars are supposed to be attached to Dhruva, the pole-star, by
two aerial cords, which are lengthened in the sun's southern course, and
shortened in his northern; and retained by which to Dhruva, as to a
pivot, the wheel of the car traverses the summit of the Mánasottara
mountain on Pushkara-dwípa, which runs like a ring round the several
continents and oceans. The contrivance is commonly compared to an oil
mill, and was probably suggested by that machine as constructed in
India. As the Mánasottara mountain is but 50.000 leagues high, and Meru
84.000, whilst Dhruva is 1500.000, both levers are inclined at obtuse
angles to the nave of the wheel and each other. In images of the sun,
two equal and semicircular axles connect a central wheel with the sides
of the car.

<span id="fn_685"></span>[218:6](vp066.htm#fr_685) In the Linga the city
of Indra is called Amarávati; and in it and the Váyu that of Varuńa is
termed Sukhá.

<span id="fn_686"></span>[219:7](vp066.htm#fr_686) The terms Púrva and
Apara mean properly 'before and behind;' but 'before' naturally denotes
the east, either because men, according to a text of the Vedas,
spontaneously face, as if to welcome the rising sun, or because they are
enjoined by the laws so to do. When they face the rising sun, the west
is of course behind them. The same circumstance determines the
application of the term Dakshina, properly 'right,' δεξιὸς, or
'dexterum,' to the south. Uttara, 'other' or 'last,' necessarily implies
the north.

<span id="fn_687"></span>[219:8](vp066.htm#fr_687) This is rather
obscure, but it is made out clearly enough in the commentary, and in the
parallel passages in the Váyu, Matsya, Linga, Kúrma, and Bhágavata. The
sun travels round the world, keeping Meru always on his right: to the
spectator who fronts him therefore, as he rises, Meru must be always on
the north; and as the sun's rays do not penetrate beyond the centre of
the mountain, the regions beyond, or to the north of it, must be in
darkness; whilst those on the south of it must be in light: north and
south being relative, not absolute terms, depending upon the position of
the spectator with regard to the sun and to Meru. So the commentator:
\#\#\#. <span id="page_220">p. 220</span> It was probably through some
misapprehension of this doctrine that Major Wilford asserted, "by Meru
the Pauráńiks understand in general the north pole, but the context of
the Puráńas is against this supposition." As. Res. VIII. 286. There is
no inconsistency, however, in Meru's being absolutely in the centre of
the world, and relatively north to the inhabitants of the several
portions, to all of whom the east is that quarter where the sun first
appears, and the other quarters are thereby regulated.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[220:9](vp066.htm#fr_688) Similar notions are
contained in the Váyu.

<span id="fn_689"></span>[220:10](vp066.htm#fr_689) The sun travels at
the rate of one-thirtieth of the earth's circumference in a Muhúrtta, or
31.50.000 Yojanas; making the total 9 crores and 45 lakhs, or
9.45.00.000; according to the Váyu, Lingo, and Matsya Puráńas.

<span id="fn_690"></span>[221:11](vp066.htm#fr_690) This passage, which
is somewhat at variance with the general doctrine, that the length of
the day depends upon the velocity of the sun's course, and which has not
been noticed in any other Pauráńik text, is defended by the commentator,
upon the authority of the Jyotishśástra, or astronomical writings.
According to them, he asserts, the signs of the Zodiac are of different
extent. Aquarius, Pisces, and Aries are the shortest; Taurus,
Capricornus, and Gemini are something longer; Leo and Scorpio longer
still; and the remaining four the longest of all. According to the six
which the sun traverses, the day or night will be the longer or shorter.
The text is, \#\#\#. The apparent contradiction may however be
reconciled by understanding the sun's slow motion, and the length of a
sign, to be equivalent terms.

<span id="fn_691"></span>[222:12](vp066.htm#fr_691) The same story
occurs in the Váyu, with the addition that the Mandehas are three crores
in number. It seems to be an ancient legend, imperfectly preserved in
some of the Puráńas.

<span id="fn_692"></span>[222:13](vp066.htm#fr_692) The sacred syllable
Om has been already described (p. [1](vp035.htm#page_1). n.
[1](vp035.htm#fn_98)). The Gayatrí, or holiest verse of the Vedas, not
to be uttered to ears profane, is a short prayer to the sun, identified
as the supreme, and occurs in the tenth hymn of the fourth section of
the third Asht́aka of the Sanhitá of the Rig-veda: 'We meditate on that
excellent light of the divine sun: may he illuminate our minds.' Such is
the fear entertained of profaning this text, that copyists of the Vedas
not unfrequently refrain from transcribing it, both in the Sanhitá and
Bháshya.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[222:14](vp066.htm#fr_693) Or, in the text,
with the prayer that commences with the words Súrya jyotir, 'That which
is in the sun (or light) is adorable,' &c. The whole prayer is given in
Colebrooke's account of the religious ceremonies of the Hindus. As. Res.
V. 355.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[223:15](vp066.htm#fr_694) But this comprehends
the two Sandhyás, 'morning and evening twilight.' Two Náris, or half a
Muhúrtta before sunrise, constitute the morning Sandhyá; and the same
interval after sunset the evening. Sandhya, meaning 'junction,' is so
termed as it is the juncture or interval between darkness and light; as
in the Váyu and Matsya: \#\#\#.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[223:16](vp066.htm#fr_695) The four months are
named in the Váyu, and are, 1. the Saura, or solar-sydereal, consisting
of the sun's passage through a sign of the Zodiac: 2. the Saumya or
Chándra or lunar month, comprehending thirty lunations or Tithis, and
reckoned most usually from new moon to new moon, though sometimes from
full moon to full moon: 3. the Sávana or solar month, containing thirty
days of sunrise and sunset: and 4. the Nákshatra or lunar <span
id="page_224">p. 224</span> asterismal month, which is the moon's
revolution through the twenty-eight lunar mansions.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[224:17](vp066.htm#fr_696) The five years
forming this Yuga, or cycle, differ only in denomination, being composed
of the months above described, with such Malamásas, or intercalary
months, as may be necessary to complete the period, according to Vriddha
Garga. The cycle comprehends, therefore, sixty solar- sydereal months of
1800 days; sixty-one solar months, or 1830 days; sixty-two lunar months,
or 1860 lunations; and sixty-seven lunar-asterismal months, or 1809 such
days. Col. Warren, in his Kála Sankalitá, considers these years to be
severally cycles. "In the cycle of sixty," he observes, "are contained
five cycles of twelve years, each supposed equal to one year of the
planet (Jupiter). I only mention this cycle because I found it mentioned
in some books; but I know of no nation nor tribe that reckons time after
that account. The names of the five cycles, or Yugs, are, 1. Samvatsara,
2. Parivatsara, 3. Idvatsara, 4. Anuvatsara, 5. Udravatsara. The name of
each year is determined from the Nákshatra, in which Vrihaspati sets and
rises heliacally, and they follow in the order of the lunar months." K.
S. 212. It may be reasonably doubted, however, if this view be correct;
and the only connexion between the cycle of five years and that of
Vrihaspati may be the multiplication of the former by the latter (5 x
12), so as to form the cycle of sixty years: a cycle based, the
commentator remarks, upon the conjunction (Yuga) of the sun and moon in
every sixtieth year. The original and properly Indian cycle, however, is
that of five years, as Bentley remarks. "The astronomers of this period
(1181 B. C.) framed a cycle of five years for civil and religious
ceremonies." Ancient and modern Hindu Astronomy. It is in fact, as Mr.
Colebrooke states, the cycle of the Vedas, described in the Jyotish, or
astronomical sections, and specified in the institutes of Paráśara as
the basis of calculation for larger cycles. As. Res. VIII. 470.

<span id="fn_697"></span>[225:18](vp066.htm#fr_697) Reference is here
made apparently, though indistinctly, to those positions of the planets
which indicate, according to Bentley, the formation of the lunar
mansions by Hindu astronomers, about 1424 B. C. Hindu Astronomy, p. 3
and 4. The Váyu and Linga Puráńas specify the positions of the other
planets at the same time, or the end, according to the former, of the
Chákshusha Manwantara. At that time the sun was in Viśákhá, the moon in
Krittiká, Venus in Pushyá, Jupiter in Púrvaphalguní, Mars in Áshád́há,
Budha in Dhanisht́há, Śani in Revatí, Ketu in Ásleshá, and Ráhu in
Bharaní. There are differences between some of these and the positions
cited by Bentley, but most of them are the same. He considers them to
have been observations of the occultations of the moon by the planets,
in the respective lunar mansions, 1424-5 B. C. According to the Váyu,
these positions or origins of the planets are from the Vedas: \#\#\#.
The Linga, less accurately perhaps, reads \#\#\# referring it to the
works of law.

<span id="fn_698"></span>[225:19](vp066.htm#fr_698) These are the names
of the months which occur in the Vedas, and belong to a system now
obsolete, as was noticed by Sir Wm. Jones. As. Res. III. 258. According
to the classification of the text, they correspond severally with the
lunar months Mágha, Phálguna, Chaitra, Vaiśákha, Jyesht́ha, Áshárha, or
from December to June; and with Śrávańa, Bhádra, Áswina, Kártika,
Agraháyana, and Pausha, from July to December. From this order of the
two series of the months, as occurring in the Vedas, Mr. Colebrooke
infers, upon astronomical computations, their date to be about fourteen
centuries prior to the Christian era. As. Res. VII. 283.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[226:20](vp066.htm#fr_699) The Váyu has the
same names, but ascribes a different descent to the first, making
Sudháman the son of Viraja. Sankhapád is the son of Kardama: the other
two are the sons of Parjanya and Rajas, consistently with the origin
ascribed to these Lokapálas in the patriarchal genealogies of that
Puráńa (see [p. 83](vp045.htm#page_83)).

<span id="fn_700"></span>[226:21](vp066.htm#fr_700) Allusion is here
made to some divisions of the celestial sphere which are not described
in any other part of the text. The fullest, but still in some respects a
confused and partly inaccurate account is given in the Matsya Puráńa;
but a more satisfactory description occurs in the comment on the
Bhágavata, there cited from the Váyu, but not found in the copies
consulted on the present occasion. According to those details, the path
(Márga) of the sun and other planets amongst the lunar asterisms is
divided into three portions or Avasht́hánas, northern, southern, and
central, called severally Airávata, Járadgava (Ajagava, Matsya P.), and
Vaiswánara. Each of these, again, is divided into three parts or Víthis:
those of the northern portion are termed Nágavithi, Gajavíthi, and
Airávati; those of the centre are Árshabhí Govíthí, and Járadgaví; and
those of the south are named Ajavíthí, Mrígavithí, and Vaiswánarí. Each
of these Víthis comprises three asterisms.

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Nágavíthi</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Aswiní<br />
Bharańí<br />
Krittiká</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Gajavíthí</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Rohiní<br />
Mrigaśiras<br />
Ardrá</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Airávati</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Punarvasu<br />
Pushyá<br />
Ásleshá</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Árshabhí</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Maghá<br />
Púrvaphalguní<br />
Uttaraphalguní</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Govíthí</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Hastá<br />
Chitrá<br />
Swáti</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Járadgaví</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Viśákhá<br />
Anurádhá<br />
Jyesht́há</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Ajavíthi</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Múlá<br />
Purváshád́há<br />
Uttaráshád́há</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Mrigavíthí</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><a href="errata.htm#8">Śravańá</a><br />
Dhanisht́há<br />
Satábhishá</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Vaiswánarí</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Púrva Bhádrapadá<br />
Uttara Bhádrapadá<br />
Revatí.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> See also As. Res.
IX. table of Nakshatras, 346. Agastya is Canopus; and the line of the
goat, or Ajavíthi, comprises asterisms which contain stars in Scorpio
and Sagittarius.

<span id="fn_701"></span>[227:22](vp066.htm#fr_701) A marginal note in
one MS. explains the phrase of the text, \#\#\# to signify as far as to
the moon and stars; but the Pitri yána, or path of the Pitris, lies
amongst the asterisms; and, according to the Pauráńik system of the
heavens, it is not clear what could be meant by its being bounded by the
moon and stars. The path south of the solar orb is, according to the
Vedas, that of smoke or darkness.

<span id="fn_702"></span>[227:23](vp066.htm#fr_702) The stars of the
Nágavíthi are those of Aries and Taurus; and by the seven Rishis we are
here to understand Ursa Major.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[227:24](vp066.htm#fr_703) This, according to
the Vedas, is all that is to be understood of the immortality of the
gods: they perish at the period of universal dissolution.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[227:25](vp066.htm#fr_704) That is, generally
as affecting created beings, not individuals, whose acts influence their
several successive births.

<span id="fn_705"></span>[228:26](vp066.htm#fr_705) From Ursa Major to
the polar star.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[228:27](vp066.htm#fr_706) The popular notion
is, that Śiva or Mahádeva receives the Ganges on his head; but this, as
subsequently explained, is referred, by the Vaishńavas at least, to the
descent of the Alakanandá, or Ganges of India, not to the celestial
Ganges.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[229:28](vp066.htm#fr_707) Or, in other words,
'flows into the sea.' The legend here alluded to is more fully detailed
in a subsequent book.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[229:29](vp066.htm#fr_708) The situation of the
source of the Ganges of heaven identifies it with the milky way.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX](vp067)
