[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp071)  [Next](vp073) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

### CHAP. XIV.

Dialogue continued. Bharata expounds the nature of existence, the end of
life, and the identification of individual with universal spirit.

PARÁŚARA.--Having heard these remarks, full of profound truth, the king
was highly pleased with the Brahman, and respectfully thus addressed
him: "What you have said is no doubt the truth; but in listening to it
my mind is much disturbed. You have shewn *that* to be discriminative
wisdom which exists in all creatures, and which is the great principle
that is distinct from plastic nature; but the assertions--'I do not bear
the palankin---the palankin does not rest upon me--the body, by which
the vehicle is conveyed, is different from me--the conditions of
elementary beings are influenced by acts, through the influence of the
qualities, and the qualities are the principles of action;'--what sort
of positions are these. Upon these doctrines entering into my ears, my
mind, which is anxious to investigate the truth, is lost in perplexity.
It was my purpose, illustrious sage, to have gone to Kapila Rishi, to
inquire of him what in this life was the most desirable object: but now
that I have heard from you such words, my mind turns to you, to become
acquainted with the great end of life. The Rishi Kapila is a portion of
the mighty and universal Vishńu, who has come down upon earth to
dissipate delusion; and surely it is he who, in kindness to me, has thus
manifested himself to me in all that you have said. To me, thus
suppliant, then, explain what is the best of all things; for thou art an
ocean overflowing with the waters of divine wisdom." The Brahman replied
to the king, "You, again, ask me what is the best of all things, not
what is the great end of life <span id="fr_740"></span>[1](#fn_740); but
there are many things which are

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

considered best, as well as those which are the great ends (or truths)
of life. To him who, by the worship of the gods, seeks for wealth,
prosperity, children, or dominion, each of these is respectively best.
Best is the rite or sacrifice, that is rewarded with heavenly pleasures.
Best is that which yields the best recompense, although it be not
solicited. Self-contemplation, ever practised by devout ascetics, is to
them the best. But best of all is the identification of soul with the
supreme spirit. Hundreds and thousands of conditions may be called the
best; but these are not the great and true ends of life. Hear what those
are. Wealth cannot be the true end of life, for it may be relinquished
through virtue, and its characteristic property is expenditure for the
gratification of desire. If a son were final truth, that would be
equally applicable to a different source; for the son that is to one the
great end of life, becomes the father of another. Final or supreme
truth, therefore, would not exist in this world, as in all these cases
those objects which are so denominated are the effects of causes, and
consequently are not finite. If the acquisition of sovereignty were
designated by the character of being the great end of all, then finite
ends would sometimes be, and sometimes cease to be. If you suppose that
the objects to be effected by sacrificial rites, performed according to
the rules of the Rik, Yajur, and Sama Vedas, be the great end of life,
attend to what I have to say. Any effect which is produced through the
causality of earth partakes of the character of its origin, and consists
itself of clay; so any act performed by perishable agents, such as fuel,
clarified butter, and Kuśa grass, must itself be of but temporary
efficacy. The great end of life (or truth) is considered by the wise to
be eternal; but it would be transient, if it were accomplished through
transitory things. If you imagine that this great truth is the
performance of religious acts, from which no recompense is sought, it is
not so; for such acts are the means of obtaining liberation, and truth
is (the end), not the means. Meditation on self, again, is said to be
for the sake of supreme truth; but the object of this is to establish
distinctions (between soul and body), and the great truth of all is
without distinctions. Union of self with supreme spirit is said to be
the great end of all; but this is false; for one substance cannot become
substantially

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

another <span id="fr_741"></span>[2](#fn_741). Objects, then, which are
considered most desirable are infinite. What the great end of all is,
you shall, monarch, briefly learn from me. It is soul: one (in all
bodies), pervading, uniform, perfect, preeminent over nature (Prakriti),
exempt from birth, growth, and decay, omnipresent, undecaying, made up
of true knowledge, independent, and unconnected with unrealities, with
name, species, and the rest, in time present, past, or to come. The
knowledge that this spirit, which is essentially one, is in one's own
and in all other bodies, is the great end, or true wisdom, of one who
knows the unity and the true principles of things. As one diffusive air,
passing through the perforations of a flute, is distinguished as the
notes of the scale (Sherga and the rest), so the nature of the great
spirit is single, though its forms be manifold, arising from the
consequences of acts. When the difference of the investing form, as that
of god or the rest, is destroyed, then there is no distinction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_740"></span>[251:1](vp072.htm#fr_740) You ask what is
Śreyas, not what is Paramártha: the first means literally 'best,' 'most
excellent,' and is here used to denote temporary and special objects, or
sources of happiness, as wealth, posterity, power, &c.; the latter is
the one great object or end of life, true wisdom or truth, knowledge of
the real and universal nature of soul.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[253:2](vp072.htm#fr_741) But this is to be
understood as applying to the doctrines which distinguish between the
vital spirit (Jívátmá) and the supreme spirit (Paramátmá), the doctrine
of the Yoga. It is here argued, that it is absurd to talk of effecting a
union between the soul of man and supreme soul; for if they are distinct
essentially, they cannot combine; if they are already one and the same,
it is nonsense to talk of accomplishing their union. The great end of
life or truth is not to effect the union of two things, or two parts of
one thing, but to know that all is unity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XV](vp073)
