[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp075)  [Next](vp077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

### CHAP. II.

Of the seven future Manus and Manwantaras. Story of Sanjná and Chháyá,
wives of the sun. Sávarńi, son of Chháyá, the eighth Manu. His
successors, with the divinities, &c. of their respective periods.
Appearance of [Vishńu](errata.htm#11) in each of the four Yugas.

MAITREYA.--You have recapitulated to me, most excellent Brahman, the
particulars of the past Manwantaras; now give me some account of those
which are to come.

PARÁŚARA.--Sanjná, the daughter of Viśwakarman, was the wife of the sun,
and bore him three children, the Manu (Vaivaswata), Yama, and the
goddess Yamí (or the Yamuná river). Unable to endure the fervours of her
lord, Sanjná gave him Chháyá <span id="fr_766"></span>[1](#fn_766) as
his handmaid, and repaired to the forests to practise devout exercises.
The sun, supposing Chháyá to be his wife Sanjná, begot by her three
other children, Śanaiśchara (Saturn), another Manu (Sávarńi), and a
daughter Tapatí (the Tapti river). Chháyá, upon one occasion, being
offended with Yama <span id="fr_767"></span>[2](#fn_767), the son of
Sanjná, denounced an imprecation upon him, and thereby revealed to Yama
and to the sun that she was not in truth Sanjná, the mother of the
former. Being further informed by Chháyá that his wife had gone to the
wilderness, the sun beheld her by the eye of meditation engaged in
austerities, in the figure of a mare (in the region of Uttara Kuru).
Metamorphosing himself into a horse, he rejoined his wife, and begot
three other children, the two Áswins and Revanta, and

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

then brought Sanjná back to his own dwelling. To diminish his intensity,
Viśwakarman placed the luminary on his lathe, to grind off some of his
effulgence; and in this manner reduced it an eighth, for more than that
was inseparable <span id="fr_768"></span>[3](#fn_768). The parts of the
divine Vaishńava splendour, residing in the sun, that were filed off by
Viśwakarman, fell blazing down upon the earth, and the artist
constructed of them the discus of Vishńu, the trident of Śiva, the
weapon <span id="fr_769"></span>[4](#fn_769) of the god of wealth, the
lance of Kártikeya, and the weapons of the other gods: all these
Viśwakarman fabricated from the superfluous rays of the sun <span
id="fr_770"></span>[5](#fn_770).

The son of Chháyá, who was called also a Manu, was denominated
Sávarńi <span id="fr_771"></span>[6](#fn_771), from being of the same
caste (Savarńa) as his elder brother, the Manu Vaivaswata. He presides
over the ensuing or eighth Manwantara; the particulars of which, and the
following, I will now relate. In the period in which Sávarńi shall be
the Manu, the classes of the gods will be Sutapas, Amitábhas, and
Mukhyas; twenty-one of each. The seven Rishis will be Díptimat, Gálava,
Ráma, Kripa, Drauńi; my son Vyása will be the sixth, and the seventh
will be Rishyasringa <span id="fr_772"></span>[7](#fn_772). The Indra
will be Bali, the sinless son of Virochana, who through the favour of
Vishńu is actually sovereign of part of Pátála. The royal progeny of
Sávarńi will be Virajas, Arvarívas, Nirmoha, and others.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

The ninth Manu will be Daksha-sávarńi <span
id="fr_773"></span>[8](#fn_773). The Páras, Maríchigarbhas, and
Sudharmas will be the three classes of divinities, each consisting of
twelve; their powerful chief will be the Indra Adbhuta. Savana,
Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, Jyotishmán, and Satya will be the
seven Rishis. Dhritaketu, Driptiketu, Panchahasta, Mahámáyá,
Prithuśrava, and others, will be the sons of the Manu.

In the tenth Manwantara the Manu will be Brahmá-sávarńi: the gods will
be the Sudhámas, Viruddhas, and Śatasankhyas: the Indra will be the
mighty Śánti: the Rishis will be Havishmán, Sukriti, Satya, Apámmúrtti,
Nábhága, Apratimaujas, and Satyaketu: and the ten sons of the Manu will
be Sukshetra, Uttarnaujas, Harisheńa, and others.

In the eleventh Manwantara the Manu will be Dharma-sávarńi: the
principal classes of gods will be the Vihangamas, Kámagamas, and
Nirmánaratis, each thirty in number <span
id="fr_774"></span>[9](#fn_774); of whom Vrisha will be the Indra: the
Rishis will be Niśchara, Agnitejas, Vapushmán, Vishńu, Áruni, Havishmán,
and Anagha: the kings of the earth, and sons of the Manu, will be
Savarga, Sarvadharma, Deváníka, and others.

In the twelfth Manwantara the son of Rudra, Sávarńi, will be the Manu:
Ritudhámá will be the Indra: and the Haritas, Lohitas, Sumanasas, and
Sukarmas will be the classes of gods, each comprising fifteen.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Tapaswí, Sutapas,
Tapomúrtti, Taporati, Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti, and Tapodhana will be the
Rishis: and Devaván, Upadeva, Devaśresht́a, and others, will be the
Manu's sons, and mighty monarchs on the earth.

In the thirteenth Manwantara the Manu will be Rauchya <span
id="fr_775"></span>[10](#fn_775): the classes of gods, thirty-three in
each, will be the Sudhámans, Sudharmans, and Sukarmans; their Indra will
be Divaspati: the Rishis will be Nirmoha, Tatwadersín, Nishprakampa,
Nirutsuka, Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutapas: and Chitrasena, Vichitra, and
others, will be the kings.

In the fourteenth Manwantara, Bhautya will be the Manu <span
id="fr_776"></span>[11](#fn_776); Suchi, the Indra: the five classes of
gods will be the Chákshushas, the Pavitras, Kanisht́has, Bhrájiras, and
Vávriddhas: the seven Rishis will be Agnibáhu, Śuchi, Śukra, Magadhá,
Gridhra, Yukta, and Ajita: and the sons of the Manu will be Uru,
Gabhíra, Bradhna, and others, who will be kings, and will rule over the
earth <span id="fr_777"></span>[12](#fn_777).

At the end of every four ages there is a disappearance of the Vedas, and
it is the province of the seven Rishis to come down upon earth from
heaven to give them currency again. In every Krita age the Manu (of the
period) is the legislator or author of the body of law, the Smriti: the

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

deities of the different classes receive the sacrifices during the
Manwantaras to which they severally belong: and the sons of the Manu
them. selves, and their descendants, are the sovereigns of the earth for
the whole of the same term. The Manu, the seven Rishis, the gods, the
sons of the Manu, who are the kings, and Indra, are the beings who
preside over the world during each Manwantara.

An entire Kalpa, oh Brahman, is said to comprise a thousand ages, or
fourteen Manwantaras <span id="fr_778"></span>[13](#fn_778); and it is
succeeded by a night of similar duration; during which, he who wears the
form of Brahmá, Janárddana, the substance of all things, the lord of
all, and creator of all, involved in his own illusions, and having
swallowed up the three spheres, sleeps upon the serpent Śesha, amidst
the ocean <span id="fr_779"></span>[14](#fn_779). Being after that
awake, he, who is the universal soul, again creates all things as they
were before, in combination with the property of foulness (or activity):
and in a portion of his essence, associated with the property of
goodness, he, as the Manus, the kings, the gods, and their Indras, as
well as the seven Rishis, is the preserver of the world. In what manner
Vishńu, who is characterised by the attribute of providence during the
four ages, effected their preservation, I will next, Maitreya, explain.

In the Krita age, Vishńu, in the form of Kapila and other inspired
teachers, assiduous for the benefit of all creatures, imparts to them
true wisdom. In the Treta age he restrains the wicked, in the form of a
universal monarch, and protects the three worlds <span
id="fr_780"></span>[15](#fn_780). In the Dwápara age, in the person of
Veda-vyása, he divides the one Veda into four, and

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

distributes it into innumerable branches: and at the end of the Kali or
fourth age he appears as Kalki, and reestablishes the iniquitous in the
paths of rectitude. In this manner the universal spirit preserves,
creates, and at last destroys, all the world.

Thus, Brahman, I have described to you the true nature of that great
being who is all things, and besides whom there is no other existent
thing, nor has there been, nor will there be, either here or elsewhere.
I have also enumerated to you the Manwantaras, and those who preside
over them. What else do you wish to hear?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_766"></span>[266:1](vp076.htm#fr_766) That is, her shadow
or image. It also means 'shade.' The Bhágavata, however, makes both
Sanjná and Chháyá daughters of Viśwakarman. According to the Matsya,
Vivaswat, the son of Kaśyapa and Adití, had three wives, Rájní, the
daughter of Raivata, by whom he had Revanta; Prabhá, by whom he had
Prabhata; and by Sanjná, the daughter of Twasht́ri, the Manu and Yama and
Yamuná. The story then proceeds much as in the text.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[266:2](vp076.htm#fr_767) Yama, provoked at her
partiality for her own children, abused Chháyá, and lifted up his foot
to kick her. She cursed him to have his leg affected with sores and
worms; but his father bestowed upon him a cock, to eat the worms, and
remove the discharge; and Yama, afterwards propitiating Mahádeva,
obtained the rank of Lokapála, and sovereign of Tartarus.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[267:3](vp076.htm#fr_768) The Matsya says he
trimmed the sun every where except in the feet, the extent of which he
could not discern. Consequently in pictures or images the feet of the
sun must never be delineated, under pain of leprosy, &c.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[267:4](vp076.htm#fr_769) The term is Śiviká,
which properly means 'a litter,' The commentator calls it Astra, 'a
weapon.'

<span id="fn_770"></span>[267:5](vp076.htm#fr_770) This legend is told,
with some variations of no great importance, in the Matsya, Márkańd́eya,
and Padma P. (Swarga Khańd́a), in the Bhágavata, and Hari Vanśa, &c.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[267:6](vp076.htm#fr_771) The Márkańd́eya,
whilst it admits Sávarńi to be the son of the sun, has a legend of his
former birth, in the Swárochisha Manwantara, as Suratha Rájá, who became
a Manu by having then propitiated Deví. It was to him that the Durgá
Máhátmya or Chańd́í, the popular narrative of Durga's triumphs over
various demons, was narrated.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[267:7](vp076.htm#fr_772) The Váyu has
Jámadagnya or Paraśuráma, of the Kuśika race; Gálava, of that of Bhrigu;
Dwaipáyana (or Vyása), of the family of Vaśisht́ha; Kripa, the son of
Śaradwat; Díptimat, descended from Atri; Rishyasringa, from Kaśyapa; and
Aswattháman, the son of Drońa, of the Bháradwája family. The Matsya and
Padma have Satánanda in place of Diptimat.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[268:8](vp076.htm#fr_773) The four following
Sávarńis are described in the Váyu as the mind-engendered sons of a
daughter of Daksha, named either Suvratá (Váyu) or Priyá (Bráhma) by
himself and the three gods, Brahmá, Dharma, and Rudra, to whom he
presented her on mount Meru; whence they are called also Meru-sávarńis.
They are termed Sávarńis from their being of one family or caste.
According to the same authority, followed by the Hari Vanśa, it appears
that this Manu is also called Rohita. Most of the details of this and
the following Manwantaras are omitted in the Matsya, Brahmá, Padma, and
Márkańd́eya Puráńas. The Bhágavata and Kúrma give the same as our text;
and the Váyu, which agrees very nearly with it, is followed in most
respects by the Hari Vanśa. The Matsya and Padma are peculiar in their
series and nomenclature of the Manus themselves, calling the 9th
Rauchya, 10th Bhautya, 11th Merusavárńi, son of Brahmá, 12th Ritu, 13th
Ritadháman, and 14th Viswaksena. The Bhágavata calls the two last Manus,
Deva-sávarńi and Indra-sávarńi.

<span id="fn_774"></span>[268:9](vp076.htm#fr_774) Hence the Váyu
identifies the first with days, the second with nights, and the third
with hours.

<span id="fn_775"></span>[269:10](vp076.htm#fr_775) The son of the
Prajápati Ruchi (Váyu, &c.), by the nymph Mániní, the daughter of the
Apsaras Pramlochá (Márkańd́eya).

<span id="fn_776"></span>[269:11](vp076.htm#fr_776) Son of Ravi, by the
goddess Bhútí, according to the Váyu; but the Márkańd́eya makes Bhútí the
son of Angiras, whose pupil Śánti, having suffered the holy fire to go
out in his master's absence, prayed to Agni, and so propitiated him,
that he not only relighted the flame, but desired Śánti to demand a
further boon. Śánti accordingly solicited a son for his Guru; which son
was Bhúti, the father of the Manu Bhautya.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[269:12](vp076.htm#fr_777) Although the Puráńas
which give an account of the Manwantaras agree in some of the principal
details, yet in the minor ones they offer many varieties, some of which
have been noticed. These chiefly regard the first six and the eighth.
Except in a few individual peculiarities, the authorities seem to
arrange themselves in two classes; one comprehending the Vishńu, Váyu,
Kúrma, Bhágavata, and Márkańd́eya; and the other the Matsya, Padma,
Bráhma, and Hari Vanśa. The Márkańd́eya, although it agrees precisely
with the Vishńu in its nomenclature, differs from it, and from all, in
devoting a considerable number of its pages to legends of the origin of
the Manus, all of which are evidently of comparatively recent invention,
and several of which have been no doubt suggested by the etymology of
the names of the Manus.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[270:13](vp076.htm#fr_778) A thousand ages of
the gods and fourteen Manwantaras are not precisely the same thing, as
has been already explained. (See [p. 24](vp037.htm#page_24). n.
[6](vp037.htm#fn_155).)

<span id="fn_779"></span>[270:14](vp076.htm#fr_779) The order of the
text would imply, that as Brahmá he sleeps upon Śesha; but if this be
intended, it is at variance with the usual legend, that it is as Vishńu
or Náráyańa that the deity sleeps in the intervals of dissolution. The
commentator accordingly qualifies the phrase Brahmarúpadhara by the term
Divá: 'Vishńu wears the form of Brahmá by day; by night he sleeps on
Śesha, in the person of Náráyańa.' This however may be suspected to be
an innovation upon an older system; for in speaking of the alternations
of creation and dissolution, they are always considered as consentaneous
with the day and night of Brahmá alone.

<span id="fn_780"></span>[270:15](vp076.htm#fr_780) As a Chakravarttin.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III](vp077)
