[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp073)  [Next](vp075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

### CHAP. XVI.

Ribhu returns to his disciple, and perfects him in divine knowledge. The
same recommended to the Rájá by Bharata, who thereupon obtains final
liberation. Consequences of hearing this legend.

"AFTER the expiration of another thousand years, Ribhu again repaired to
the city where Nidágha dwelt, to instruct him farther in true wisdom.
When he arrived near the town, he beheld a prince entering into it, with
a splendid retinue; and his pupil Nidágha standing afar off, avoiding
the crowd; his throat shrivelled with starvation, and bearing from the
thicket fuel and holy grass. Ribhu approached him, and saluting him
reverentially (as if he was a stranger) demanded why he was standing in
such a retired spot. Nidágha replied, 'There is a great crowd of people
attending the entrance of the king into the town, and I am staying here
to avoid it.' 'Tell me, excellent Brahman,' said Ribhu, 'for I believe
that thou art wise, which is here the king, and which is any other man.'
The king,' answered Nidágha, is he who is seated on the fierce and
stately elephant, vast as a mountain peak; the others are his
attendants.' You have shewn me,' observed Ribhu, 'at one moment the
elephant and the king, without noticing any peculiar characteristic by
which they may be distinguished. Tell me, venerable sir, is there any
difference between them? for I am desirous to know which is here the
elephant, which is the king.' 'The elephant,' answered Nidágha, 'is
underneath; the king is above him. Who is not aware, Brahman, of the
relation between that which bears and that which is borne?' To this
Ribhu rejoined, 'Still explain to me, according to what I know of it,
this matter: what is it that is meant by the word *underneath*, and what
is it that is termed *above*?' As soon as he had uttered this, Nidágha
jumped upon Ribhu, and said, 'Here is my answer to the question you have
asked: I am above, like the Rájá.; you are underneath, like the
elephant. This example, Brahman, is intended for your information.' Very
well,' said Ribhu, you, it seems, are as it were the Rájá, and I am like
the elephant; but come now do you tell me which of us two is you; which
is *I*.'

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

"When Nidágha heard these words, he immediately fell at the feet o the
stranger, and said, Of a surety thou art my saintly preceptor Ribhu the
mind of no other person is so fully imbued with the doctrines of unity
as that of my teacher, and hence I know that thou art he.' To this Ribhu
replied, 'I am your preceptor, by name Ribhu, who, pleased with: the
dutiful attention he has received, has come to Nidágha to give him
instruction: for this purpose have I briefly intimated to you divine
truth, the essence of which is the non-duality of all.' Having thus
spoken to Nidágha, the Brahman Ribhu went away, leaving his disciple
profoundly impressed, by his instructions, with belief in unity. He
beheld all beings thenceforth as the same with himself, and, perfect in
holy knowledge, obtained final liberation.

"In like manner do thou, oh king, who knowest what duty is, regarding
equally friend or foe, consider yourself as one with all that exists in
the world. Even as the same sky is apparently diversified as white or
blue, so Soul, which is in truth but one, appears to erroneous vision
distinct in different persons. That One, which here is all things, is
Achyuta (Vishńu); than whom there is none other. He is I; he is thou; he
is all: this universe is his form. Abandon the error of distinction."

PARÁŚARA resumed.--The king, being thus instructed, opened his eyes to
truth, and abandoned the notion of distinct existence: whilst the
Brahman, who, through the recollection of his former lives, had acquired
perfect knowledge, obtained now exemption from future birth. Whoever
narrates or listens to the lessons inculcated in the dialogue between
Bharata and the king, has his mind enlightened, mistakes not the nature
of individuality, and in the course of his migrations becomes fitted for
ultimate emancipation <span id="fr_742"></span>[1](#fn_742).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_742"></span>[258:1](vp074.htm#fr_742) This legend is a good
specimen of a sectarial graft upon a Pauráńik stem. It is in a great
measure peculiar to the Vishńu P., as although it occurs also in the
Bhágavata, it is narrated there in a much more concise manner, and in a
strain that looks like an abridgment of our text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](vp075)
