[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp079)  [Next](vp081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

### CHAP. VI.

Divisions of the Sáma-veda: of the Atharva-veda. Four Pauráńik Sanhitás.
Names of the eighteen Puráńas. Branches of knowledge. Classes of Rishis.

YOU shall now hear, Maitreya, how Jaimini, the pupil of Vyása, divided
the branches of the Sáma-veda. The son of Jaimini was Sumantu, and his
son was Sukarman, who both studied the same Sanhitá under Jaimini <span
id="fr_805"></span>[1](#fn_805). The latter composed the Sáhasra Sanhitá
(or compilation of a thousand hymns, &c.), which he taught to two
disciples, Hirańyanábha, also named Kauśalya (or of Kośala), and
Paushyinji <span id="fr_806"></span>[2](#fn_806). Fifteen disciples of
the latter were the authors of as many Sanhitás: they were called the
northern chaunters of the Sáman. As many more, also the disciples of
Hirańyanábha, were termed the eastern chaunters of the Sáman, founding
an equal number of schools. Lokákshi, Kuthumi, Kushídí, and Lángali were
the pupils of Paushyinji; and by them and their disciples many other
branches were formed. Whilst another scholar of Hirańyanábha, named
Kriti, taught twenty-four Sanhitás to as many pupils; and by them,
again, was the Sáma-veda divided into numerous branches <span
id="fr_807"></span>[3](#fn_807).

I will now give you an account of the Sanhitás of the Atharva-veda. The
illustrious Muni Sumantu taught this Veda to his pupil Kabandha, who
made it twofold, and communicated the two portions to Devaderśa and to
Pathya. The disciples of Devaderśa were Maudga, Brahmabali,

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Śaulkáyani, and
Pippaláda. Pathya had three pupils, Jájali, Kumudádi, and Śaunaka; and
by all these were separate branches instituted. Śaunaka having divided
his Sanhitá into two, gave one to Babhru, and the other to
Saindhaváyana; and from them sprang two schools, the Saindhavas and
Munjakeśas <span id="fr_808"></span>[4](#fn_808). The principal subjects
of difference in the Sanhitás of the Atharva-veda are the five Kalpas or
ceremonials: the Nakshatra Kalpa, or rules for worshipping the planets;
the Vaitána Kalpa, or rules for oblations, according to the Vedas
generally; the Sanhitá Kalpa, or rules for sacrifices, according to
different schools; the Ángirasa Kalpa, incantations and prayers for the
destruction of foes and the like; and the Sánti Kalpa, or prayers for
averting evil <span id="fr_809"></span>[5](#fn_809).

Accomplished in the purport of the Puráńas, Vyása compiled a Pauráńik
Sanhitá, consisting of historical and legendary traditions, prayers and
hymns, and sacred chronology <span id="fr_810"></span>[6](#fn_810). He
had a distinguished disciple, Súta, also termed Romaharshańa, and to him
the great Muni communicated the Puráńas. Súta had six scholars, Sumati,
Agnivarchas, Mitrayu, Śánśapáyana, Akritavrańa, who is also called
Káśyapa, and Sáverńi. The three last composed three fundamental
Sanhitás; and Romaharshańa himself compiled a fourth, called
Romaharshańika. The substance of which four Sanhitás is collected into
this (Vishńu) Puráńa.

The first of all the Puráńas is entitled the Bráhma. Those who are

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

acquainted with the Puráńas enumerate eighteen, or the Bráhma, Pádma,
Vaishńava, Śaiva, Bhágavata, Náradíya, Márkańd́eya, Ágneya, Bhavishyat,
Brahma Vaivartta, Lainga, Váráha, Skánda, Vámana, Kaurmma, Mátsya,
Gárura, Brahmáńd́a. The creation of the world, and its successive
reproductions, the genealogies of the patriarchs and kings, the periods
of the Manus, and the transactions of the royal dynasties, are narrated
in all these Puráńas. This Puráńa which I have repeated to you,
Maitreya, is called the Vaishńava, and is next in the series to the
Padma; and in every part of it, in its narratives of primary and
subsidiary creation, of families, and of periods, the mighty Vishńu is
declared in this Puráńa <span id="fr_811"></span>[7](#fn_811).

The four Vedas, the six Angas (or subsidiary portions of the Vedas, viz.
Śikshá, rules of reciting the prayers, the accents and tones to be
observed; Kalpa, ritual; Vyákarańa, grammar; Nirukta, glossarial
comment; Chhandas, metre; and Jyotish, (astronomy), with Mímánsá
(theology), Nyáya (logic), Dharma (the institutes of law), and the
Puráńas, constitute the fourteen principal branches of knowledge: or
they are considered as eighteen, with the addition of these four; the
Áyur-veda, medical science (as taught by Dhanwantari); Dhanur-veda, the
science of archery or arms, taught by Bhrigu; Gándharba-veda, or the
drama, and the arts of music, dancing, &c., of which the Muni Bharata
was the author; and the Artha śástram, or science of government, as laid
down first by Vrihaspati.

There are three kinds of Rishis, or inspired sages; royal Rishis, or
princes who have adopted a life of devotion, as Viswamitra; divine
Rishis, or sages who are demigods also, as Nárada; and Brahman Rishis,
or sages who are the sons of Brahmá, or Brahmans, as Vaśisht́ha and
others <span id="fr_812"></span>[8](#fn_812).

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

I have thus described to you the branches of the Vedas, and their
subdivisions; the persons by whom they were made; and the reason why
they were made (or the limited capacities of mankind). The same branches
are instituted in the different Manwantaras. The primitive Veda, that of
the progenitor of all things, is eternal: these branches are but its
modifications (or Vikalpas).

I have thus related to you, Maitreya, the circumstances relating to the
Vedas, which you desired to hear. Of what else do you wish to be
informed <span id="fr_813"></span>[9](#fn_813)?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_805"></span>[282:1](vp080.htm#fr_805) The Váyu makes
Sukarman the grandson of Sumantu, his son being called Sunwat.

<span id="fn_806"></span>[282:2](vp080.htm#fr_806) Some copies read
Paushpinji. The Váyu agrees with our text, but alludes to a legend of
Sukarman having first taught a thousand disciples, but they were all
killed by Indra, for reading on an unlawful day, or one when sacred
study is prohibited.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[282:3](vp080.htm#fr_807) The Váyu specifies
many more names than the Vishńu, but the list is rather confused.
Amongst the descendants of those named in the text, Ráyánaníya (or
Ráńáyaníya), the son of Lokákshi, is the author of a Sanhitá still
extant: Saumitri his son was the author of three Sanhitás: Paráśara, the
son of Kuthumi, compiled and taught six Sanhitás: and Śáligotra, a son
of Lángali, established also six schools. Kriti was of royal descent: he
and Paushyinji were the two most eminent teachers of the Sáma-veda.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[283:4](vp080.htm#fr_808) According to the
commentator, Munjakeśa is another name for Babhru; but the Váyu seems to
consider him as the pupil of Saindhava, but the text is corrupt.

<span id="fn_809"></span>[283:5](vp080.htm#fr_809) The Váyu has an
enumeration of the verses contained in the different Vedas, but it is
very indistinctly given in many respects, especially as regards the
Yajush. The Rich is said to comprise 8600 Richas. The Yajush, as
originally compiled by Vyása, 12000: of which the Vájasaneyi contains
1900 Richas, and 7600 Brahmanas; the Charaka portion contains 6026
stanzas: and consequently the whole exceeds 12000 verses. The stanzas of
the Sáman are said to be 8014; and those of the Atharvan 5980. Mr.
Colebrooke states the verses of the whole Yajush to be 1987; of the
Salapalka Brahmana of the same Veda 7624; and of the Atharvan 6015.

<span id="fn_810"></span>[283:6](vp080.htm#fr_810) Or of stories
(Ákhyánas) and minor stories or tales (Upákhyánas); of portions
dedicated to some particular divinity, as the Śíva-gitá, Bhagavad-gítá,
&c.; and accounts of the periods called Kalpas, as the Bráhma Kalpa,
Váráha Kalpa, &c.

<span id="fn_811"></span>[284:7](vp080.htm#fr_811) For remarks upon this
enumeration, see Introduction.

<span id="fn_812"></span>[284:8](vp080.htm#fr_812) A similar enumeration
is given in the Váyu, with some additions. Rishi is derived from Rish,
'to go to' or 'approach.' The Brahmarshis, it is said, are descendants
of the five patriarchs, who were the founders of races or Gotras of
Brahmans, or Kaśyapa, Vaśisht́ha, Angiras, Atri, and Bhrigu. The
Devarshis are Nara and Náráyańa, the sons of Dharma; the Bálakhilyas,
who sprung from Kratu; Kardama, the son of Pulaha; Kuvera, the son of
Pulastya; Achala, the son of Pratyúsha; <span id="page_285">p.
285</span> Nárada and Parvata, the sons of Kaśyapa. Brahmarshis are
Ikshwáku and other princes. The Brahmarshis dwell in the sphere of
Brahmá; the Devarshis in the region of the gods; and the Rájarshis in
the heaven of Indra.

<span id="fn_813"></span>[285:9](vp080.htm#fr_813) No notice is taken
here of a curious legend which is given in the Mahábhárata, in the Gadá
Parvan. It is there said, that during a great drought the Brahmans,
engrossed by the care of subsistence, neglected the study of the sacred
books, and the Vedas were lost. The Rishi Sáraswata alone, being fed
with fish by his mother Saraswatí, the personified river so named, kept
up his studies, and preserved the Hindu scriptures. At the end of the
famine the Brahmans repaired to him to be taught, and sixty thousand
disciples again acquired a knowledge of the Vedas from Sáraswata. This
legend appears to indicate the revival, or more probably the
introduction, of the Hindu ritual by the race of Brahmans, or the
*people* called Sáraswata; for, according to the Hindu geographers, it
was the name of a nation, as it still is the appellation of a class of
Brahmans who chiefly inhabit the Panjab. (As. Res. VII. 219, 338, 341.)
The Sáraswata Brahmans are met with in many parts of India, and are
usually fair-complexioned, tall, and handsome men. They are classed in
the Játi málás, or popular lists of castes, amongst the five Gaura
Brahmans, and are divided into ten tribes: they are said also to be
especially the Purohits or family priests of the Kshatriya or military
castes: (see the Játi málá, printed in Price's Hindi Selections, II.
280:) circumstances in harmony with the purport of the legend, and
confirmatory of the Sáraswatas of the Panjab having been prominent
agents in the establishment of the Hindu religion in India. The holy
land of the Hindus, or the primary seat, perhaps, of Brahmanism, has for
one of its boundaries the Saraswatí river: see [p.
181](vp061.htm#page_181), n. [7](vp061.htm#fn_403).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](vp081)
