[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp088)  [Next](vp090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

### CHAP. XV.

What Brahmans are to be entertained at Śráddhas. Different prayers to be
recited. Offerings of food to be presented to deceased ancestors.

AURVA proceeded.--"Hear next, oh prince, what description of Brahman
should be fed at ancestral ceremonies. he should be one studied in
various triplets of the Rich and Yajur Vedas <span
id="fr_880"></span>[1](#fn_880); one who is acquainted with the six
supplementary sciences of the Vedas <span
id="fr_881"></span>[2](#fn_881); one who understands the Vedas; one who
practises the duties they enjoin <span id="fr_882"></span>[3](#fn_882);
one who exercises penance; a chanter of the principal Sáma-veda <span
id="fr_883"></span>[4](#fn_883), an officiating priest, a sister's son,
a daughter's son, a son-in-law, a father-in-law, a maternal uncle, an
ascetic, a Brahman who maintains the five fires, a pupil, a kinsman; one
who reverences his parents. A man should first employ the Brahmans first
specified in the principal obsequial

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

rite; and the others (commencing with the ministering priest) in the
subsidiary ceremonies instituted to gratify his ancestors.

"A false friend, a man with ugly nails or black teeth, a ravisher, a
Brahman who neglects the service of fire and sacred study, a vender of
the Soma plant, a man accused of any crime, a thief, a calumniator, a
Brahman who conducts religious ceremonies for the vulgar; one who
instructs his servant in holy writ, or is instructed in it by his
servant; the husband of a woman who has been formerly betrothed to
another; a man who is undutiful to his parents; the protector of the
husband of a woman of the servile caste, or the husband of a woman of
the servile caste; and a Brahman who ministers to idols--are not proper
persons to be invited to au ancestral offering <span
id="fr_884"></span>[5](#fn_884). On the first day let a judicious man
invite eminent teachers of the Vedas, and other Brahmans; and according
to their directions determine what is to be dedicated to the gods, and
what to the Pitris. Associated with the Brahmans, let the institutor of
an obsequial rite abstain from anger and incontinence. He who having
eaten himself in a Śráddha, and fed Brahmans, and appointed them to
their sacred offices, is guilty of incontinence, thereby sentences his
progenitors to shameful suffering. In the first place, the Brahmans
before described are to be invited; but those holy men who come to the
house without an invitation are also to be entertained. The guests are
to be reverently received with water for their feet, and the like; and
the entertainer, holding holy grass in his hand, is to place them, after
they have rinsed their mouths, upon seats. An uneven number of Brahmans
is to be invited in sacrifices to the manes; an even or uneven number in
those presented to the gods; or one only on each occasion <span
id="fr_885"></span>[6](#fn_885).

"Then let the householder, inspired by religious faith, offer oblations
to the maternal grandfather, along with the worship of the
Viśwadevas <span id="fr_886"></span>[7](#fn_886),

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

or the ceremony called Vaiśwadeva, which comprehends offerings to both
paternal and maternal ancestors, and to ancestors in general. Let him
feed the Brahmans who are appropriated to the gods, and to maternal
ancestors, with their faces to the north; and those set apart for the
paternal ancestors, and ancestors in general, with their faces to the
east. Some say that the viands of the Śráddha should be kept distinct
for these two sets of ancestors, but others maintain that they are to be
fed with the same food, at the same time. Having spread Kuśa grass for
seats, and offered libations according to rule, let the sensible man
invoke the deities, with the concurrence of the Brahmans who are
present <span id="fr_887"></span>[8](#fn_887). Let the man who is
acquainted with the ritual offer a libation to the gods with water and
barley, having presented to them flowers, perfumes, and incense. Let him
offer the same to the Pitris, placed upon his left; and with the consent
of the Brahmans, having first provided seats of Kuśa grass doubled, let
him invoke with the usual prayers the manes to the ceremony, offering a
libation, on his left hand, of water and sesamum. He will then, with the
permission of the Brahmans, give food to any guest who arrives at the
time, or who is desirous of victuals, or who is passing along the road;
for holy saints

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

and ascetics, benefactors of mankind, are traversing this earth,
disguised in various shapes <span id="fr_888"></span>[9](#fn_888). On
this account let a prudent man welcome a person who arrives at such a
season; for inattention to a guest frustrates the consequences of an
ancestral offering.

"The sacrificer is then to offer food, without salt or seasoning, to
fire <span id="fr_889"></span>[10](#fn_889), three several times, with
the consent of the assistant Brahmans; exclaiming first, 'To fire, the
vehicle of the oblations; to the manes Swáhá!' Next addressing the
oblation to Soma, the lord of the progenitors; and giving the third to
Vaivaswata. He is then to place a very little of the residue of the
oblation in the dishes of the Brahmans; and next, presenting them with
choice viands, well dressed and seasoned, and abundant, he is to request
them civilly to partake of it at their pleasure. The Brahmans are to eat
of such food attentively, in silence, with cheerful countenances, and at
their ease. The sacrificer is to give it to them, not churlishly, nor
hurriedly, but with devout faith.

"Having next recited the prayer for the discomfiture of malignant
spirits <span id="fr_890"></span>[11](#fn_890), and scattered
sesamum-seeds upon the ground, the Brahmans who have been fed are to be
addressed, in common with the ancestors of the sacrificer, in this
manner: 'May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather, in the
persons of these Brahmans, receive satisfaction! May my father,
grandfather, and great grandfather derive nutriment from these oblations
to fire! May my father, grandfather, and great grandfather derive
satisfaction from the balls of food placed by me upon the ground! May my
father, grandfather, and great grandfather be pleased with what I have
this day offered them in faith! May my maternal grandfather, his father,
and his father, also enjoy contentment from my offerings! May all the
gods experience gratification, and all evil beings perish! May the lord
of sacrifice, the imperishable deity

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Hari, be the
acceptor of all oblations made to the manes or the gods! and may all
malignant spirits, and enemies of the deities, depart from the rite.'

"When the Brahmans have eaten sufficiently, the worshipper must scatter
some of the food upon the ground, and present them individually with
water to rinse their mouths; then, with their assent, he may place upon
the ground balls made up of boiled rice and condiments, along with
sesamum-seeds. With the part of his hand sacred to the manes he must
offer sesamum-seeds, and water from his joined palms; and with the same
part of his hand he must present cakes to his maternal ancestors. He
should in lonely places, naturally beautiful, and by the side of sacred
streams, diligently make presents (to the manes and the Brahmans) <span
id="fr_891"></span>[12](#fn_891). Upon Kuśa grass, the tips of which are
pointed to the south, and lying near the fragments of the meat, let the
householder present the first ball of food, consecrated with flowers and
incense, to his father; the second to his grandfather; and the third to
his great grandfather; and let him satisfy those who are contented with
the wipings of his hand, by wiping it with the roots of Kuśa grass <span
id="fr_892"></span>[13](#fn_892). After presenting balls of food to his
maternal ancestors in the same manner, accompanied by perfumes and
incense, he is to give to the principal Brahmans water to rinse their
mouths; and then, with attention and piety, he is to give the Brahmans
gifts, according to his power, soliciting their benedictions,
accompanied with the exclamation 'Swadhá <span
id="fr_893"></span>[14](#fn_893)!' Having made presents to the Brahmans,
he is to address himself to the gods, saying, 'May they who are the
Viśwadevas be pleased with this oblation!' Having thus said, and the
blessings to be solicited having been granted by the Brahmans, he is to
dismiss first the paternal ancestors, and then the gods. The order is
the same with the maternal ancestors and the gods in respect to food,
donation, and dismissal. Commencing with the

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

washing of the feet, until the dismissing of the gods and Brahmans, the
ceremonies are to be performed first for paternal ancestors, and then
for ancestors on the mother's side. Let him dismiss the Brahmans with
kindly speeches and profound respect, and attend upon them at the end of
the Śráddha; until permitted by them to return. The wise man will then
perform the invariable worship of the Viśwadevas, and take' his own meal
along with his friends, his kinsmen, and his dependants.

"In this manner an enlightened householder will celebrate the obsequial
worship of his paternal and maternal ancestors, who, satisfied by his
offerings, will grant him all his desires. Three things are held pure at
obsequies, a daughter's son, a Nepal blanket, and sesamum-seeds <span
id="fr_894"></span>[15](#fn_894); and the gift, or naming, or sight of
silver is also propitious <span id="fr_895"></span>[16](#fn_895). The
person offering a Śráddha should avoid anger, walking about, and hurry;
these three things are very objectionable. The Viśwadevas, and paternal
and maternal ancestors, and the living members of a man's family are all
nourished by the offerer of ancestral oblations.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

"The class of Pitris derives support from the moon, and the moon is
sustained by acts of austere devotion. Hence the appointment of one who
practises austerities is most desirable. A Yogi set before a thousand
Brahmans enables the institutor of obsequial rites to enjoy all his
desires <span id="fr_896"></span>[17](#fn_896)."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_880"></span>[325:1](vp089.htm#fr_880) The Brahmans here
particularized are termed Trińáchiketa, Trimadhu, and Trisuparńa; and
are so denominated, according to the commentator, from particular parts
of the Vedas. The first is so called from studying or reciting three
Anuvákas of the Kát́haka branch of the Yajur-veda, commencing with the
term Trińáchiketa; the second, from three Anuvákas of the same Veda,
beginning Madhuvátá, &c.; and the third, from a similar portion,
commencing Brahmavan namámi. The first and third terms occur in Manu,
III. 185; and Kullúka Bhat́t́a explains Trińáchiketa to mean a portion of
the Yajur-veda, and the Brahman who studies it; and Trisuparńa, a part
of the Rich, and the Brahman who is acquainted with it. The Nirńaya
Sindhu explains the terms m a like manner, but calls the Trisuparńa, as
well as the Trińáchiketa prayers, portions of the Yajush. The Trimadhu
it assigns to the Rich. Other explanations are also given to the terms
Trińáchiketa and Trisuparńa: the first being explained a Brahman who
thrice performs the ceremony called Chayana; and the last, one who,
after the seven ascending generations, worships the Pitris termed
Somapás. These explanations are however considered less correct than the
preceding, and which are thus given in the authority cited: \#\#\#.

<span id="fn_881"></span>[325:2](vp089.htm#fr_881) For the six Angas,
see [p. 284](vp080.htm#page_284).

<span id="fn_882"></span>[325:3](vp089.htm#fr_882) So the commentator
distinguishes the Vedavit, the Brahman who understands the meaning of
the text of the Vedas, from the Śrotriya, who practises the rites he
studies.

<span id="fn_883"></span>[325:4](vp089.htm#fr_883) Portions of the Sáman
contained in the Árańyaka are called the Jyesht́ha, 'elder' or
'principal' Sáman.

<span id="fn_884"></span>[326:5](vp089.htm#fr_884) Manu, III. 150, &c.

<span id="fn_885"></span>[326:6](vp089.htm#fr_885) As two or five at a
ceremony dedicated to the gods; three at the worship of the Pitris.
Nirńaya Sindhu, p. 311.

<span id="fn_886"></span>[326:7](vp089.htm#fr_886) The worship of the
Viśwadevas (see [p. 321](vp088.htm#page_321)) forms a part of the
general Śráddhas, and of the daily sacrifices of the householder.
According to the Váyu this was a privilege conferred upon them by Brahmá
and the Pitris, as a reward for religious austerities practised by them
upon Himálaya. Their introduction as a <span id="page_327">p. 327</span>
specific class seems to have originated in the custom of sacrificing to
the gods collectively, or to all the gods, as the name Viśwadevas
implies. They appear, however, as a distinct class in the Vedas, and
their assumption of this character is therefore of ancient date. The
daily offering to them is noticed by Manu, III. 90, 172; and offerings
to 'the gods' are also enjoined at the beginning and end of a Śráddha.
Kullúka Bhat́t́a understands here the Viśwadevas, and it probably is so;
but in another verse different divinities are specified: "First having
satisfied Agni, Soma, Yama, with clarified butter, let him proceed to
satisfy the manes of his progenitors." v. 211. Manu also directs them to
be worshipped first and last in order. See As. Res. VII. 265, 271, &c.

<span id="fn_887"></span>[327:8](vp089.htm#fr_887) The text is 'with
*their* assent;' but no noun occurs in the sentence with which the
relative is connected. It must mean the Brahmans, however, as in this
passage of Vriddha Par tiara; 'Let the sacrificer place his left hand on
the Brahman's right knee, and say, "Shall I invoke the Viśwadevas?" and
being desired to invoke them, let him address them with the two Mantras,
"Viśwadevas, he is come! Viśwadevas, hear him!"'

<span id="fn_888"></span>[328:9](vp089.htm#fr_888) This notion occurs
more than once in the Váyu, in nearly the same words.

<span id="fn_889"></span>[328:10](vp089.htm#fr_889) This places the
initiatory oblations noticed by Manu (see note [7](#fn_886)) subsequent
to the offerings to the Viśwadevas.

<span id="fn_890"></span>[328:11](vp089.htm#fr_890) The Rakshoghna
Mantra: the extinguishing of a lamp, lighted to keep off evil spirits,
which is accompanied by a Mantra, or prayer. As. Res. VII. 274.

<span id="fn_891"></span>[329:12](vp089.htm#fr_891) Part of this passage
is in the words of Manu, III. 207. It is omitted in the MSS. in the
Bengali character.

<span id="fn_892"></span>[329:13](vp089.htm#fr_892) Manu, III. 296.

<span id="fn_893"></span>[329:14](vp089.htm#fr_893) "Then let the
Brahmans address him, saying, 'Swadhá!' for in all ceremonies relating
to deceased ancestors, the word Swadhá is the highest benison." Manu,
III. 252.

<span id="fn_894"></span>[330:15](vp089.htm#fr_894) We have here the
words of Manu; III. 235. Three things are held pure at such obsequies,
the daughter's son, the Nepal blanket, and sesamum-seed.' Sir Wm.
Jones's translation of these terms rests upon the explanation of Kullúka
Bhat́t́a of this and the verse preceding; 'Let him give his daughter's
son, though a religious student, food at a Śráddha, and the blanket for
a seat.' The commentator on our text says that some understand by
Dauhitra, clarified butter made from the milk of a cow fed with grass
gathered on the day of new moon; and some explain it a plate or dish of
buffalo horn. Kutapa he interprets by Asht́ama Muhúrtta, the eighth hour
of the day, or a little after noon, although he admits that some render
it a blanket made of goats' wool. These explanations are also noticed in
the Nirńaya Sindhu, p. 302; and, upon the authority of the Matsya P.,
Kutapa is said to mean eight things; which equally consume (Tapa) all
sin (Ku), or noon, a vessel of rhinoceros' horn, a nepal blanket,
silver, holy grass, sesamum, kine, and a daughter's son.

<span id="fn_895"></span>[330:16](vp089.htm#fr_895) So the Matsya P. has
'the gift, sight, and name of silver are desired.' The notion originates
with Manu, III. 202.

<span id="fn_896"></span>[331:17](vp089.htm#fr_896) The same doctrine is
inculcated by the Váyu P.; but it appears to be a Pauráńik innovation,
for Manu places the Brahman intent on scriptural knowledge and on
austere devotion on a level, and makes no mention of the Yogi. III, 134.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](vp090)
