[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp080)  [Next](vp082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

### CHAP. VII.

By what means men are exempted from the authority of Yama, as narrated
by Bhíshma to Nakula. Dialogue between Yama and one of his attendants.
Worshippers of Vishńu not subject to Yama. How they are to be known.

MAITREYA.--You have indeed related to me, most excellent Brahman, all
that I asked of you; but I am desirous to hear one thing which you have
not touched on. This universe, composed of seven zones, with its seven
subterrestrial regions, and seven spheres--this whole egg of Brahmá.--is
every where swarming with living creatures, large or small, with smaller
and smallest, and larger and largest; so that there is not the eighth
part of an inch in which they do not abound. Now all these are captives
in the chains of acts, and at the end of their existence become slaves
to the power of Yama, by whom they are sentenced to painful punishments.
Released from these inflictions, they are again born in the condition of
gods, men, or the like: and thus living beings, as the Śástras apprise
us, perpetually revolve. Now the question I have to ask, and which you
are so well able to answer, is, by what acts men may free themselves
from subjection to Yama?

PARÁŚARA.--This question, excellent Muni, was once asked by Nakula <span
id="fr_814"></span>[1](#fn_814) of his grandfather Bhíshma; and I will
repeat to you the reply made by the latter.

Bhíshma said to the prince, "There formerly came on a visit to me a
friend of mine, a Brahman, from the Kalinga country, who told me that he
had once proposed this question to a holy Muni, who retained the
recollection of his former births, and by whom what was, and what will
be, was accurately told. Being importuned by me, who placed implicit
faith in his words, to repeat what that pious personage had imparted to
him, he at last communicated it to me; and what he related I have never
met with elsewhere.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

"Having, then, on one occasion, put to him the same question which you
have asked, the Kalinga Brahman recalled the story that had been told
him by the Muni--the great mystery that had been revealed to him by the
pious sage, who remembered his former existence--a dialogue that
occurred between Yama and one of his ministers.

"Yama beholding one of his servants with his noose in his hand,
whispered to him, and said, 'Keep clear of the worshippers of
Madhusúdana. I am the lord of all men, the Vaishńavas excepted. I was
appointed by Brahmá, who is reverenced by all the immortals, to restrain
mankind, and regulate the consequences of good and evil in the universe.
But be who obeys Hari, as his spiritual guide, is here independent of
me; for Vishńu is of power to govern and control me. As gold is one
substance still, however diversified as bracelets, tiaras, or earrings,
so Hari is one and the same, although modified in the forms of gods,
animals, and man. As the drops of water, raised by wind from the earth,
sink into the earth again when the wind subsides, so the varieties of
gods, men, and animals, which have been detached by the agitation of the
qualities, are reunited, when that disturbance ceases, with the eternal.
He who through holy knowledge diligently adores the lotus foot of that
Hari, who is reverenced by the gods, is released from all the bonds of
sin; and you must avoid him as you would avoid fire fed with oil.'

"Having heard these injunctions of Yama, the messenger addressed the
lord of righteousness, and said, 'Tell me, master, how am I to
distinguish the worshipper of Hari, who is the protector of all beings?'
Yama replied, 'You are to consider the worshipper of Vishńu, him who
never deviates from the duties prescribed to his caste; who looks with
equal indifference upon friend or enemy; who takes,; nothing (that is
not his own), nor injures any being. Know that person of unblemished
mind to be a worshipper of Vishńu. Know him to be a devout worshipper of
Hari, who has placed Janárddana in his pure mind, which has been freed
from fascination, and whose soul is undefiled by the soil of the Kali
age. Know that excellent man to be a worshipper of Vishńu, who, looking
upon gold in secret, holds that which is another's wealth but as grass,
and devotes all his thoughts to the lord. Pure is he as a mountain

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

of clear crystal; for how can Vishńu abide in the hearts of men with
malice and envy, and other evil passions? the glowing heat of fire
abides not in a cluster of the cooling rays of the moon. He who lives
pure in thought, free from malice, contented, leading a holy life,
feeling tenderness for all creatures, speaking wisely and kindly, humble
and sincere, has Vásudeva ever present in his heart. As the young
Sál-tree by its beauty declares the excellence of the juices which it
has imbibed from the earth, so when the eternal has taken up his abode
in the bosom of any one, that man is lovely amidst the beings of this
world. Depart, my servant, quickly from those men whose sins have been
dispersed by moral and religious merit <span
id="fr_815"></span>[2](#fn_815), whose minds are daily dedicated to the
imperceptible deity, and who are exempt from pride, uncharitableness,
and malice. In the heart in which the divine Hari, who is without
beginning or end, abides, armed with a sword, a shell, and a mace, sin
cannot remain; for it cannot coexist with that which destroys it, as
darkness cannot continue in the world when the sun is shining. The
eternal makes not his abode in the heart of that man who covets
another's wealth, who injures living creatures, who speaks harshness and
untruth, who is proud of his iniquity, and whose mind is evil.
Janárddana occupies not his thoughts who envies another's prosperity,
who calumniates the virtuous, who never sacrifices nor bestows gifts
upon the pious, who is blinded by the property of darkness. That vile
wretch is no worshipper of Vishńu, who through avarice is unkind to his
nearest friends and relations, to his wife, children, parents, and
dependants. The brute-like man whose thoughts are evil, who is addicted
to unrighteous acts, who ever seeks the society of the wicked, and
suffers no day to pass without the perpetration of crime, is no
worshipper of Vásudeva. Do you proceed afar off from those in whose
hearts Ananta is enshrined;

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

from him whose sanctified understanding conceives the supreme male and
ruler, Vásudeva, as one with his votary, and with all this world. Avoid
those holy persons who are constantly invoking the lotus-eyed Vásudeva,
Vishńu, the supporter of the earth, the immortal wielder of the discus
and the shell, the asylum of the world. Come not into the sight of him
in whose heart the imperishable soul resides, for he is defended from my
power by the discus of his deity: he is designed for another world (for
the heaven of Vishńu).'

"'Such,' said the Kalinga Brahman, 'were the instructions communicated
by the deity of justice, the son of the sun, to his servants, as they
were repeated to me by that holy personage, and as I have related them
to you, chief of the house of Kuru' (Bhíshma). So also, Nakula, I have
faithfully communicated to you all I heard from my pious friend, when he
came from his country of Kalinga to visit me. I have thus explained to
you, as was fitting, that there is no protection in the ocean of the
world except Vishńu; and that the servants and ministers of Yama, the
king of the dead himself, and his tortures, are all unavailing against
one who places his reliance on that divinity."

I have thus, resumed Paráśara, related to you what you wished to hear,
and what was said by the son of Vivaswat <span
id="fr_816"></span>[3](#fn_816). What else do you wish to hear?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_814"></span>[286:1](vp081.htm#fr_814) Nakula is one of the
Páńd́ava princes, and consequently grand-nephew, not grandson, of
Bhíshma: he is great grandson of Paráśara; and it is rather an anomaly
for the latter to cite a conversation in which Nakula formerly bore a
part.

<span id="fn_815"></span>[288:2](vp081.htm#fr_815) Or Yama and Niyama.
The duties intended by these terms are variously enumerated. The
commentator on the text specifics under the first head, absence of
violence or cruelty to other beings (Ahinsá), honesty (Asteya), truth
(Satya), chastity (Brahmácháryya), and disinterestedness or
non-acceptance of gifts (Aparigraha). Under Niyama are comprehended
purity (Śaucha), contentment (Santosha), devotion (Tapas), study of the
Vedas (Swádhyáya), and adoration of the supreme (Íśwara-prańidhána).

<span id="fn_816"></span>[289:3](vp081.htm#fr_816) Or Vaivaswata. This
section is called the Yama gíta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](vp082)
