[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp095)  [Next](vp097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_377">p. 377</span>

### CHAP. IV.

The progeny of Sagara: their wickedness: he performs an Aśwamedha: the
horse stolen by Kapila: found by Sagara's sons, who are all destroyed by
the sage: the horse recovered by Anśumat: his descendants. Legend of
Mitrasaha or Kalmáshapáda, the son of Sudása. Legend of Khat́wánga. Birth
of Ráma and the other sons of Daśaratha. Epitome of the history of Ráma:
his descendants, and those of his brothers. Line of Kuśa. Vrihadbala,
the last, killed in the great war.

SUMATI the daughter of Kaśyapa, and Kesiní the daughter of Rája
Viderbha, were the two wives of Sagara <span
id="fr_989"></span>[1](#fn_989). Being without progeny, the king
solicited the aid of the sage Aurva with great earnestness, and the Muni
pronounced this boon, that one wife should bear one son, the upholder of
his race, and the other should give birth to sixty thousand sons; and he
left it to them to make their election. Kesiní chose to have the single
son; Sumati the multitude: and it came to pass in a short time that the
former bore Asamanjas <span id="fr_990"></span>[2](#fn_990), a prince
through whom the dynasty continued; and the daughter of Vinatá (Sumati)
had sixty thousand sons. The son of Asamanjas was Anśumat.

Asamanjas was from his boyhood of very irregular conduct. His father
hoped that as he grew up to manhood he would reform; but finding that he
continued guilty of the same immorality, Sagara abandoned him. The sixty
thousand sons of Sagara followed the example of their brother Asamanjas.
The path of virtue and piety being obstructed in the world by the sons
of Sagara, the gods repaired to the Muni Kapila, who was a portion of
Vishńu, free from fault, and endowed with all true wisdom. Having
approached him with respect, they said, "O lord, what will become of the
world, if these sons of Sagara are permitted to go on in the evil ways
which they have learned from Asamanjas! Do thou, then, assume a visible
form, for the protection of the afflicted

<span id="page_378">p. 378</span>

universe." "Be satisfied," replied the sage, "in a brief time the sons
of Sagara shall be all destroyed."

At that period Sagara commenced the performance of the solemn sacrifice
of a horse, who was guarded by his own sons: nevertheless some one stole
the animal, and carried it off into a chasm in the earth, Sagara
commanded his sons to search for the steed; and they, tracing him by the
impressions of his hoofs, followed his course with perseverance, until
coming to the chasm where he had entered, they proceeded to enlarge it,
and dug downwards each for a league. Coming to Pátála, they beheld the
horse wandering freely about, and at no great distance from him they saw
the Rishi Kapila sitting, with his head declined in meditation, and
illuminating the surrounding space with radiance as bright as the
splendours of the autumnal sun, shining in an unclouded sky. Exclaiming,
"This is the villain who has maliciously interrupted our sacrifice, and
stolen the horse! kill him! kill him!" they ran towards him with
uplifted weapons. The Muni slowly raised his eyes, and for an instant
looked upon them, and they were reduced to ashes by the sacred flame
that darted from his person <span id="fr_991"></span>[3](#fn_991).

When Sagara learned that his sons, whom he had sent in pursuit of the
sacrificial steed, had been destroyed by the might of the great Rishi
Kapila, he dispatched Anśumat, the son of Asamaujas, to effect the
animals recovery. The youth, proceeding by the deep path which the
princes had dug, arrived where Kapila was, and bowing respectfully,
prayed to him, and so propitiated him, that the saint said, "Go, my

<span id="page_379">p. 379</span>

son, deliver the horse to your grandfather; and demand a boon; thy
grandson shall bring down the river of heaven on the earth." Anśumat
requested as a boon that his uncles, who had perished through the sage's
displeasure, might, although unworthy of it, be raised to heaven through
his favour. "I have told you," replied Kapila, "that your grandson shall
bring down upon earth the Ganges of the gods; and when her waters shall
wash the bones and ashes of thy grandfather's sons, they shall be raised
to Swarga. Such is the efficacy of the stream that flows from the toe of
Vishńu, that it confers heaven upon all who bathe in it designedly, or
who even become accidentally immersed in it: those even shall obtain
Swarga, whose bones, skin, fibres, hair, or any other part, shall be
left after death upon the earth which is contiguous to the Ganges."
Having acknowledged reverentially the kindness of the sage, Anśumat
returned to his grandfather, and delivered to him the horse. Sagara, on
recovering the steed, completed his sacrifice; and in affectionate
memory of his sons, denominated Ságara the chasm which they had
dug <span id="fr_992"></span>[4](#fn_992).

The son of Anśumat was Dilípa <span id="fr_993"></span>[5](#fn_993); his
son was Bhagíratha, who brought Gangá down to earth, whence she is
called Bhágirathí. The son of Bhagíratha was Śruta <span
id="fr_994"></span>[6](#fn_994); his son was Nábhága <span
id="fr_995"></span>[7](#fn_995); his son was Ambarísha; his son was
Sindhudwípa; his son was Ayutáśwa <span id="fr_996"></span>[8](#fn_996);
his son was Rituparńa, the friend of Nala, skilled profoundly in
dice <span id="fr_997"></span>[9](#fn_997). The

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

son of Rituparńa was Sarvakáma <span id="fr_998"></span>[10](#fn_998);
his son was Sudása; his son was Saudása, named also Mitrasaha <span
id="fr_999"></span>[11](#fn_999).

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

The son of Sudása having gone into the woods to hunt, fell in with a
couple of tigers, by whom the forest had been cleared of the deer. The
king slew one of these tigers with an arrow. At the moment of expiring,
the form of the animal was changed, and it became that of a fiend of
fearful figure, and hideous aspect. Its companion, threatening the
prince with its vengeance, disappeared.

After some interval Saudása celebrated a sacrifice, which was conducted
by Vaśisht́ha. At the close of the rite Vaśisht́ha went out; when the
Rákshas, the fellow of the one that had been killed in the figure of a
tiger, assumed the semblance of Vaśisht́ha, and came and said to the
king, "Now that the sacrifice is ended, you must give me flesh to eat:
let it be cooked, and I will presently return." Having said this, he
withdrew, and, transforming himself into the shape of the cook, dressed
some human flesh, which he brought to the king, who, receiving it on a
plate of gold, awaited the reappearance of Vaśisht́ha. As soon as the
Muni returned, the king offered to him the dish. Vaśisht́ha surprised at
such want of propriety in the king, as his offering him meat to eat,
considered what it should be that was so presented, and by the efficacy
of his meditations discovered that it was human flesh. His mind being
agitated with wrath, he denounced a curse upon the Rájá, saying,
"Inasmuch as you have insulted all such holy men as we are, by giving me
what is not to be eaten, your appetite shall henceforth be excited by
similar food."

"It was yourself," replied the Rájá to the indignant sage, "who
commanded this food to be prepared." "By me!" exclaimed Vaśisht́ha; "how
could that have been?" and again having recourse to meditation, he
detected the whole truth. Foregoing then all displeasure towards the
king, he said, "The food to which I have sentenced you shall not be your
sustenance for ever; it shall only be so for twelve years." The king,
who had taken up water in the palms of his hands, and was prepared to
curse the Muni, now considered that Vaśisht́ha was his spiritual guide,
and being reminded by Madayantí his queen that it ill became him to
denounce an imprecation upon a holy teacher, who was the guardian
divinity of his race, abandoned his intention.

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Unwilling to cast
the water upon the earth, lest it should wither up the grain, for it was
impregnated with his malediction, and equally reluctant to throw it up
into the air, lest it should blast the clouds, and dry up their
contents, he threw it upon, his own feet. Scalded by the heat which the
water had derived from his angry imprecation, the feet of the Rájá
became spotted black and white, and he thence obtained the name of
Kalmáshapáda, or he with the spotted (kalmásha) feet (páda).

In consequence of the curse of Vaśisht́ha, the Rájá became a cannibal
every sixth watch of the day for twelve years, and in that state
wandered through the forests, and devoured multitudes of men. On one
occasion he beheld a holy person engaged in dalliance with his wife. As
soon as they saw his terrific form, they were frightened, and
endeavoured to escape; but the regal Rákshasa overtook and seized the
husband. The wife of the Brahman then also desisted from flight, and
earnestly entreated the savage to spare her lord, exclaiming, "Thou,
Mitrasaha, art the pride of the royal house of Ikshwáku, not a malignant
fiend! it is not in thy nature, who knowest the characters of women, to
carry off and devour my husband." But all was in vain, and, regardless
of her reiterated supplications, he ate the Brahman, as a tiger devours
a deer. The Brahman's wife, furious with wrath, then addressed the Rájá,
and said, "Since you have barbarously disturbed the joys of a wedded
pair, and killed my husband, your death shall be the consequence of your
associating with your queen." So saying, she entered the flames.

At the expiration of the period of his curse Saudása returned home.
Being reminded of the imprecation of the Brahmani by his wife Madayantí,
he abstained from conjugal intercourse, and was in consequence
childless; but having solicited the interposition of Vaśisht́ha,
Madayantí became pregnant. The child, however, was not born for seven
years, when the queen, becoming impatient, divided the womb with a sharp
stone, and was thereby delivered. The child was thence called Aśmaka
(from Aśman, 'a stone'). The son of Aśmaka was Múlaka, who, when the
warrior tribe was extirpated upon earth, was surrounded and concealed by
a number of females; whence he was denominated Náríkavacha

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (having women for
armour) <span id="fr_1000"></span>[12](#fn_1000). The son of Múlaka was
Daśaratha; his son was Ilavila; his son was Viśwasaha; his son was
Khat́wánga, called also Dilípa <span id="fr_1001"></span>[13](#fn_1001),
who in a battle between the gods and the Asuras, being called by the
former to their succour, killed a number of the latter. Having thus
acquired the friendship of the deities in heaven, they desired him to
demand a boon. He said to them, "If a boon is to be accepted by me, then
tell me, as a favour, what is the duration of my life." "The length of
your life is but an hour," the gods replied. On which, Khat́wánga, who
was swift of motion, descended in his easy-gliding chariot to the world
of mortals. Arrived there, he prayed, and said, "If my own soul has
never been dearer to me than the sacred Brahmans; if I have never
deviated from the discharge of my duty; if I have never regarded gods,
men, animals, vegetables, all created things, as different from the
imperishable; then may I, with unswerving step, attain to that divine
being on whom holy sages meditate!" Having thus spoken, he was united
with that supreme being, who is Vásudeva; with that elder of all the
gods, who is abstract existence, and whose form cannot be described.
Thus he obtained absorption, according to this stanza, which was
repeated formerly by the seven Rishis; "Like unto Khat́wánga will be no
one upon earth, who having come from heaven, and dwelt an hour amongst
men, became united with the three worlds by his liberality and knowledge
of truth <span id="fr_1002"></span>[14](#fn_1002)."

The son of Khat́wánga was Dírghabáhu; his son was Raghu; his son was Aja;
his son was Daśaratha <span id="fr_1003"></span>[15](#fn_1003). The god
from whose navel the

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

lotus springs became fourfold, as the four sons of Daśaratha, Ráma,
Lakshmańa, Bharata, and Śatrughna, for the protection of the world.
Ráma, whilst yet a boy, accompanied Viswámitra, to protect his
sacrifice, and slew Tád́aká. He afterwards killed Máricha with his
resistless shafts; and Subáhu and others fell by his arms. He removed
the guilt of Ahalyá by merely looking upon her. In the palace of Janaka
he broke with ease the mighty bow of Maheśwara, and received the hand of
Sítá, the daughter of the king, self-born from the earth, as the prize
of his prowess. He humbled the pride of Paraśuráma, who vaunted his
triumphs over the race of Haihaya, and his repeated slaughters of the
Kshatriya tribe. Obedient to the commands of his father, and cherishing
no regret for the loss of sovereignty, he entered the forest,

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

accompanied by his brother Lakshmańa and by his wife, where he killed in
conflict Virádha, Kharadúshana and other Rákshasas, the headless giant
Kabandha, and Báli the monkey monarch. Having built a bridge across the
ocean, and destroyed the whole Rákshasa nation, he recovered his bride
Sítá, whom their ten-headed king Rávańa had carried off, and returned to
Ayodhyá with her, after she had been purified by the fiery ordeal from
the soil contracted by her captivity, and had been honoured by the
assembled gods, who bore witness to her virtue <span
id="fr_1004"></span>[16](#fn_1004).

Bharata made himself master of the country of the Gandharbas, after
destroying vast numbers of them; and Śatrughna having killed the
Rákshasa chief Lavańa, the son of Madhu, took possession of his capital
Mathurá.

Having thus, by their unequalled valour and might, rescued the whole
world from the dominion of malignant fiends, Ráma, Lakshmańa, Bharata,
and Śatrughna reascended to heaven, and were followed by those of the
people of Kośala who were fervently devoted to these incarnate portions
of the supreme Vishńu.

Ráma and his brothers had each two sons. Kuśa and Lava were the sous of
Ráma; those of Lakshmańa were Angada and Chandraketu; the sons of
Bharata were Taksha and Pushkara; and Subáhu and Śúrasena <span
id="fr_1005"></span>[17](#fn_1005) were the sons of Śatrughna.

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

The son of Kuśa was Atithi; his son was Nishadha; his son was Nala <span
id="fr_1006"></span>[18](#fn_1006); his son was Nabhas; his son was
Puńd́aríka; his son was Kshemadhanwan; his son was Deváníka; his son was
Ahínagu <span id="fr_1007"></span>[19](#fn_1007); his son was Páripátra;
his son was Dala <span id="fr_1008"></span>[20](#fn_1008); his son was
Chhala <span id="fr_1009"></span>[21](#fn_1009); his son was Uktha <span
id="fr_1010"></span>[22](#fn_1010); his son was Vajranábha; his son was
Śankhanábha <span id="fr_1011"></span>[23](#fn_1011); his son was
Abhyutthitáśwa <span id="fr_1012"></span>[24](#fn_1012); his son was
Viśwasaha <span id="fr_1013"></span>[25](#fn_1013); his son was
Hirańyanábha, who was a pupil of the mighty Yogí Jaimini, and
communicated the knowledge of spiritual exercises to Yájnawalkya <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[26](#fn_1014). The son of this

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

saintly king was Pushya; his son was Dhruvasandhi <span
id="fr_1015"></span>[27](#fn_1015); his son was Sudarśana; his son was
Agnivarńa; his son was Śíghra; his son was Maru <span
id="fr_1016"></span>[28](#fn_1016), who through the power of devotion
(Yoga) is still living in the village called Kalápa, and in a future age
will be the restorer of the Kshatriya race in the solar dynasty. Maru
had a son named Prasuśruta; his son was Susandhi; his son was Amarsha;
his son was Mahaswat <span id="fr_1017"></span>[29](#fn_1017); his son
was Viśrutavat <span id="fr_1018"></span>[30](#fn_1018); and his son was
Vrihadbala, who was killed in the great war by Abhimanyu, the son of
Anjuna. These are the most distinguished princes in the family of
Ikshwáku: whoever listens to the account of them will be purified from
all his sins <span id="fr_1019"></span>[31](#fn_1019).}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_989"></span>[377:1](vp096.htm#fr_989) So the Rámáyańa.
Sumati is called the daughter of Arisht́anemi: the Mahábhárata calls her
Śaivyá. The story of Sagara and his descendants is told at length in the
Rámáyańa, first book, and in the Mahábhárata, Vana Parva, III. 106, et
seq., as well as in most of the Puráńas.

<span id="fn_990"></span>[377:2](vp096.htm#fr_990) Or Panchajana:
Bráhma.

<span id="fn_991"></span>[378:3](vp096.htm#fr_991) The Bhágavata has,
for a Puráńa, some curious remarks on this part of the story, flatly
denying its truth. 'The report is not true, that the sons of the king
were scorched by the wrath of the sage; for how can the quality of
darkness, made up of anger, exist in a world-purifying nature,
consisting of the quality of goodness; the dust of earth, as it were, in
the sky? How should mental perturbation distract that sage, who was one
with the supreme, and who has promulgated that Sankhyá philosophy, which
is a strong vessel, by which he who is desirous of liberation passes
over the dangerous ocean of the world by the path of death?'

<span id="fn_992"></span>[379:4](vp096.htm#fr_992) Ságara is still the
name of the ocean, and especially of the bay of Bengal, at the mouth of
the Ganges. On the shore of the island called by the same name,
tradition places a Kapiláśrama, or hermitage of Kapila, which is still
the scene of an annual pilgrimage. Other legends assign a very different
situation for the abode of the ascetic, or the foot of the Himálaya,
where the Ganges descends to the plains. There would be no
incompatibility, however, in the two sites, could we imagine the
tradition referred to a period when the ocean washed, as it appears once
to have done, the base of the Himálaya, and Saugor (Ságara) was at
Harídwar.

<span id="fn_993"></span>[379:5](vp096.htm#fr_993) Or Khat́wánga: Bráhma
and Hari Vanśa: but this is apparently an error. See note
[14](#fn_1002).

<span id="fn_994"></span>[379:6](vp096.htm#fr_994) Omitted: Matsya and
Agni. Viśruta: Linga.

<span id="fn_995"></span>[379:7](vp096.htm#fr_995) Nábhin: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_996"></span>[379:8](vp096.htm#fr_996) Ayutáyus: Váyu,
Linga, and Kúrma. Śrutáyus: Agni. Ayutajit: Bráhma.

<span id="fn_997"></span>[379:9](vp096.htm#fr_997) 'knowing the heart of
the dice.' The same epithet, as well as that of 'friend of Nala,' is
given him in the Váyu, Bhágavata, and Bráhma Puráńas, <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> and in the Hari Vanśa, and leaves no doubt
of their referring to the hero of the story told in the Mahábhárata.
Nara however, as we shall hereafter see, is some twenty generations
later than Rituparńa in the same family; and the Váyu therefore thinks
it necessary to observe that two Nalas are noticed in the Puráńas, and
the one here adverted to is the son of Vírasena; whilst the other
belongs to the family of Ikshwáku. The same passage occurs in the Bráhma
P. and Hari V.; and the commentator on the latter observes, 'Nala the
son of Nishadha is different from Nala the son of Vírasena.' It is also
to be observed, that the Nala of the tale is king of Nishadha, and his
friend Rituparńa is king of Ayodhya. The Nala of the race of Ikshwáku is
king of Ayodhyá: he is the son of Nishadha, however, and there is
evidently some confusion between the two. We do not find Vírasena or his
son in any of the lists. See n. [19](#fn_1007).

<span id="fn_998"></span>[380:10](vp096.htm#fr_998) There is
considerable variety in this part of the lists, but the Váyu and
Bhágavata agree with our text. The Matsya and others make Kalmáshapáda
the son or grandson of Rituparńa, and place Sarvakáma or Sarvakarman
after him. See further on.

<span id="fn_999"></span>[380:11](vp096.htm#fr_999) The Váyu, Agni,
Bráhma, and Hari Vanśa read Amitrasaha, 'foe-enduring;' but the
commentator on our text explains it Mitra, a name of Vaśisht́ha, Saha,
'able to bear' the imprecation of; as in the following legend, which is
similarly related in the Bhágavata. It is not detailed in the Váyu. A
full account occurs in the Mahábhárata, Ádi P., s. 176, but with many
and important variations. Kalmáshapáda, whilst hunting, encountered
Śaktri, the son of Vaśisht́ha, in the woods; and on his refusing to make
way, struck the sage with his whip. Śaktri cursed the king to become a
cannibal; and Viswámitra, who had a quarrel with Vaśisht́ha, seized the
opportunity to direct a Rákshas to take possession of the king, that he
might become the instrument of destroying the family of the rival saint.
Whilst thus influenced, Mitrasaha, a Brahman, applied to Kalmáshapáda
for food, and the king commanded his cook to dress human flesh, and give
it to the Brahman, who, knowing what it was, repeated the curse of
Śaktri, that the king should become a cannibal; which taking effect with
double force, Kalmáshapáda began to eat men. One of his first victims
was Śaktri, whom he slew and ate; and then killed and devoured, under
the secret impulse of Viśwámitra's demon, all the other sons of
Vaśisht́ha. Vaśisht́ha however liberated him from the Rákshas who
possessed him, and restored him to his natural character. The
imprecation of the Brahman's wife, and its consequences, are told in the
Mahábhárata as in the text; but the story of the water falling on his
feet appears to have grown out of the etymology of his name, which might
have referred to some disease of the lower extremities, the prince's
designation being at length, Mitrasaha Saudása Kalmáshapáda, or
Mitrasaha, son of Sudása, with the swelled feet.

<span id="fn_1000"></span>[383:12](vp096.htm#fr_1000) His name Múlaka,
or 'the root,' refers also to his being the stem whence the Kshatriya
races again proceeded. It may be doubted if the purport of his title
Náríkavacha is accurately explained by the text.

<span id="fn_1001"></span>[383:13](vp096.htm#fr_1001) This prince is
confounded with an earlier Dilípa by the Bráhma P. and Hari Vanśa.

<span id="fn_1002"></span>[383:14](vp096.htm#fr_1002) The term for his
obtaining final liberation is rather unusual; 'By whom the three worlds
were affected or beloved:' the three worlds being identified with their
source, or the supreme. The text says of this stanza \#\#\#, and the
Váyu, citing it, says \#\#\#, the legend is therefore from the Vedas.

<span id="fn_1003"></span>[383:15](vp096.htm#fr_1003) The lists here
differ very materially, as the following comparison will best shew:
<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<div align="center">

|              |              |              |
|--------------|--------------|--------------|
| Vishńu.      | Matsya.      | Rámáyańa.    |
| Kalmáshapáda | Kalmáshapáda | Kalmáshapáda |
| Aśmaka       | Sarvakarman  | Śankana      |
| Múlaka       | Anarańya     | Sudarśana    |
| Daśaratha    | Nighna       | Agnivarńa    |
| Ilavila      | Anamitra     | Śighraga     |
| Viśwasaha    | Raghu        | Maru         |
| Dilípa       | Dilípa       | Prasusruka   |
| Dírghabáhu   | Aja          | Ambarísha    |
| Raghu        | Dírghabáhu   | Nahusha      |
| Aja          | Ajapála      | Yayáti       |
| Daśaratha    | Daśaratha    | Nábhága      |
|              |              | Aja          |
|              |              | Daśaratha.   |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The Váyu,
Bhágavata, Kúrma, and Linga agree with our text, except in the reading
of a few names; as Śataratha for Daśaratha the first; Vairivíra for
Ilavila; and Kritasarman, Vriddhasarman, or Vriddhakarman, for
Viśwasaha. The Agni and Bráhma and Hari Vanśa agree with the second
series, with similar occasional exceptions; shewing that the Puráńas
admit two series, differing in name, but agreeing in number. The
Rámáyańa, however, differs from both in a very extraordinary manner, and
the variation is not limited to the cases specified, as it begins with
Bhagíratha, as follows:

<div align="center">

|               |              |
|---------------|--------------|
| Puráńas.      | Rámáyańa.    |
| Bhagíratha    | Bhagíratha   |
| Śruta         | Kakutshtha   |
| Nábhága       | Raghu        |
| Ambarísha     | Kalmáshapáda |
| Sindhudwípa   |              |
| Ayutáśwa      |              |
| Rituparńa     |              |
| Sarvakáma     |              |
| Sudása        |              |
| Kalmáshapáda. |              |

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The entire
Pauráńik series comprises twenty descents, and that of the Rámáyańa
sixteen. Some of the last names of the poem occur amongst the first of
those of the Puráńas, but there is an irreconcilable difference in much
of the nomenclature. The Agni, under the particular account of the
descent of Ráma, has for his immediate predecessors Raghu, Aja,
Daśaratha, as in our text; and the author of the Raghu Vanśa agrees with
the Puráńas from Dilípa downwards.

<span id="fn_1004"></span>[385:16](vp096.htm#fr_1004) This is an epitome
of the Rámáyańa, the heroic poem of Válmíki, on the subject of Ráma's
exploits. A part of the Rámáyańa was published, with a translation by
Messrs. Carey and Marshman, several years since; but a much more correct
edition of the text of the two first books, with a Latin translation of
the first, and part of the second, have been more recently published by
Professor Schlegel; a work worthy of his illustrious name. A summary of
the story may be found in Sir Wm. Jones's Works, Maurice's Hindustan,
Moor's Pantheon, &c. It is also the subject of the Uttara Ráma Charitra
in the Hindu Theatre, in the introduction to which an outline of the
whole is given. The story is therefore, no doubt, sufficiently familiar
even to English readers. It seems to be founded on historical fact; and
the traditions of the south of India uniformly ascribe its civilization,
the subjugation or dispersion of its forest tribes of barbarians, and
the settlement of civilized Hindus, to the conquest of Lanká by Ráma.

<span id="fn_1005"></span>[385:17](vp096.htm#fr_1005) The Váyu specifies
the countries or cities over which they reigned. Anguda and Chitraketu,
as the Váyu terms the latter, governed countries near the Himálaya,
<span id="page_386">p. 386</span> the capitals of which were Ángadi and
Chandravaktrá. Taksha and Pushkara were sovereigns of Gandhára, residing
at Takshaśílá and Pushkaravatí. Subáhu and Śúrasena reigned at Mathurá;
and in the latter we might be satisfied to find the Śúrasenas of Arrian,
but that there is a subsequent origin, of perhaps greater authenticity,
in the family of Yadu, as we shall hereafter see. 'Kuśa built Kuśasthalí
on the brow of the Vindhya, the capital of Kośalá; and Lava reigned at
Śrávastí (see p. [355](vp093.htm#page_355). [361](vp094.htm#page_361))
in Uttara (northern) Kośalá:' &c. The Raghu Vaasa describes Kuśa as
returning from Kuśavati to Ayodhyá, after his father's death; but it
seems not unlikely that the extending power of the princes of the Doab,
of the lunar family, compelled Ráma's posterity to retire more to the
west and south.

<span id="fn_1006"></span>[386:18](vp096.htm#fr_1006) The Bhágavata is
the only Puráńa that omits this name, as if the author had been induced
to correct the reading in order to avoid the necessity of recognising
two Nalas. See above, n. 9.

<span id="fn_1007"></span>[386:19](vp096.htm#fr_1007) Here again we have
two distinct series of princes, independently of variations of
individual names. Instead of the list of the text, with which the Váyu
and Bhágavata nearly, and the Bráhma and Hari Vanśa indifferently
conform, we have in the [Matsya](errata.htm#18), Linga, Kúrma, and Agni
the following: Ahínagu, Sahasráśwa, Sahasráya or Sahasrabala,
Chandrávaloka, Tárapíd́a or Tárádhíśa, Chandragiri, Bhánúratha or
Bhánumitra, and Śrútáyus, with whom the list ends, except in the Linga,
which adds Báhula, killed by Abhimanyu: enumerating therefore from
Deváníka but seven or eight princes to the great war, instead of
twenty-three, as in the other series. The Raghu Vaasa gives much the
same list as our text, ending with Agnivarńa.

<span id="fn_1008"></span>[386:20](vp096.htm#fr_1008) Bala: Bhágavata.
Nala: Hari V.

<span id="fn_1009"></span>[386:21](vp096.htm#fr_1009) Sthala: Bhágavata.
Śala: Váyu and Bráhma. Śila: Raghu Vanśa.

<span id="fn_1010"></span>[386:22](vp096.htm#fr_1010) Omitted:
Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1011"></span>[386:23](vp096.htm#fr_1011) Śankha: Bráhma.
Khagana: Bhág.

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[386:24](vp096.htm#fr_1012) Dúshitáśwa: Váyu.
Adhyúshitáśwa: Bráhma. Vidhriti: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[386:25](vp096.htm#fr_1013) Omitted: Bráhma
and Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[386:26](vp096.htm#fr_1014) Omitted: Bráhma
and Hari V.: but included with similar particulars by the Váyu,
Bhágavata, and Raghu Vanśa: see also p. 283, where Kauśalya is likewise
given as the synonyme of Hirańyagarbha, being, as the commentator
observes, his Visheshańam, his epithet or attribute, born <span
id="page_387">p. 387</span> in, or king of, Kośalá. The Váyu accordingly
terms him \#\#\#, but in the Bhágavata the epithet Kauśalya is referred
by the commentator to Yájnawalkya, the pupil of Hirańyanábha. The author
of the Raghu Vanśa, not understanding the meaning of the term, has
converted Kauśalya into the son of Hirańyanábha. Raghu V. 18. 27. The
Bhágavata, like our text, calls the prince the pupil of Jaimini. The
Váyu, more correctly, 'the pupil of the sage's grandson.' There seems to
be, however, something unusual in the account given of the relation
borne by the individuals named to each other. As a pupil of Jaimini,
Hirańyanábha is a teacher of the Sáma-veda (see [p.
283](vp080.htm#page_283)), but Yájnawalkya is the teacher of the
Vájasaneyi branch of the Yajush ([p. 281](vp079.htm#page_281)). Neither
of them is specified by Mr. Colebrooke amongst the authorities of the
Pátanjala or Yoga philosophy; nor does either appear as a disciple of
Jaimini in his character of founder of the Mímánsá school. Trans. R. As.
Soc. vol. I.

<span id="fn_1015"></span>[387:27](vp096.htm#fr_1015) Arthasiddhi:
Bráhma P. and Hari V.

<span id="fn_1016"></span>[387:28](vp096.htm#fr_1016) Maruta: Bráhma P.
and Hari V. These authorities omit the succeeding four names.

<span id="fn_1017"></span>[387:29](vp096.htm#fr_1017) Sahaswat: Váyu.

<span id="fn_1018"></span>[387:30](vp096.htm#fr_1018) Viśwasaha:
Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1019"></span>[387:31](vp096.htm#fr_1019) The list closes
here, as the author of the Puráńas, Vyása, is cotemporary with the great
war. The line of Ikshwáku is resumed prophetically in the twenty-second
chapter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](vp097)
