[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp091)  [Next](vp093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

### CHAP. XVIII.

Buddha goes to the earth, and teaches the Daityas to contemn the Vedas:
his sceptical doctrines: his prohibition of animal sacrifices. Meaning
of the term Bauddha. Jainas and Bauddhas; their tenets. The Daityas lose
their power, and are overcome by the gods. Meaning of the term Nagna.
Consequences of neglect of duty. Story of Śatadhanu and his wife Śaivyá.
Communion with heretics to be shunned.

PARÁŚARA.--After this, the great delusion, having proceeded to earth,
beheld the Daityas engaged in ascetic penances upon the banks of the
Narmadá river <span id="fr_905"></span>[1](#fn_905); and approaching
them in the semblance of a naked mendicant, with his head shaven, and
carrying a bunch of peacock's feathers <span
id="fr_906"></span>[2](#fn_906), he thus addressed them in gentle
accents: "Ho, lords of the Daitya race! wherefor is it that you practise
these acts of penance? is it with a view to recompense in this world, or
in another?" "Sage," replied the Daityas, "we pursue these devotions to
obtain a reward hereafter; why should you make such an inquiry?" "If you
are desirous of final emancipation," answered the seeming ascetic,
"attend to my words, for you are worthy of a revelation which is the
door to ultimate felicity. The duties that I will teach you are the
secret path to liberation; there are none beyond or superior to them: by
following them you shall obtain either heaven or exemption from future
existence. You, mighty beings, are deserving of such lofty doctrine." By
such persuasions, and by many specious arguments, did this delusive
being mislead the Daityas from the tenets of the Vedas; teaching that
the same thing might be for the sake of virtue and of vice; might be,
and might not be; might or might not contribute to liberation; might be
the

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

supreme object, and not the supreme object; might be effect, and not be
effect; might be manifest, or not be manifest; might be the duty of
those who go naked, or who go clothed in much raiment: and so the
Daityas were seduced from their proper duties by the repeated lessons of
their illusory preceptor, maintaining the equal truth of contradictory
tenets <span id="fr_907"></span>[3](#fn_907); and they were called
Arhatas <span id="fr_908"></span>[4](#fn_908), from the phrase he had
employed of "Ye are worthy (Arhatha) of this great doctrine;" that is,
of the false doctrines which he persuaded them to embrace.

The foes of the gods being thus induced to apostatize from the religion
of the Vedas, by the delusive person sent by Vishńu, became in their
turn teachers of the same heresies, and perverted others; and these,
again, communicating their principles to others, by whom they were still
further disseminated, the Vedas were in a short time deserted by most of
the Daitya race. Then the same deluder, putting on garments of a red
colour, assuming a benevolent aspect, and speaking in soft and agreeable
tones, addressed others of the same family, and said to them, "If;
mighty demons, you cherish a desire either for heaven or for final
repose, desist from the iniquitous massacre of animals (for sacrifice),
and hear from me what you should do. Know that all that exists is
composed of discriminative knowledge. Understand my words, for they have
been uttered by the wise. This world subsists without support, and
engaged in the pursuit of error, which it mistakes for knowledge, as
well as vitiated by passion and the rest, revolves in the straits of
existence." In this manner, exclaiming to them, "Know!" (Budhyadwam),
and they replying, "It is known" (Budhyate), these Daityas were induced
by the

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

arch deceiver to deviate from their religious duties (and become
Bauddhas), by his repeated arguments and variously urged
persuasions <span id="fr_909"></span>[5](#fn_909), When they had
abandoned their own faith, they persuaded others to do the same, and the
heresy spread, and many deserted the practices enjoined by the Vedas and
the laws.

The delusions of the false teacher paused not with the conversion of the
Daityas to the Jaina and Bauddha heresies, but with various erroneous
tenets he prevailed upon others to apostatize, until the whole were led
astray, and deserted the doctrines and observances inculcated by the
three Vedas. Some then spake evil of the sacred books; some blasphemed
the gods; some treated sacrifices and other devotional ceremonies with
scorn; and others calumniated the Brahmans. "The precepts," they cried,
"that lead to the injury of animal life (as in sacrifices) are highly
reprehensible. To say that casting butter into flame is productive of
reward, is mere childishness. If Indra, after having obtained godhead by
multiplied rites, is fed upon the wood used as fuel in holy fire, he is
lower than a brute, which feeds at least upon leaves. If an animal
slaughtered in religious worship is thereby raised to heaven, would it
not be expedient for a man who institutes a sacrifice to kill his own
father for a victim? If that which is eaten by one at a Śráddha gives
satisfaction to another, it must be unnecessary for one who resides at a
distance to bring food for presentation in person <span
id="fr_910"></span>[6](#fn_910)." "First, then, let it be determined
what may be (rationally) believed by mankind, and then," said their
preceptor, "you will find that felicity may be expected from my
instructions. The words of authority do not, mighty Asuras, fall from
heaven: the text that has reason is alone to be acknowledged by me, and
by such as you are <span id="fr_911"></span>[7](#fn_911)." By such and
similar

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

lessons the Daityas were perverted, so that not one of them admitted the
authority of the Vedas.

When the Daityas had thus declined from the path of the holy writings,
the deities took courage, and gathered together for battle. Hostilities
accordingly were renewed, but the demons were now defeated and slain by
the gods, who had adhered to the righteous path. The armour of religion,
which had formerly protected the Daityas, had been discarded by them,
and upon its abandonment followed their destruction <span
id="fr_912"></span>[8](#fn_912).

Thus, Maitreya, you are to understand that those who have seceded from
their original belief are said to be naked, because they have thrown off
the garment of the Vedas. According to the law there are four conditions
or orders of men (of the three first castes), the religious student, the
householder, the hermit, and the mendicant. There is no fifth state; and
the unrighteous man who relinquishes the order of the householder, and
does not become either an anchoret or a mendicant, is also a naked
(seceder). The man who neglects his permanent observances for one day
and night, being able to perform them, incurs thereby sin for one day;
and should he omit them, not being in trouble, for a fortnight, he can
be purified only by arduous expiation. The virtuous must stop to gaze
upon the sun after looking upon a person who has allowed a year to
elapse without the observance of the perpetual ceremonies; and they must
bathe with their clothes on should they have touched him: but for the
individual himself no expiation has been declared. There is no sinner
upon earth more culpable than one in whose dwelling the gods,
progenitors, and spirits, are left to sigh unworshipped. Let not a man
associate, in residence, sitting, or society, with him whose person or
whose house has been blasted by the sighs of the gods, progenitors, and
spirits. Conversation, interchange of civilities, or association with a
man who for a twelvemonth has not discharged his

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

religious duties, is productive of equality of guilt; and the person who
eats in the house of such a man, or sits down with him, or sleeps on the
same couch with him, becomes like him instantaneously. Again; he who
takes his food without shewing reverence to the gods, progenitors,
spirits, and guests, commits sin. How great is his sin! The Brahmans,
and men of the other castes, who turn their faces away from their proper
duties, become heretics, and are classed with those who relinquish pious
works. Remaining in a place where there is too great an intermixture of
the four castes is detrimental to the character of the righteous. Men
fall into hell who converse with one who takes his food without offering
a portion to the gods, the sages, the manes, spirits, and guests. Let
therefore a prudent person carefully avoid the conversation, or the
contact, and the like, of those heretics who are rendered impure by
their desertion of the three Vedas. The ancestral rite, although
performed with zeal and faith, pleases neither gods nor progenitors if
it be looked upon by apostates.

It is related that there was formerly a king named Śatadhanu, whose wife
Śaivyá was a woman of great virtue. She was devoted to her husband,
benevolent, sincere, pure, adorned with every female excellence, with
humility, and discretion. The Rájá and his wife daily worshipped the god
of gods, Janárddana, with pious meditations, oblations to fire, prayers,
gifts, fasting, and every other mark of entire faith, and exclusive
devotion. On one occasion, when they had fasted on the full moon of
Kártika, and had bathed in the Bhagirathí, they beheld, as they came up
from the water, a heretic approach them, who was the friend of the
Rájá's military preceptor. The Rájá, out of respect to the latter,
entered into conversation with the heretic; but not so did the princess;
reflecting that she was observing a fast, she turned from him, and cast
her eyes up to the sun. On their arrival at home, the husband and wife,
as usual, performed the worship of Vishńu, agreeably to the ritual.
After a time the Rájá, triumphant over his enemies, died; and the
princess ascended the funeral pile of her husband.

In consequence of the fault committed by Śatadhanu, by speaking to an
infidel when he was engaged in a solemn fast, he was born again as a

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

dog. His wife was born as the daughter of the Rájá of Káśí, with a
knowledge of the events of her preexistence, accomplished in every
science, and endowed with every virtue. Her father was anxious to give
her in marriage to some suitable husband, but she constantly opposed his
design, and the king was prevented by her from accomplishing her
nuptials. With the eye of divine intelligence she knew that her own
husband had been regenerate as a dog, and going once to the city of
Vaidiśá she saw the dog, and recognised her former lord in him. Knowing
that the animal was her husband, she placed upon his neck the bridal
garland, accompanying it with the marriage rites and prayers: but he,
eating the delicate food presented to him, expressed his delight after
the fashion of his species; at which she was much ashamed, and, bowing
reverently to him, thus spake to her degraded spouse: "Recall to memory,
illustrious prince, the ill-timed politeness on account of which you
have been born as a dog, and are now fawning upon me. In consequence of
speaking to a heretic, after bathing in a sacred river, you have been
condemned to this abject birth. Do you not remember it?" Thus reminded,
the Rájá recollected his former condition, and was lost in thought, and
felt deep humiliation. With a broken spirit he went forth from the city,
and falling dead in the desert, was born anew as a jackal. In the course
of the following year the princess knew what had happened, and went to
the mountain Koláhala to seek for her husband. Finding him there, the
lovely daughter of the king of the earth said to her lord, thus
disguised as a jackal, "Dost thou not remember, oh king, the
circumstance of conversing with a heretic, which I called to thy
recollection when thou wast a dog?" The Rájá, thus addressed, knew that
what the princess had spoken was true, and thereupon desisted from food,
and died. He then became a wolf; but his blameless wife knew it, and
came to him in the lonely forest, and awakened his remembrance of his
original state. "No wolf art thou," she said, "but the illustrious
sovereign Śatadhanu. Thou wast then a dog, then a jackal, and art now a
wolf." Upon this, recollecting himself, the prince abandoned his life,
and became a vulture; in which form his lovely queen still found him,
and aroused him to a knowledge of the past. "Prince,"

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

she exclaimed, "recollect yourself: away with this uncouth form, to
which the sin of conversing with a heretic has condemned you!" The Rájá
was next born as a crow; when the princess, who through her mystical
powers was aware of it, said to him, "Thou art now thyself the eater of
tributary grain, to whom, in a prior existence, all the kings of the
earth paid tribute <span id="fr_913"></span>[9](#fn_913)." Having
abandoned his body, in consequence of the recollections excited by these
words, the king next became a peacock, which the princess took to
herself, and petted, and fed constantly with such food as is agreeable
to birds of its class. The king of Káśí instituted at that time the
solemn sacrifice of a horse. In the ablutions with which it terminated
the princess caused her peacock to be bathed, bathing also herself; and
she then reminded Śatadhanu how he had been successively born as various
animals. On recollecting this, he resigned his life. He was then born as
the son of a person of distinction; and the princess now assenting to
the wishes of her father to see her wedded, the king of Káśí caused it
to be made known that she would elect a bridegroom from those who should
present themselves as suitors for her hand. When the election took
place, the princess made choice of her former lord, who appeared amongst
the candidates, and again invested him with the character of her
husband. They lived happily together, and upon her father's decease
Śatadhanu ruled over the country of Videha. He offered many sacrifices,
and gave away many gifts, and begot sons, and subdued his enemies in
war; and having duly exercised the sovereign power, and cherished
benignantly the earth, he died, as became his warrior birth, in battle.
His queen again followed him in death, and, conformably to sacred
precepts, once more mounted cheerfully his funeral pile. The king then,
along with his princess, ascended beyond the sphere of Indra to the
regions where all desires are for ever gratified, obtaining ever-during
and unequalled happiness in heaven, the perfect felicity that is the
rarely realised reward of conjugal fidelity <span
id="fr_914"></span>[10](#fn_914).

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

Such, Maitreya, is the sin of conversing with a heretic, and such are
the expiatory effects of bathing after the solemn sacrifice of a horse,
as I have narrated them to you. Let therefore a man carefully avoid the
discourse or contact of an unbeliever, especially at seasons of
devotion, and when engaged in the performance of religious rites
preparatory to a sacrifice. If it be necessary that a wise man should
look at the sun, after beholding one who has neglected his domestic
ceremonies for a month, how much greater need must there be of expiation
after encountering one who has wholly abandoned the Vedas? one who is
supported by infidels, or who disputes the doctrines of holy writ? Let
not a person treat with even the civility of speech, heretics, those who
do forbidden acts, pretended saints, scoundrels, sceptics <span
id="fr_915"></span>[11](#fn_915), and hypocrites. Intercourse with such
iniquitous wretches, even at a distance, all association with
schismatics, defiles; let a man therefore carefully avoid them.

These, Maitreya, are the persons called naked, the meaning of which term
you desired to have explained. Their very looks vitiate the performance
of an ancestral oblation; speaking to then destroys religious merit for
a whole day. These are the unrighteous heretics to whom a man must not
give shelter, and speaking to whom effaces whatever merit he may that
day have obtained. Men, indeed, fall into hell as the consequence of
only conversing with those who unprofitably assume the twisted hair, and
shaven crown; with those who feed without offering food to gods,
spirits, and guests; and those who are excluded from the presentation of
cakes, and libations of water, to the manes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_905"></span>[338:1](vp092.htm#fr_905) The situation chosen
for the first appearance of the heresy agrees well enough with the great
prevalence of the Jain faith in the west of India in the eleventh and
twelfth centuries (As. Res. XVI. 318), or perhaps a century earlier, and
is a circumstance of some weight in investigating the date of the Vishńu
Puráńa.

<span id="fn_906"></span>[338:2](vp092.htm#fr_906) A bunch of peacock's
feathers is still an ordinary accompaniment of a Jain mendicant.
According to the Hindi poem, the Prithu Rai Charitra, it was borne by
the Buddhist Amara Sinha; but that work is not, perhaps, very good
authority for Bauddha observances, at least of an ancient date.

<span id="fn_907"></span>[339:3](vp092.htm#fr_907) In this and the
preceding contradictions it is probable that the writer refers, although
not with much precision, to the sceptical tenets of the Jainas, whence
they are called commonly Syádvádis, assertors of probabilities, or of
what may be. These usually form seven categories, or, 1. a thing is; 2.
it is not; 3. it is, and it is not; 4. it is not definable; 5. it is,
but is not definable; 6. it is not, neither is it definable; 7. it is,
and it is not, and is not definable. Hence the Jains are also termed
Saptavádis and Saptabhangis, assertors and oppugners of seven
propositions. As. Res. XVII. 271; and Trans. Royal As. Soc. I. 555.

<span id="fn_908"></span>[339:4](vp092.htm#fr_908) Here is farther
confirmation of the Jains being intended by our text, as the term Arhat
is more particularly applied to them, although it is also used by the
Buddhists.

<span id="fn_909"></span>[340:5](vp092.htm#fr_909) We have therefore the
Bauddhas noticed as a distinct set. If the author wrote from a personal
knowledge of Buddhists in India, he could not have written much later
than the 10th or 11th century.

<span id="fn_910"></span>[340:6](vp092.htm#fr_910) That is, according to
the commentator, a Śráddha may be performed for a man who is abroad by
any of his kinsmen who are tarrying at home; it will be of equal benefit
to him as if he offered it himself; he will equally eat of the
consecrated food.

<span id="fn_911"></span>[340:7](vp092.htm#fr_911) We have in these
passages, no doubt, allusion to the Várhaspatyas, or followers of
Vrihaspati, who seem to have been numerous and bold at some period
anterior to the 14th century. As. Res. XVI. 5.

<span id="fn_912"></span>[341:8](vp092.htm#fr_912) We may have in this
conflict of the orthodox divinities and heretical Daityas some covert
allusion to political troubles, growing out of religious differences,
and the final predominance of Brahmanism. Such occurrences seem to have
preceded the invasion of India by the Mohammedans, and prepared the way
for their victories.

<span id="fn_913"></span>[344:9](vp092.htm#fr_913) There is a play upon
the word Bali, which means 'tribute,' or 'fragments of a meal scattered
abroad to the birds,' &c.

<span id="fn_914"></span>[344:10](vp092.htm#fr_914) The legend is
peculiar to the Vishńu Puráńa, although the doctrine it inculcates is to
be found elsewhere.

<span id="fn_915"></span>[345:11](vp092.htm#fr_915) Haitukas,
'causalists;' either the followers of the Nyáya or 'logical' philosophy,
or Bauddhas, those who take nothing upon authority, and admit nothing
that cannot be proved; or it is explained, those who by argument cast a
doubt upon the efficacy of acts of devotion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](vp093)
