[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp094)  [Next](vp096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_369">p. 369</span>

### CHAP. III.

Saubhari and his wives adopt an ascetic life. Descendants of Mándhátri.
Legend of Narmadá and Purukutsa. Legend of Triśanku. Báhu driven from
his kingdom by the Haihayas and Tálajanghas. Birth of Sagara: he
conquers the barbarians, imposes upon them distinguishing usages, and
excludes them from offerings to fire, and the study of the Vedas.

HAVING thus communed with himself, Saubhari abandoned his children, his
home, and all his splendour, and, accompanied by his wives, entered the
forest, where he daily practised the observances followed by the
ascetics termed Vaikhánasas (or anchorets having families), until he had
cleansed himself from all sin. When his intellect had attained maturity,
he concentrated in his spirit the sacramental fires <span
id="fr_971"></span>[1](#fn_971), and became a religious mendicant. Then
having consigned all his acts to the supreme, he obtained the condition
of Achyuta, which knows no change, and is not subject to the
vicissitudes of birth, transmigration, or death. Whoever reads, or
hears, or remembers, or understands, this legend of Saubhari, and his
espousal of the daughters of Mándhátri, shall never, for eight
successive births, be addicted to evil thoughts, nor shall he act
unrighteously, nor shall his mind dwell upon improper objects, nor shall
he be influenced by selfish attachments. The line of Mándhátri is now
resumed.

The son of Ambarísha, the son of Mándhátri, was Yuvanáśwa; his son was
Harita <span id="fr_972"></span>[2](#fn_972), from whom the Angirasa
Háritas were descended <span id="fr_973"></span>[3](#fn_973).

<span id="page_370">p. 370</span>

In the regions below the earth the Gandharbas called Mauneyas (or sons
of the Muni Kaśyapa), who were sixty millions in number, had defeated
the tribes of the Nágas, or snake-gods, and seized upon their most
precious jewels, and usurped their dominion. Deprived of their power by
the Gandharbas, the serpent chiefs addressed the god of the gods, as he
awoke from his slumbers; and the blossoms of his lotus eyes opened while
listening to their hymns. They said, "Lord, how shall we be delivered
from this great fear?" Then replied the first of males, who is without
beginning, "I will enter into the person of Purukutsa, the son of
Mándhátri, the son of Yuvanáśwa, and in him will I quiet these
iniquitous Gandharbas." On hearing these words, the snake-gods bowed and
withdrew, and returning to their country dispatched Narmadá to solicit
the aid of Purukutsa <span id="fr_974"></span>[4](#fn_974).

Narmadá accordingly went to Purukutsa, and conducted him to the regions
below the earth, where, being filled with the might of the deity, he
destroyed the Gandharbas. He then returned to his own palace; and the
snake-gods, in acknowledgment of Narmadá's services, conferred upon her
as a blessing, that whosoever should think of her, and invoke her name,
should never have any dread of the venom of snakes. This is the
invocation; "Salutation be to Narmadá in the morning; salutation be to
Narmadá at night; salutation be to thee, O Narmadá! defend me

<span id="page_371">p. 371</span>

from the serpent's poison." Whoever repeats this day and night, shall
never be bitten by a snake in the dark nor in entering a chamber; nor
shall he who calls it to mind when he eats suffer any injury from
poison, though it be mixed with his food. To Purukutsa also the
snake-gods announced that the series of his descendants should never be
cut off.

Purukutsa had a son by Narmadá named Trasadasyu, whose son was
Sambhúta <span id="fr_975"></span>[5](#fn_975), whose son was Anarańya,
who was slain, by Rávańa in his triumphant progress through the nations.
The son of Anarańya was Prishadaśwa; his son was Haryyaśwa; his son was
Sumanas <span id="fr_976"></span>[6](#fn_976); his son was Tridhanwan;
his son was Trayyáruńa; and his son was Satyavrata, who obtained the
appellation of Triśanku, and was degraded to the condition of a
Cháńd́ála, or outcast <span id="fr_977"></span>[7](#fn_977). During a
twelve years' famine Triśanku provided the flesh of deer for the
nourishment of the wife and children of Viswamitra, suspending it upon a
spreading fig-tree on the borders of the Ganges, that he might not
subject them to the indignity of receiving presents from an outcast. On
this account Viśwámitra, being highly pleased with him, elevated him in
his living body to heaven <span id="fr_978"></span>[8](#fn_978).

<span id="page_372">p. 372</span>

The son of Triśanku was Hariśchandra <span
id="fr_979"></span>[9](#fn_979); his son was

<span id="page_373">p. 373</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Rohitáśwa <span
id="fr_980"></span>[10](#fn_980); his son was Harita <span
id="fr_981"></span>[11](#fn_981); his son was Chunchu <span
id="fr_982"></span>[12](#fn_982), who had two sons named Vijaya and
Sudeva. Ruruka <span id="fr_983"></span>[13](#fn_983) was the son of
Vijaya, and his own son was Vrika, whose son was Báhu (or Báthuka). This
prince was vanquished by the tribes of Haihayas and Tálajanghas <span
id="fr_984"></span>[14](#fn_984), anti his country was overrun by them;
in consequence of which he fled into the forests with his wives. One of
these was pregnant, and being an object of jealousy to a rival queen,
the latter gave her poison to prevent her delivery. The poison had the
effect of confining the child in the womb for seven years. Báhu, having
waxed old, died in the neighbourhood of the residence of the Muni Aurva.
His queen having constructed his pile, ascended it with the
determination of accompanying him in death; but the sage Aurva, who knew
all things, past, present, and to come, issued forth from his hermitage,
and forbade her, saying, "Hold! hold! this is unrighteous; a valiant
prince, the monarch of many realms, the

<span id="page_374">p. 374</span>

offerer of many sacrifices, the destroyer of his foes, a universal
emperor, is in thy womb; think not of committing so desperate an act!"
Accordingly, in obedience to his injunctions, she relinquished her
intention. The sage then conducted, her to his abode, and after some
time a very splendid boy was there born. Along with him the poison that
had been given to his mother was expelled; and Aurva, after performing
the ceremonies required at birth, gave him on that account the name of
Sagara (from Sa, 'with,' and Gara, 'poison'). The same holy sage
celebrated his investure with the cord of his class, instructed him
fully in the Vedas, and taught him the use of arms, especially those of
fire, called after Bhárgava.

When the boy had grown up, and was capable of reflection, he said to his
mother one day, "Why are we dwelling in this hermitage? where is my
father? and who is he?" His mother, in reply, related to him all that
had happened. Upon hearing which he was highly incensed, and vowed to
recover his patrimonial kingdom; and exterminate the Haihayas and
Tálajanghas, by whom it had been overrun. Accordingly when he became a
man he put nearly the whole of the Haihayas to death, and would have
also destroyed the Śakas, the Yavanas, Kámbojas, Páradas, and
Pahnavas <span id="fr_985"></span>[15](#fn_985), but that they applied
to Vaśisht́ha, the

<span id="page_375">p. 375</span>

family priest of Sagara, for protection. Vaśisht́ha regarding them as
annihilated (or deprived of power), though living, thus spake to Sagara:
"Enough, enough, my son, pursue no farther these objects of your wrath,
whom you may look upon as no more. In order to fulfil your vow I have
separated them from affinity to the regenerate tribes, and from the
duties of their castes." Sagara, in compliance with the injunctions of
his spiritual guide, contented himself therefore with imposing upon the
vanquished nations peculiar distinguishing marks. He made the
Yavanas <span id="fr_986"></span>[16](#fn_986) shave their heads
entirely; the Śakas he compelled to shave (the upper) half of their
heads; the Páradas wore their hair long; and the Pahnavas let their
beards grow, in obedience to his commands <span
id="fr_987"></span>[17](#fn_987). Them also, and other Kshatriya races,
he deprived of the established usages of oblations to fire and the study
of the Vedas; and thus separated from religious rites, and abandoned by
the Brahmans, these different tribes became Mlechchhas. Sagara, after
the recovery of his kingdom, reigned over the seven-zoned earth with
undisputed dominion <span id="fr_988"></span>[18](#fn_988).

<span id="page_376">p. 376</span>

This page consists solely of footnotes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_971"></span>[369:1](vp095.htm#fr_971) So Manu; "Having
reposited, as the law directs, the holy fires in his breast," &c. VI.
25.

<span id="fn_972"></span>[369:2](vp095.htm#fr_972) The Váyu, Linga,
Kúrma, and Bhágavata agree in this series; the others omit it.

<span id="fn_973"></span>[369:3](vp095.htm#fr_973) The words of the text
are \#\#\#, and the commentator explains the phrase, 'the Angirasa
Brahmans, of whom the Hárita family was the chief.' The Linga reads,
'Harita was the son of Yuvanáśwa, whose sons were the Háritas; they were
on the part (or followers) of Angiras, and were Brahmans with the
properties of Kshatriyas.' The Váyu has, 'Harita was the son of
Yuvanáśwa, from whom were many called <span id="page_370">p. 370</span>
Háritas; they were sons of Angiras, and Brahmans with the properties of
Kshatriyas.' The Bhágavata has only, These (Ambarísha, Purukutsa, and
Harita) were, according to Śridhara Swámi's comment, the chiefs of
Mándhátri's descendants, being founders of three several branches: or it
may mean, he says, merely that they had Mándhátri for their progenitor,
Mándhátri being by some also named Angiras, according to Aśwaláyana. It
may be questioned if the compilers of the Puráńas, or their annotators,
knew exactly what to make of this and similar phrases, although they
were probably intended to intimate that some persons of Kshatriya origin
became the. disciples of certain Brahmans, particularly of Angiras, and
afterwards founders of schools of religious instruction themselves.
Mándhátri himself is the author of a hymn in the Rig-veda. As. Res.
VIII. 385. Hárita is the name of an individual sage, considered as the
son of Chyavana, and to whom a work on law is attributed. It is probably
rather that of a school, however, than of an individual.

<span id="fn_974"></span>[370:4](vp095.htm#fr_974) Narmadá, the
personified Nerbudda river, was, according to the Bhágavata, the sister
of the Nágas.

<span id="fn_975"></span>[371:5](vp095.htm#fr_975) We have some
varieties here. Instead of Trasadasyu the Matsya has Dussaha, whom it
makes the husband of Narmadá, and father of Sambhúti, the father of
Tridhanwan. The Bhágavata omits Sambhúti; the Linga makes him the
brother of Trasadasyu; and the Agni has in his place Sudhanwan.

<span id="fn_976"></span>[371:6](vp095.htm#fr_976) Vrishadaśwa: Váyu.
The Matsya, Agni, and Bráhma omit all between Sambhúta and Tridhanwan.
The Bhágavata has a rather different series, or Anarańya, Haryyaśwa,
Aruńa, Tribandhana, Triśanku. As Anarańya is famous in Hindu story, and
Trayyáruńa is a contributor to the Rig-veda, their omission shews
careless compilation.

<span id="fn_977"></span>[371:7](vp095.htm#fr_977) The Váyu states he
was banished by his father for his wickedness (Adharma). The Bráhma P.
and Hari Vanśa detail his iniquity at length; and it is told more
concisely in the Linga. He carried off the betrothed wife of another
man, one of the citizens according to the two former, of Vidarbha
according to the latter: for this, his father, by the advice of
Vaśisht́ha, banished him, and he took refuge with Śwapákas. The Rámáyańa
has a different story, and ascribes Triśanku's degradation to the curse
of the sons of Vaśisht́ha, to whom the king had applied to conduct his
sacrifice, after their father had refused to do so. Before that, he is
described as a pious prince, and the object of his sacrifice was to
ascend to heaven.

<span id="fn_978"></span>[371:8](vp095.htm#fr_978) The occurrence of the
famine, and Satyavrata's care of the wife and family of Viśwámitra, are
told, with some variations, in the Váyu, which has been followed by
<span id="page_372">p. 372</span> the Bráhma and Hari Vanśa. During the
famine, when game finis he kills the cow of Vaśisht́ha; and for the three
crimes of displeasing his father, killing a cow, and eating flesh not
previously consecrated, he acquires the name of Triśanku (tri, 'three,'
śanku, 'sin'). Vaśisht́ha refusing to perform his regal inauguration,
Viśwámitra celebrates the rites, and on his death elevates the king in
his mortal body to heaven. The Rámáyańa relates the same circumstance,
but assigns to it a different motive, Viśwámitra's resentment of the
refusal of the gods to attend Triśanku's sacrifice. That work also
describes the attempt of the gods to cast the king down upon earth, and
the compromise between them and Viśwámitra, by which Triśanku was left
suspended, head downwards, in mid-air, forming a constellation in the
southern hemisphere, along with other new planets and stars formed by
Viśwámitra. The Bhágavata has an allusion to this legend, saying that
Triśanku is still visible in heaven. The Váyu furnishes some further
information from an older source. Both my copies leave a blank where it
is marked, and a similar passage does not elsewhere occur; but the word
should probably be \#\#\#, and the whole may be thus rendered: 'Men
acquainted with the Puráńas recite these two stanzas; "By the favour of
Viśwámitra the illustrious Triśanku shines in heaven along with the
gods, through the kindness of that sage. Slowly passes the lovely night
in winter, embellished by the moon, decorated with three watches, and
ornamented with the constellation Triśanku:"' This legend is therefore
clearly astronomical, and alludes possibly to some reformation of the
sphere by Viśwámitra, under the patronage of Triśanku, and in opposition
to a more ancient system advocated by the school of Vaśisht́ha. It might
be no very rash conjecture, perhaps, to identify Triśanku with Orion,
the three bright stars of whose belt may have suggested the three Śankus
(stakes or pins) which form his name.

<span id="fn_979"></span>[372:9](vp095.htm#fr_979) The Pauráńik lists
generally dismiss Hariśchandra very summarily, but he makes a
conspicuous figure in legends of an apparently later date. In the
Mahábhárata, Sabhá Parva, it is stated that he resides in the court of
Indra, to which he was elevated for his performance of the Rájasúya
sacrifice, and for his unbounded liberality. This seems to have served
as the groundwork of the tale told in the Márkańd́eya and Padma Puráńas,
of his having given his whole country, his wife and son, and finally
himself, to Viśwámitra, in satisfaction of his demands for Dakshińá. In
consequence he was elevated with his subjects to heaven, from whence,
having been insidiously led by Náreda to boast of his merits, he was
again precipitated. His repentance of his pride, however, arrested his
downward descent, and he and his train paused in mid-air. The city of
Hariśchandra is popularly believed to be at times still <span
id="page_373">p. 373</span> visible in the skies. The indignation of
Vaśisht́ha at Viśwámitra's insatiableness produced a quarrel, in which
their mutual imprecations changed them to two birds, the Śaráli, a sort
of Turdus, and the Baka, or crane. In these forms they fought for a
considerable term, until Brahmá interposed, and reconciled them. The
Bhágavata alludes to this story, in its notice of Hariśchandra; but the
Váyu refers the conflict to the reign of a different prince: see c. 2.
n. 11. According to the Śiva P., Hariśchandra was an especial worshipper
of that deity; and his wife Satyavatí was a form of Jayá, one of Durga's
handmaids.

<span id="fn_980"></span>[373:10](vp095.htm#fr_980) Also read Rohita.
Traces of his name appear in the strong holds of Rotas, in Behar and in
the Panjab. The Bhágavata has a legend of his having been devoted to
Varuńa, before his birth, by his father, who having on various pleas
deferred offering his son as promised, was afflicted by a dropsy. Rohita
at last purchased Śunahśephas, who was offered as a victim in his stead:
see hereafter, note on Śunahśephas.

<span id="fn_981"></span>[373:11](vp095.htm#fr_981) Omitted: Agni,
Linga, and Matsya.

<span id="fn_982"></span>[373:12](vp095.htm#fr_982) Omitted: Agni.
Dhundhu: Linga and Kúrma. Champa, founder of Champamáliní: Bhágavata.
But all other authorities make Champa a different person, a descendant
of Anga: see family of Ann, of the lunar race.

<span id="fn_983"></span>[373:13](vp095.htm#fr_983) Kuruka: Linga and
Kúrma. Bharuka: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_984"></span>[373:14](vp095.htm#fr_984) Descendants of Yadu.
The first springs from a prince who is the twelfth, and t́he second from
one who is the eighteenth, in the lunar line, and both are thus
cotemporary with a prince who is the thirty-fifth of the solar dynasty.
The Váyu adds, that they were assisted by Śakas, Yavanas, Kámbojas,
Páravas, and Pahlavas.

<span id="fn_985"></span>[374:15](vp095.htm#fr_985) The Haihayas we
shall have farther occasion to notice. The Śakas are, no doubt, the Sacæ
or Sakai of the classical geographers, Scythians and Indo-Scythians,
Turk or Tartar tribes, who established themselves, about a century and a
half before our era, along the western districts of India, and who are
not improbably connected with our Saxon forefathers. The Yavanas are the
Ionians or Greeks. The Kámbojas were a people on the northwest of India,
of whom it is said that they were remarkable for a capital breed of
horses. There is an apparent trace of their name in the Caumogees of
Kaferistan, who may have retreated to the mountains before the advance
of the Turk tribes. (Elphinstone's Caubul, 619: see also before, [p.
194](vp061.htm#page_194). n. [146](vp061.htm#fn_622).) The Páradas and
Pahlavas or Pahnavas may designate other bordering tribes in the same
direction, or on the confines of Persia. Along with these, in the legend
that follows, the Bhágavata enumerates Barbaras. The Váyu adds
Máhishikas, Chaulas, Dárvas, and Khasas: the two former of which are
people on the Malabar and Coromandel coasts; the two latter are usually
placed amongst the mountaineers of the Hindu Kosh. The Bráhma P.
lengthens the list with the Kolas, the forest races of eastern Gondwana;
the Sarpas and the<span id="page_375">p. 375</span> Keralas, who are the
people of Malabar. The Hari Vanśa still farther extends the enumeration
with the Tusharas or Tokharas, the Turks of Tokharestan; the Chinas,
Chinese; the Mádras, people in the Panjab; the Kishkindhas, in Mysore;
Kauntalas, along the Narbudda; Bangas, Bengalis; Śálwas, people in
western India; and the Konkanas, or inhabitants of the Concan. It is
evident from the locality of most of the additions of the last
authority, that its compiler or corrupter has been a native of the
Dekhin.

<span id="fn_986"></span>[375:16](vp095.htm#fr_986) And Kámbojas: Váyu.

<span id="fn_987"></span>[375:17](vp095.htm#fr_987) The Asiatic nations
generally shave the head either wholly or in part. Amongst the Greeks it
was common to shave the fore part of the head, a custom introduced,
according to Plutarch, by the Abantes, whom Homer calls ὄπιθεν κομοῶντες
and followed, according to Xenophon, by the Lacedæmonians. It may be
doubted, however, if the Greeks or Ionians ever shaved the head
completely. The practice prevails amongst the Mohammedans, but it is not
universal. The Śakas, Scythians or Tartars, shave the fore part of the
head, gathering the hair at the back into a long tail, as do the
Chinese. The mountaineers of the Himalaya shave the crown of the head,
as do the people of Kaferistan, with exception of a single tuft. What
Oriental people wore their hair long, except at the back of the head, is
questionable; and the usage would be characteristic rather of the
Teutonic and Gothic nations. The ancient Persians had long bushy beards,
as the Persepolitan sculptures demonstrate. In Chardin's time they were
out of fashion, but they were again in vogue in that country in the
reign of the last king, Fateh Shuh.

<span id="fn_988"></span>[375:18](vp095.htm#fr_988) So the Váyu, &c.;
and a similar <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> statement is given in
Manu, X. 44, where to the Śakas, Yavanas, Kámbojas, Páradas, and
Pahnavas, are added the Pańd́aras (people of western Bengal), Od́ras
(those of Orissa), Dráviras (of the Coromandel coast), Chinas (Chinese),
Kirátas (mountaineers), and Daradas (Durds of the Hindu Koh). From this
passage, and a similar one in the Rámáyańa, in which the Chinas are
mentioned, the late Mr. Klaproth inferred those works to be not older
than the third century B. C., when the reigning dynasty of Thsin first
gave that name to China (see also [p. 194](vp061.htm#page_194). n.
[145](vp061.htm#fn_621).) It was probable, he supposed, that the Hindus
became acquainted with the Chinese only about 200 B. C., when their arms
extended to the Oxus; but it is difficult to reconcile this date with
the difference of style between the Rámáyańa particularly and the works
of the era of Vikramáditya. It would seem more likely that the later
appellations were interpolated. It must have been a period of some
antiquity, when all the nations from Bengal to the Coromandel coast were
considered as Mlechchhas and outcasts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](vp096)
