[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp107)  [Next](vp109) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

### CHAP. XV.

Explanation of the reason why Śiśupála in his previous births as
Hirańyakaśipu and Rávańa was not identified with Vishńu on being slain
by him, and was so identified when killed as Śiśupála. The wives of
Vasudeva: his children: Balaráma and Krishńa his sons by Devakí: born
apparently of Rohińí and Yasodá. The wives and children of Krishńa.
Multitude of the descendants of Yadu.

MAITREYA.--Most eminent of all who cultivate piety, I am curious to hear
from you, and you are able to explain to me, how it happened that the
same being who when killed by Vishńu as Hirańyakaśipu and Rávańa
obtained enjoyments which, though scarcely attainable by the immortals,
were but temporary, should have been absorbed into the eternal Hari when
slain by him in the person of Śiśupála.

PARÁŚARA.--When the divine author of the creation, preservation, and
destruction of the universe accomplished the death of Hirańyakaśipu, he
assumed a body composed of the figures of a lion and a man, so that
Hirańyakaśipu was not aware that his destroyer was Vishńu: although
therefore the quality of purity, derived from exceeding merit, had been
attained, yet his mind was perplexed by the predominance of the property
of passion; and the consequence of that intermixture was, that he
reaped, as the result of his death by the hands of Vishńu, only
unlimited power and enjoyment upon earth, as Daśánana, the sovereign of
the three spheres; he did not obtain absorption into the supreme spirit,
that is without beginning or end, because his mind was not wholly
dedicated to that sole object. So also Daśánana being entirely subject
to the passion of love, and engrossed completely by the thoughts of
Jánakí, could not comprehend that the son of Daśaratha whom he beheld
was in reality the divine Achyuta. At the moment of his death he was
impressed with the notion that his adversary was a mortal, and therefore
the fruit he derived from being slain by Vishńu was confined to his
birth in the illustrious family of the kings of Chedi, and the exercise
of extensive dominion. In this situation many circumstances brought the
names of Vishńu to his notice, and on all these occasions the enmity
that had accumulated through successive births influenced his

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

mind; and in speaking constantly with disrespect of Achyuta, he was ever
repeating his different appellations. Whether walking, eating, sitting,
or sleeping, his animosity was never at rest, and Krishńa was ever
present to his thoughts in his ordinary semblance, having eyes as
beautiful as the leaf of the lotus, clad in bright yellow raiment,
decorated with a garland, with bracelets on his arms and wrists, and a
diadem on his head; having four robust arms, bearing the conch, the
discus, the mace, and the lotus. Thus uttering his names, even though in
malediction, and dwelling upon his image, though in enmity, he beheld
Krishńa, when inflicting his death, radiant with resplendent weapons,
bright with ineffable splendour in his own essence as the supreme being,
and all his passion and hatred ceased, and he was purified front every
defect. Being killed by the discus of Vishńu at the instant he thus
meditated, all his sins were consumed by his divine adversary, and he
was blended with him by whose might he had been slain. I have thus
replied to your inquiries. He by whom the divine Vishńu is named or
called to recollection, even in enmity, obtains a reward that is
difficult of attainment to the demons and the gods: how much greater
shall be his recompense who glorifies the deity in fervour and in faith!

Vasudeva, also called Ánakadandubhi, had Rohińí, Pauraví <span
id="fr_1181"></span>[1](#fn_1181), Bhadrá, Madirá, Devakí, and several
other wives. His sons by Rohińí were Balabhadra, Sárańa, Śaru, Durmada,
and others. Balabhadra espoused Revatí, and had by her Nisat́ha and
Ulmuka. The sons of Śarańa were Mársht́i, Mársht́imat, Śíśu, Satyadhriti,
and others. Bhadráśwa, Bhadrabáhu, Durgama, Bhúta, and others, were born
in the family of Rohińí (of the race of Puru). The sons of Vasudeva by
Madirá were Nanda, Upananda, Krítaka, and others. Bhadrá bore him
Upanidhi, Gada, and others. By his wife Vaiśálí he had one son named
Kauśika. Devakí bore him six sons, Kírttimat, Susheńa, Udáyin,
Bhadrasena, Rijudaśa, and Bhadradeha; all of whom Kansa put to
death <span id="fr_1182"></span>[2](#fn_1182).

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

When Devakí was pregnant the seventh time, Yoganidrá (the sleep of
devotion), sent by Vishńu, extricated the embryo from its maternal womb
at midnight, and transferred it to that of Rohińí; and from having been
thus taken away, the child (who was Balaráma) received the name of
Sankarshańa. Next, the divine Vishńu himself, the root of the vast
universal tree, inscrutable by the understandings of all gods, demons,
sages, and men, past, present, or to come, adored by Brahmá and all the
deities, he who is without beginning, middle, or end, being moved to
relieve the earth of her load, descended into the womb of Devakí, and
was born as her son Vásudeva. Yoganidrá, proud to execute his orders,
removed the embryo to Yasodá, the wife of Nanda the cowherd. At his
birth the earth was relieved from all iniquity; the sun, moon, and
planets shone with unclouded splendour; all fear of calamitous portents
was dispelled; and universal happiness prevailed. From the moment he
appeared, all mankind were led into the righteous path in him.

Whilst this powerful being resided in this world of mortals, he had
sixteen thousand and one hundred wives; of these the principal were
Rukminí, Satyabhámá, Jámbavatí, Játahaśiní, and four others. By these
the universal form, who is without beginning, begot a hundred and eighty
thousand sons, of whom thirteen are most renowned, Pradyumna,
Chárudeshńa, Sámba, and others. Pradyumna married Kakudwatí, the
daughter of Rukmin, and had by her Aniruddha. Aniruddha married
Subhadrá, the granddaughter of the same Rukmin, and she bore him a son
named Vajra. The son of Vajra was Báhu; and his son was Sucháru <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[3](#fn_1183).

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

In this manner the descendants of Yadu multiplied, and there were many
hundreds of thousands of them, so that it would be impossible to repeat
their names in hundreds of years. Two verses relating to them are
current: "The domestic instructors of the boys in the use of arms
amounted to three crores and eighty lacs (or thirty-eight millions). Who
shall enumerate the whole of the mighty men of the Yádava race, who were
tens of ten thousands and hundreds of hundred thousands in number?"
Those powerful Daityas who were killed in the conflicts between them and
the gods were born again upon earth as men, as tyrants and oppressors;
and, in order to check their violence, the gods also descended to the
world of mortals, and became members of the hundred and one branches of
the family of Yadu. Vishńu was to them a teacher and a ruler, and all
the Yádavas were obedient to his commands.

Whoever listens frequently to this account of the origin of the heroes
of the race of Vrishńi, shall be purified from all sin, and obtain the
sphere of Vishńu.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[439:1](vp108.htm#fr_1181) Pauraví is rather a
title attached to a second Rohińí, to distinguish her from the first,
the mother of Balaráma: she is also said by the Váyu to be the daughter
of Báhlíka.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[439:2](vp108.htm#fr_1182) The enumeration of
our text is rather imperfect. The Váyu names the wives of Vasudeva,
Pauraví, Rohińí, Madirá, Rudrá, Vaiśákhí, Devakí; and adds two
bondmaids, Sugandhí and Vanarají. The <span id="page_440">p. 440</span>
Bráhma P. and Hari V. name twelve wives, and two slaves; Rohiní, Madirá,
Vaiśákhí, Bhadrá, Sunámní, Sahadevá, Śántidevá, Śrídevá, Devarakshitá,
Vrikadeví, Upadeví, Devaki; and Śantanu and Báravá. The children of the
two slaves, according to the Váyu, were Puńd́ra, who became a king, and
Kapila, who retired to the woods. In the Bhágavata we have thirteen
wives, Pauraví, Rohińí, Bhadrá, Madirá, Rochaná, Ilá, Devakí,
Dhritadeví, Śántidevá, Upadeví, Śrídevá, Devarakshitá, and Sahadevá: the
last seven in this and the preceding list are the daughters of Devaka.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[440:3](vp108.htm#fr_1183) The wives and
children of Krishńa are more particularly described in the next book.
The Bráhma P. and Hari V. add some details of the descendants of
Vasudeva's brothers: thus Devabhága is said to be the father of Uddhava;
Anadhrisht́i of Devaśravas, a great scholar or Pańd́it. Devaśravas,
another brother of Vasudeva, <span id="page_441">p. 441</span> had
Śatrughna and another son called Ekalavya, who for some cause being
exposed when an infant, was found and brought up by the Nishádas, and
was thence termed Nishádin. Vatsavat (Vatsabálaka) and Gańd́úsha being
childless, Vasudeva gave his son Kauśika to be adopted by the former,
and Krishńa gave Chárudeshńa and three others to the latter. Kanaka
(Karundhaka) had two sons, Tantrija and Tantripála. Aváksrinjima
(Śrinjaya) had also two, Víra and Aśwahanu. The gracious Śamíka became
as the son (although the brother) of Śyáma, and disdaining the joint
rule which the princes of the house of Bhoja exercised, made himself
paramount. Yudhisht́hira was his friend. The extravagant numbers of the
Yádavas merely indicate that they were, as they undoubtedly were, a
powerful and numerous tribe, of whom many traces exist in various parts
of India.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVI](vp109)
