[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp101)  [Next](vp103) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_411">p. 411</span>

### CHAP. IX.

Descendants of Raji, son of Áyus: Indra resigns his throne to him:
claimed after his death by his sons, who apostatize from the religion of
the Vedas, and are destroyed by Indra. Descendants of Pratíkshatra, son
of Kshatravriddha.

RAJI had five hundred sons, all of unequalled daring and vigour. Upon
the occurrence of a war between the demons and the gods, both parties
inquired of Brahmá which would be victorious. The deity replied, "That
for which Raji shall take up arms." Accordingly the Daityas immediately
repaired to Raji, to secure his alliance; which he promised them, if
they would make him their Indra after defeating the gods. To this they
answered and said, "We cannot profess one thing, and mean another; our
Indra is Prahláda, and it is for him that we wage war." Having thus
spoken, they departed; and the gods then came to him on the like errand.
He proposed to them the said conditions, and they agreed that he should
be their Indra. Raji therefore joined the heavenly host, and by his
numerous and formidable weapons destroyed the army of their enemies.

When the demons were discomfited, Indra placed the feet of Raji upon his
head, and said, "Thou hast preserved me from a great danger, and I
acknowledge thee as my father; thou art the sovereign chief over all the
regions, and I, the Indra of the three spheres, am thy son." The Rájá.
smiled, and said, "Even be it so. The regard that is conciliated by many
agreeable speeches is not to be resisted even when such language
proceeds from a foe (much less should the kind words of a friend fail to
win our affection)." He accordingly returned to his own city, and Indra
remained as his deputy in the government of heaven.

When Raji ascended to the skies, his sons, at the instigation of Nárada,
demanded the rank of Indra as their hereditary right; and as the deity
refused to acknowledge their supremacy, they reduced him to submission
by force, and usurped his station. After some considerable time had
elapsed, the god of a hundred sacrifices, Indra, deprived of his share
of offerings to the immortals, met with Vrihaspati in a retired

<span id="page_412">p. 412</span>

place, and said to him, "Cannot you give me a little of the sacrificial
butter, even if it were no bigger than a jujube, for I am in want of
sustenance?" "If," replied Vrihaspati, "I had been applied to by you
before, I could have done any thing for you that you wished; as it is, I
will endeavour and restore you in a few days to your sovereignty." So
saying, he commenced a sacrifice for the purpose of increasing the might
of Indra, and of leading the sons of Raji into error, and so effecting
their downfall <span id="fr_1086"></span>[1](#fn_1086). Misled by their
mental fascination, the princes became enemies of the Brahmans,
regardless of their duties, and contemners of the precepts of the Vedas;
and thus devoid of morality and religion, they were slain by Indra, who
by the assistance of the priest of the gods resumed his place in heaven.
Whoever hears this story shall retain for ever his proper place, and
shall never be guilty of wicked acts.

Rambha, the third son of Áyus, had no progeny <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[2](#fn_1087). Kshatravriddha had a son named
Pratíkshatra <span id="fr_1088"></span>[3](#fn_1088); his son was
Sanjaya; his son was Vijaya <span id="fr_1089"></span>[4](#fn_1089); his
son was Yajnakrit <span id="fr_1090"></span>[5](#fn_1090); his son was
Harshavarddhana <span id="fr_1091"></span>[6](#fn_1091); his son was
Sahadeva; his son was Adína <span id="fr_1092"></span>[7](#fn_1092); his
son was Jayasena; his son was Sankriti; his son was Kshatradharman <span
id="fr_1093"></span>[8](#fn_1093). These were the descendants of
Kshatravriddha. I will now mention those of Nahusha.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[412:1](vp102.htm#fr_1086) The Matsya says he
taught the sons of Raji the Jinadharma or Jain religion.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[412:2](vp102.htm#fr_1087) The Bhágavata
enumerates however, as his descendants, Rabhasa, Gambhíra, and Akriya,
whose posterity became Brahmans. The same authority gives as the
descendants of Anenas, the fourth son of Áyus, Śuddha, Śuchi, Trikakud,
and Śántákhya.

<span id="fn_1088"></span>[412:3](vp102.htm#fr_1088) The Váyu agrees
with our text in making Pratipaksha (Pratikshatra) the son of
Kshattravriddha; but the Bráhma P. and Hari V. consider Anenas to be the
head of this branch of the posterity of Áyus. The Bhágavata substitutes
Kuśa, the Leśa, of our text, the grandson of Kshatravriddha, for the
first name; and this seems most likely to be correct. Although the
different MSS. agree in reading \#\#\# it should be perhaps \#\#\# the
patronymic Kshátravriddha; making then, as the Bhágavata does,
Pratíkshatra the son of the son of Kshatravriddha.

<span id="fn_1089"></span>[412:4](vp102.htm#fr_1089) Jaya: Bhágavata,
Váyu.

<span id="fn_1090"></span>[412:5](vp102.htm#fr_1090) Vijaya: Váyu.
Krita: Bhágavata,

<span id="fn_1091"></span>[412:6](vp102.htm#fr_1091) Haryaśwa: Bráhma,
Hari V. Haryavana: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1092"></span>[412:7](vp102.htm#fr_1092) The last of the
list: Váyu. Ahína: Bhágavata.

<span id="fn_1093"></span>[412:8](vp102.htm#fr_1093) Kshatravriddha:
Bráhma, Hari V.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X](vp103)
