[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp112)  [Next](vp114) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

### CHAP. XX.

Descendants of Kuru. Devápi abdicates the throne: assumed by Śántanu: he
is confirmed by the Brahmans: Bhíshma his son by Gangá: his other sons.
Birth of Dhritarásht́ra, Páńd́u, and Vidura. The hundred sons of
Dhritarásht́ra. The five sons of Páńd́u: married to Draupadí: their
posterity. Paríkshit, the grandson of Arjuna, the reigning king.

PARÍKSHIT, the son of Kuru, had four sons, Janamejaya, Śrutasena,
Ugrasena, and Bhímasena <span id="fr_1278"></span>[1](#fn_1278). The son
of Jahnu was Suratha; his son was Vidúratha; his son was Sárvabhauma;
his son was Jayasena Árávin; his son was Ayutáyus; his son was
Akrodhana; one of his sons was Devatithi, and another was called Riksha;
his son was Dilípa; his son was Pratípa, who had three sons, Devápi,
Śántanu, and Báhlíka. The first adopted in childhood a forest life, and
Śántanu became king. Of him this verse is spread through the earth;
"Śántanu is his name, because if he lays his hands upon an old man, he
restores him to youth, and by him men obtain tranquillity (śánti)."

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

In the kingdom over which Śántanu ruled there was no rain for twelve
years. Apprehensive that the country would become a desert, the king
assembled the Brahmans, and asked them why no rain fell, and what fault
he had committed. They told him that he was as it were a younger brother
married before an elder, for he was in the enjoyment of the earth, which
was the right of his elder brother Devápi. "What then am I to do?" said
the Rájá: to which they replied, "Until the gods shall be displeased
with Devápi, by his declining from the path of righteousness, the
kingdom is his, and to him therefore you should resign it." When the
minister of the king, Asmarisárin, heard this, he collected a number of
ascetics who taught doctrines opposed to those of the Vedas, and sent
them into the forest; where meeting with Devápi, they perverted the
understanding of the simple-minded prince, and led him to adopt
heretical notions. In the meantime, Śántanu being much distressed to
think that he had been guilty of the offence intimated by the Brahmans,
sent them before him into the woods, and then proceeded thither himself,
to restore the kingdom to his elder brother. When the Brahmans arrived
at the hermitage of Devápi, they informed him, that, according to the
doctrines of the Vedas, succession to a kingdom was the right of the
elder brother: but he entered into discussion with them, and in various
ways advanced arguments which had the defect of being contrary to the
precepts of the Vedas. When the Brahmans heard this, they turned to
Śántanu, and said, "Come hither, Rájá; you need give yourself no further
trouble in this matter; the dearth is at an end: this man is fallen from
his state, for he has uttered words of disrespect to the authority of
the eternal, untreated Veda; and when the elder brother is degraded,
there is no sin in the prior espousals of his junior." Śántanu thereupon
returned to his capital, and administered the government as before; and
his elder brother Devápi being degraded from his caste by repeating
doctrines contrary to the Vedas, Indra poured down abundant rain, which
was followed by plentiful harvests <span
id="fr_1279"></span>[2](#fn_1279).

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

The son of Báhlíka was Somadatta, who had three sons, Bhúri,
Bhúriśravas, and Śala <span id="fr_1280"></span>[3](#fn_1280).

The son of Śántanu was the illustrious and learned Bhíshma, who was born
to him by the holy river-goddess, Gangá; and he had by his wife
Satyavatí two sons, Chitrángada and Vichitravíryya. Chitrángada, whilst
yet a youth, was killed in a conflict with a Gandharba, also called
Chitrángada. Vichitravíryya married Ambá and Ambaliká, the daughters of
the king of Káśí; and indulging too freely in connubial rites, fell into
a consumption, of which he died. By command of Satyavatí, my son
Krishńa-dwaipáyana, ever obedient to his mother's wishes <span
id="fr_1281"></span>[4](#fn_1281), begot upon the widows of his brother
the princes Dhritarásht́ra and Páńd́u, and upon a female servant, Vidura.
Dhritarásht́ra had Duryodhana, Duhsáśana, and other sons, to the cumber
of a hundred. Páńd́u having incurred the curse of a deer, whose mate he
had killed in the chase, was deterred from procreating children; and his
wife Kuntí, bare to him in consequence three sons, who were begotten by
the deities Dharma, Váyu, and Indra; namely, Yudhisht́hira, Bhíma, and
Arjuna: and his wife Mádrí had two sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, by the
celestial sons of Aświní. These had each a son by Draupadí. The son of
Yudhisht́hira was Prativindhya; of Bhíma, Śrutasoma; of Arjuna,
Śrutakírtti; of Nakula, Śatáníka; and of Sahadeva, Śrutakarman. The
Páńd́avas had also other sons <span id="fr_1282"></span>[5](#fn_1282). By
his wife Yaudheyí, Yudhisht́hira had Devaka.

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The son of Bhíma
by Hid́imbá was Ghat́otkacha, and he had also Sarvatraga by his wife Káśí.
The son of Sahadeva by Vijayá was Suhotra; and Niramitra was the son of
Nakula by Kareńumatí. Arjuna had Irávat by the serpent-nymph Ulupí;
Babhruváhana, who was adopted as the son of his maternal grandfather, by
the daughter of the king of Manipura; and, by his wife Subhadrá
Abhimanyu, who even in extreme youth was renowned for his valour and his
strength, and crushed the chariots of his foes in fight. The son of
Abhimanyu by his wife Uttará was Paríkshit, who, after the Kurus were
all destroyed, was killed in his mother's womb by the magic Bráhma
weapon, hurled by Aswattháman: he was however restored to life by the
clemency of that being whose feet receive the homage of all the demons
and the gods, and who for his own pleasure had assumed a human shape
(Krishńa). This prince, Paríkshit, now reigns over the whole world with
undivided sway <span id="fr_1283"></span>[6](#fn_1283).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1278"></span>[457:1](vp113.htm#fr_1278) This, although it
occurs in other authorities, appears to be an error, for these are the
sons of a subsequent Paríkshit (see the next chapter, [p.
461](vp114.htm#page_461)). The Matsya omits Paríkshit here, and the
Bhágavata states that he had no children. In most of the Puráńas,
however, the line of Paríkshit is continued, but there is very great
confusion in the lineage. According to the Váyu, Janamejaya was the son
of Paríkshit, whose son was Śrutasena, whose son was Bhímasena.
Janamejaya had also a son named Suratha; but Suratha was also the name
of the son of Jahnu, from whom the line continues as in the text. The
Bráhma P. and Hari V. also make Suratha the son both of Janamejaya and
of Jahnu; and they observe that there are two Rikshas, two Paríkshits,
three Bhímasenas, and two Janamejayas, in the lunar race. Some of the
confusion probably originates with the Mahábhárata, which, as before
noticed, gives two lists from Puru to Śántanu, differing from one
another and from all the lists of the Puráńas. In the first of these
lists such collateral names have been retained as appear to have
furnished our text and that of other Puráńas with distinct persons: thus
making the members of one fraternity so many descents. Of the two lists,
however, the second is probably to be regarded as the more recent, if
not more correct; for Vaiśámpáyana repeats it at Janamejaya's request,
because the latter is not satisfied with the summary account which the
former had first communicated to him. Mahábh. vol. I, p. 136 and p. 138.

<span id="fn_1279"></span>[458:2](vp113.htm#fr_1279) The Mahábhárata
merely states that Devápi retired to a religious life. The story of his
heresy is narrated, much as in the text, in the Bhágavata, Váyu, &c. The
Matsya adds, that he was also leprous; on which account his subjects
contemned him. <span id="page_459">p. 459</span> He was probably set
aside in favour of his younger brother, either on that account or on
that of his heresy; such a disposition being conformable to Hindu law.
According to the Bhágavata and Matsya he is still alive at a place
called Kalápa gráma, where, in the Krita age of the next Maháyuga, he
will be the restorer of the Kshatriya race.

<span id="fn_1280"></span>[459:3](vp113.htm#fr_1280) The Matsya says
that Báhlíka had a hundred sons or lords of the Bahlíkas.

<span id="fn_1281"></span>[459:4](vp113.htm#fr_1281) Before her marriage
to Śántanu, Satyavatí had a son, Krishńa-dwaipáyana or Vyása, by
Paráśara: he was therefore the half brother of Vichitravíryya, and
legally qualified to raise up offspring to him by his widow. This law is
abrogated in the present age. The whole story of the sons of Śántanu is
told at length in the Mahábhárata.

<span id="fn_1282"></span>[459:5](vp113.htm#fr_1282) The Mahábhárata
names some of them rather differently, and adds some particulars. Thus
Yaudheya was the son of Yudhisht́hira by his wife Deviká, daughter of
Govásana of the Śaivya tribe. The son of Bhímasena was Sarvaga, by
Balandhará, princess of Káśí; he had also Ghat́okkacha by Hid́imbá.
Abhimanyu was the <span id="page_460">p. 460</span> son of Arjuna by
Subhadrá. The wives and sons of the other two are the same, but
Kareńumatí is termed a princess [of](errata.htm#21) Chedí, and Vijayá of
Madra.

<span id="fn_1283"></span>[460:6](vp113.htm#fr_1283) In the details
immediately preceding, the Puráńas generally concur, deriving them
probably from the same source, the Ádi Parvan of the Mahábhárata, and
employing very frequently the same words. The period at which the
chapter closes is supposed to be that at which the Vyása, who arranged
or compiled the Puráńas, is believed to have flourished. Paríkshit died
of the bite of a snake, according to the Mahábhárata, Ádi P. The
Bhágavata is supposed to have been narrated to him in the interval
between the bite and its fatal effect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXI](vp114)
