[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp126)  [Next](vp128) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_522">p. 522</span>

### CHAP. X.

Description of autumn. Krishńa dissuades Nanda from worshipping Indra:
recommends him and the Gopas to worship cattle and the mountains.

WHILST Keśava and Ráma were sporting thus in Vraja, the rainy season
ended, and was succeeded by the season of autumn, when the lotus is full
blown. The small Saphari fish, in their watery burrows, were oppressed
by the heat, like a man by selfish desires, who is devoted to his
family. The peacocks, no longer animated by passion, were silent amidst
the woods, like holy saints, who have come to know the unreality of the
world. The clouds, of shining whiteness, exhausted of their watery
wealth, deserted the atmosphere, like those who have acquired wisdom,
and depart from their homes. Evaporated by the rays of the autumnal sun,
the lakes were dried up, like the hearts of men when withered by the
contact of selfishness. The pellucid waters of the season were suitably
embellished by white water-lilies, as are the minds of the pure by the
apprehension of truth. Brightly in the starry sky shone the moon with
undiminished orb, like the saintly being, who has reached the last stage
of bodily existence, in the company of the pious. The rivers and lakes
slowly retired from their banks, as the wise by degrees shrink from the
selfish attachment that connects them with wife and child. First
abandoned by the waters of the lake, the swans again began to
congregate, like false ascetics, whose devotions are interrupted, and
they are again assailed by innumerable afflictions. The ocean was still
and calm, and exhibited no undulations, like the perfect sage, who has
completed his course of restraint, and has acquired undisturbed
tranquillity of spirit. Every where the waters were as clear and pure as
the minds of the wise, who behold Vishńu in all things. The autumnal sky
was wholly free from clouds, like the heart of the ascetic, whose care's
have been consumed by the fire of devotion. The moon allayed the
fervours of the sun, as discrimination alleviates the pain to which
egotism gives birth. The clouds of the atmosphere, the muddiness of the
earth, the discoloration of the waters, were all removed by autumn, as
abstraction detaches the senses

<span id="page_523">p. 523</span>

from the objects of perception. The exercise of inspiring, suppressing,
and expiring the vital air, was as if performed daily by the waters of
the lakes (as they were full, and stationary, and then again
declined) <span id="fr_1485"></span>[1](#fn_1485).

At this season, when the skies were bright with stars, Krishńa,
repairing to Vraja, found all the cowherds busily engaged in preparing
for a sacrifice to be offered to Indra <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[2](#fn_1486); and going to the elders, he asked
them, as if out of curiosity, what festival of Indra it was in which
they took so much pleasure. Nanda replied to his question, and said,
"Śatakratu or Indra is the sovereign of the clouds and of the waters:
sent by him, the former bestow moisture upon the earth, whence springs
the grain, by which we and all embodied beings subsist; with which also,
and with water, we please the gods: hence too these cows bear calves,
and yield milk, and are happy, and well nourished. So when the clouds
are seen distended with rain, the earth is neither barren of corn, nor
bare of verdure, nor is man distressed by hunger. Indra, the giver of
water, having drank the milk of earth by the solar ray, sheds it again
upon the earth for the sustenance of all the world. On this account all
sovereign princes offer with pleasure sacrifices to Indra at the end of
the rains, and so also do we, and so do other people."

When Krishńa heard this speech from Nanda in regard to the worship of
Indra, he determined to put the king of the celestials into a

<span id="page_524">p. 524</span>

passion, and replied, "We, father, are neither cultivators of the soil,
nor dealers in merchandise; we are sojourners in forests, and cows are
our divinities. There are four branches of knowledge, logical,
scriptural, practical, and political <span
id="fr_1487"></span>[3](#fn_1487). Hear me describe what practical
science is. Agriculture, commerce, and tending of cattle; the knowledge
of these three professions constitutes practical science. Agriculture is
the subsistence of farmers; buying and selling, of traders. Kine are our
support. Thus the knowledge of means of support is threefold. The object
that is cultivated by any one should be to him as his chief divinity;
that should be venerated and worshipped, as it is his benefactor. He who
worships the deity of another, and diverts from him the reward that is
his due, obtains not a prosperous station either in this world or in the
next. Where the land ceases to be cultivated there are bounds assigned,
beyond which commences the forest; the forests are bounded by the hills,
and so far do our limits extend. We are not shut in with doors, nor
confined within walls; we have neither fields nor houses; we wander
about happily wherever we list, travelling in our waggons <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[4](#fn_1488). The spirits of these mountains, it is
said, walk the woods in whatever forms they will, or in their proper
persons sport upon their own precipices. If they should be displeased
with those who inhabit the forests, then, transformed to lions and
beasts of prey, they will kill the offenders. We then are bound to
worship the mountains; to offer sacrifices to cattle. What have we to do
with Indra? cattle and mountains are our gods. Brahmans offer worship
with prayer; cultivators of the earth adore their landmarks; but we who
tend our herds in the forests and mountains should worship them and our
kine. Let prayer and offerings then be addressed

<span id="page_525">p. 525</span>

to the mountain Govarddhana, and kill a victim in due form. Let the
whole station collect their milk without delay, and feed with it the
Brahmans and all who may desire to partake of it. When the oblations
have been presented, and the Brahmans have been fed, let the Gopas
circumambulate the cows, decorated with garlands of autumnal flowers. If
the cowherds will attend to these suggestions, they will secure the
favour of the mountain, of the cattle, and also mine."

When Nanda and the other Gopas heard these words of Krishńa, their faces
expanded with delight, and they said that he had spoken well. "You have
judged rightly, child," exclaimed they; "we will do exactly as you have
proposed, and offer adoration to the mountain." Accordingly the
inhabitants of Vraja worshipped the mountain, presenting to it curds and
milk and flesh; and they fed hundreds and thousands of Brahmans, and
many other guests, who came to the ceremony, even as Krishńa had
enjoined: and when they had made their offerings, they circumambulated
the cows and the bulls, that bellowed as loud as roaring clouds. Upon
the summit of Govarddhana, Krishńa presented himself, saying, "I am the
mountain," and partook of much food presented by the Gopas; whilst in
his own form as Krishńa he ascended the hill along with the cowherds,
and worshipped his other self <span id="fr_1489"></span>[5](#fn_1489).
Having promised them many blessings, the mountain-person of Krishńa
vanished; and the ceremony being completed, the cowherds returned to
their station.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[523:1](vp127.htm#fr_1485) A set of very poor
quibbles upon the terms of the Práńáyáma: or, Púrańa, drawing in the
breath through one nostril; literally, 'filling:' Kumbhaka, closing the
nostrils, and suppressing the breath; keeping it stationary or confined,
as it were in a Kumbha, or waterpot: and Rechaka, opening the other
nostril, and emitting the breath; literally, 'purging' or 'depletion.'
The waters of the reservoirs, replenished in the beginning of the
autumnal season by the previous rains, remain for a while full, until
they are drawn off for irrigation, or reduced by evaporation: thus
representing the three operations of Púrańa, Kumbhaka, and Rechaka.

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[523:2](vp127.htm#fr_1486) No public worship
is offered to Indra at present; and the only festival in the Hindu
kalendar, the Śakradhwajotthána, the erection of a flag in honour of
Śakra or Indra, should be held on the twelfth or thirteenth of Bhádra,
which is in the very middle of the rainy season; according to the Tithi
Tatwa, following the authority of the Káliká and Bhavishyottara Puráńas.
The Śakradhwajotthána is also a rite to be performed by kings and
princes. It may be doubted, therefore, if the text intends any
particular or appointed celebration.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[524:3](vp127.htm#fr_1487) Or, Ánvíkshikí, the
science of inquiring by reasoning, Tarka, or logic: Trayí, the three
Vedas collectively, or the doctrines they teach: Várttá, rendered
'practical,' is the knowledge of the means of acquiring subsistence: the
fourth is Dańd́aníti, the science of government, both domestic and
foreign.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[524:4](vp127.htm#fr_1488) These nomadic
habits are entirely lost sight of in the parallel passages of those
Puráńas in which the juvenile life of Krishńa is narrated. The text of
the Hari Vanśa is in most of the other verses precisely the same as that
of the Vishńu P., putting however into the mouth of Krishńa a long
additional eulogium on the season of autumn.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[525:5](vp127.htm#fr_1489) The Hari Vanśa
says, 'an illusory Krishńa, having become the mountain, ate the flesh
that was offered.' Of course the 'personified' mountain is intended, as
appears from several of the ensuing passages; as for instance, he says
presently, 'I am satisfied; and then in his divine form he smiled.' The
Hari Vanśa affords here, as in so many other places, proofs of its
Dakhini origin. It is very copious upon the homage paid to the cattle,
and their decoration with garlands and plumes of peacocks' feathers, of
which our text takes no notice. But in the south of India there is a
very popular festival, that of the Punjal, scarcely known in the north,
when cattle are decorated and worshipped; a celebration which has no
doubt suggested to the compiler of the Hari Vanśa the details which he
describes.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI](vp128)
