[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp121)  [Next](vp123) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_506">p. 506</span>

### CHAP. V.

Nanda returns with the infants Krishńa and Balaráma to Gokula. Pútaná
killed by the former. Prayers of Nanda and Yaśodá.

WHEN Vasudeva was set at liberty, he went to the waggon of Nanda, and
found Nanda there rejoicing that a son was born to him <span
id="fr_1468"></span>[1](#fn_1468). Vasudeva spake to him kindly, and
congratulated him on having a son in his old age. "The yearly tribute,"
he added, "has been paid to the king, and men of property should not
tarry near the court, when the business that brought them there has been
transacted. Why do you delay, now that your affairs are settled? Up,
Nanda, quickly, and set off to your own pastures; and let this boy, the
son whom Rohińí has borne me, accompany you, and be brought up by you as
this your own son." Accordingly Nanda and the other cowherds, their
goods being placed in their waggons, and their taxes having been paid to
the king, returned to their village.

Some time after they were settled at Gokula, the female fiend Pútaná,
the child-killer, came thither by night, and finding the little Krishńa
asleep, took him up, and gave him her breast to suck <span
id="fr_1469"></span>[2](#fn_1469). Now whatever child is suckled in the
night by Pútaná instantly dies; but Krishńa, laying hold of the breast
with both hands, sucked it with such violence, that he drained it of the
life; and the hideous Pútaná, roaring aloud, and giving way in every
joint, fell on the ground expiring. The inhabitants of Vraja awoke in
alarm at the cries of the fiend, ran to the spot, and beheld Pútaná
lying on the earth, and Krishńa in her arms. Yaśodá snatching up
Krishńa, waved over him a cow-tail brush to guard him from harm, whilst
Nanda placed dried cow-dung powdered upon his

<span id="page_507">p. 507</span>

head; he gave him also an amulet <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[3](#fn_1470), saying at the same time, "May Hari,
the lord of all beings without reserve, protect you; he from the lotus
of whose navel the world was developed, and on the tip of whose tusks
the globe was upraised from the waters. May that Keśava, who assumed the
form of a boar, protect thee. May that Keśava, who, as the man-lion,
rent with his sharp nails the bosom of his foe, ever protect thee. May
that Keśava, who, appearing first as the dwarf, suddenly traversed in
all his might, with three paces, the three regions of the universe,
constantly defend thee. May Govinda guard thy head; Keśava thy neck;
Vishńu thy belly; Janárddana thy legs and feet; the eternal and
irresistible Náráyańa thy face, thine arms, thy mind, and faculties of
sense. May all ghosts, goblins, and spirits malignant and unfriendly,
ever fly thee, appalled by the bow, the discus, mace, and sword of
Vishńu, and the echo of his shell. May Vaikunt́ha guard thee in the
cardinal points; and in the intermediate ones, Madhusúdana. May
Rishikeśa defend thee in the sky, and Mahídhara upon earth." Having
pronounced this prayer to avert all evil, Nanda put the child to sleep
in his bed underneath the waggon. Beholding the vast carcass of Pútaná,
the cowherds were filled with astonishment and terror.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[506:1](vp122.htm#fr_1468) It is literally
'went to the cart' or 'waggon;' as if Nanda and his family dwelt in such
a vehicle, as the Scythians are said to have done. The commentator
explains Śakat́a 'the place of loosing or unharnessing the waggon.' In
the Bhágavata, Vasudeva does not quit Mathurá, but goes to the halting
ground of Nanda, who has come to that city to pay his taxes: explained
by the comment.

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[506:2](vp122.htm#fr_1469) In the Hari Vanśa
this female fiend is described as coming in the shape of a bird.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[507:3](vp122.htm#fr_1470) The Rakshá, the
preserver, or preservative against charms, is a piece of thread or silk,
or some more costly material, bound round the wrist or arm, with an
appropriate prayer such as that in the text. Besides its application to
children, to avert the effects of evil eyes, or to protect them against
Dains or witches, there is one day in the year, the Rákhí Purnimá, or
full moon in the month of Śravan (July--August), when it is bound upon
the wrists of adults by friendly or kindred Brahmans, with a short
prayer or benediction. The Rákhí is also sent sometimes by persons of
distinction, and especially by females, to members of a different
family, or even race and nation, to intimate a sort of brotherly or
sisterly adoption. Tod's Rajasthan, I. 312.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI](vp123)
