[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp123)  [Next](vp125) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_512">p. 512</span>

### CHAP. VII.

Krishńa combats the serpent Kálíya: alarm of his parents and companions:
he overcomes the serpent, and is propitiated by him: commands him to
depart from the Yamuná river to the ocean.

ONE day Krishńa, unaccompanied by Ráma, went to Vrindavan: he was
attended by a troop of cowherds, and gaily decorated with wild flowers.
On his way he came to the Yamuná, which was flowing in sportive
undulations, and sparkling with foam, as if with smiles, as the waves
dashed against the borders. Within its bed, however, was the fearful
pool of the serpent Kálíya, boiling with the fires of poison <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1](#fn_1476); from the fumes of which, large trees
upon the bank were blighted, and by whose waters, when raised by a gale
into the air, birds were scorched. Beholding this dreadful lake, which
was like another mouth of death, Madhusúdana reflected that the wicked
and poisonous Kálíya, who had been vanquished by himself (in the person
of Garud́a), and had been obliged to fly from the ocean (where he had
inhabited the island Ramańaka), must be lurking at its bottom, and
defiling the Yamuná, the consort of the sea, so that neither men nor
cattle could slake their thirst by her waters. Such being the case, he
determined to dislodge the Nága, and enable the dwellers of Vraja to
frequent the vicinage without fear; for it was the especial purpose he
considered of his descent upon earth to reduce to subjection all such
violators of law. "Here," thought he, "is a Kadamba tree, which is
sufficiently near; I can climb up it, and thence leap into the serpent's
pool." Having thus resolved, he bound his clothes tightly about him, and
jumped boldly into the lake of the serpent-king. The waters, agitated by
his plunge amidst them, were scattered to a considerable distance from
the bank, and the spray falling upon the trees, they were immediately
set on fire by the heat of the

<span id="page_513">p. 513</span>

poisonous vapour combined with the water; and the whole horizon was in a
blaze. Krishńa, having dived into the pool, struck his arms in
defiance <span id="fr_1477"></span>[3](#fn_1477), and the snake-king,
hearing the sound, quickly came forth: his eyes were coppery red, and
his hoods were flaming with deadly venom: he was attended by many other
powerful and poisonous snakes, feeders upon air, and by hundreds of
serpent-nymphs, decorated with rich jewels, whose earrings glittered
with trembling radiance as the wearers moved along. Coiling themselves
around Krishńa, they all bit him with teeth from which fiery poison was
emitted. Krishńa's companions, beholding him in the lake, encompassed by
the snakes, twining around him, ran off to Vraja, lamenting and
bewailing aloud his fate. "Krishńa," they called out, "has foolishly
plunged into the serpent's pool, and is there bitten to death by the
snake-king! Come and see." The cowherds and their wives and Yaśodá,
hearing this news, which was like a thunderbolt, ran immediately to the
pool, frightened out of their senses, and crying, "Alas! alas! where is
he?" The Gopís were retarded by Yaśodá, who in her agitation stumbled
and slipped at every step; but Nanda and the cowherds and the invincible
Ráma hastened to the banks of the Yamuná, eager to assist Krishńa. There
they beheld him apparently in the power of the serpent-king, encompassed
by twining snakes, and making no effort to escape. Nanda, as soon as he
set his eyes upon his son, became senseless; and Yaśodá also, when she
beheld him, lost all consciousness. The Gopís, overcome with sorrow,
wept, and called affectionately, and with convulsive sobs, upon Keśava.
"Let us all," said they, "plunge with Yaśodá into the fearful pool of
the serpent-king. We cannot return to Vraja; for what is day, without
the sun? what night, without the moon? what is a herd of heifers,
without its lord? what is Vraja, without Krishńa? Deprived of him, we
will go no more to Gokula. The forest will lose its delights; it will be
like a lake without water. When this dark lotus leaf complexioned Hari
is not present, there is no joy in the maternal dwelling. How strange is
this! And as for you, ye cowherds, how, poor beings, will you live
amidst the pastures, when you no longer

<span id="page_514">p. 514</span>

behold the brilliant lotus eyes of Hari? Our hearts have been wiled away
by the music of his voice. We will not go without Puńd́aríkáksha to the
folds of Nanda. Even now, though held in the coils of the serpent-king,
see, friends, hew his face brightens with smiles as we gaze upon him."

When the mighty son of Rohińí, Balaráma, heard these exclamations of the
Gopís, and with disdainful glance beheld the cowherds overcome with
terror, Nanda gazing fixedly upon the countenance of his son, and Yaśodá
unconscious, he spake to Krishńa in his own character: "What is this, O
god of gods! the quality of mortal is sufficiently assumed; dost thou
not know thyself eternal? Thou art the centre of creation, as the nave
is of the spokes of a wheel. A portion of thee have I also been born, as
thy senior. The gods, to partake of thy pastimes as man, have all
descended under a like disguise; and the goddesses have come down to
Gokula to join in thy sports. Thou, eternal, hast last of all appeared
below. Wherefore, Krishńa, dost thou disregard these divinities, who, as
cowherds, are thy friends and kin? these sorrowing females, who also are
thy relations? Thou hast put on the character of man; thou hast
exhibited the tricks of childhood: now let this fierce snake, though
armed with venomed fangs, be subdued (by thy celestial vigour)."

Thus reminded of his real character by Ráma, Krishńa smiled gently, and
speedily extricated himself from the coils of the snakes. Laying hold of
the middle hood of their chief with both his hands, he bent it down, and
set his foot upon the hitherto unbended head, and danced upon it in
triumph. Wherever the snake attempted to raise his head, it was again
trodden down, and many bruises were inflicted on the hood by the
pressure of the toes of Krishńa. Trampled upon by the feet of Krishńa,
as they changed position in the dance, the snake fainted, and vomited
forth much blood <span id="fr_1478"></span>[3](#fn_1478). Beholding the
head and neck of their lord thus injured, and the blood flowing from his
mouth, the females of the snake-king implored the clemency of
Madhusúdana. "Thou art recognised,

<span id="page_515">p. 515</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> O god of gods!"
they exclaimed; "thou art the sovereign of all; thou art light supreme,
inscrutable; thou art the mighty lord, the portion of that supreme
light. The gods themselves are unable worthily to praise thee, the lord
self-existent: how then shall females proclaim thy nature? How shall we
fully declare him of whom the egg of Brahmá, made up of earth, sky,
water, fire, and air, is but a small portion of a part? Holy sages have
in vain sought to know thy eternal essence. We bow to that form which is
the most subtile of atoms, the largest of the large; to him whose birth
is without a creator, whose end knows no destroyer, and who alone is the
cause of duration. There is no wrath in thee; for thine is the
protection of the world; and hence this chastisement of Kálíya. Yet hear
us. Women are to be regarded with pity by the virtuous: animals are
humanely treated even by fools. Let therefore the author of wisdom have
compassion upon this poor creature. Thyself, as an oviparous, hooded
snake, art the upholder of the world. Oppressed by thee, he will
speedily perish. What is this feeble serpent, compared to thee in whom
the universe reposes? Friendship and enmity are felt towards equals and
superiors, not for those infinitely beneath us. Then, sovereign of the
world, have mercy upon us. This unfortunate snake is about to expire:
give us, as a gift of charity, our husband."

When they had thus spoken, the Nága himself, almost exanimate, repeated
feebly their solicitations for mercy. "Forgive me," the murmured, "O god
of gods! How shall I address thee, who art possessed, through thine own
strength and essence, of the eight great faculties, in energy
unequalled? Thou art the supreme, the progenitor of the supreme
(Brahmá): thou art the supreme spirit, and from thee the supreme
proceeds: thou art beyond all finite objects; how can I speak thy
praise? How can I declare his greatness, from whom cone Brahmá, Rudra,
Chandra, Indra, the Maruts, the Aswins, the Vasus, and Ádityas; of whom
the whole world is an infinitely small portion, a portion destined to
represent his essence; and whose nature, primitive or derived, Brahmá
and the immortals do not comprehend? How can I approach him, to whom the
gods offer incense and flowers culled from the groves of Nandana; whose
incarnate forms the king of the deities ever adores, unconscious of his
real person; whom the sages, that have withdrawn

<span id="page_516">p. 516</span>

their senses from all external objects, worship in thought, and
enshrining his image in the purposes of their hearts, present to it the
flowers of sanctity <span id="fr_1479"></span>[4](#fn_1479)? I am quite
unable, O god of gods, to worship or to hymn thee. Thy own clemency must
alone influence thy mind to shew me compassion. It is the nature of
snakes to be savage, and I am born of their kind: hence this is my
nature, not mine offence. The world is created, as it is destroyed, by
thee; and the species, form, and nature of all things in the world are
thy work. Even such as thou hast created me in kind, in form, and in
nature, such I am, and such are my actions: should I act differently,
then indeed should I deserve thy punishment, for so thou hast
declared <span id="fr_1480"></span>[5](#fn_1480). Yet that I have been
punished by thee is indeed a blessing; for punishment from thee alone is
a favour. Behold I am now without strength, without poison; deprived of
both by thee. Spare me my life; I ask no more. Command me what I shall
do."

Being thus addressed by Kálíya, Krishńa replied, "You must not tarry
here, nor any where in the stream of the Yamuná; depart immediately,
with your family and followers, to the sea; where Garud́a, the foe of the
serpent race, will not harm you, when he sees the impressions of my feet
upon your brow." So saying, Hari set the snake-king at liberty, who,
bowing reverentially to his victor, departed to the ocean; abandoning,
in the sight of all, the lake he had haunted, accompanied by all his
females, children, and dependants. When the snake was gone, the Gopas
hailed Govinda, as one risen from the dead, and embraced him, and bathed
his forehead with tears of joy: others, contemplating the water of the
river, now freed from peril, were filled with wonder, and sang the
praise of Krishńa, who is unaffected by works. Thus eminent by his
glorious exploits, and eulogized by the Gopas and Gopas, Krishńa
returned to Vraja.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[512:1](vp124.htm#fr_1476) The commentator
says this means nothing more than that the waters of the pool were hot.
I do not know if hot springs have been found in the bed or on the
borders of the Jumna: the hot well of Sita-kund, near Mongir, is not far
from the Ganges.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[513:3](vp124.htm#fr_1477) Slapping the upper
part of one arm with the hand of the other is a common act of defiance
amongst Indian athletæ.

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[514:3](vp124.htm#fr_1478) The expressions are
\#\#\# and \#\#\# and Rechaka and Dańd́apáta, which are said to be
different dispositions of the feet in dancing; variations of the bhrama
or pirouette; the latter is the a-plomb or descent. It is also read
Dańd́apáda-nipáta, the falling of the feet, like that of a club.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[516:4](vp124.htm#fr_1479) Bháva-pushpas:
there are said to be eight such flowers, clemency, self-restraint,
tenderness, patience, resignation, devotion, meditation, and truth.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[516:5](vp124.htm#fr_1480) Both in the Vedas
and in the institutes of law; where it is enjoined that every one shall
discharge the duties of his caste and condition, and any deviation from
them merits punishment; as by the texts 'In following prohibited
observances, a person is punishable' and 'Who does acts unsuited to his
natural disposition, incurs guilt.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII](vp125)
