[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp120)  [Next](vp122) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_504">p. 504</span>

### CHAP. IV.

Kansa addresses his friends, announces their danger, and orders male
children to be put to death.

KANSA, much troubled in mind, summoned all his principal Asuras,
Pralamba, Keśin, and the rest, and said to them, "O valiant chiefs,
Pralamba, Keśin, Dhenuka, Pútaná, Arisht́a, and all the rest of you, hear
my words. The vile and contemptible denizens of heaven are assiduously
plotting against my life, for they dread my prowess: but, heroes, I hold
them of no account. What can the impotent Indra, or the ascetic Hara,
perform? or what can Hari accomplish, except the murder of his foes by
fraud? What have we to fear from the Ádityas, the Vasus, the Agnis, or
any others of the immortals, who have all been vanquished by my
resistless arms? Have I not seen the king of the gods, when he had
ventured into the conflict, quickly retreat from the field, receiving my
shafts upon his back, not bravely upon his breast? When in resentment he
withheld the fertilizing showers from my kingdom, did not my arrows
compel the clouds to part with their waters, as much as were required?
Are not all the monarchs of the earth in terror of my prowess, and
subject to my orders, save only Jarásandha my sire <span
id="fr_1467"></span>[1](#fn_1467)? Now, chiefs of the Daitya race, it is
my determination to inflict still deeper degradation upon these
evil-minded and unprincipled gods. Let therefore every man who is
notorious for liberality (in gifts to gods and Brahmans), every man who
is remarkable for his celebration of sacrifices, be put to death, that
thus the gods shall be deprived of the means by which they subsist. T́he
goddess who has been born as the infant child of Devakí has announced to
me that he is again alive who in a former being was my death. Let
therefore active search be made for whatever young children there may be
upon earth, and let every boy in whom there are signs of unusual vigour
be slain without remorse."

Having issued these commands, Kansa retired into his palace, and
liberated Vasudeva and Devakí from their captivity. "It is in vain,"

<span id="page_505">p. 505</span>

said he to them, "that I have slain all your children, since after all
he who is destined to kill me has escaped. It is of no use to regret the
past. The children you may hereafter have may enjoy life unto its
natural close; no one shall cut it short." Having thus conciliated them,
Kansa, alarmed for himself, withdrew into the interior apartments of his
palace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[504:1](vp121.htm#fr_1467) Jarásandha, prince
of Magadhá, was the father-in-law of Kansa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V](vp122)
