[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp132)  [Next](vp134) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_539">p. 539</span>

### CHAP. XVI.

Keśin, in the form of a horse, slain by Krishńa: he is praised by
Nárada.

KEŚIN, confiding in his prowess, having received the commands of Kansa,
set off to the woods of Vrindávana, with the intention of destroying
Krishńa. He came in the shape of a steed, spurning the earth with his
hoofs, scattering the clouds with his mane, and springing in his paces
beyond the orbits of the sun and moon. The cowherds and their females,
hearing his neighings, were struck with terror, and fled to Govinda for
protection, calling upon him to save them. In a voice deep as the
roaring of the thundercloud, Krishńa replied to them, "Away with these
fears of Keśin; is the valour of a hero annihilated by your alarms? What
is there to apprehend from one of such little might, whose neighings are
his only terrors; a galloping and vicious steed, who is ridden by the
strength of the Daityas? Come on, wretch--I am Krishńa--and I will knock
all thy teeth down thy throat, as the wielder of the trident did to
Púshan <span id="fr_1499"></span>[1](#fn_1499)." Thus defying him to
combat, Govinda went to encounter Keśin. The demon ran upon him, with
his mouth opened wide; but Krishńa enlarging the bulk of his arm, thrust
it into his mouth, and wrenched out the teeth, which fell from his jaws
like fragments of white clouds. Still the arm of Krishńa, in the throat
of the demon, continued to enlarge, like a malady increasing from its
commencement till it ends in dissolution. From his torn lips the demon
vomited foam and blood; his eyes rolled in agony; his joints gave way;
he beat the earth with his feet; his body was covered with perspiration;
he became incapable of any effort. The formidable demon, having his
mouth rent open by the arm of Krishńa, fell down, torn asunder like a
tree struck by lightning: he lay separated into two portions, each
having two legs, half a back, half a tail, one ear, one eye, and one
nostril. Krishńa stood, unharmed and smiling, after the destruction of
the demon, surrounded by the cowherds, who, together with their women,
were filled with astonishment at

<span id="page_540">p. 540</span>

the death of Keśin, and glorified the amiable god with the lotus eyes.
Nárada the Brahman, invisible, seated in a cloud, beheld the fall of
Keśin, and delightedly exclaimed, "Well done, lord of the universe, who
in thy sports hast destroyed Keśin, the oppressor of the denizens of
heaven! Curious to behold this great combat between a man and a
horse--such a one as was never before heard of--I have come from heaven.
Wonderful are the works that thou hast done, in thy descent upon the
earth! they have excited my astonishment; but this, above all, has given
me pleasure. Indra and the gods lived in dread of this horse, who tossed
his mane, and neighed, and looked down upon the clouds. For this, that
thou hast slain the impious Keśin, thou shalt be known in the world by
the name of Keśava <span id="fr_1500"></span>[2](#fn_1500). Farewell: I
will now depart. I shall meet thee again, conqueror of Keśin, in two
days more, in conflict with Kansa. When the son of Ugrasena, with his
followers, shall have been slain, then, upholder of the earth, will
earth's burdens have been lightened by thee. Many are the battles of the
kings that I have to see, in which thou shalt be renowned. I will now
depart, Govinda. A great deed, and acceptable to the gods, has been done
by thee. I have been much delighted with thee, and now take my leave."
When Nárada had gone, Krishńa, not in any way surprised, returned with
the Gopas to Gokula; the sole object of the eyes of the women of
Vraja <span id="fr_1501"></span>[3](#fn_1501).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[539:1](vp133.htm#fr_1499) As Vírabhadra did
to Púshá or Púshan, a form of Súrya, at the sacrifice of Daksha: see [p.
67](vp043.htm#page_67). n. [6](vp043.htm#fn_226).

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[540:2](vp133.htm#fr_1500) Or Keśi and va,
'who kills,' from vadh or badh, 'to kill:' but this is a Pauráńik
etymology, and less satisfactory than the usual grammatical one of Keśa,
'hair,' and 'va' possessive affix: Krishńa corresponding in this respect
to the Apollo Crinitus. It is also derived from the legend of his origin
from 'a hair' (see [p. 497](vp118.htm#page_497). n.
[23](vp118.htm#fn_1460)): and again, Keśa is said to purport 'radiance'
or 'rays,' whether of the sun or moon or fire; all which are the light
of Krishńa: whence he is called Keśava, 'the rayed' or 'radiant.'
Mahábhárata, Moksha Dharma.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[540:3](vp133.htm#fr_1501) The legend is told
by all the other narrators of Krishńa's juvenile exploits.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVII](vp134)
