[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp140)  [Next](vp142) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_569">p. 569</span>

### CHAP. XXIV.

Muchukunda goes to perform penance. Krishńa takes the army and treasures
of Kálayavana, and repairs with them to Dwáraká. Balaráma visits Vraja:
inquiries of its inhabitants after Krishńa.

THUS praised by the wise Muchukunda, the sovereign of all things, the
eternal lord, Hari, said to him, "Go to whatever celestial regions you
wish, lord of men, possessed of might irresistible, honoured by my
favour. When you have fully enjoyed all heavenly pleasures, you shall be
born in a distinguished family, retaining the recollection of your
former births; and you shall finally obtain emancipation." Having heard
this promise, and prostrated himself before Achyuta, the lord of the
world, Muchukunda, went forth from the cave, and beholding men of
diminutive stature, now first knew that the Kali age had arrived. The
king therefore departed to Gandhamádana, the shrine of Narańáráyańa, to
perform penance.

Krishńa having by this stratagem destroyed his enemy, returned to
Mathurá, and took captive his army, rich in horses, elephants and cars,
which he conducted to Dwáraká, and delivered to Ugrasena, and the Yadu
race was relieved from all fear of invasion. Baladeva, when hostilities
had entirely ceased, being desirous of seeing his kinsmen, went to
Nanda's cow-pens, and there again conversed with the herdsmen and their
females, with affection and respect. By some, the elders, he was
embraced; others, the juniors, he embraced; and with those of his own
age, male or female, he talked and laughed. The cowherds made many kind
speeches to Halayudha; but some of the Gopís spoke to him with the
affectation of anger, or with feelings of jealousy, as they inquired
after the loves of Krishńa with the women of Mathurá. "Is all well with
the fickle and inconstant Krishńa?" said they: "Does the volatile swain,
the friend of an instant, amuse the women of the city by laughing at our
rustic efforts (to please him)? Does he ever think of us, singing in
chorus to his songs? Will he not come here once again to see his mother?
But why talk of these things? it is a different tale to tell for

<span id="page_570">p. 570</span>

him without us, and for us without him. Father, mother, brother,
husband, kin, what have we not abandoned for his sake? but he is a
monument of ingratitude. Yet tell us, does not Krishńa talk of coming
here? Falsehood is never, O Krishńa, to be uttered by thee. Verily this
is Dámodara, this is Govinda, who has given up his heart to the damsels
of the city, who has no longer any regard for us, but looks upon us with
disdain." So saying, the Gopís, whose minds were fixed on Krishńa,
addressed Ráma in his place, calling him Dámodara and Govinda, and
laughed and were merry; and Ráma consoled them by communicating to them
agreeable, modest, affectionate, and gentle messages from Krishńa. With
the cowherds he talked mirthfully, as he had been wont to do, and
rambled along with them over the lands of Vraja <span
id="fr_1529"></span>[1](#fn_1529).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1529"></span>[570:1](vp141.htm#fr_1529) This visit of
Balaráma to Vraja is placed by the Hari Vanśa anterior to the fall of
Mathurá; by the Bhágavata, long subsequent to the establishment of the
Yadus at Dwáraká.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV](vp142)
