[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp139)  [Next](vp141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_565">p. 565</span>

### CHAP. XXIII.

Birth of Kálayavana: he advances against Mathurá. Krishńa builds
Dwáraká, and sends thither the Yádava tribe: he leads Kálayavana into
the cave of Muchukunda: the latter awakes, consumes the Yavana king, and
praises Krishńa.

PARÁŚARA.--Śyála having called Gárgya the Brahman, whilst at the
cow-pens, impotent, in an assembly of the Yádavas, they all laughed; at
which he was highly offended, and repaired to the shores of the western
sea, where he engaged in arduous penance to obtain a son, who should be
a terror to the tribe of Yadu. Propitiating Mahádeva, and living upon
iron sand for twelve years, the deity at last was pleased with him, and
gave him the desired boon. The king of the Yavanas, who was childless,
became the friend of Gárgya; and the latter begot a son by his wife, who
was as black as a bee, and was thence called Kálayavana <span
id="fr_1525"></span>[1](#fn_1525). The Yavana king having placed his
son, whose breast was as hard as the point of the thunderbolt, upon the
throne, retired to the woods. Inflated with conceit of his prowess,
Kálayavana demanded of Nárada who were the most mighty heroes on earth.
To which the sage answered, "The Yádavas." Accordingly Kálayavana
assembled many myriads of Mlechchhas and barbarians <span
id="fr_1526"></span>[2](#fn_1526), and with a vast armament of

<span id="page_566">p. 566</span>

elephants, cavalry, chariots, and foot, advanced impatiently against
Mathurá and the Yádavas; wearying every day the animal that carried him,
but insensible of fatigue himself.

When Krishńa knew of his approach, he reflected that if the Yádavas
encountered the Yavana, they would be so much weakened by the conflict,
that they would then be overcome by the king of Magadhá; that their
force was much reduced by the war with Magadhá, whilst that of
Kálayavana was unbroken; and that the enemy might be therefore
victorious. Thus the Yádavas were exposed to a double danger. He
resolved therefore to construct a citadel for the Yadu tribe, that
should not be easily taken; one that even women might defend, and in
which therefore the heroes of the house of Vrishńi should be secure; one
in which the male combatants of the Yádavas should dread no peril,
though he himself should be drunk or careless, asleep or abroad. Thus
reflecting, Krishńa solicited a space of twelve furlongs from the ocean,
and there he built the city of Dwáraka <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[3](#fn_1527), defended by high ramparts, and
beautified with gardens and reservoirs of water, crowded with houses and
buildings, and splendid as the capital of Indra, Amarávatí. Thither
Janárddana conducted the inhabitants of Mathurá, and then awaited at
that city the approach of Kálayavana.

When the hostile army encamped round Mathura, Krishńa unarmed went
forth, and beheld the Yavana king. Kálayavana, the strong-armed,
recognizing Vásudeva, pursued him; him whom the thoughts of perfect
ascetics cannot overtake. Thus pursued, Krishńa entered a large cavern,
where Muchukunda, the king of men, was asleep. The rash Yavana entering
the cave, and beholding a man lying asleep there, concluded it

<span id="page_567">p. 567</span>

must be Krishńa, and kicked him; at which Muchukunda awoke, and casting
on him an angry glance, the Yavana was instantly consumed, and reduced
to ashes. For in a battle between the gods and demons, Muchukunda had
formerly contributed to the defeat of the latter; and, being overcome
with sleep, he solicited of the gods as a boon that he should enjoy a
long repose. "Sleep long and soundly," said the gods; "and whoever
disturbs you shall be instantly burnt to ashes by fire emanating from
your body <span id="fr_1528"></span>[4](#fn_1528)."

Having burnt up the iniquitous Yavana, and beholding the foe of Madhu,
Muchukunda asked him who he was. "I am born," he replied, "in the lunar
race, in the tribe of Yadu, and am the son of Vasudeva." Muchukunda,
recollecting the prophecy of old Garga, fell down before the lord of
all, Hari, saying, "Thou art known, supreme lord, to be a portion of
Vishńu; for it was said of old by Garga, that at the end of the
twenty-eighth Dwápara age Hari would be born in the family of Yadu. Thou
art he, without doubt, the benefactor of mankind; for thy glory I am
unable to endure. Thy words are of deeper tone than the muttering of the
rain cloud; and earth sinks down beneath the pressure of thy feet. As in
the battle between the gods and demons the Asuras were unable to sustain
my lustre, so even am I incapable of bearing thy radiance. Thou alone
art the refuge of every living being who has lighted on the world. Do
thou, who art the alleviator of all distress, shew favour upon me, and
remove from me all that is evil. Thou art the oceans, the mountains, the
rivers, the forests: thou art earth, sky, air, water, and fire: thou art
mind, intelligence, the unevolved principle, the vital airs, the lord of
life--the soul; all that is beyond the soul; the all-pervading; exempt
from the vicissitudes of birth; devoid of sensible

<span id="page_568">p. 568</span>

properties, sound and the like; undecaying, illimitable, imperishable,
subject neither to increase nor diminution: thou art that which is
Brahma, without beginning or end. From thee the immortals, the
progenitors, the Yakshas, Gandharbhas, and Kinnaras, the Siddhas, the
nymphs of heaven, men, animals, birds, deer, reptiles, and all the;,
vegetable world, proceed; and all that has been, or will be, or is now,
moveable or fixed. All that is amorphous or has form, all that is
subtile, gross, stable, or moveable, thou art, O creator of the world;
and beside thee there is not any thing. O lord, I have been whirled
round in the circle of worldly existence for ever, and have suffered the
three classes of affliction, and there is no rest whatever. I have
mistaken pains for pleasures, like sultry vapours for a pool of water;
and their enjoyment has yielded me nothing but sorrow. The earth,
dominion, forces, treasures, friends, children, wife, dependants, all
the objects of sense, have I possessed, imagining them to be sources of
happiness; but I found that in their changeable nature, O lord, they
were nothing but vexation. The gods themselves, though high in heaven,
were in need of my alliance. Where then is everlasting repose? Who
without adoring thee, who art the origin of all worlds, shall attain, O
supreme deity, that rest which endures for ever? Beguiled by thy
delusions, and ignorant of thy nature, men, after suffering the various
penalties of birth, death, and infirmity, behold the countenance of the
king of ghosts, and suffer in hell dreadful tortures, the reward of
their own deeds. Addicted to sensual objects, through thy delusions I
revolve in the whirpool of selfishness and pride; and hence I come to
thee, as my final refuge, who art the lord deserving of all homage, than
whom there is no other asylum; my mind afflicted with repentance for my
trust in the world, and desiring the fulness of felicity, emancipation
from all existence."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[565:1](vp140.htm#fr_1525) This legend of the
origin of Kálayavana is given also by the Hari Vanśa. The Bhágavata,
like our text, comes [at](errata.htm#23) once to the siege of Mathurá by
this chief; but the Hari Vanśa suspends the story, for more than thirty
chapters, to narrate an origin of the Yádavas, and sundry adventures of
Krishńa and Ráma to the south-west. Most of these have no other
authority, and are no doubt inventions of the Dakhini compiler; and the
others are misplaced.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[565:2](vp140.htm#fr_1526) So the Bhágavata
describes him as leading a host of Mlechchhas, or barbarians, against
Krishńa; but in the Mahábhárata, Sabhá Parvan, vol. I. p. 330, where
Krishńa describes the power of Jarásandha, he admits that he and the
Yádavas fled from Mathurá to the west, through fear of that king, but no
account is given of any siege of Mathurá by Kálayavana. The only
indication of such a person is the mention that Bhagadatta, the Yavana
king, who rules over Muru and Naraka in the west and south, is one of
his most attached feudatories. This king is in various other places
called king of Prágjyotish, as he is in a subsequent passage of the same
book, Sabhá P., p. 374; and this name is always applied to the <span
id="page_566">p. 566</span> the west of Asam. His subjects are, however,
still Yavanas and Mlechchhas, and he presents horses, caps set with
jewels, and swords with ivory hilts; articles scarcely to be found in
Asam, which cannot well be the seat of his sovereignty. It seems most
likely therefore that the story may have originated in some knowledge of
the power and position of the Greek-Bactrian princes, or their Scythian
successors, although in the latter compilations it has been mixed up
with allusions to the first Mohammedan aggressions. See As. Res. V. 506
and XV. 100.

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[566:3](vp140.htm#fr_1527) According to the
Mahábhárata, he only enlarged and fortified the ancient city of
Kuśasthalí, founded by Raivata. Sabhá P.: see also [p.
356](vp093.htm#page_356) of our text.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[567:4](vp140.htm#fr_1528) The name of
Muchukunda, as one of the sons of Mańd́hátri, occurs [p.
363](vp094.htm#page_363); but no further notice is taken of him. The
Bhágavata specifies his being the son of that king, and relates the same
story of his long sleep as the text. The same occurs in the Hari Vanśa.
The general character of the legends in this chapter is that of
reference to something familiar, rather than its narration. In the Hari
Vanśa the opposite extreme is observable, and there the legends are as
prolix as here they are concise. The Bhágavata follows a middle course;
but it seems unlikely that in either of the three we have the original
fables.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVI](vp141)
