[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp151)  [Next](vp153) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_601">p. 601</span>

### CHAP. XXXV.

Śámba carries off the daughter of Duryodhana, but is taken prisoner.
Balaráma comes to Hastinápur, and demands his liberation: it is refused:
in his wrath he drags the city towards him, to throw it into the river.
The Kuru chiefs give up Śámba and his wife.

MAITREYA.--I have a great desire to hear, excellent Brahman, some
further account of the exploits of Balaráma. You have related to me his
dragging the Yamuná, and other mighty deeds, but you can tell me,
venerable sir, some other of his acts.

PARÁŚARA.--Attend, Maitreya, to the achievements performed by Ráma, who
is the eternal, illimitable Śesha, the upholder of the earth. At the
choice of a husband by the daughter of Duryodhana, the princess was
carried off by the hero Śámba, the son of Jámbavatí. Being pursued by
Duryodhana, Karńa, Bhíshma, Drońa, and other celebrated chiefs, who were
incensed at his audacity, he was defeated, and taken prisoner. When the
Yádavas heard of the occurrence, their wrath was kindled against
Duryodhana and his associates, and they prepared to take up arms against
them; but Baladeva, in accents interrupted by the effects of ebriety,
forbade them, and said, "I will go alone to the sons of Kuru; they will
liberate Śámba at my request." Accordingly he went to the
elephant-styled city (Hastinápur), but took up his abode in a grove
without the town, which he did not enter. When Duryodhana and the rest
heard that he had arrived there, they sent him a cow, a present of
fruits and flowers, and water. Bala received the offering in the
customary form, and said to the Kauravas, "Ugrasena commands you to set
Śámba at liberty." When Duryodhana, Karńa, Bhíshma, Drońa, and the
others, heard this, they were very angry; and Báhlíka and other friends
of the Kauravas, who looked upon the Yadu race as not entitled to regal
dignity, said to the wielder of the club, "What is this, Balabhadra,
that thou hast uttered? What Yádava shall give orders to the chiefs of
the family of Kuru? If Ugrasena issues his mandates to

<span id="page_602">p. 602</span>

the Kauravas, then we must take away the white umbrella that he has
usurped, and which is fit only for kings. Depart therefore, Balaráma;
you are entitled to our respect; but Śámba has been guilty of improper
conduct, and we will not liberate him either at Ugrasena's commands or
yours. The homage that is due to us, their superiors, by the Kukkura and
Andhaka tribes, may not be paid by them; but who ever heard of a command
issued by a servant to his master? Elevation to an equal seat has
rendered you arrogant. We have committed a great mistake in neglecting,
through our friendship for you, the policy (that teaches the danger of
treating the abject with deference). Our sending you to-day a respectful
present was an intimation of (personal) regard, which it was neither fit
for our race to have proffered, nor for your's to have expected."

Having thus spoken, the Kuru chiefs, unanimously refusing to set the son
of Hari at large, immediately returned into the city. Bala, rolling
about with intoxication, and the wrath which their contemptuous language
had excited, struck the ground furiously with his heel, so that it burst
to pieces with a loud sound that reverberated through the regions of
space. His eyes reddened with rage, and his brow was curved with frowns,
as he exclaimed, "What arrogance is this, in such vile and pithless
creatures! The sovereignty of the Kauravas, as well as our own, is the
work of fate, whose decree it also is that they now disrespect or
disobey the commands of Ugrasena. Indra may of right give his orders to
the gods; and Ugrasena exercises equal authority with the lord of Śachí.
Fie upon the pride that boasts a throne, the leavings of a hundred
mortals! Is not he the sovereign of the earth, the wives of whose
servants adorn themselves with the blossoms of the Párijáta tree?
Ugrasena shall be the undisputed king of kings; for I will not return to
his capital until I have rid the world wholly of the sons of Kuru. I
will destroy Karńa, Duryodhana, Drońa, Bhíshma, Báhlíka, Duhsáśana,
Bhúrisravas, Somadatta, Śalya, Bhíma, Arjuna,
[Yudhisht́hira](errata.htm#26), the twins, and all the other vile
descendants of Kuru, with their horses, elephants, and chariots. I will
rescue the hero Śámba from captivity, and carry him, along with his
wife, to Dwáraká, where I shall again behold Ugrasena

<span id="page_603">p. 603</span>

and the rest of my kin. Or, authorized by the king of the gods to remove
the burdens of the earth, I will take this capital of the Kauravas, with
all the sons of Kuru, and cast the city of the elephant into the
Bhágírathí."

So saying, the wielder of the club, Baladeva, his eyes red with rage,
plunged the blade of his ploughshare downwards, beneath the ramparts of
the city, and drew them towards him. When the Kauravas beheld
Hastinápura tottering, they were much alarmed, and called loudly on
Ráma, saying, "Ráma, Ráma! hold, hold! suppress your wrath! have mercy
upon us! Here is Śámba, and his wife also, delivered up to thee. Forgive
our sins, committed in ignorance of thy wondrous power." Accordingly,
issuing hurriedly from the city, the Kauravas delivered Śámba and his
bride to the mighty Balaráma, who, bowing to Bhíshma, Drońa, and Kripa,
who addressed him in conciliatory language, said, "I am satisfied;" and
so desisted. The city bears the marks of the shock it received, even to
the present day--such was the might of Ráma--proving both his strength
and prowess. The Kauravas then offering homage to Śámba and to Bala,
dismissed the former with his wife and a bridal portion <span
id="fr_1564"></span>[1](#fn_1564).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1564"></span>[603:1](vp152.htm#fr_1564) This adventure is
related in the Bhágavata, and very briefly noticed in the Hari Vanśa;
but I have not found any mention of it in the Mahábhárata. It may have
been suggested originally by Hastinápura having sustained some injury
either from an earthquake or from the encroachments of the river, which,
as is recorded, compelled the removal of the capital to Kausámbí ([p.
461](vp114.htm#page_461)).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVI](vp153)
