[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp157)  [Next](vp159) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_630">p. 630</span>

### CHAP. III.

Three different kinds of dissolution. Duration of a Parárddha. The
Clepsydra, or vessel for measuring time. The dissolution that occurs at
the end of a day of Brahmá.

THE dissolution of existing beings is of three kinds, incidental,
elemental, and absolute <span id="fr_1612"></span>[1](#fn_1612). The
incidental is that which relates to Brahmá, and occurs at the end of a
Kalpa: the elemental is that which takes place after two Parárddhas: the
absolute is final liberation from existence.

MAITREYA.--Tell me, excellent master, what is the enumeration of a
Parárddha, the expiration of two of which is the period of elemental
dissolution <span id="fr_1613"></span>[2](#fn_1613).

PARÁŚARA.--A Parárddha, Maitreya, is that number which occurs in the
eighteenth place of figures, enumerated according to the rule of decimal
notation <span id="fr_1614"></span>[3](#fn_1614). At the end of twice
that period elemental dissolution

<span id="page_631">p. 631</span>

occurs, when all the discrete products of nature are withdrawn into
their indiscrete source. The shortest period of time is a Mátrá, which
is equal to the twinkling of the human eye. Fifteen Mátrás make a
Kásht́há; thirty Kásht́hás, one Kalá; fifteen Kalás, one Nád́iká. A Nád́iká
is ascertained by a measure of water, with a vessel made of twelve Palas
and a half of copper, in the bottom of which there is to be a hole made
with a tube of gold, of the weight of four Máshas, and four inches
long <span id="fr_1615"></span>[4](#fn_1615). According to the Mágadha
measure, the vessel should hold a Prastha (or sixteen Palas) of water.
Two of these Nád́ís make one Muhúrtta; thirty of which are one day and
night. Thirty such periods form a month; twelve months make a year, or a
day and night of the gods; and three hundred and sixty such days
constitute a year of the celestials. An aggregate of four ages contains
twelve thousand divine years; and a thousand periods of four ages
complete a day of Brahmá. That period is also termed a Kalpa, during
which fourteen Manus preside; and at the end of it occurs the incidental
or Brahmá dissolution. The nature of this dissolution is very fearful:
hear me describe it, as well as that which takes place at the elemental
dissolution, which I will also relate to you.

At the end of a thousand periods of four ages the earth is for the most
part exhausted. A total dearth then ensues, which lasts a hundred

<span id="page_632">p. 632</span>

years; and, in consequence of the failure of food, all beings become
languid and exanimate, and at last entirely perish. The eternal Vishńu
then assumes the character of Rudra, the destroyer, and descends to
reunite all his creatures with himself. He enters into the seven rays of
the sun <span id="fr_1616"></span>[5](#fn_1616), drinks up all the
waters of the globe, and causes all moisture whatever, in living bodies
or in the soil, to evaporate; thus drying up the whole earth. The seas,
the rivers, the mountain torrents, and springs, are all exhaled; and so
are all the waters of Pátála, the regions below the earth. Thus fed,
through his intervention, with abundant moisture, the seven solar rays
dilate to seven suns <span id="fr_1617"></span>[6](#fn_1617), whose
radiance glows above, below, and on every side, and sets the three
worlds and Pátála on fire. The three worlds, consumed by these suns,
become rugged and deformed throughout the whole extent of their
mountains, rivers, and seas; and the earth, bare of verdure, and
destitute of moisture, alone remains, resembling in appearance the back
of a tortoise. The destroyer of all things, Hari, in the form of Rudra,
who is the flame of time, becomes the scorching breath of the serpent
Śesha, and thereby reduces Pátála to ashes. The great fire, when it has
burnt all the divisions of Pátála, proceeds to the earth, and consumes
it also. A vast whirlpool of eddying flame then spreads to the region of
the atmosphere, and the sphere of the gods, and wraps them in ruin. The
three spheres shew like a frying-pan amidst the surrounding flames, that
prey upon all moveable or stationary things. The inhabitants of the two
upper spheres, having discharged their functions, and being annoyed by
the heat, remove to the sphere above, or Maharloka. When that becomes
heated, its tenants, who after the full period of their stay are
desirous of ascending to higher regions, depart for the Janaloka <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[7](#fn_1618).

<span id="page_633">p. 633</span>

Janárddana, in the person of Rudra, having consumed the whole world,
breathes forth heavy clouds; and those called Samvartta, resembling vast
elephants in bulk, overspread the sky, roaring, and darting lightnings.
Some are as black as the blue lotus; some are white as the water-lily;
some are dusky, like smoke; and some are yellow; some are of a dun
colour, like that of an ass; some like ashes sprinkled on the forehead;
some are deep blue, as the lapis lazuli; some azure, like the sapphire;
some are white, as the conch or the jasmine; and some are black, as
collyrium; some are of bright red, like the ladybird; some are of the
fierceness of red arsenic; and some are like the wing of the painted
jay. Such are these massy clouds in hue: in form some resemble towns,
some mountains, some are like houses and hovels, and some are like
columns. Mighty in size, and loud in thunder, they fill all space.
Showering down torrents of water, these clouds quench the dreadful fires
which involve the three worlds, and then they rain uninterruptedly for a
hundred years, and deluge the whole world. Pouring down in drops as
large as dice, these rains overspread the earth, and fill the middle
region, and inundate heaven. The world is now enveloped in darkness, and
all things, animate or inanimate, having perished, the clouds continue
to pour down their waters for more than a hundred years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1612"></span>[630:1](vp158.htm#fr_1612) The first is called
Naimittaka, 'occasional' or 'incidental,' or Bráhmya, as occasioned by
the intervals of Brahmá's days; the destruction of creatures, though not
of the substance of the world, occurring during his night. The general
resolution of the elements into their primitive source, or Prakriti, is
the Prákritika destruction, and occurs at the end of Brahmá's life. The
third, the absolute or final, Átyantika, is individual annihilation;
Moksha, exemption for ever from future existence. The Bhágavata here
notices the fourth kind, of which mention occurred in a preceding
passage ([p. 56](vp041.htm#page_56)), Nitya or constant dissolution;
explaining it to be the imperceptible change that all things suffer in
the various stages of growth and decay, life and death. 'The various
conditions of beings subject to change are occasioned by that constant
dissolution of life which is rapidly produced by the resistless stream
of time, taking every thing perpetually away.' The Váyu describes but
three kinds of Pralaya, omitting the Nitya.

<span id="fn_1613"></span>[630:2](vp158.htm#fr_1613) Maitreya has a
rather indifferent memory (see [p. 22](vp037.htm#page_22)); but the
periods specified in the two places do not agree. In the first book two
Parárddhas, as equal to one hundred years of Brahmá, are
311.040.000.000.000 years of mortals.

<span id="fn_1614"></span>[630:3](vp158.htm#fr_1614) Counting according
to this mode of enumeration, a Parárddha is represented by
100.000.000.000.000.000. The Váyu Puráńa has a term for each of these
decimal values. Daśa, 10; Śatam, 100; Sahasram, 1000; Ayutam, 10.000;
Niyutam, 100.000; Prayutam, 1.000.000; Arvudam, 10.000.000; Nyurvudam,
<span id="page_631">p. 631</span> 100.000.000; Vrindam, 1.000.000.000;
Param, 10.000.000.000; Kharvam, 100.000.000.000; Nikharvam,
1000.000.000.000; Śankham, 10.000.000.000.000; Padmam,
100.000.000.000.000; Samudram, 1.000.000.000.000; Madhyamam,
10.000.000.000.000.000; Parárddham, 100.000.000.000.000.000. In the
first book the Parárddham, as the half of Brahmá's life, is but
155.520.000.000.000, fifteen instead of eighteen places of figures.

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[631:4](vp158.htm#fr_1615) The description of
the Clepsydra is very brief, and wanting in precision. One of the
commentaries is more explicit: 'A vessel made of twelve Palas and a half
of copper, and holding a Prastha, Mágadha measure, of water, broad at
top, and having at bottom a tube of gold of four Máshas weight, four
fingers long, is placed in water, and the time in which the vessel is
filled by the hole in the bottom is called a Nád́ika:' The term Śaláká
generally means a needle or stake, but it must here denote a pipe. The
common measure of the Nád́í is a thin shallow brass cup, with a small
hole in the bottom. It is placed on the surface of water, in a large
vessel, where nothing can disturb it, and where the water gradually
fills the cup, and sinks it. As. Res, vol. V. p. 87.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[632:5](vp158.htm#fr_1616) See [p.
236](vp069.htm#page_236). n. [3](vp069.htm#fn_717).

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[632:6](vp158.htm#fr_1617) These also have
their several appellations: the commentator quotes the Vedas as the
authority: Árága, Bhrája, Pat́ala, Patanga, Swamábhák, Jyotishmat, and
Savibhása.

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[632:7](vp158.htm#fr_1618) The passage may
also be understood, 'Those go to Janaloka who are desirous of obtaining
Brahma, or final liberation, through the ten stages of
perfection--devotion, penance, truth, &c.' In the Váyu Puráńa more
details are specified. Those sainted mortals who have diligently
worshipped Vishńu, and are distinguished for piety, abide, at the time
of dissolution, in Maharloka, with the Pitris, the Manus, <span
id="page_633">p. 633</span> the seven Rishis, the various orders of
celestial spirits, and the gods. These, when the heat of the flames that
destroy the world reaches to Maharloka, repair to Janaloka in their
subtile forms, destined to become reembodied, in similar capacities as
their former, when the world is renewed, at the beginning of the
succeeding Kalpa. This continues throughout the life of Brahmá; at the
expiration of his life all are destroyed: but those who have then
attained a residence in the Brahmaloka, by having identified themselves
in spirit with the supreme, are finally resolved into the sole-existing
Brahma.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV](vp159)
