[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp153)  [Next](vp155) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_606">p. 606</span>

### CHAP. XXXVII.

Destruction of the Yádavas. Śámba and others deceive and ridicule the
Rishis. The former bears an iron pestle: it is broken, and thrown into
the sea. The Yádavas go to Prabhása by desire of Krishńa: they quarrel
and fight, and all perish. The great serpent Śesha issues from the mouth
of Ráma. Krishńa is shot by a hunter, and again becomes one with
universal spirit.

IN this manner did Krishńa, assisted by Baladeva, destroy demons and
iniquitous monarchs, for the good of the earth; and along with
Phálguna <span id="fr_1566"></span>[1](#fn_1566) also did he relieve
earth of her load, by the death of innumerable hosts. Having thus
lightened the burdens of the earth, and slain many unrighteous princes,
he exterminated <span id="fr_1567"></span>[2](#fn_1567), by the pretext
of an imprecation denounced by Brahmans, his own Yádava race. Then
quitting Dwáraká, and relinquishing his mortal being, the self-born
reentered, with all his emanations, his own sphere of Vishńu.

MAITREYA.--Tell me how Janárddana effected the destruction of his own
race under the plea of Brahmanical imprecation, and in what manner he
relinquished his mortal body <span id="fr_1568"></span>[3](#fn_1568).

PARÁŚARA.--At the holy place Pińd́áraka <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[4](#fn_1569), Viswámitra, Kańwa, and the great sage
Nárada, were observed by some boys of the Yadu tribe. Giddy with youth,
and influenced by predestined results, they dressed and adorned Sumba,
the son of Jámbavatí, as a damsel, and conducting her to the sages, they
addressed them with the usual marks of reverence, and said, "What child
will this female, the wife of Babhru, who is

<span id="page_607">p. 607</span>

anxious to have a son, give birth to?" The sages, who were possessed of
divine wisdom, were very angry to find themselves thus tricked by the
boys, and said, "She will bring forth a club, that shall crush the whole
of the Yádava race." The boys, thus spoken to by the sages, went and
related all that had occurred to Ugrasena; and, as foretold, a club was
produced from the belly of Śámba. Ugrasena had the club, which was of
iron, ground to dust, and thrown into the sea; but the particles of dust
there became rushes <span id="fr_1570"></span>[5](#fn_1570). There was
one part of the iron club which was like the blade of a lance, and which
the Andhakas could not break: this, when thrown into the sea, was
swallowed by a fish; the fish was caught, the iron spike was extracted
from its belly, and was taken by a hunter named Jará. The all-wise and
glorious Madhusúdana did not think fit to counteract what had been
predetermined by fate.

Then there came to Keśava, when he was private and alone, a messenger
from the gods, who addressed him with reverence, and said, "I am sent to
you, O lord, by the deities, and do thou hear what Indra, together with
the Viśwas, Maruts, Ádityas, Sádhyas, and Rudras, respectfully
represents. [ ](errata.htm#27)More than a hundred years have elapsed
since thou, in favour to the gods, hast descended upon earth, for the
purpose of relieving it of its load. The demons have been slain, and the
burden of earth has been removed: now let the immortals once again
behold their monarch in heaven. A period exceeding a century has passed:
now, if

<span id="page_608">p. 608</span>

it be thy pleasure, return to Swarga. This is the solicitation of the
celestials. But should such not be thy will, then remain here as long as
it may be desirable to thy dependants <span
id="fr_1571"></span>[6](#fn_1571)." To this Krishńa replied, "All that
thou hast said I am well aware of. The destruction of the Yádavas by me
has commenced. The burdens of the earth are not removed until the
Yádavas are extirpated. I will effect this also in my descent, and
quickly; for it shall come to pass in seven nights. When I have restored
the land of Dwáraká to the ocean, and annihilated the race of Yadu, I
will proceed to the mansions of the immortals. Apprise the gods, that,
having abandoned my human body, and accompanied by Sankarshańa, I will
then return to them. The tyrants that oppressed the earth, Jarásandha
and the rest, have been killed; and a youth, even of the race of Yadu,
is, no less than they, an incumbrance. When therefore I have taken away
this great weight upon earth, I will return to protect the sphere of the
celestials. Say this to them." The messenger of the gods, having
received this reply, bowed, and took his heavenly course to the king of
the gods.

The mighty Krishńa now beheld signs and portents both in earth and
heaven, prognosticating, day and night, the ruin of Dwáraká <span
id="fr_1572"></span>[7](#fn_1572).

<span id="page_609">p. 609</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shewing these to
the Yádavas, he said, "See; behold these fearful phenomena: let us
hasten to Prabhása, to avert these omens." When he had thus spoken to
the eminent Yádava, the illustrious Uddhava saluted and said to him,
"Tell me, O lord, what it is proper that I should do, for it seems to me
that thou wilt destroy all this race: the signs that are manifest
declare nothing less than the annihilation of the tribe." Then Krishńa
replied to him, "Do you go by a celestial route, which my favour shall
provide you, to the holy place Badarikáśrama, in the Gandhamádana
mountain, the shrine of Naranáráyańa; and on that spot, sanctified by
them, thou, by meditating on me, shalt obtain perfection through my
favour. When the race of Yadu shall have perished, I shall proceed to
heaven; and the ocean shall inundate Dwáraká, when I have quitted it."
Accordingly Uddhava, thus instructed by Keśava, saluted him with
veneration, and departed to the shrine of Naranáráyańa <span
id="fr_1573"></span>[8](#fn_1573).

Then the Yádavas ascended their rapid cars, and drove to Prabhása <span
id="fr_1574"></span>[9](#fn_1574), along with Krishńa, Ráma, and the
rest of their chiefs <span id="fr_1575"></span>[10](#fn_1575). They
bathed there, and, excited by Vásudeva, the Kukkuras and Andhakas
indulged in liquor. As they drank, the destructive flame of dissension
was kindled amongst them by mutual collision, and fed with the fuel of
abuse. Infuriated by the divine influence, they fell upon one another
with missile weapons, and when those were expended, they had recourse to
the rushes growing nigh. The rushes in their hands became like
thunderbolts,

<span id="page_610">p. 610</span>

and they struck one another with them fatal blows. Pradyumna, Śámba,
Kritavarman, Sátyaki, Aniruddha, Prithu, Viprithu, Cháruvarman, Cháruka,
Akrúra, and many others, struck one another with the rushes, which had
assumed the hardness of thunderbolts <span
id="fr_1576"></span>[11](#fn_1576). Keśava interposed to prevent them,
but they thought that he was taking part with each severally, and
continued the conflict. Krishńa then enraged took up a handful of rushes
to destroy them, and the rushes became a club of iron, and with this he
slew many of the murderous Yádavas; whilst others, fighting fiercely,
put an end to one another. The chariot of the holder of the discus,
named Jaitra, was quickly carried off by the swift steeds, and swept
away by the sea, in the sight of Dáruka the charioteer. The discus, the
club, the bow, the quiver, the shell, and the sword of Keśava, having
circumambulated their lord, flew along the path of the sun. In a short
time there was not a single Yádava left alive, except the mighty Krishńa
and Dáruka <span id="fr_1577"></span>[12](#fn_1577). Going towards Ráma,
who

<span id="page_611">p. 611</span>

was sitting at the root of a tree, they beheld a large serpent coming
out of his mouth. Having issued from his mouth, the mighty snake
proceeded towards the ocean, hymned by saints and by other great
serpents. Bringing an offering of respect, Ocean came to meet him; and
then the majestic being, adored by attendant snakes, entered into the
waters of the deep. Beholding the departure of the spirit of Balabhadra,
Keśava said to Dáruka, "All this is to be related by you to Vasudeva and
Ugrasena. Go and inform them of the departure of Balabhadra, and the
destruction of the Yádavas; also that I shall engage in religious
meditation, and quit this body. Apprise Áhuka and all the inhabitants of
Dwáraká <span id="fr_1578"></span>[13](#fn_1578), that the sea will
inundate the town: be ready therefore in expectation of the coming of
Arjuna, and when he quits Dwáraka, no longer abide there, but go
whithersoever that descendant of Kuru shall repair. Do you also go to
the son of Kunti, and tell him, that it is my request that he will grant
what protection he can to all my family. Then depart with Arjuna and all
the people of Dwárávatí, and let Vajra be installed sovereign over the
tribe of Yadu."

Dáruka, being thus instructed, prostrated himself again and again before
Krishńa, and walked round him repeatedly, and then departed as he had
been desired; and having conducted Arjuna to Dwárávatí, the intelligent
servant of Krishńa established Vajra as king. The divine Govinda then,
having concentrated in himself that supreme spirit which is one with
Vásudeva, was identified with all beings <span
id="fr_1579"></span>[14](#fn_1579). Respecting the words of the Brahman,
the imprecation of Durvásas <span id="fr_1580"></span>[15](#fn_1580),
the illustrious

<span id="page_612">p. 612</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Krishńa sat
engaged in thought, resting his foot upon his knee. Then came there a
hunter, named Jará <span id="fr_1581"></span>[16](#fn_1581), whose arrow
was tipped with a blade made of the piece of iron of the club, which had
not been reduced to powder; and beholding from a distance the foot of
Krishńa, he mistook it for part of a deer, and shooting his arrow,
lodged it in the sole <span id="fr_1582"></span>[17](#fn_1582).
Approaching his mark, he saw the four-armed king, and, falling at his
feet, repeatedly besought his forgiveness, exclaiming, "I have done this
deed unwittingly, thinking I was aiming at a deer! Have pity upon me,
who am consumed by my crime; for thou art able to consume me!" Bhagavat
replied, "Fear not thou in the least. Go, hunter, through my favour, to
heaven, the abode of the gods." As soon as he had thus spoken, a
celestial car appeared, and the hunter, ascending it, forthwith
proceeded to heaven. Then the illustrious Krishńa, having united himself
with his own pure, spiritual, inexhaustible, inconceivable, unborn,
undecaying, imperishable, and universal spirit, which is one with
Vásudeva, abandoned his mortal body and the condition of the threefold
qualities <span id="fr_1583"></span>[18](#fn_1583).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1566"></span>[606:1](vp154.htm#fr_1566) A name of Arjuna,
the great friend of Krishńa, to whom the latter served as charioteer in
the war between the Páńd́us and Kurus.

<span id="fn_1567"></span>[606:2](vp154.htm#fr_1567) With Balaráma,
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and the rest.

<span id="fn_1568"></span>[606:3](vp154.htm#fr_1568) The legend of the
destruction of the Yádava race, and the death of Krishńa, appears
probably in its earliest extant form in the Mauśala Parva of the
Mahábhárata. It forms the narrative portion of the eleventh book of the
Bhágavata, having been previously briefly adverted to in the first and
third books; and it is summarily told in the Uttara Khańd́a of the Padma
P.

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[606:4](vp154.htm#fr_1569) The village of
Pińd́áraka, still held in veneration, is situated in Guzerat, about
twenty miles from the north-west extremity of the Peninsula. Hamilton,
II. 664.

<span id="fn_1570"></span>[607:5](vp154.htm#fr_1570) The term is Eraká,
which is explained in some medical lexicons, 'a kind of grass.' The
commentator also calls it a kind of grass: and in the text of the
Mahábhárata the term subsequently used, and as synonymous with it, is
Trińa, 'grass.' The Mahábhárata, when describing the affray which
follows, mentions that the grass or rushes, on being plucked by Krishńa
and the Yádavas, turn to clubs. The text, and that of the Bhágavata,
here say, that the powdered particles, floating on the sea, became
rushes; or the latter may imply, that they fastened upon grass or weeds.
The commentator, however, explains that the particles of iron being
borne to land, they were so transformed. The Mahábhárata says nothing of
the piece which could not be pounded, and this seems to be an
embellishment either of our text or the Bhágavata. The Mahábhárata,
however, adds another precaution, which the two others have left
unnoticed. Ugrasena causes a proclamation to be made, that none of the
inhabitants of Dwáraká shall thenceforth drink wine, on pain of being
impaled alive: and the people for some time observe the prohibition.

<span id="fn_1571"></span>[608:6](vp154.htm#fr_1571) Nothing of this
kind occurs in the Mahábhárata: our text therefore offers an
embellishment. The Bhágavata, again, improves upon the text; for, not
content with a messenger, it makes Brahmá with the Prajápatis, Śiva with
the Bhútas, Indra with the other divinities, all come in person;
indicating evidently a later date, as plainly as the addition of the
text shews it to be subsequent to the date of the legend in the
Mahábhárata.

<span id="fn_1572"></span>[608:7](vp154.htm#fr_1572) The Mahábhárata,
which delights in describing portents and signs, does not fail to detail
them here. A dreadful figure, death personified, haunts every house,
coming and going no one knows how, and being invulnerable to the weapons
by which he is assailed. Strong hurricanes blow; large rats multiply,
and infest the roads and houses, and attack persons in their sleep;
Sárikás, or starlings, utter inauspicious screams in their cages; storks
imitate the hooting of owls, and goats the howling of jackals; cows
bring forth foals, and camels mules; food, in the moment of being eaten,
is filled with worms; fire burns with discoloured flames; and at sunset
and sunrise the air is traversed by headless and hideous spirits. There
is more to the same effect, which neither our text nor the Bhágavata has
ventured to detail. The whole passage has been published in Maurice's
Ancient History of Hindustan, II. 463; translated apparently <span
id="page_609">p. 609</span> by the late Sir Charles Wilkins. The names
have been much disfigured either by the copyist or compositor.

<span id="fn_1573"></span>[609:8](vp154.htm#fr_1573) In the Mahábhárata
it is said merely that Uddhava, who was versed in Yoga, foreseeing the
destruction of the Yádavas, went away; that is, according to the
commentator, he practised penance, and went to heaven. The Bhágavata,
taking the hint, makes much more of it than our text, and expands it
into a long course of instruction given by Krishńa to Uddhava, occupying
150 leaves.

<span id="fn_1574"></span>[609:9](vp154.htm#fr_1574) See [p.
561](vp138.htm#page_561). n. [3](vp138.htm#fn_1520). By sending the
Yádavas to Prabhása, the commentator asserts, Krishńa prevented
purposely the Yádavas from obtaining Mukti, 'final liberation,' which
would have been the consequence of dying at Dwáraká. Death at Prabhása
conferred only Indra's heaven.

<span id="fn_1575"></span>[609:10](vp154.htm#fr_1575) The Mahábhárata
describes them as going forth with horses, elephants, and cars, and
their women, and abundance of good cheer, and varieties of wine and
meat.

<span id="fn_1576"></span>[610:11](vp154.htm#fr_1576) The Bhágavata,
like the text, adverts only in this general manner to the conflict; but
the Mahábhárata gives the particulars. Yuyudhána reproaches Kritavarman
with having aided Aswattháman in his night attack on the Páńd́u camp, and
killing warriors in their sleep. Pradyumna joins in the abuse.
Kritavarman retorts. Krishńa looks at him angrily. Sátyaki repeats the
story of the Śyamantaka gem, by which he accuses Kritavarman of being an
accomplice in the murder of Satrájit ([p. 428](vp106.htm#page_428)).
Satyabhámá, the daughter of the latter, then mixes in the quarrel, and
incites Krishńa to avenge her; but Sátyaki anticipates him, and murders
Kritavarman. Saineya and the Bhojas attack Sátyaki; the Andhakas defend
him; and the affray becomes general. Krishńa attempts to part the
combatants, until Pradyumna is killed; and then taking up a handful of
rushes, which become an iron club, he kills indiscriminately all that
come in his way. The conflict continues until the greater part of the
combatants have fallen, including all Krishńa's sons, and he then in
wrath sweeps off all the survivors, except Babhru and Dáruka, with his
discus.

<span id="fn_1577"></span>[610:12](vp154.htm#fr_1577) The Mahábhárata,
as observed at the end of the last note, adds Babhru, but it presently
gets rid of him. Krishńa sends him to take care of the old people, the
women, and children, in Dwáraká, whilst Dáruka goes to bring Arjuna to
their aid: but as he goes along, overcome with grief for the loss of his
kindred, and approaching separation from Krishńa, he is killed by a club
that is cast from a snare or trap set by a hunter. Krishńa then goes to
Dwáraká, and desires Vasudeva to await the coming of Arjuna; after which
he returns to Ráma, and sees the phenomenon described in the text; the
serpent being Śesha, of whom Balaráma was the incarnation. The Bhágavata
does not mention this incident, <span id="page_611">p. 611</span> merely
observing that Ráma, by the power of Yoga, returned into himself; that
is, into Vishńu.

<span id="fn_1578"></span>[611:13](vp154.htm#fr_1578) The women, the
elders, and the children, amongst whom, as we shall presently see, was
Vajra, the son of Aniruddha, who was established as chief of the Yádavas
at Indraprastha, and who therefore escaped the destruction which
overwhelmed their kinsmen, the Vrishńis, Kukkuras, and Andhakas, of
Dwáraká. This was a fortunate reservation for the tribes which in
various parts of Hindustan, both on the Ganges and in the Dakhin,
profess to derive their origin from the Yádavas.

<span id="fn_1579"></span>[611:14](vp154.htm#fr_1579) The process is
explained by the commentator: 'By the force of Dhyána, or abstraction,
Krishńa satisfies himself that he is Brahma, or universal spirit; and is
next convinced that he is therefore all things; by which his
individuality ceases.'

<span id="fn_1580"></span>[611:15](vp154.htm#fr_1580) The story is told
in the Mahábhárata, Durvásas was on one occasion hospitably <span
id="page_612">p. 612</span> entertained by Krishńa, but the latter
omitted to wipe away the fragments of the meal which had fallen on the
foot of the irascible sage, who thereupon foretold that Krishńa should
be killed as in the text.

<span id="fn_1581"></span>[612:16](vp154.htm#fr_1581) This is an
allegorical personage, however, for Jará signifies 'infirmity,' 'old
age,' 'decay.'

<span id="fn_1582"></span>[612:17](vp154.htm#fr_1582) The Bhágavata
explains how this part of the foot became exposed. Krishńa had assumed
one of the postures in which abstraction is practised: he had laid his
left leg across his right thigh, by which the sole of the foot was
turned outwards.

<span id="fn_1583"></span>[612:18](vp154.htm#fr_1583) He became Nirguńa,
'devoid of all qualities.'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXXVIII](vp155)
