[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vp160)  [Next](vp162) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0026P4NWS/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Vishnu Purana*, translated by Horace Hayman Wilson, \[1840\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_645">p. 645</span>

### CHAP. VI.

Means of attaining liberation. Anecdotes of Kháńd́ikya and Keśidhwaja.
The former instructs the latter how to atone for permitting the death of
a cow. Keśidhwaja offers him a requital, and he desires to be instructed
in spiritual knowledge.

HE, Purushottama, is also known by holy study and devout meditation; and
either, as the cause of attaining him, is entitled Brahma. From study
let a man proceed to meditation, and from meditation to study <span
id="fr_1632"></span>[1](#fn_1632); by perfection in both supreme spirit
becomes manifest. Study is one eye wherewith to behold it, and
meditation is the other: he who is one with Brahma sees not with the eye
of flesh.

MAITREYA.--Reverend teacher, I am desirous of being informed what is
meant by the term meditation (Yoga), by understanding which I may behold
the supreme being, the upholder of the universe.

PARÁŚARA.--I will repeat to you, Maitreya, the explanation formerly
given by Keśidhwaja to the magnanimous Kháńd́ikya, also called Janaka.

MAITREYA.--Tell me first, Brahman, who Kháńd́ikya was, and who was
Keśidhwaja; and how it happened that a conversation relating to the
practice of Yoga occurred between them.

PARÁŚARA.--There was Janaka, named Dharmadhwaja, who had two sons,
Amitadhwaja and Kritadhwaja; and the latter was a king ever intent upon
existent supreme spirit: his son was the celebrated Keśidhwaja. The son
of Amitadhwaja was Janaka, called Kháńd́ikya <span
id="fr_1633"></span>[2](#fn_1633).

<span id="page_646">p. 646</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Kháńd́ikya was
diligent in the way of works, and was renowned on earth for religious
rites. Keśidhwaja, on the other hand, was endowed with spiritual
knowledge. These two were engaged in hostilities, and Kháńd́ikya was
driven from his principality by Keśidhwaja. Expelled from his dominions,
he wandered with a few followers, his priest and his counsellors, amidst
woods and mountains, where, destitute of true wisdom, he performed many
sacrifices, expecting thereby to obtain divine truth, and to escape from
death by ignorance <span id="fr_1634"></span>[3](#fn_1634).

Once whilst the best of those who are skilled in devotion, Keśidhwaja,
was engaged in devout exercises, a fierce tiger slew his milch cow <span
id="fr_1635"></span>[4](#fn_1635) in the lonely forest. When the Rájá
heard that the cow had been killed, he asked the ministering priests
what form of penance would expiate the crime. They replied that they did
not know, and referred him to Kaśeru. Kaśeru, when the Rája consulted
him, told him that he knew not, but that Sunaka would be able to tell
him. Accordingly the Rája went to Sunaka; but he replied, "I am as
unable, great king, to answer your question as Kaśeru has been; and
there is no one now upon earth who can give you the information except
your enemy Kháńd́ikya, whom you have conquered."

Upon receiving this answer, Keśidhwaja said, "I will go, then, and pay a
visit to my foe: if he kill me, no matter, for then I shall obtain the
reward that attends being killed in a holy cause: if, on the contrary,
he tell me what penance to perform, then my sacrifice will be unimpaired
in efficacy." Accordingly he ascended his car, having clothed himself in
the deer skin (of the religious student), and went to the forest where
the wise Kháńd́ikya resided. When Kháńd́ikya beheld him approach, his eyes
reddened with rage, and he took up his bow, and said to him, "You have
armed yourself with the deer skin to accomplish my

<span id="page_647">p. 647</span>

destruction, imagining that in such an attire you will be safe from me;
but, fool, the deer, upon whose backs this skin is seen, are slain by
you and me with sharp arrows: so will I slay you; you shall not go free
whilst I am living. You are an unprincipled felon, who have robbed me of
my kingdom, and are deserving of death." To this Keśidhwaja answered, "I
have come hither, Kháńd́ikya, to ask you to solve my doubts, and not with
any hostile intention: lay aside therefore both your arrow and your
anger." Thus spoken to, Kháńd́ikya retired a while with his counsellors
and his priest, and consulted with them what course to pursue. They
strongly urged him to slay Keśidhwaja, who was now in his power, and by
whose death he would again become the monarch of the whole earth.
Kháńd́ikya replied to them, "It is no doubt true that by such an act I
should become the monarch of the whole earth: he, however, would thereby
conquer the world to come; whilst the earth would be mine. Now if I do
not kill him, I shall subdue the next world, and leave him this earth.
It seems to me that this world is not of more value than the next; for
the subjugation of the next world endures for ever; the conquest over
this is but for a brief season. I will therefore not kill him, but tell
him what he wishes to know."

Returning then to Keśidhwaja, Kháńd́ikya desired him to propose his
question, which he promised to answer; and Keśidhwaja related to him
what had happened, the death of the cow, and demanded to know what
penance he should perform. Kháńd́ikya, in reply, explained to him fully
the expiation that was suited to the occasion; and Keśidhwaja then, with
his permission, returned to the place of sacrifice, and regularly
fulfilled every necessary act. Having completed the ceremony, with its
supplementary rites, Keśidhwaja accomplished all his objects: but he
then reflected thus: "The priests whom I invited to attend have all been
duly honoured; all those who had any request to make have been gratified
by compliance with their desires; all that is proper for this world has
been effected by me: why then should my mind feel as if my duty had been
unfulfilled?" So meditating, he remembered that he had not presented to
Kháńd́ikya the gift that it is becoming to offer to a spiritual
preceptor, and, mounting his chariot, he immediately set off to

<span id="page_648">p. 648</span>

the thick forest where that sage abode. Kháńd́ikya, upon his
reappearance, assumed his weapons to kill him; but Keśidhwaja exclaimed,
"Forbear, venerable sage. I am not here to injure you, Kháńd́ikya:
dismiss your wrath, and know that I have come hither to offer you that
remuneration which is due to you as my instructor. Through your lessons
I have fully completed my sacrifice, and I am therefore desirous to give
you a gift. Demand what it shall be."

Kháńd́ikya having once more communed with his counsellors, told them the
purpose of his rival's visit, and asked them what he should demand. His
friends recommended him to require his whole kingdom back again, as
kingdoms are obtained by prudent men without conflicting hosts. The
reflecting king Kháńd́ikya laughed, and replied to them, "Why should a
person such as I be desirous of a temporary earthly kingdom? Of a truth
you are able counsellors in the concerns of this life, but of those of
the life to cone you are assuredly ignorant." So speaking, he went back
to Keśidhwaja, and said to him, "Is it true that you wish to make me a
gift, as to your preceptor?" "Indeed I do," answered Keśidhwaja. "Then,"
rejoined Kháńd́ikya, "as it is known that you are learned in the
spiritual learning that teaches the doctrine of the soul, if you will
communicate that knowledge to me, you will have discharged your debt to
your instructor. Declare to me what acts are efficacious for the
alleviation of human affliction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1632"></span>[645:1](vp161.htm#fr_1632) Both study of the
Vedas (Swádhyáya) and abstraction (Yoga) are to be practised: when a man
is weary of one, he may apply to the other. The Yoga, however, limits
the practical part to silent prayer. 'Wearied of meditation, let him
pray inaudibly: weary of prayer, let him repeat meditation.' 'By the
union of prayer and meditation let him behold soul in himself.'

<span id="fn_1633"></span>[645:2](vp161.htm#fr_1633) No such names occur
amongst the Maithila kings of the Vishńu Puráńa (see [p.
390](vp097.htm#page_390)); but, as there noticed (note
[6](vp097.htm#fn_1025)), the Bhágavata inserts them. Janaka is used as a
title. Kritadhwaja, in some of the copies, is read Ritadhwaja.

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[646:3](vp161.htm#fr_1634) The performance of
rites as a means of salvation is called ignorance in the Vedas (see [p.
642](vp160.htm#page_642), n. [7](vp160.htm#fn_1628)). Works are
recommended as introductory to the acquirement of knowledge: it is
ignorance to consider them as finite.

<span id="fn_1635"></span>[646:4](vp161.htm#fr_1635) Tasya-dhenum. One
copy has Homa-dhenu, 'cow of sacrifice;' another, Dharma-dhenu, 'cow of
righteousness.' The commentator explains the terms as importing the same
thing, a cow yielding milk for holy purposes, or for the butter which is
poured in oblations upon the sacrificial fire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII](vp162)
