<span class="small"></span>

[Sacred Texts Index](../../index)  [Northern European Index](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saxo06)  [Next](saxo081.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Danish History, Book Seven

We are told by historians of old, that Ingild had four sons, of whom
three perished in war, while OLAF alone reigned after his father; but
some say that Olaf was the son of Ingild's sister, though this opinion
is doubtful. Posterity has but an uncertain knowledge of his deeds,
which are dim with the dust of antiquity; nothing but the last counsel
of his wisdom has been rescued by tradition. For when he was in the last
grip of death he took thought for his sons FRODE and HARALD, and bade
them have royal sway, one over the land and the other over the sea, and
receive these several powers, not in prolonged possession, but in yearly
rotation. Thus their share in the rule was made equal; but Frode, who
was the first to have control of the affairs of the sea, earned disgrace
from his continual defeats in roving. His calamity was due to his
sailors being newly married, and preferring nuptial joys at home to the
toils of foreign warfare. After a time Harald, the younger son, received
the rule of the sea, and chose soldiers who were unmarried, fearing to
be baffled like his brother. Fortune favoured his choice; for he was as
glorious a rover as his brother was inglorious; and this earned him his
brother's hatred. Moreover, their queens, Signe and Ulfhild, one of whom
was the daughter of Siward, King of Sweden, the other of Karl, the
governor of Gothland, were continually wrangling as to which was the
nobler, and broke up the mutual fellowship of their husbands. Hence
Harald and Frode, when their common household was thus shattered,
divided up the goods they held in common, and gave more heed to the
wrangling altercations of the women than to the duties of brotherly
affection.

Moreover, Frode, judging that his brother's glory was a disgrace to
himself and brought him into contempt, ordered one of his household to
put him to death secretly; for he saw that the man of whom he had the
advantage in years was surpassing him in courage. When the deed was
done, he had the agent of his treachery privily slain, lest the
accomplice should betray the crime. Then, in order to gain the credit of
innocence and escape the brand of crime, he ordered a full inquiry to be
made into the mischance that had cut off his brother so suddenly. But he
could not manage, by all his arts, to escape silent condemnation in the
thoughts of the common people. He afterwards asked Karl, "Who had killed
Harald?" and Karl replied that it was deceitful in him to ask a question
about something which he knew quite well. These words earned him his
death; for Frode thought that he had reproached him covertly with
fratricide.

After this, the lives of Harald and Halfdan, the sons of Harald by Signe
the daughter of Karl, were attempted by their uncle. But the guardians
devised a cunning method of saving their wards. For they cut off the
claws of wolves and tied them to the soles of their feet; and then made
them run along many times so as to harrow up the mud near their
dwelling, as well as the ground (then covered with, snow), and give the
appearance of an attack by wild beasts. Then they killed the children of
some bond- women, tore their bodies into little pieces, and scattered
their mangled limbs all about. So when the youths were looked for in
vain, the scattered limbs were found, the tracks of the beasts were
pointed out, and the ground was seen besmeared with blood. It was
believed that the boys had been devoured by ravening wolves; and hardly
anyone was suffered to doubt so plain a proof that they were mangled.
The belief in this spectacle served to protect the wards. They were
presently shut up by their guardians in a hollow oak, so that no trace
of their being alive should get abroad, and were fed for a long time
under pretence that they were dogs; and were even called by hounds'
names, to prevent any belief getting abroad that they were hiding. (1)

Frode alone refused to believe in their death; and he went and inquired
of a woman skilled in divination where they were hid. So potent were her
spells, that she seemed able, at any distance, to perceive anything,
however intricately locked away, and to summon it out to light. She
declared that one Ragnar had secretly undertaken to rear them, and had
called them by the names of dogs to cover the matter. When the young men
found themselves dragged from their hiding by the awful force of her
spells, and brought before the eyes of the enchantress, loth to be
betrayed by this terrible and imperious compulsion, they flung into her
lap a shower of gold which they had received from their guardians. When
she had taken the gift, she suddenly feigned death, and fell like one
lifeless. Her servants asked the reason why she fell so suddenly; and
she declared that the refuge of the sons of Harald was inscrutable; for
their wondrous might qualified even the most awful effects of her
spells. Thus she was content with a slight benefit, and could not bear
to await a greater reward at the king's hands. After this Ragnar,
finding that the belief concerning himself and his wards was becoming
rife in common talk, took them, both away into Funen. Here he was taken
by Frode, and confessed that he had put the young men in safe keeping;
and he prayed the king to spare the wards whom he had made fatherless,
and not to think it a piece of good fortune to be guilty of two
unnatural murders. By this speech he changed the king's cruelty into
shame; and he promised that if they attempted any plots in their own
land, he would give information to the king. Thus he gained safety for
his wards, and lived many years in freedom from terror.

When the boys grew up, they went to Zealand, and were bidden by their
friends to avenge their father. They vowed that they and their uncle
should not both live out the year. When Ragnar found this out, he went
by night to the palace, prompted by the recollection of his covenant,
and announced that he was come privily to tell the king something he had
promised. But the king was asleep, and he would not suffer them to wake
him up, because Frode had been used to punish any disturbance of his
rest with the sword. So mighty a matter was it thought of old to break
the slumbers of a king by untimely intrusion. Frode heard this from the
sentries in the morning; and when he perceived that Ragnar had come to
tell him of the treachery, he gathered together his soldiers, and
resolved to forestall deceit by ruthless measures. Harald's sons had no
help for it but to feign madness. For when they found themselves
suddenly attacked, they began to behave like maniacs, as if they were
distraught. And when Frode thought that they were possessed, he gave up
his purpose, thinking it shameful to attack with the sword those who
seemed to be turning the sword against themselves. But he was burned to
death by them on the following night, and was punished as befitted a
fratricide. For they attacked the palace, and first crushing the queen
with a mass of stones and then, having set fire to the house, they
forced Frode to crawl into a narrow cave that had been cut out long
before, and into the dark recesses of tunnels. Here he lurked in hiding
and perished, stifled by the reek and smoke.

After Frode was killed, HALFDAN reigned over his country about three
years, and then, handing over his sovereignty to his brother Harald as
deputy, went roving, and attacked and ravaged Oland and the neighbouring
isles, which are severed from contact with Sweden by a winding sound.
Here in the winter he beached and entrenched his ships, and spent three
years on the expedition. After this he attacked Sweden, and destroyed
its king in the field. Afterwards he prepared to meet the king's
grandson Erik, the son of his own uncle Frode, in battle; and when he
heard that Erik's champion, Hakon, was skillful in blunting swords with
his spells, he fashioned, to use for clubbing, a huge mace studded with
iron knobs, as if he would prevail by the strength of wood over the
power of sorcery. Then -- for he was conspicuous beyond all others for
his bravery -- amid the hottest charges of the enemy, he covered his
head with his helmet, and, without a shield, poised his club, and with
the help of both hands whirled it against the bulwark of shields before
him. No obstacle was so stout but it was crushed to pieces by the blow
of the mass that smote it. Thus he overthrew the champion, who ran
against him in the battle, with a violent stroke of his weapon. But he
was conquered notwithstanding, and fled away into Helsingland, where he
went to one Witolf (who had served of old with Harald), to seek tendance
for his wounds. This man had spent most of his life in camp; but at
last, after the grievous end of his general, he had retreated into this
lonely district, where he lived the life of a peasant, and rested from
the pursuits of war. Often struck himself by the missiles of the enemy,
he had gained no slight skill in leechcraft by constantly tending his
own wounds. But if anyone came with flatteries to seek his aid, instead
of curing him he was accustomed to give him something that would
secretly injure him, thinking it somewhat nobler to threaten than to
wheedle for benefits. When the soldiers of Erik menaced his house, in
their desire to take Halfdan, he so robbed them of the power of sight
that they could neither perceive the house nor trace it with certainty,
though it was close to them. So utterly had their eyesight been dulled
by a decisive mist.

When Halfdan had by this man's help regained his full strength, he
summoned Thore, a champion of notable capacity, and proclaimed war
against Erik. But when the forces were led out on the other side, and he
saw that Erik was superior in numbers, he hid a part of his army, and
instructed it to lie in ambush among the bushes by the wayside, in order
to destroy the enemy by an ambuscade as he marched through the narrow
part of the path. Erik foresaw this, having reconnoitred his means of
advancing, and thought he must withdraw for fear, if he advanced along
the track he had intended, of being hard-pressed by the tricks of the
enemy among the steep windings of the hills. They therefore joined
battle, force against force, in a deep valley, inclosed all round by
lofty mountain ridges. Here Halfdan, when he saw the line of his men
wavering, climbed with Thore up a crag covered with stones and,
uprooting boulders, rolled them down upon the enemy below; and the
weight of these as they fell crushed the line that was drawn up in the
lower position. Thus he regained with stones the victory which he had
lost with arms. For this deed of prowess he received the name of
Biargramm ("rock strong"), a word which seems to have been compounded
from the name of his fierceness and of the mountains. He soon gained so
much esteem for this among the Swedes that he was thought to be the son
of the great Thor, and the people bestowed divine honours upon him, and
judged him worthy of public libation.

But the souls of the conquered find it hard to rest, and the insolence
of the beaten ever struggles towards the forbidden thing. So it came to
pass that Erik, in his desire to repair the losses incurred in flight,
attacked the districts subject to Halfdan. Even Denmark he did not
exempt from this harsh treatment; for he thought it a most worthy deed
to assail the country of the man who had caused him to be driven from
his own. And so, being more anxious to inflict injury than to repel it,
he set Sweden free from the arms of the enemy. When Halfdan heard that
his brother Harald had been beaten by Erik in three battles, and slain
in the fourth, he was afraid of losing his empire; he had to quit the
land of the Swedes and go back to his own country. Thus Erik regained
the kingdom of Sweden all the more quickly, that he quitted it so
lightly. Had fortune wished to favour him in keeping his kingdom as much
as she had in regaining it, she would in nowise have given him into the
hand of Halfdan. This capture was made in the following way: When
Halfdan had gone back into Sweden, he hid his fleet craftily, and went
to meet Erik with two vessels. Erik attacked him with ten; and Halfdan,
sailing through sundry winding channels, stole back to his concealed
forces. Erik pursued him too far, and the Danish fleet came out on the
sea. Thus Erik was surrounded; but he rejected the life, which was
offered him under condition of thraldom. He could not bear to think more
of the light of day than liberty, and chose to die rather than serve;
lest he should seem to love life so well as to turn from a slave into a
freeman; and that he might not court with new-born obeisance the man
whom fortune had just before made only his equal. So little knows virtue
how to buy life with dishonour. Wherefore he was put in chains, and
banished to a place haunted by wild beasts; an end unworthy of that
lofty spirit.

Halfdan had thus become sovereign of both kingdoms, and graced his fame
with a triple degree of honour. For he was skillful and eloquent in
composing poems in the fashion of his country; and he was no less
notable as a valorous champion than as a powerful king. But when he
heard that two active rovers, Toke and Anund, were threatening the
surrounding districts, he attacked and routed them in a sea-fight. For
the ancients thought that nothing was more desirable than glory which
was gained, not by brilliancy of wealth, but by address in arms.
Accordingly, the most famous men of old were so minded as to love
seditions, to renew quarrels, to loathe ease, to prefer fighting to
peace, to be rated by their valour and not by their wealth, to find
their greatest delight in battles, and their least in banquetings.

But Halfdan was not long to seek for a rival. A certain Siwald, of most
illustrious birth, related with lamentation in the assembly of the
Swedes the death of Frode and his queen; and inspired in almost all of
them such a hatred of Halfdan, that the vote of the majority granted him
permission to revolt. Nor was he content with the mere goodwill of their
voices, but so won the heart of the commons by his crafty canvassing
that he induced almost all of them to set with their hands the royal
emblem on his head. Siwald had seven sons, who were such clever
sorcerers that often, inspired with the force of sudden frenzy, they
would roar savagely, bite their shields, swallow hot coals, and go
through any fire that could be piled up; and their frantic passion could
only be checked by the rigour of chains, or propitiated by slaughter of
men. With such a frenzy did their own sanguinary temper, or else the
fury of demons, inspire them.

When Halfdan had heard of these things while busy roving, he said it was
right that his soldiers, who had hitherto spent their rage upon
foreigners, should now smite with the steel the flesh of their own
countrymen, and that they who had been used to labour to extend their
realm should now avenge its wrongful seizure. On Halfdan approaching,
Siwald sent him ambassadors and requested him, if he was as great in act
as in renown, to meet himself and his sons in single combat, and save
the general peril by his own. When the other answered, that a combat
could not lawfully be fought by more than two men, Siwald said, that it
was no wonder that a childless bachelor should refuse the proffered
conflict, since his nature was void of heat, and had struck a
disgraceful frost into his soul and body. Children, he added, were not
different from the man who begot them, since they drew from him their
common principle of birth. Thus he and his sons were to be accounted as
one person, for nature seemed in a manner to have bestowed on them a
single body. Halfdan, stung with this shameful affront, accepted the
challenge; meaning to wipe out with noble deeds of valour such an
insulting taunt upon his celibacy. And while he chanced to be walking
through a shady woodland, he plucked up by the roots all oak that stuck
in his path, and, by simply stripping it of its branches, made it look
like a stout club. Having this trusty weapon, he composed a short song
as follows:

"Behold! The rough burden which I bear with straining crest, shall unto
crests bring wounds and destruction. Never shall any weapon of leafy
wood crush the Goths with direr augury. It shall shatter the towering
strength of the knotty neck, and shall bruise the hollow temples with
the mass of timber. The club which shall quell the wild madness of the
land shall be no less fatal to the Swedes. Breaking bones, and
brandished about the mangled limbs of warriors, the stock I have
wrenched off shall crush the backs of the wicked, crush the hearths of
our kindred, shed the blood of our countrymen, and be a destructive pest
upon our land."

When he had said this, he attacked Siwald and his seven sons, and
destroyed them, their force and bravery being useless against the
enormous mass of his club.

At this time one Hardbeen, who came from Helsingland, gloried in
kidnapping and ravishing princesses, and used to kill any man who
hindered him in his lusts. He preferred high matches to those that were
lowly; and the more illustrious the victims he could violate, the more
noble he thought himself. No man escaped unpunished who durst measure
himself with Hardbeen in valour. He was so huge, that his stature
reached the measure of nine ells. He had twelve champions dwelling with
him, whose business it was to rise up and to restrain his fury with the
aid of bonds, whenever the rage came on him that foreboded of battle.
These men asked Halfdan to attack Hardbeen and his champions man by man;
and he not only promised to fight, but assured himself the victory with
most confident words. When Hardbeen heard this, a demoniacal frenzy
suddenly took him; he furiously bit and devoured the edges of his
shield; he kept gulping down fiery coals; he snatched live embers in his
mouth and let them pass down into his entrails; he rushed through the
perils of crackling fires; and at last, when he had raved through every
sort of madness, he turned his sword with raging hand against the hearts
of six of his champions. It is doubtful whether this madness came from
thirst for battle or natural ferocity. Then with the remaining band of
his champions he attacked Halfdan, who crushed him with a hammer of
wondrous size, so that he lost both victory and life; paying the penalty
both to Halfdan, whom he had challenged, and to the kings whose
offspring he had violently ravished.

Fortune never seemed satisfied with the trying of Halfdan's strength,
and used to offer him unexpected occasions for fighting. It so happened
that Egther, a Finlander, was harrying the Swedes on a roving raid.
Halfdan, having found that he had three ships, attacked him with the
same number. Night closed the battle, so that he could not conquer him;
but he challenged Egther next day, fought with and overthrew him. He
next heard that Grim, a champion of immense strength, was suing, under
threats of a duel, for Thorhild, the daughter of the chief Hather, and
that her father had proclaimed that he who put the champion out of the
way should have her. Halfdan, though he had reached old age a bachelor,
was stirred by the promise of the chief as much as by the insolence of
the champion, and went to Norway. When he entered it, he blotted out
every mark by which he could be recognized, disguising his face with
splashes of dirt; and when he came to the spot of the battle, drew his
sword first. And when he knew that it had been blunted by the glance of
the enemy, he cast it on the ground, drew another from the sheath, with
which he attacked Grim, cutting through the meshes on the edge of his
cuirass, as well as the lower part of his shield. Grim wondered at the
deed, and said, "I cannot remember an old man who fought more keenly;"
and, instantly drawing his sword, he pierced through and shattered the
target that was opposed to his blade. But as his right arm tarried on
the stroke, Halfdan, without wavering, met and smote it swiftly with his
sword. The other, notwithstanding, clasped his sword with his left hand,
and cut through the thigh of the striker, revenging the mangling of his
own body with a slight wound. Halfdan, now conqueror, allowed the
conquered man to ransom the remnant of his life with a sum of money; he
would not be thought shamefully to rob a maimed man, who could not
fight, of the pitiful remainder of his days. By this deed he showed
himself almost as great in saving as in conquering his enemy. As a prize
for this victory he won Thorhild in marriage, and had by her a son
Asmund, from whom the kings of Norway treasure the honour of being
descended; retracing the regular succession of their line down from
Halfdan.

After this, Ebbe, a rover of common birth, was so confident of his
valour, that he was moved to aspire to a splendid marriage. He was a
suitor for Sigrid, the daughter of Yngwin, King of the Goths, and
moreover demanded half the Gothic kingdom for her dowry. Halfdan was
consulted whether the match should be entertained, and advised that a
feigned consent should be given, promising that he would baulk the
marriage. He also gave instructions that a seat should be allotted to
himself among the places of the guests at table. Yngwin approved the
advice; and Halfdan, utterly defacing the dignity of his royal presence
with an unsightly and alien disguise, and coming by night on the wedding
feast, alarmed those who met him; for they marvelled at the coming of a
man of such superhuman stature.

When Halfdan entered the palace, he looked round on all and asked, who
was he that had taken the place next to the king? Upon Ebbe replying
that the future son-in-law of the king was next to his side, Halfdan
asked him, in the most passionate language, what madness, or what
demons, had brought him to such wantonness, as to make bold to unite his
contemptible and filthy race with a splendid and illustrious line, or to
dare to lay his peasant finger upon the royal family: and, not content
even with such a claim, to aspire, as it seemed, to a share even in the
kingdom of another. Then he bade Ebbe fight him, saying that he must get
the victory before he got his wish. The other answered that the night
was the time to fight with monsters, but the day the time with men; but
Halfdan, to prevent him shirking the battle by pleading the hour,
declared that the moon was shining with the brightness of daylight. Thus
he forced Ebbe to fight, and felled him, turning the banquet into a
spectacle, and the wedding into a funeral.

Some years passed, and Halfdan went back to his own country, and being
childless he bequeathed the royal wealth by will to Yngwin, and
appointed him king. YNGWIN was afterwards overthrown in war by a rival
named Ragnald, and he left a son SIWALD.

Siwald's daughter, Sigrid, was of such excellent modesty, that though a
great concourse of suitors wooed her for her beauty, it seemed as if she
could not be brought to look at one of them. Confident in this power of
self-restraint, she asked her father for a husband who by the sweetness
of his blandishments should be able to get a look back from her. For in
old time among us the self-restraint of the maidens was a great subduer
of wanton looks, lest the soundness of the soul should be infected by
the licence of the eyes; and women desired to avouch the purity of their
hearts by the modesty of their faces. Then one Ottar, the son of Ebb,
kindled with confidence in the greatness either of his own achievements,
or of his courtesy and eloquent address, stubbornly and ardently desired
to woo the maiden. And though he strove with all the force of his wit to
soften her gaze, no device whatever could move her downcast eyes; and,
marvelling at her persistence in her indomitable rigour, he departed.

A giant desired the same thing, but, finding himself equally foiled, he
suborned a woman; and she, pretending friendship for the girl, served
her for a while as her handmaid, and at last enticed her far from her
father's house, by cunningly going out of the way; then the giant rushed
upon her and bore her off into the closest fastnesses of a ledge on the
mountain. Others think that he disguised himself as a woman,
treacherously continued his devices so as to draw the girl away from her
own house, and in the end carried her off. When Ottar heard of this, he
ransacked the recesses of the mountain in search of the maiden, found
her, slew the giant, and bore her off. But the assiduous giant had bound
back the locks of the maiden, tightly twisting her hair in such a way
that the matted mass of tresses was held in a kind of curled bundle; nor
was it easy for anyone to unravel their plaited tangle, without using
the steel. Again, he tried with divers allurements to provoke the maiden
to look at him; and when he had long laid vain siege to her listless
eyes, he abandoned his quest, since his purpose turned out so little to
his liking. But he could not bring himself to violate the girl, loth to
defile with ignoble intercourse one of illustrious birth. She then
wandered long, and sped through divers desert and circuitous paths, and
happened to come to the hut of a certain huge woman of the woods, who
set her to the task of pasturing her goats. Again Ottar granted her his
aid to set her free, and again he tried to move her, addressing her in
this fashion: "Wouldst thou rather hearken to my counsels, and embrace
me even as I desire, than be here and tend the flock of rank goats?

"Spurn the hand of thy wicked mistress, and flee hastily from thy cruel
taskmistress, that thou mayst go back with me to the ships of thy
friends and live in freedom.

"Quit the care of the sheep entrusted to thee; scorn to drive the steps
of the goats; share my bed, and fitly reward my prayers.

"O thou whom I have sought with such pains, turn again thy listless
beams; for a little while -- it is an easy gesture -- lift thy modest
face.

"I will take thee hence, and set thee by the house of thy father, and
unite thee joyfully with thy loving mother, if but once thou wilt show
me thine eyes stirred with soft desires.

"Thou, whom I have borne so oft from the prisons of the giants, pay thou
some due favour to my toil of old; pity my hard endeavours, and be stern
no more.

"For why art thou become so distraught and brainsick, that thou wilt
choose to tend the flock of another, and be counted among the servants
of monsters, sooner than encourage our marriage- troth with fitting and
equal consent?"

But she, that she might not suffer the constancy of her chaste mind to
falter by looking at the world without, restrained her gaze, keeping her
lids immovably rigid. How modest, then, must we think, were the women of
that age, when, under the strongest provocations of their lovers, they
could not be brought to make the slightest motion of their eyes! So when
Ottar found that even by the merits of his double service he could not
stir the maiden's gaze towards him, he went back to the fleet, wearied
out with shame and chagrin. Sigrid, in her old fashion, ran far away
over the rocks, and chanced to stray in her wanderings to the abode of
Ebb; where, ashamed of her nakedness and distress, she pretended to be a
daughter of paupers. The mother of Ottar saw that this woman, though
bestained and faded, and covered with a meagre cloak, was the scion of
some noble stock; and took her, and with honourable courtesy kept her by
her side in a distinguished seat. For the beauty of the maiden was a
sign that betrayed her birth, and her telltale features echoed her
lineage. Ottar saw her, and asked why she hid her face in her robe.
Also, in order to test her mind more surely, he feigned that a woman was
about to become his wife, and, as he went up into the bride- bed, gave
Sigrid the torch to hold. The lights had almost burnt down, and she was
hard put to it by the flame coming closer; but she showed such an
example of endurance that she was seen to hold her hand motionless, and
might have been thought to feel no annoyance from the heat. For the fire
within mastered the fire without, and the glow of her longing soul
deadened the burn of her scorched skin. At last Ottar bade her look to
her hand. Then, modestly lifting her eyes, she turned her calm gaze upon
him; and straightway, the pretended marriage being put away, went up
unto the bride-bed to be his wife. Siwald afterwards seized Ottar, and
thought that he ought to be hanged for defiling his daughter.

But Sigrid at once explained how she had happened to be carried away,
and not only brought Ottar back into the king's favour, but also induced
her father himself to marry Ottar's sister. After this a battle was
fought between Siwald and Ragnald in Zealand, warriors of picked valour
being chosen on both sides. For three days they slaughtered one another;
but so great was the bravery of both sides, that it was doubtful how the
victory would go. Then Ottar, whether seized with weariness at the
prolonged battle, or with desire of glory, broke, despising death,
through the thickest of the foe, cut down Ragnald among the bravest of
his soldiers, and won the Danes a sudden victory. This battle was
notable for the cowardice of the greatest nobles. For the whole mass
fell into such a panic, that forty of the bravest of the Swedes are said
to have turned and fled. The chief of these, Starkad, had been used to
tremble at no fortune, however cruel, and no danger, however great. But
some strange terror stole upon him, and he chose to follow the flight of
his friends rather than to despise it. I should think that he was filled
with this alarm by the power of heaven, that he might not think himself
courageous beyond the measure of human valour. Thus the prosperity of
mankind is wont ever to be incomplete. Then all these warriors embraced
the service of King Hakon, the mightiest of the rovers, like remnants of
the war drifting to him.

After this Siwald was succeeded by his son SIGAR, who had sons Siwald,
Alf, and Alger, and a daughter Signe. All excelled the rest in spirit
and beauty, and devoted himself to the business of a rover. Such a grace
was shed on his hair, which had a wonderful dazzling glow, that his
locks seemed to shine silvery. At the same time Siward, the king of the
Goths, is said to have had two sons, Wemund and Osten, and a daughter
Alfhild, who showed almost from her cradle such faithfulness to modesty
that she continually kept her face muffled in her robe, lest she should
cause her beauty to provoke the passion of another. Her father banished
her into very close keeping, and gave her a viper and a snake to rear,
wishing to defend her chastity by the protection of these reptiles when
they came to grow up. For it would have been hard to pry into her
chamber when it was barred by so dangerous a bolt. He also enacted that
if any man tried to enter it, and failed, he must straightway yield his
head to be taken off and impaled on a stake. The terror which was thus
attached to wantonness chastened the heated spirits of the young men.

Alf, the son of Sigar, thinking that peril of the attempt only made it
nobler, declared himself a wooer, and went to subdue the beasts that
kept watch beside the room of the maiden; inasmuch as, according to the
decree, the embraces of the maiden were the prize of their subduer. Alf
covered his body with a blood- stained hide in order to make them more
frantic against him. Girt with this, as soon as he had entered the doors
of the enclosure, he took a piece of red-hot steel in the tongs, and
plunged it into the yawning throat of the viper, which he laid dead.
Then he flung his spear full into the gaping mouth of the snake as it
wound and writhed forward, and destroyed it. And when he demanded the
gage which was attached to victory by the terms of the covenant, Siward
answered that he would accept that man only for his daughter's husband
of whom she made a free and decided choice. None but the girl's mother
was stiff against the wooer's suit; and she privately spoke to her
daughter in order to search her mind. The daughter warmly praised her
suitor for his valour; whereon the mother upbraided her sharply, that
her chastity should be unstrung, and she be captivated by charming
looks; and because, forgetting to judge his virtue, she cast the gaze of
a wanton mind upon the flattering lures of beauty. Thus Alfhild was led
to despise the young Dane; whereupon she exchanged woman's for man's
attire, and, no longer the most modest of maidens, began the life of a
warlike rover.

Enrolling in her service many maidens who were of the same mind, she
happened to come to a spot where a band of rovers were lamenting the
death of their captain, who had been lost in war; they made her their
rover captain for her beauty, and she did deeds beyond the valour of
woman. Alf made many toilsome voyages in pursuit of her, and in winter
happened to come on a fleet of the Blacmen. The waters were at this time
frozen hard, and the ships were caught in such a mass of ice that they
could not get on by the most violent rowing. But the continued frost
promised the prisoners a safer way of advance; and Alf ordered his men
to try the frozen surface of the sea in their brogues, after they had
taken off their slippery shoes, so that they could run over the level
ice more steadily. The Blacmen supposed that they were taking to flight
with all the nimbleness of their heels, and began to fight them, but
their steps tottered exceedingly and they gave back, the slippery
surface under their soles making their footing uncertain. But the Danes
crossed the frozen sea with safer steps, and foiled the feeble advance
of the enemy, whom they conquered, and then turned and sailed to
Finland. Here they chanced to enter a rather narrow gulf, and, on
sending a few men to reconnoitre, they learnt that the harbour was being
held by a few ships. For Alfhild had gone before them with her fleet
into the same narrows. And when she saw the strange ships afar off, she
rowed in swift haste forward to encounter them, thinking it better to
attack the foe than to await them. Alf's men were against attacking so
many ships with so few; but he replied that it would be shameful if
anyone should report to Alfhild that his desire to advance could be
checked by a few ships in the path; for he said that their record of
honours ought not to be tarnished by such a trifle.

The Danes wondered whence their enemies got such grace of bodily beauty
and such supple limbs. So, when they began the sea-fight, the young man
Alf leapt on Alfhild's prow, and advanced towards the stern,
slaughtering all that withstood him. His comrade Borgar struck off
Alfhild's helmet, and, seeing the smoothness of her chin, saw that he
must fight with kisses and not with arms; that the cruel spears must be
put away, and the enemy handled with gentler dealings. So Alf rejoiced
that the woman whom he had sought over land and sea in the face of so
many dangers was now beyond all expectation in his power; whereupon he
took hold of her eagerly, and made her change her man's apparel for a
woman's; and afterwards begot on her a daughter, Gurid. Also Borgar
wedded the attendant of Alfhild, Groa, and had by her a son, Harald, to
whom the following age gave the surname Hyldeland.

And that no one may wonder that this sex laboured at warfare, I will
make a brief digression, in order to give a short account of the estate
and character of such women. There were once women among the Danes who
dressed themselves to look like men, and devoted almost every instant of
their lives to the pursuit of war, that they might not suffer their
valour to be unstrung or dulled by the infection of luxury. For they
abhorred all dainty living, and used to harden their minds and bodies
with toil and endurance. They put away all the softness and
lightmindedness of women, and inured their womanish spirit to masculine
ruthlessness. They sought, moreover, so zealously to be skilled in
warfare, that they might have been thought to have unsexed themselves.
Those especially, who had either force of character or tall and comely
persons, used to enter on this kind of life. These women, therefore
(just as if they had forgotten their natural estate, and preferred
sternness to soft words), offered war rather than kisses, and would
rather taste blood than busses, and went about the business of arms more
than that of amours. They devoted those hands to the lance which they
should rather have applied to the loom. They assailed men with their
spears whom they could have melted with their looks, they thought of
death and not of dalliance. Now I will cease to wander, and will go back
to my theme.

In the early spring, Alf and Alger, who had gone back to sea- roving,
were exploring the sea in various directions, when they lighted with a
hundred ships upon Helwin, Hagbard, and Hamund, sons of the kinglet
Hamund. These they attacked and only the twilight stayed their
blood-wearied hands; and in the night the soldiers were ordered to keep
truce. On the morrow this was ratified for good by a mutual oath; for
such loss had been suffered on both sides in the battle of the day
before that they had no force left to fight again. Thus, exhausted bye
quality of valour, they were driven perforce to make peace. About the
same time Hildigisl, a Teuton Of noble birth, relying on his looks and
his rank, sued for Signe, the daughter of Sigar. But she scorned him,
chiefly for his insignificance, inasmuch as he was not brave, but wished
to adorn his fortunes with the courage of other people. But this woman
was inclined to love Hakon, chiefly for the high renown of his great
deeds. For she thought more of the brave than the feeble; she admired
notable deeds more than looks, knowing that every allurement of beauty
is mere dross when reckoned against simple valour, and cannot weigh
equal with it in the balance. For there are maids that are more charmed
by the fame than by the face of their lovers; who go not by the looks,
but by the mind, and whom naught but regard for a man's spirit can
kindle to pledge their own troth. Now Hagbard, going to Denmark with the
sons of Sigar, gained speech of their sister without their knowledge,
and in the end induced her to pledge her word to him that she would
secretly become his mistress. Afterwards, when the waiting-women
happened to be comparing the honourable deeds of the nobles, she
preferred Hakon to Hildigisl, declaring that the latter had nothing to
praise but his looks, while in the case of the other a wrinkled visage
was outweighed by a choice spirit. Not content with this plain kind of
praise, she is said to have sung as follows:

"This man lacks fairness, but shines with foremost courage, measuring
his features by his force.

"For the lofty soul redeems the shortcoming of harsh looks, and conquers
the body's blemish.

"His look flashes with spirit, his face, notable in its very harshness,
delights in fierceness.

"He who strictly judges character praises not the mind for the fair hue,
but rather the complexion for the mind.

"This man is not prized for beauty, but for brave daring and war- won
honour.

"While the other is commended by his comely head and radiant countenance
and crest of lustrous locks.

"Vile is the empty grace of beauty, self-confounded the deceptive pride
of comeliness.

"Valour and looks are swayed by different inclinations: one lasts on,
the other perishes.

"Empty red and white brings in vice, and is frittered away little by
little by the lightly gliding years;

"But courage plants firmer the hearts devoted to it, and does not slip
and straightway fall.

"The voice of the multitude is beguiled by outward good, and forsakes
the rule of right;

"But I praise virtue at a higher rate, and scorn the grace of
comeliness."

This utterance fell on the ears of the bystanders in such a way, that
they thought she praised Hagbard under the name of Hakon. And Hildigisl,
vexed that she preferred Hagbard to himself, bribed a certain blind man,
Bolwis, to bring the sons of Sigar and the sons of Hamund to turn their
friendship into hatred. For King Sigar had been used to transact almost
all affairs by the advice of two old men, one of whom was Bolwis. The
temper of these two men was so different, that one used to reconcile
folk who were at feud, while the other loved to sunder in hatred those
who were bound by friendship, and by estranging folk to fan pestilent
quarrels.

So Bolwis began by reviling the sons of Hamund to the sons of Sigar, in
lying slanders, declaring that they never used to preserve the bonds of
fellowship loyally, and that they must be restrained by war rather than
by league. Thus the alliance of the young men was broken through; and
while Hagbard was far away, the sons of Sigar, Alf and Alger, made an
attack, and Helwin and Hamund were destroyed by the harbour which is
called Hamund's Bay. Hagbard then came up with fresh forces to avenge
his brothers, and destroyed them in battle. Hildigisl slunk off with a
spear through both buttocks, which was the occasion for a jeer at the
Teutons, since the ugliness of the blow did not fail to brand it with
disgrace.

Afterwards Hagbard dressed himself in woman's attire, and, as though he
had not wronged Sigar's daughter by slaying her brothers, went back to
her alone, trusting in the promise he had from her, and feeling more
safe in her loyalty than alarmed by reason of his own misdeed. Thus does
lust despise peril. And, not to lack a pretext for his journey, he gave
himself out as a fighting-maid of Hakon, saying that he took an embassy
from him to Sigar. And when he was taken to bed at night among the
handmaids, and the woman who washed his feet were wiping them, they
asked him why he had such hairy legs, and why his hands were not at all
soft to touch, he answered:

"What wonder that the soft hollow of my foot should harden, and that
long hairs should stay on my shaggy leg, when the sand has so often
smitten my soles beneath, and the briars have caught me in mid-step?

"Now I scour the forest with leaping, now the waters with running. Now
the sea, now the earth, now the wave is my path.

"Nor could my breast, shut in bonds of steel, and wont to be beaten with
lance and missile, ever have been soft to the touch, as with you who are
covered by the mantle or the smooth gown.

"Not the distaff or the wool-frails, but spears dripping from the
slaughter, have served for our handling."

Signe did not hesitate to back up his words with like dissembling, and
replied that it was natural that hands which dealt more in wounds than
wools, and in battle than in tasks of the house should show the hardness
that befitted their service; and that, unenfeebled with the pliable
softness of women, they should not feel smooth to the touch of others.
For they were hardened partly by the toils of war, partly by the habit
of seafaring. For, said she, the warlike handmaid of Hakon did not deal
in woman's business, but had been wont to bring her right hand
blood-stained with hurling spears and flinging missiles. It was no
wonder, therefore, if her soles were hardened by the immense journeys
she had gone; and that, when the shores she had scoured so often had
bruised them with their rough and broken shingle, they should toughen in
a horny stiffness, and should not feel soft to the touch like theirs,
whose steps never strayed, but who were forever cooped within the
confines of the palace. Hagbard received her as his bedfellow, under
plea that he was to have the couch of honour; and, amid their converse
of mutual delight, he addressed her slowly in such words as these:

"If thy father takes me and gives me to bitter death, wilt thou ever,
when I am dead, forget so strong a troth, and again seek the
marriage-plight?

"For if the chance should fall that way, I can hope for no room for
pardon; nor will the father who is to avenge his sons spare or have
pity.

"For I stripped thy brothers of their power on the sea and slew them;
and now, unknown to thy father, as though I had done naught before
counter to his will, I hold thee in the couch we share.

"Say, then, my one love, what manner of wish wilt thou show when thou
lackest the accustomed embrace?"

Signe answered:

"Trust me, dear; I wish to die with thee, if fate brings thy turn to
perish first, and not to prolong my span of life at all, when once
dismal death has cast thee to the tomb.

"For if thou chance to close thy eyes for ever, a victim to the maddened
attack of the men-at-arms; -- by whatsoever doom thy breath be cut off,
by sword or disease, by sea or soil, I forswear every wanton and corrupt
flame, and vow myself to a death like thine; that they who were bound by
one marriage-union may be embraced in one and the same punishment. Nor
will I quit this man, though I am to feel the pains of death; I have
resolved he is worthy of my love who gathered the first kisses of my
mouth, and had the first fruits of my delicate youth. I think that no
vow will be surer than this, if speech of woman have any loyalty at
all."

This speech so quickened the spirit of Hagbard, that he found more
pleasure in her promise than peril in his own going away (to his death).
The serving-women betrayed him; and when Sigar's men-at-arms attacked
him, he defended himself long and stubbornly, and slew many of them in
the doorway. But at last he was taken, and brought before the assembly,
and found the voices of the people divided over him. For very many said
that he should be punished for so great an offence; but Bilwis, the
brother of Bolwis, and others, conceived a better judgment, and advised
that it would be better to use his stout service than to deal with him
too ruthlessly. Then Bolwis came forward and declared that it was evil
advice which urged the king to pardon when he ought to take vengeance,
and to soften with unworthy compassion his righteous impulse to anger.
For how could Sigar, in the case of this man, feel any desire to spare
or pity him, when he had not only robbed him of the double comfort of
his sons, but had also bestained him with the insult of deflowering his
daughter? The greater part of the assembly voted for this opinion;
Hagbard was condemned, and a gallows-tree planted to receive him. Hence
it came about that he who at first had hardly one sinister voice against
him was punished with general harshness. Soon after the queen handed him
a cup, and, bidding him assuage his thirst, vexed him with threats after
this manner:

"Now, insolent Hagbard, whom the whole assembly has pronounced worthy of
death, now to quench thy thirst thou shalt give thy lips liquor to drink
in a cup of horn.

"Wherefore cast away fear, and, at this last hour of thy life, taste
with bold lips the deadly goblet;

"That, having drunk it, thou mayst presently land by the dwellings of
those below, passing into the sequestered palace of stern Dis, giving
thy body to the gibbet and thy spirit to Orcus."

Then the young man took the cup offered him, and is said to have made
answer as follows:

"With this hand, wherewith I cut off thy twin sons, I will take my last
taste, yea the draught of the last drink.

"Now not unavenged shall I go to the Elysian regions, not unchastising
to the stern ghosts. For these men have first been shut in the dens of
Tartarus by a slaughter wrought by my endeavours. This right hand was
wet with blood that was yours, this hand robbed thy children of the
years of their youth, children whom thy womb brought to light; but the
deadly sword spared it not then. Infamous woman, raving in spirit,
hapless, childless mother, no years shall restore to thee the lost, no
time and no day whatsoever shall save thy child from the starkness of
death, or redeem him!"

Thus he avenged the queen's threats of death by taunting her with the
youths whom he had slain; and, flinging back the cup at her, drenched
her face with the sprinkled wine.

Meantime Signe asked her weeping women whether they could endure to bear
her company in the things which she purposed. They promised that they
would carry out and perform themselves whatsoever their mistress should
come to wish, and their promise was loyally kept. Then, drowned in
tears, she said that she wished to follow in death the only partner of
her bed that she had ever had; and ordered that, as soon as the signal
had been given from a place of watch, torches should be put to the room,
then that halters should be made out of their robes; and to these they
should proffer their throats to be strangled, thrusting away the support
to the feet. They agreed, and that they might blench the less at death,
she gave them a draught of wine. After this Hagbard was led to the hill,
which afterwards took its name from him, to be hanged. Then, to test the
loyalty of his true love, he told the executioners to hang up his
mantle, saying that it would be a pleasure to him if he could see the
likeness of his approaching death rehearsed in some way. The request was
granted; and the watcher on the outlook, thinking that the thing was
being done to Hagbard, reported what she saw to the maidens who were
shut within the palace. They quickly fired the house, and thrusting away
the wooden support under their feet, gave their necks to the noose to be
writhen. So Hagbard, when he saw the palace wrapped in fire, and the
familiar chamber blazing, said that he felt more joy from the loyalty of
his mistress than sorrow at his approaching death. He also charged the
bystanders to do him to death, witnessing how little he made of his doom
by a song like this:

"Swiftly, O warriors! Let me be caught and lifted into the air. Sweet, O
my bride! Is it for me to die when thou hast gone.

"I perceive the crackling and the house ruddy with flames; and the love,
long-promised, declares our troth.

"Behold, thy covenant is fulfilled with no doubtful vows, since thou
sharest my life and my destruction.

"We shall have one end, one bond after our troth, and somewhere our
first love will live on.

"Happy am I, that have deserved to have joy of such a consort, and not
to go basely alone to the gods of Tartarus!

"Then let the knot gripe the midst of the throat; nought but pleasure
the last doom shall bring,

"Since there remains a sure hope of the renewal of love, and a death
which will soon have joys of its own.

"Either country is sweet; in both worlds shall be held in honour the
repose of our souls together, our equal truth in love,

"For, see now, I welcome the doom before me; since not even among the
shades does very love suffer the embrace of its partner to perish." And
as he spoke the executioners strangled him. And, that none may think
that all traces of antiquity have utterly disappeared, a proof of the
aforesaid event is afforded by local marks yet existing; for the killing
of Hagbard gave his name to the stead; and not far from the town of
Sigar there is a place to be seen, where a mound a little above the
level, with the appearance of a swelling in the ground, looks like an
ancient homestead. Moreover, a man told Absalon that he had seen a beam
found in the spot, which a countryman struck with his ploughshare as he
burrowed into the clods.

Hakon, the son of Hamund, heard of this; but when he was seen to be on
the point of turning his arms from the Irish against the Danes in order
to avenge his brother, Hakon the Zealander, the son of Wigar, and
Starkad deserted him. They had been his allies from the death of Ragnald
up to that hour: one, because he was moved by regard for friendship, the
other by regard for his birth; so that different reasons made both
desire the same thing.

Now patriotism diverted Hakon (of Zealand) from attacking his country;
for it was apparent that he was going to fight his own people, while all
the rest warred with foreigners. But Starkad forbore to become the foe
of the aged Sigar, whose hospitality he had enjoyed, lest he should be
thought to wrong one who deserved well of him. For some men pay such
respect to hospitality that, if they can remember ever to have
experienced kindly offices from folk, they cannot be thought to inflict
any annoyance on them. But Hakon thought the death of his brother a
worse loss than the defection of his champions; and, gathering his fleet
into the haven called Herwig in Danish, and in Latin Hosts' Bight, he
drew up his men, and posted his line of foot-soldiers in the spot where
the town built by Esbern now defends with its fortifications those who
dwell hard by, and repels the approach of barbarous savages. Then he
divided his forces in three, and sent on two-thirds of his ships,
appointing a few men to row to the river Susa. This force was to advance
on a dangerous voyage along its winding reaches, and to help those on
foot if necessary. He marched in person by land with the remainder,
advancing chiefly over wooded country to escape notice. Part of this
path, which was once closed up with thick woods, is now land ready for
the plough, and fringed with a scanty scrub. And, in order that when
they got out into the plain they might not lack the shelter of trees, he
told them to cut and carry branches. Also, that nothing might burden
their rapid march, he bade them cast away some of their clothes, as well
as their scabbards; and carry their swords naked. In memory of this
event he left the mountain and the ford a perpetual name. Thus by his
night march he eluded two pickets of sentries; but when he came upon the
third, a scout, observing the marvellous event, went to the
sleeping-room of Sigar, saying that he brought news of a portentous
thing; for he saw leaves and shrubs like men walking. Then the king
asked him how far off was the advancing forest; and when he heard that
it was near, he added that this prodigy boded his own death. Hence the
marsh where the shrubs were cut down was styled in common parlance
Deadly Marsh. Therefore, fearing the narrow passages, he left the town,
and went to a level spot which was more open, there to meet the enemy in
battle. Sigar fought unsuccessfully, and was crushed and slain at the
spot that is called in common speech Walbrunna, but in Latin the Spring
of Corpses or Carnage. Then Hakon used his conquest to cruel purpose,
and followed up his good fortune so wickedly, that he lusted for an
indiscriminate massacre, and thought no forbearance should be shown to
rank or sex. Nor did he yield to any regard for compassion or shame, but
stained his sword in the blood of women, and attacked mothers and
children in one general and ruthless slaughter.

SIWALD, the son of Sigar, had thus far stayed under his father's roof.
But when he heard of this, he mustered an army in order to have his
vengeance. So Hakon, alarmed at the gathering of such numbers, went back
with a third of his army to his fleet at Herwig, and planned to depart
by sea. But his colleague, Hakon, surnamed the Proud, thought that he
ought himself to feel more confidence at the late victory than fear at
the absence of Hakon; and, preferring death to flight, tried to defend
the remainder of the army. So he drew back his camp for a little, and
for a long time waited near the town of Axelsted, for the arrival of the
fleet, blaming his friends for their tardy coming. For the fleet that
had been sent into the river had not yet come to anchor in the appointed
harbour. Now the killing of Sigar and the love of Siwald were stirring
the temper of the people one and all, so that both sexes devoted
themselves to war, and you would have thought that the battle did not
lack the aid of women.

On the morrow Hakon and Siwald met in an encounter and fought two whole
days. The combat was most frightful; both generals fell; and victory
graced the remnants of the Danes. But, in the night after the battle,
the fleet, having penetrated the Susa, reached the appointed haven. It
was once possible to row along this river; but its bed is now choked
with solid substances, and is so narrowed by its straits that few
vessels can get in, being prevented by its sluggishness and
contractedness. At daybreak, when the sailors saw the corpses of their
friends, they heaped up, in order to bury the general, a barrow of
notable size, which is famous to this day, and is commonly named Hakon's
Howe.

But Borgar, with Skanian chivalry suddenly came up and slaughtered a
multitude of them. When the enemy were destroyed, he manned their ships,
which now lacked their rowers, and hastily, with breathless speed,
pursued the son of Hamund. He encountered him, and ill-fortune befell
Hakon, who fled in hasty panic with three ships to the country of the
Scots, where, after two years had gone by, he died.

All these perilous wars and fortunes had so exhausted the royal line
among the Danes, that it was found to be reduced to GURID alone, the
daughter of Alf, and granddaughter of Sigar. And when the Danes saw
themselves deprived of their usual high-born sovereigns, they committed
the kingdom to men of the people, and appointed rulers out of the
commons, assigning to Ostmar the regency of Skaane, and that of Zealand
to Hunding; on Hane they conferred the lordship of Funen; while in the
hands of Rorik and Hather they put the supreme power of Jutland, the
authority being divided. Therefore, that it may not be unknown from what
father sprang the succeeding line of kings, some matters come to my mind
which must be glanced at for a while in a needful digression.

They say that Gunnar, the bravest of the Swedes, was once at feud with
Norway for the most weighty reasons, and that he was granted liberty to
attack it, but that he turned this liberty into licence by the greatest
perils, and fell, in the first of the raids he planned, upon the
district of Jather, which he put partly to the sword and partly to the
flames. Forbearing to plunder, he rejoiced only in passing through the
paths that were covered with corpses, and the blood-stained ways. Other
men used to abstain from bloodshed, and love pillage more than
slaughter; but he preferred bloodthirstiness to booty, and liked best to
wreak his deadly pleasure by slaughtering men. His cruelty drove the
islanders to forestall the impending danger by a public submission.
Moreover, Ragnald, the King of the Northmen, now in extreme age, when he
heard how the tyrant busied himself, had a cave made and shut up in it
his daughter Drota, giving her due attendance, and providing her
maintenance for a long time. Also he committed to the cave some swords
which had been adorned with the choicest smith-craft, besides the royal
household gear; so that he might not leave the enemy to capture and use
the sword, which he saw that he could not wield himself. And, to prevent
the cave being noticed by its height, he levelled the hump down to the
firmer ground. Then he set out to war; but being unable with his aged
limbs to go down into battle, he leaned on the shoulders of his escort
and walked forth propped by the steps of others. So he perished in the
battle, where he fought with more ardour than success, and left his
country a sore matter for shame.

For Gunnar, in order to punish the cowardice of the conquered race by
terms of extraordinary baseness, had a dog set over them as a governor.
What can we suppose to have been his object in this action, unless it
were to make a haughty nation feel that their arrogance was being more
signally punished when they bowed their stubborn heads before a yapping
hound? To let no insult be lacking, he appointed governors to look after
public and private affairs in its name; and he appointed separate ranks
of nobles to keep continual and steadfast watch over it. He also enacted
that if any one of the courtiers thought it contemptible to do
allegiance to their chief, and omitted offering most respectful homage
to its various goings and comings as it ran hither and thither, he
should be punished with loss of his limbs. Also Gunnar imposed on the
nation a double tribute, one to be paid out of the autumn harvest, the
other in the spring. Thus he burst the bubble conceit of the Norwegians,
to make them feel clearly how their pride was gone, when they saw it
forced to do homage to a dog.

When he heard that the king's daughter was shut up in some distant
hiding-place, Gunnar strained his wits in every nerve to track her out.
Hence, while he was himself conducting the search with others, his
doubtful ear caught the distant sound of a subterranean hum. Then he
went on slowly, and recognized a human voice with greater certainty. He
ordered the ground underfoot to be dug down to the solid rock; and when
the cave was suddenly laid open, he saw the winding tunnels. The
servants were slain as they tried to guard the now uncovered entrance to
the cave, and the girl was dragged out of the hole, together with the
booty therein concealed. With great foresight, she had consigned at any
rate her father's swords to the protection of a more secret place.
Gunnar forced her to submit to his will, and she bore a son Hildiger.
This man was such a rival to his father in cruelty, that he was ever
thirsting to kill, and was bent on nothing but the destruction of men,
panting with a boundless lust for bloodshed. Outlawed by his father on
account of his unbearable ruthlessness, and soon after presented by
Alver with a government, he spent his whole life in arms, visiting his
neighbours with wars and slaughters; nor did he, in his estate of
banishment, relax his accustomed savagery a whir, but would not change
his spirit with his habitation.

Meanwhile Borgar, finding that Gunnar had married Drota, the daughter of
Ragnald, by violence, took from him both life and wife, and wedded Drota
himself. She was not an unwilling bride; she thought it right for her to
embrace the avenger of her parent. For the daughter mourned her father,
and could never bring herself to submit with any pleasure to his
murderer. This woman and Borgar had a son Halfdan, who through all his
early youth was believed to be stupid, but whose later years proved
illustrious for the most glorious deeds, and famous for the highest
qualities that can grace life. Once, when a stripling, he mocked in
boyish fashion at a champion of noble repute, who smote him with a
buffet; whereupon Halfdan attacked him with the staff he was carrying
and killed him. This deed was an omen of his future honours; he had
hitherto been held in scorn, but henceforth throughout his life he had
the highest honour and glory. The affair, indeed, was a prophecy of the
greatness of his deeds in war.

At this period, Rothe, a Ruthenian rover, almost destroyed our country
with his rapine and cruelty. His harshness was so notable that, while
other men spared their prisoners utter nakedness, he did not think it
uncomely to strip of their coverings even the privy parts of their
bodies; wherefore we are wont to this day to call all severe and
monstrous acts of rapine Rothe-Ran (Rothe's Robbery). He used also
sometimes to inflict the following kind of torture: Fastening the men's
right feet firmly to the earth, he tied the left feet to boughs for the
purpose that when these should spring back the body would be rent
asunder. Hane, Prince of Funen, wishing to win honour and glory, tried
to attack this man with his sea-forces, but took to flight with one
attendant. It was in reproach of him that the proverb arose: "The cock
(Hane) fights better on its own dunghill." Then Borgar, who could not
bear to see his countrymen perishing any longer, encountered Rothe.
Together they fought and together they perished. It is said that in this
battle Halfdan was sorely stricken, and was for some time feeble with
the wounds he had received. One of these was inflicted conspicuously on
his mouth, and its scar was so manifest that it remained as an open
blotch when all the other wounds were healed; for the crushed portion of
the lip was so ulcerated by the swelling, that the flesh would not grow
out again and mend the noisome gash. This circumstance fixed on him a
most insulting nickname,.... although wounds in the front of the body
commonly bring praise and not ignominy. So spiteful a colour does the
belief of the vulgar sometimes put upon men's virtues.

Meanwhile Gurid, the daughter of Alf, seeing that the royal line was
reduced to herself alone, and having no equal in birth whom she could
marry, proclaimed a vow imposing chastity on herself, thinking it better
to have no husband than to take one from the commons. Moreover, to
escape outrage, she guarded her room with a chosen band of champions.
Once Halfdan happened to come to see her. The champions, whose brother
he had himself slain in his boyhood, were away. He told her that she
ought to loose her virgin zone, and exchange her austere chastity for
deeds of love; that she ought not to give in so much to her inclination
for modesty as to be too proud to make a match, and so by her service
repair the fallen monarchy. So he bade her look on himself, who was of
eminently illustrious birth, in the light of a husband, since it
appeared that she would only admit pleasure for the reason he had named.
Gurid answered that she could not bring her mind to ally the remnants of
the royal line to a man of meaner rank. Not content with reproaching his
obscure birth, she also taunted his unsightly countenance. Halfdan
rejoined that she brought against him two faults: one that his blood was
not illustrious enough; another, that he was blemished with a cracked
lip whose scar had never healed. Therefore he would not come back to ask
for her before he had wiped away both marks of shame by winning glory in
war.

Halfdan entreated her to suffer no man to be privy to her bed until she
heard certain tidings either of his return or his death. The champions,
whom he had bereaved of their brother long ago, were angry that he had
spoken to Gurid, and tried to ride after him as he went away. When he
saw it, he told his comrades to go into ambush, and said he would
encounter the champions alone. His followers lingered, and thought it
shameful to obey his orders, but he drove them off with threats, saying
that Gurid should not find that fear had made him refuse to fight.
Presently he cut down an oak-tree and fashioned it into a club, fought
the twelve single-handed, and killed them. After their destruction, not
content with the honours of so splendid an action, and meaning to do one
yet greater, he got from his mother the swords of his grandfather, one
of which was called Lyusing.... and the other Hwyting, after the sheen
of its well- whetted point. But when he heard that war was raging
between Alver, the King of Sweden, and the Ruthenians (Russians), he
instantly went to Russia, offered help to the natives, and was received
by all with the utmost honour. Alver was not far off, there being only a
little ground to cross to cover the distance between the two. Alver's
soldier Hildiger, the son of Gunnar, challenged the champions of the
Ruthenians to fight him; but when he saw that Halfdan was put up against
him, though knowing well that he was Halfdan's brother, he let natural
feeling prevail over courage, and said that he, who was famous for the
destruction of seventy champions, would not fight with an untried man.
Therefore he told him to measure himself in enterprises of lesser
moment, and thenceforth to follow pursuits fitted to his strength. He
made this announcement not from distrust in his own courage, but in
order to preserve his uprightness; for he was not only very valiant, but
also skilled at blunting the sword with spells. For when he remembered
that Halfdan's father had slain his own, he was moved by two feelings --
the desire to avenge his father, and his love for his brother. He
therefore thought it better to retire from the challenge than to be
guilty of a very great crime. Halfdan demanded another champion in his
place, slew him when he appeared, and was soon awarded the palm of
valour even by the voice of the enemy, being accounted by public
acclamation the bravest of all. On the next day he asked for two men to
fight with, and slew them both. On the third day he subdued three; on
the fourth he overcame four who met him; and on the fifth he asked for
five.

When Halfdan conquered these, and when the eighth day had been reached
with an equal increase in the combatants and in the victory, he laid low
eleven who attacked him at once. Hildiger, seeing that his own record of
honours was equalled by the greatness of Halfdan's deeds could not bear
to decline to meet him any longer. And when he felt that Halfdan had
dealt him a deadly wound with a sword wrapped in rags, he threw away his
arms, and, lying on the earth, addressed his brother as follows:

"It is pleasing to pass an hour away in mutual talk; and, while the
sword rests, to sit a little on the ground and while away the time by
speaking in turn, and keep ourselves in good heart. Time is left for our
purpose; our two destinies have a different lot; one is surely doomed to
die by a fatal weird, while triumph and glory and all the good of living
await the other in better years. Thus our omens differ, and our portions
are distinguished. Thou art a son of the Danish land, I of the country
of Sweden. Once, Drota thy mother had her breast swell for thee; she
bore me, and by her I am thy foster-brother. Lo now, there perishes a
righteous offspring, who had the heart to fight with savage spears;
brothers born of a shining race charge and bring death on one another;
while they long for the height of power, they lose their days, and,
having now received a fatal mischief in their desire for a sceptre, they
will go to Styx in a common death. Fast by my head stands my Swedish
shield, which is adorned with (as) a fresh mirror of diverse chasing,
and ringed with layers of marvellous fretwork. There a picture of really
hues shows slain nobles and conquered champions, and the wars also and
the notable deed of my right hand. In the midst is to be seen, painted
in bright relief, the figure of my son, whom this hand bereft of his
span of life. He was our only heir, the only thought of his father's
mind, and given to his mother with comfort from above. An evil lot,
which heaps years of ill-fortune on the joyous, chokes mirth in
mourning, and troubles our destiny. For it is lamentable and wretched to
drag out a downcast life, to draw breath through dismal days and to
chafe at foreboding. But whatsoever things are bound by the prophetic
order of the fates, whatsoever are shadowed in the secrets of the divine
plan, whatsoever are foreseen and fixed in the course of the destinies,
no change of what is transient shall cancel these things."

When he had thus spoken, Halfdan condemned Hildiger for sloth in avowing
so late their bond of brotherhood; he declared he had kept silence that
he might not be thought a coward for refusing to fight, or a villain if
he fought; and while intent on these words of excuse, he died. But
report had given out among the Danes that Hildiger had overthrown
Halfdan. After this, Siwar, a Saxon of very high birth, began to be a
suitor for Gurid, the only survivor of the royal blood among the Danes.
Secretly she preferred Halfdan to him, and imposed on her wooer the
condition that he should not ask her in marriage till he had united into
one body the kingdom of the Danes, which was now torn limb from limb,
and restored by arms what had been wrongfully taken from her. Siwar made
a vain attempt to do this; but as he bribed all the guardians, she was
at last granted to him in betrothal. Halfdan heard of this in Russia
through traders, and voyaged so hard that he arrived before the time of
the wedding-rites. On their first day, before he went to the palace, he
gave orders that his men should not stir from the watches appointed them
till their ears caught the clash of the steel in the distance. Unknown
to the guests, he came and stood before the maiden, and, that he might
not reveal his meaning to too many by bare and common speech, he
composed a dark and ambiguous song as follows:

"As I left my father's sceptre, I had no fear of the wiles of woman's
device nor of female subtlety.

"When I overthrew, one and two, three and four, and soon five, and next
six, then seven, and also eight, yea eleven single- handed, triumphant
in battle.

"But neither did I then think that I was to be shamed with the taint of
disgrace, with thy frailness to thy word and thy beguiling pledges."

Gurid answered: "My soul wavered in suspense, with slender power over
events, and shifted about with restless fickleness. The report of thee
was so fleeting, so doubtful, borne on uncertain stories, and parched by
doubting heart. I feared that the years of thy youth had perished by the
sword. Could I withstand singly my elders and governors, when they
forbade me to refuse that thing, and pressed me to become a wife? My
love and my flame are both yet unchanged, they shall be mate and match
to thine; nor has my troth been disturbed, but shall have faithful
approach to thee.

"For my promise has not yet beguiled thee at all, though I, being alone,
could not reject the counsel of such manifold persuasion, nor oppose
their stern bidding in the matter of my consent to the marriage bond."

Before the maiden had finished her answer, Halfdan had already run his
sword through the bridegroom. Not content with having killed one man, he
massacred most of the guests. Staggering tipsily backwards, the Saxons
ran at him, but his servants came up and slaughtered them. After this
HALFDAN took Gurid to wife. But finding in her the fault of barrenness,
and desiring much to have offspring, he went to Upsala in order to
procure fruitfulness for her; and being told in answer, that he must
make atonement to the shades of his brother if he would raise up
children, he obeyed the oracle, and was comforted by gaining his desire.
For he had a son by Gurid, to whom he gave the name of Harald. Under his
title Halfdan tried to restore the kingdom of the Danes to its ancient
estate, as it was torn asunder by the injuries of the chiefs; but, while
fighting in Zealand, he attacked Wesete, a very famous champion, in
battle, and was slain. Gurid was at the battle in man's attire, from
love for her son. She saw the event; the young man fought hotly, but his
companions fled; and she took him on her shoulders to a neighbouring
wood. Weariness, more than anything else, kept the enemy from pursuing
him; but one of them shot him as he hung, with an arrow, through the
hinder parts, and Harald thought that his mother's care brought him more
shame than help.

HARALD, being of great beauty and unusual size, and surpassing those of
his age in strength and stature, received such favour from Odin (whose
oracle was thought to have been the cause of his birth), that steel
could not injure his perfect soundness. The result was, that shafts
which wounded others were disabled from doing him any harm. Nor was the
boon unrequited; for he is reported to have promised to Odin all the
souls which his sword cast out of their bodies. He also had his father's
deeds recorded for a memorial by craftsmen on a rock in Bleking, whereof
I have made mention.

After this, hearing that Wesete was to hold his wedding in Skaane, he
went to the feast disguised as a beggar; and when all were sunken in
wine and sleep, he battered the bride-chamber with a beam. But Wesete,
without inflicting a wound, so beat his mouth with a cudgel, that he
took out two teeth; but two grinders unexpectedly broke out afterwards
and repaired their loss: an event which earned him the name of
Hyldetand, which some declare he obtained on account of a prominent row
of teeth. Here he slew Wesete, and got the sovereignty of Skaane. Next
he attacked and killed Hather in Jutland; and his fall is marked by the
lasting name of the town. After this he overthrew Hunding and Rorik,
seized Leire, and reunited the dismembered realm of Denmark into its
original shape. Then he found that Asmund, the King of the Wikars, had
been deprived of his throne by his elder sister; and, angered by such
presumption on the part of a woman, went to Norway with a single ship,
while the war was still undecided, to help him. The battle began; and,
clothed in a purple cloak, with a coif broidered with gold, and with his
hair bound up, he went against the enemy trusting not in arms, but in
his silent certainty of his luck, insomuch that he seemed dressed more
for a feast than a fray. But his spirit did not match his attire. For,
though unarmed and only adorned with his emblems of royalty, he
outstripped the rest who bore arms, and exposed himself, lightly-armed
as he was, to the hottest perils of the battle. For the shafts aimed
against him lost all power to hurt, as if their points had been blunted.
When the other side saw him fighting unarmed, they made an attack, and
were forced for very shame into assailing him more hotly. But Harald,
whole in body, either put them to the sword, or made them take to
flight; and thus he overthrew the sister of Asmund, and restored him his
kingdom. When Asmund offered him the prizes of victory, he said that the
reward of glory was enough by itself; and demeaned himself as greatly in
refusing the gifts as he had in earning them. By this he made all men
admire his self-restraint as much as his valour; and declared that the
victory should give him a harvest not of gold but glory.

Meantime Alver, the King of the Swedes, died leaving sons Olaf, Ing, and
Ingild. One of these, Ing, dissatisfied with the honours his father
bequeathed him, declared war with the Danes in order to extend his
empire. And when Harald wished to inquire of oracles how this war would
end, an old man of great height, but lacking one eye, and clad also in a
hairy mantle, appeared before him, and declared that he was called Odin,
and was versed in the practice of warfare; and he gave him the most
useful instruction how to divide up his army in the field. Now he told
him, whenever he was going to make war with his land-forces, to divide
his whole army into three squadrons, each of which he was to pack into
twenty ranks; the centre squadron, however, he was to extend further
than the rest by the number of twenty men. This squadron he was also to
arrange in the form of the point of a cone or pyramid, and to make the
wings on either side slant off obliquely from it. He was to compose the
successive ranks of each squadron in the following way: the front should
begin with two men, and the number in each succeeding rank should only
increase by one; he was, in fact, to post a rank of three in the second
line, four in the third, and so on behind. And thus, when the men
mustered, all the succeeding ranks were to be manned at the same rate of
proportion, until the end of (the edge that made) the junction of men
came down to the wings; each wing was to be drawn up in ten lines from
that point. Likewise after these squadrons he was to put the young men,
equipped with lances, and behind these to set the company of aged men,
who would support their comrades with what one might call a veteran
valour if they faltered; next, a skilful reckoner should attach wings of
slingers to stand behind the ranks of their fellows and attack the enemy
from a distance with missiles. After these he was to enroll men of any
age or rank indiscriminately, without heed of their estate. Moreover, he
was to draw up the rear like the vanguard, in three separated divisions,
and arranged in ranks similarly proportioned. The back of this, joining
on to the body in front would protect it by facing in the opposite
direction. But if a sea-battle happened to occur, he should withdraw a
portion of his fleet, which when he began the intended engagement, was
to cruise round that of the enemy, wheeling to and fro continually.
Equipped with this system of warfare, he forestalled matters in Sweden,
and killed Ing and Olaf as they were making ready to fight. Their
brother Ingild sent messengers to beg a truce, on pretence of his ill-
health. Harald granted his request, that his own valour, which had
learnt to spare distress, might not triumph over a man in the hour of
lowliness and dejection. When Ingild afterwards provoked Harald by
wrongfully ravishing his sister, Harald vexed him with long and
indecisive war, but then took him into his friendship, thinking it
better to have him for ally than for enemy.

After this he heard that Olaf, King of the Thronds, had to fight with
the maidens Stikla and Rusila for the kingdom. Much angered at this
arrogance on the part of women, he went to Olaf unobserved, put on dress
which concealed the length of his teeth, and attacked the maidens. He
overthrew them both, leaving to two harbours a name akin to theirs. It
was then that he gave a notable exhibition of valour; for defended only
by a shirt under his shoulders, he fronted the spears with unarmed
breast.

When Olaf offered Harald the prize of victory, he rejected the gift,
thus leaving it a question whether he had shown a greater example of
bravery or self-control. Then he attacked a champion of the Frisian
nation, named Ubbe, who was ravaging the borders of Jutland and
destroying numbers of the common people; and when Harald could not
subdue him to his arms, he charged his soldiers to grip him with their
hands, throw him on the ground, and to bind him while thus overpowered.
Thus he only overcame the man and mastered him by a shameful kind of
attack, though a little before he thought he would inflict a heavy
defeat on him. But Harald gave him his sister in marriage, and thus
gained him for his soldier.

Harald made tributaries of the nations that lay along the Rhine, levying
troops from the bravest of that race. With these forces he conquered
Sclavonia in war, and caused its generals, Duk and Dal, because of their
bravery, to be captured, and not killed. These men he took to serve with
him, and, after overcoming Aquitania, soon went to Britain, where he
overthrew the King of the Humbrians, and enrolled the smartest of the
warriors he had conquered, the chief of whom was esteemed to be Orm,
surnamed the Briton. The fame of these deeds brought champions from
divers parts of the world, whom he formed into a band of mercenaries.
Strengthened by their numbers, he kept down insurrections in all
kingdoms by the terror of his name, so that he took out of their rulers
all courage to fight with one another. Moreover, no man durst assume any
sovereignty on the sea without his consent; for of old the state of the
Danes had the joint lordship of land and sea.

Meantime Ingild died in Sweden, leaving only a very little son, Ring,
whom he had by the sister of Harald. Harald gave the boy guardians, and
put him over his father's kingdom. Thus, when he had overcome princes
and provinces, he passed fifty years in peace. To save the minds of his
soldiers from being melted into sloth by this inaction, he decreed that
they should assiduously learn from the champions the way of parrying and
dealing blows. Some of these were skilled in a remarkable manner of
fighting, and used to smite the eyebrow on the enemy's forehead with an
infallible stroke; but if any man, on receiving the blow, blinked for
fear, twitching his eyebrow, he was at once expelled the court and
dismissed the service.

At this time Ole, the son of Siward and of Harald's sister, came to
Denmark from the land of Norway in the desire to see his uncle. Since it
is known that he had the first place among the followers of Harald, and
that after the Swedish war he came to the throne of Denmark, it bears
somewhat on the subject to relate the traditions of his deeds. Ole,
then, when he had passed his tenth to his fifteenth year with his
father, showed incredible proofs of his brilliant gifts both of mind and
body. Moreover, he was so savage of countenance that his eyes were like
the arms of other men against the enemy, and he terrified the bravest
with his stern and flashing glance. He heard the tidings that Gunn,
ruler of Tellemark, with his son Grim, was haunting as a robber the
forest of Etha-scog, which was thick with underbrush and full of gloomy
glens. The offence moved his anger; then he asked his father for a
horse, a dog, and such armour as could be got, and cursed his youth,
which was suffering the right season for valour to slip sluggishly away.
He got what he asked, and explored the aforesaid wood very narrowly. He
saw the footsteps of a man printed deep on the snow; for the rime was
blemished by the steps, and betrayed the robber's progress. Thus guided,
he went over a hill, and came on a very great river. This effaced the
human tracks he had seen before, and he determined that he must cross.
But the mere mass of water, whose waves ran down in a headlong torrent,
seemed to forbid all crossing; for it was full of hidden reefs, and the
whole length of its channel was turbid with a kind of whirl of foam. Yet
all fear of danger was banished from Ole's mind by his impatience to
make haste. So valour conquered fear, and rashness scorned peril;
thinking nothing hard to do if it were only to his mind, he crossed the
hissing eddies on horseback. When he had passed these, he came upon
defiles surrounded on all sides with swamps, the interior of which was
barred from easy approach by the pinnacle of a bank in front. He took
his horse over this, and saw an enclosure with a number of stalls. Out
of this he turned many horses, and was minded to put in his own, when a
certain Tok, a servant of Gunn, angry that a stranger should wax so
insolent, attacked him fiercely; but Ole foiled his assailant by simply
opposing his shield. Thinking it a shame to slay the fellow with the
sword, he seized him, shattered him limb by limb, and flung him across
into the house whence he had issued in his haste. This insult quickly
aroused Gunn and Grim: they ran out by different side- doors, and
charged Ole both at once, despising his age and strength. He wounded
them fatally; and, when their bodily powers were quite spent, Grim, who
could scarce muster a final gasp, and whose force was almost utterly
gone, with his last pants composed this song:

"Though we be weak in frame, and the loss of blood has drained our
strength; since the life-breath, now drawn out by my wound, scarce
quivers softly in my pierced breast:

"I counsel that we should make the battle of our last hour glorious with
dauntless deeds, that none may say that a combat has anywhere been
bravelier waged or harder fought;

"And that our wild strife while we bore arms may, when our weary flesh
has found rest in the tomb, win us the wage of immortal fame.

"Let our first stroke crush the shoulder-blades of the foe, let our
steel cut off both his hands; so that, when Stygian Pluto has taken us,
a like doom may fall on Ole also, and a common death tremble over three,
and one urn cover the ashes of three."

Here Grim ended. But his father, rivalling his indomitable spirit, and
wishing to give some exhortation in answer to his son's valiant speech,
thus began:

"What though our veins be wholly bloodless, and in our frail body the
life be brief, yet our last fight be so strong and strenuous that it
suffer not the praise of us to be brief also.

"Therefore aim the javelin first at the shoulders and arms of the foe,
so that the work of his hands may be weakened; and thus when we are gone
three shall receive a common sepulchre, and one urn alike for three
shall cover our united dust."

When he had said this, both of them, resting on their knees (for the
approach of death had drained their strength), made a desperate effort
to fight Ole hand to hand, in order that, before they perished, they
might slay their enemy also; counting death as nothing if only they
might envelope their slayer in a common fall. Ole slew one of them with
his sword, the other with his hound. But even he gained no bloodless
victory; for though he had been hitherto unscathed, now at last he
received a wound in front. His dog diligently licked him over, and he
regained his bodily strength: and soon, to publish sure news of his
victory, he hung the bodies of the robbers upon gibbets in wide view.
Moreover, he took the stronghold, and put in secret keeping all the
booty he found there, in reserve for future use.

At this time the arrogant wantonness of the brothers Skate and Hiale
waxed so high that they would take virgins of notable beauty from their
parents and ravish them. Hence it came about that they formed the
purpose of seizing Esa, the daughter of Olaf, prince of the Werms; and
bade her father, if he would not have her serve the passion of a
stranger, fight either in person, or by some deputy, in defence of his
child. When Ole had news of this, he rejoiced in the chance of a battle,
and borrowing the attire of a peasant, went to the dwelling of Olaf. He
received one of the lowest places at table; and when he saw the
household of the king in sorrow, he called the king's son closer to him,
and asked why they all wore so lamentable a face. The other answered,
that unless someone quickly interposed to protect them, his sister's
chastity would soon be outraged by some ferocious champions. Ole next
asked him what reward would be received by the man who devoted his life
for the maiden. Olaf, on his son asking him about this matter, said that
his daughter should go to the man who fought for her: and these words,
more than anything, made Ole long to encounter the danger.

Now the maiden was wont to go from one guest to another in order to scan
their faces narrowly, holding out a light that she might have a surer
view of the dress and character of those who were entertained. It is
also believed that she divined their lineage from the lines and features
of the face, and could discern any man's birth by sheer shrewdness of
vision. When she stood and fixed the scrutiny of her gaze upon Olaf, she
was stricken with the strange awfulness of his eyes, and fell almost
lifeless. But when her strength came slowly back, and her breath went
and came more freely, she again tried to look at the young man, but
suddenly slipped and fell forward, as though distraught. A third time
also she strove to lift her closed and downcast gaze, but suddenly
tottered and fell, unable not only to move her eyes, but even to control
her feet; so much can strength be palsied by amazement. When Olaf saw
it, he asked her why she had fallen so often. She averred that she was
stricken by the savage gaze of the guest; that he was born of kings; and
she declared that if he could baulk the will of the ravishers, he was
well worthy of her arms. Then all of them asked Ole, who was keeping his
face muffled in a hat, to fling off his covering, and let them see
something by which to learn his features. Then, bidding them all lay
aside their grief, and keep their heart far from sorrow, he uncovered
his brow; and he drew the eyes of all upon him in marvel at his great
beauty. For his locks were golden and the hair of his head was radiant;
but he kept the lids close over his pupils, that they might not terrify
the beholders.

All were heartened with the hope of better things; the guests seemed to
dance and the courtiers to leap for joy; the deepest melancholy seemed
to be scattered by an outburst of cheerfulness. Thus hope relieved their
fears; the banquet wore a new face, and nothing was the same, or like
what it had been before. So the kindly promise of a single guest
dispelled the universal terror. Meanwhile Hiale and Skate came up with
ten servants, meaning to carry off the maiden then and there, and
disturbed all the place with their noisy shouts. They called on the king
to give battle, unless he produced his daughter instantly. Ole at once
met their frenzy with the promise to fight, adding the condition that no
one should stealthily attack an opponent in the rear, but should only
combat in the battle face to face. Then, with his sword called Logthi,
he felled them all, single-handed -- an achievement beyond his years.
The ground for the battle was found on an isle in the middle of a swamp,
not far from which is a stead that serves to memorise this slaughter,
bearing the names of the brothers Hiale and Skate together.

So the girl was given him as prize of the combat, and bore him a son
Omund. Then he gained his father-in-law's leave to revisit his father.
But when he heard that his country was being attacked by Thore, with the
help of Toste Sacrificer, and Leotar, surnamed.... he went to fight
them, content with a single servant, who was dressed as a woman. When he
was near the house of Thore, he concealed his own and his attendant's
swords in hollowed staves. And when he entered the palace, he disguised
his true countenance, and feigned to be a man broken with age. He said
that with Siward he had been king of the beggars, but that he was now in
exile, having been stubbornly driven forth by the hatred of the king's
son Ole. Presently many of the courtiers greeted him with the name of
king, and began to kneel and offer him their hands in mockery. He told
them to bear out in deeds what they had done in jest; and, plucking out
the swords which he and his man kept shut in their staves, attacked the
king. So some aided Ole, taking it more as jest than earnest, and would
not be false to the loyalty which they mockingly yielded him; but most
of them, breaking their idle vow, took the side of Thore. Thus arose an
internecine and undecided fray. At last Thore was overwhelmed and slain
by the arms of his own folk, as much as by these of his guests; and
Leotar, wounded to the death, and judging that his conqueror, Ole, was
as keen in mind as he was valorous in deeds, gave him the name of the
Vigorous, and prophesied that he should perish by the same kind of trick
as he had used with Thore; for, without question he should fall by the
treachery of his own house. And, as he spoke, he suddenly passed away.
Thus we can see that the last speech of the dying man expressed by its
shrewd divination the end that should come upon his conqueror.

After these deeds Ole did not go back to his father till he had restored
peace to his house. His father gave him the command of the sea, and he
destroyed seventy sea-kings in a naval battle. The most distinguished
among these were Birwil and Hwirwil, Thorwil, Nef and Onef, Redward (?),
Rand and Erand (?). By the honour and glory of this exploit he excited
many champions, whose whole heart's desire was for bravery, to join in
alliance with him. He also enrolled into a bodyguard the wild young
warriors who were kindled with a passion for glory. Among these he
received Starkad with the greatest honour, and cherished him with more
friendship than profit. Thus fortified, he checked, by the greatness of
his name, the wantonness of the neighbouring kings, in that he took from
them all their forces and all liking and heart for mutual warfare.

After this he went to Harald, who made him commander of the sea; and at
last he was transferred to the service of Ring. At this time one Brun
was the sole partner and confidant of all Harald's councils. To this man
both Harald and Ring, whenever they needed a secret messenger, used to
entrust their commissions. This degree of intimacy he obtained because
he had been reared and fostered with them. But Brun, amid the toils of
his constant journeys to and fro, was drowned in a certain river; and
Odin, disguised under his name and looks, shook the close union of the
kings by his treacherous embassage; and he sowed strife so guilefully
that he engendered in men, who were bound by friendship and blood, a
bitter mutual hate, which seemed unappeasable except by war. Their
dissensions first grew up silently; at last both sides betrayed their
leanings, and their secret malice burst into the light of day. So they
declared their feuds, and seven years passed in collecting the materials
of war. Some say that Harald secretly sought occasions to destroy
himself, not being moved by malice or jealousy for the crown, but by a
deliberate and voluntary effort. His old age and his cruelty made him a
burden to his subjects; he preferred the sword to the pangs of disease,
and liked better to lay down his life in the battle-field than in his
bed, that he might have an end in harmony with the deeds of his past
life. Thus, to make his death more illustrious, and go to the nether
world in a larger company, he longed to summon many men to share his
end; and he therefore of his own will prepared for war, in order to make
food for future slaughter. For these reasons, being seized with as great
a thirst to die himself as to kill others, and wishing the massacre on
both sides to be equal, he furnished both sides with equal resources;
but let Ring have a somewhat stronger force, preferring he should
conquer and survive him.

ENDNOTES:  
(1) A parallel is the Lionel-Lancelot story of children saved by being
turned into dogs.
