<span class="small"></span>

[Sacred Texts Index](../../index)  [Northern European Index](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saxopref)  [Next](saxoint2) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Danish History, Introduction Part I

SAXO'S POSITION.

Saxo Grammaticus, or "The Lettered", one of the notable historians of
the Middle Ages, may fairly be called not only the earliest chronicler
of Denmark, but her earliest writer. In the latter half of the twelfth
century, when Iceland was in the flush of literary production, Denmark
lingered behind. No literature in her vernacular, save a few Runic
inscriptions, has survived. Monkish annals, devotional works, and lives
were written in Latin; but the chronicle of Roskild, the necrology of
Lund, the register of gifts to the cloister of Sora, are not literature.
Neither are the half-mythological genealogies of kings; and besides, the
mass of these, though doubtless based on older verses that are lost, are
not proved to be, as they stand, prior to Saxo. One man only, Saxo's
elder contemporary, Sueno Aggonis, or Sweyn (Svend) Aageson, who wrote
about 1185, shares or anticipates the credit of attempting a connected
record. His brief draft of annals is written in rough mediocre Latin. It
names but a few of the kings recorded by Saxo, and tells little that
Saxo does not. Yet there is a certain link between the two writers.
Sweyn speaks of Saxo with respect; he not obscurely leaves him the task
of filling up his omissions. Both writers, servants of the brilliant
Bishop Absalon, and probably set by him upon their task, proceed, like
Geoffrey of Monmouth, by gathering and editing mythical matter. This
they more or less embroider, and arrive in due course insensibly at
actual history. Both, again, thread their stories upon a genealogy of
kings in part legendary. Both write at the spur of patriotism, both to
let Denmark linger in the race for light and learning, and desirous to
save her glories, as other nations have saved theirs, by a record. But
while Sweyn only made a skeleton chronicle, Saxo leaves a memorial in
which historian and philologist find their account. His seven later
books are the chief Danish authority for the times which they relate;
his first nine, here translated, are a treasure of myth and folk-lore.
Of the songs and stories which Denmark possessed from the common
Scandinavian stock, often her only native record is in Saxo's Latin.
Thus, as a chronicler both of truth and fiction, he had in his own land
no predecessor, nor had he any literary tradition behind him.
Single-handed, therefore, he may be said to have lifted the dead-weight
against him, and given Denmark a writer. The nature of his work will be
discussed presently.

LIFE OF SAXO.

Of Saxo little is known but what he himself indicates, though much
doubtful supposition has gathered round his name.

That he was born a Dane his whole language implies; it is full of a glow
of aggressive patriotism. He also often praises the Zealanders at the
expense of other Danes, and Zealand as the centre of Denmark; but that
is the whole contemporary evidence for the statement that he was a
Zealander. This statement is freely taken for granted three centuries
afterwards by Urne in the first edition of the book (1514), but is not
traced further back than an epitomator, who wrote more than 200 years
after Saxo's death. Saxo tells us that his father and grandfather fought
for Waldemar the First of Denmark, who reigned from 1157 to 1182. Of
these men we know nothing further, unless the Saxo whom he names as one
of Waldemar's admirals be his grandfather, in which case his family was
one of some distinction and his father and grandfather probably "King's
men". But Saxo was a very common name, and we shall see the licence of
hypothesis to which this fact has given rise. The notice, however, helps
us approximately towards Saxo's birth-year. His grandfather, if he
fought for Waldemar, who began to reign in 1157, can hardly have been
born before 1100, nor can Saxo himself have been born before 1145 or
1150. But he was undoubtedly born before 1158, since he speaks of the
death of Bishop Asker, which took place in that year, as occurring "in
our time". His life therefore covers and overlaps the last half of the
twelfth century.

His calling and station in life are debated. Except by the anonymous
Zealand chronicler, who calls him Saxo "the Long", thus giving us the
one personal detail we have, he has been universally known as Saxo
"Grammaticus" ever since the epitomator of 1431 headed his compilation
with the words, "A certain notable man of letters ("grammaticus"), a
Zealander by birth, named Saxo, wrote," etc. It is almost certain that
this general term, given only to men of signal gifts and learning,
became thus for the first time, and for good, attached to Saxo's name.
Such a title, in the Middle Ages, usually implied that its owner was a
churchman, and Saxo's whole tone is devout, though not conspicuously
professional.

But a number of Saxos present themselves in the same surroundings with
whom he has been from time to time identified. All he tells us himself
is, that Absalon, Archbishop of Lund from 1179 to 1201, pressed him, who
was "the least of his companions, since all the rest refused the task",
to write the history of Denmark, so that it might record its glories
like other nations. Absalon was previously, and also after his
promotion, Bishop of Roskild, and this is the first circumstance giving
colour to the theory -- which lacks real evidence -- that Saxo the
historian was the same as a certain Saxo, Provost of the Chapter of
Roskild, whose death is chronicled in a contemporary hand without any
mark of distinction. It is unlikely that so eminent a man would be thus
barely named; and the appended eulogy and verses identifying the Provost
and the historian are of later date. Moreover, the Provost Saxo went on
a mission to Paris in 1165, and was thus much too old for the theory.
Nevertheless, the good Bishop of Roskild, Lave Urne, took this identity
for granted in the first edition, and fostered the assumption. Saxo was
a cleric; and could such a man be of less than canonical rank? He was
(it was assumed) a Zealander; he was known to be a friend of Absalon,
Bishop of Roskild. What more natural than that he should have been the
Provost Saxo? Accordingly this latter worthy had an inscription in gold
letters, written by Lave Urne himself, affixed to the wall opposite his
tomb.

Even less evidence exists for identifying our Saxo with the scribe of
that name -- a comparative menial -- who is named in the will of Bishop
Absalon; and hardly more warranted is the theory that he was a member,
perhaps a subdeacon, of the monastery of St. Laurence, whose secular
canons formed part of the Chapter of Lund. It is true that Sweyn
Aageson, Saxo's senior by about twenty years, speaks (writing about
1185) of Saxo as his "contubernalis". Sweyn Aageson is known to have had
strong family connections with the monastery of St. Laurence; but there
is only a tolerably strong probability that he, and therefore that Saxo,
was actually a member of it. ("Contubernalis" may only imply comradeship
in military service.) Equally doubtful is the consequence that since
Saxo calls himself "one of the least" of Absalon's "followers"
("comitum"), he was probably, if not the inferior officer, who is called
an "acolitus", at most a sub-deacon, who also did the work of a superior
"acolitus". This is too poor a place for the chief writer of Denmark,
high in Absalon's favor, nor is there any direct testimony that Saxo
held it.

His education is unknown, but must have been careful. Of his training
and culture we only know what his book betrays. Possibly, like other
learned Danes, then and afterwards, he acquired his training and
knowledge at some foreign University. Perhaps, like his contemporary
Anders Suneson, he went to Paris; but we cannot tell. It is not even
certain that he had a degree; for there is really little to identify him
with the "M(agister) Saxo" who witnessed the deed of Absalon founding
the monastery at Sora.

THE HISTORY.

How he was induced to write his book has been mentioned. The expressions
of modesty Saxo uses, saying that he was "the least" of Absalon's
"followers", and that "all the rest refused the task", are not to be
taken to the letter. A man of his parts would hardly be either the least
in rank, or the last to be solicited. The words, however, enable us to
guess an upward limit for the date of the inception of the work. Absalon
became Archbishop in 1179, and the language of the Preface (written, as
we shall see, last) implies that he was already Archbishop when he
suggested the History to Saxo. But about 1185 we find Sweyn Aageson
complimenting Saxo, and saying that Saxo "had \`determined' to set forth
all the deeds" of Sweyn Estridson, in his eleventh book, "at greater
length in a more elegant style". The exact bearing of this notice on the
date of Saxo's History is doubtful. It certainly need not imply that
Saxo had already written ten books, or indeed that he had written any,
of his History. All we call say is, that by 1185 a portion of the
history was planned. The order in which its several parts were composed,
and the date of its completion, are not certainly known, as Absalon died
in 1201. But the work was not then finished; for, at the end of Bk. XI,
one Birger, who died in 1202, is mentioned as still alive.

We have, however, a yet later notice. In the Preface, which, as its
whole language implies, was written last, Saxo speaks of Waldemar II
having "encompassed (\`complexus') the ebbing and flowing waves of
Elbe." This language, though a little vague, can hardly refer to
anything but an expedition of Waldemar to Bremen in 1208. The whole
History was in that case probably finished by about 1208. As to the
order in which its parts were composed, it is likely that Absalon's
original instruction was to write a history of Absalon's own doings. The
fourteenth and succeeding books deal with these at disproportionate
length, and Absalon, at the expense even of Waldemar, is the
protagonist. Now Saxo states in his Preface that he "has taken care to
follow the statements ("asserta") of Absalon, and with obedient mind and
pen to include both his own doings and other men's doings of which he
learnt."

The latter books are, therefore, to a great extent, Absalon's personally
communicated memoirs. But we have seen that Absalon died in 1201, and
that Bk. xi, at any rate, was not written after 1202. It almost
certainly follows that the latter books were written in Absalon's life;
but the Preface, written after them, refers to events in 1208.
Therefore, unless we suppose that the issue was for some reason delayed,
or that Saxo spent seven years in polishing -- which is not impossible
-- there is some reason to surmise that he began with that portion of
his work which was nearest to his own time, and added the previous
(especially the first nine, or mythical) books, as a completion, and
possibly as an afterthought. But this is a point which there is no real
means of settling. We do not know how late the Preface was written,
except that it must have been some time between 1208 and 1223, when
Anders Suneson ceased to be Archbishop; nor do we know when Saxo died.

HISTORY OF THE WORK.

Nothing is stranger than that a work of such force and genius, unique in
Danish letters, should have been forgotten for three hundred years, and
have survived only in an epitome and in exceedingly few manuscripts. The
history of the book is worth recording. Doubtless its very merits, its
"marvellous vocabulary, thickly-studded maxims, and excellent variety of
images," which Erasmus admired long afterwards, sealed it to the vulgar.
A man needed some Latin to appreciate it, and Erasmus' natural wonder
"how a Dane at that day could have such a force of eloquence" is a
measure of the rarity both of the gift and of a public that could
appraise it. The epitome (made about 1430) shows that Saxo was felt to
be difficult, its author saying: "Since Saxo's work is in many places
diffuse, and many things are said more for ornament than for historical
truth, and moreover his style is too obscure on account of the number of
terms ("plurima vocabula") and sundry poems, which are unfamiliar to
modern times, this opuscle puts in clear words the more notable of the
deeds there related, with the addition of some that happened after
Saxo's death." A Low-German version of this epitome, which appeared in
1485, had a considerable vogue, and the two together "helped to drive
the history out of our libraries, and explains why the annalists and
geographers of the Middle Ages so seldom quoted it." This neglect
appears to have been greatest of all in Denmark, and to have lasted
until the appearance of the "First Edition" in 1511.

The first impulse towards this work by which Saxo was saved, is found in
a letter from the Bishop of Roskild, Lave Urne, dated May 1512, to
Christian Pederson, Canon of Lund, whom he compliments as a lover of
letters, antiquary, and patriot, and urges to edit and publish "tam
divinum latinae eruditionis culmen et splendorem Saxonem nostrum".
Nearly two years afterwards Christian Pederson sent Lave Urne a copy of
the first edition, now all printed, with an account of its history. "I
do not think that any mortal was more inclined and ready for" the task.
"When living at Paris, and paying heed to good literature, I twice sent
a messenger at my own charges to buy a faithful copy at any cost, and
bring it back to me. Effecting nothing thus, I went back to my country
for this purpose; I visited and turned over all the libraries, but still
could not pull out a Saxo, even covered with beetles, bookworms, mould,
and dust. So stubbornly had all the owners locked it away." A worthy
prior, in compassion offered to get a copy and transcribe it with his
own hand, but Christian, in respect for the prior's rank, absurdly
declined. At last Birger, the Archbishop of Lund, by some strategy, got
a copy, which King Christian the Second allowed to be taken to Paris on
condition of its being wrought at "by an instructed and skilled graver
(printer)." Such a person was found in Jodocus Badius Ascenshls, who
adds a third letter written by himself to Bishop Urne, vindicating his
application to Saxo of the title Grammaticus, which he well defines as
"one who knows how to speak or write with diligence, acuteness, or
knowledge." The beautiful book he produced was worthy of the zeal, and
unsparing, unweariable pains, which had been spent on it by the band of
enthusiasts, and it was truly a little triumph of humanism. Further
editions were reprinted during the sixteenth century at Basic and at
Frankfort-on-Main, but they did not improve in any way upon the first;
and the next epoch in the study of Saxo was made by the edition and
notes of Stephanus Johansen Stephanius, published at Copenhagen in the
middle of the seventeenth century (1644). Stephanius, the first
commentator on Saxo, still remains the best upon his language. Immense
knowledge of Latin, both good and bad (especially of the authors Saxo
imitated), infinite and prolix industry, a sharp eye for the text, and
continence in emendation, are not his only virtues. His very bulkiness
and leisureliness are charming; he writes like a man who had eternity to
write in, and who knew enough to fill it, and who expected readers of an
equal leisure. He also prints some valuable notes signed with the famous
name of Bishop Bryniolf of Skalholt, a man of force and talent, and
others by Casper Barth, "corculum Musarum", as Stephanius calls him,
whose textual and other comments are sometimes of use, and who worked
with a MS. of Saxo. The edition of Klotz, 1771, based on that of
Stephanius, I have but seen; however, the first standard commentary is
that begun by P. E. Muller, Bishop of Zealand, and finished after his
death by Johan Velschow, Professor of History at Copenhagen, where the
first part of the work, containing text and notes, was published in
1839; the second, with prolegomena and fuller notes, appearing in 1858.
The standard edition, containing bibliography, critical apparatus based
on all the editions and MS. fragments, text, and index, is the admirable
one of that indefatigable veteran, Alfred Holder, Strasburg, 1886.

Hitherto the translations of Saxo have been into Danish. The first that
survives, by Anders Soffrinson Vedel, dates from 1575, some sixty years
after the first edition. In such passages as I have examined it is
vigorous, but very free, and more like a paraphrase than a translation,
Saxo's verses being put into loose prose. Yet it has had a long life,
having been modified by Vedel's grandson, John Laverentzen, in 1715, and
reissued in 1851. The present version has been much helped by the
translation of Seier Schousbolle, published at Copenhagen in 1752. It is
true that the verses, often the hardest part, are put into periphrastic
verse (by Laurentius Thura, c. 1721), and Schousbolle often does not
face a difficulty; but he gives the sense of Saxo simply and concisely.
The lusty paraphrase by the enthusiastic Nik. Fred. Sev. Grundtvig, of
which there have been several editions, has also been of occasional use.
No other translations, save of a scrap here and there into German, seem
to be extant.

THE MSS.

It will be understood, from what has been said, that no complete MS. of
Saxo's History is known. The epitomator in the fourteenth century, and
Krantz in the seventeenth, had MSS. before them; and there was that one
which Christian Pedersen found and made the basis of the first edition,
but which has disappeared. Barth had two manuscripts, which are said to
have been burnt in 1636. Another, possessed by a Swedish parish priest,
Aschaneus, in 1630, which Stephenhis unluckily did not know of,
disappeared in the Royal Archives of Stockholm after his death. These
are practically the only MSS. of which we have sure information,
excepting the four fragments that are now preserved. Of these by far the
most interesting is the "Angers Fragment."

This was first noticed in 1863, in the Angers Library, where it was
found degraded into the binding of a number of devotional works and a
treatise on metric, dated 1459, and once the property of a priest at
Alencon. In 1877 M. Gaston Paris called the attention of the learned to
it, and the result was that the Danish Government received it next year
in exchange for a valuable French manuscript which was in the Royal
Library at Copenhagen. This little national treasure, the only piece of
contemporary writing of the History, has been carefully photographed and
edited by that enthusiastic and urbane scholar, Christian Bruun. In the
opinion both of Dr. Vigfusson and M. Paris, the writing dates from about
1200; and this date, though difficult to determine, owing to the paucity
of Danish MSS. of the 12th and early lath centuries, is confirmed by the
character of the contents. For there is little doubt that the Fragment
shows us Saxo in the labour of composition. The MSS. looks as if
expressly written for interlineation. Besides a marginal gloss by a
later, fourteenth century hand, there are two distinct sets of variants,
in different writings, interlined and running over into the margin.
These variants are much more numerous in the prose than in the verse.
The first set are in the same hand as the text, the second in another
hand: but both of them have the character, not of variants from some
other MSS., but of alternative expressions put down tentatively. If
either hand is Saxo's it is probably the second. He may conceivably have
dictated both at different times to different scribes. No other man
would tinker the style in this fashion. A complete translation of all
these changes has been deemed unnecessary in these volumes; there is a
full collation in Holder's "Apparatus Criticus". The verdict of the
Angers-Fragment, which, for the very reason mentioned, must not be taken
as the final form of the text, nor therefore, despite its antiquity, as
conclusive against the First Edition where the two differ, is to
confirm, so far as it goes, the editing of Ascensius and Pederson. There
are no vital differences, and the care of the first editors, as well as
the authority of their source, is thus far amply vindicated.

A sufficient account of the other fragments will be found in Holder's
list. In 1855 M. Kall-Rasmussen found in the private archives at
Kronborg a scrap of fourteenth century MS., containing a short passage
from Bk. vii. Five years later G. F. Lassen found, at Copenhagen, a
fragment of Bk. vi believed to be written in North Zealand, and in the
opinion of Bruun belonging to the same codex as Kall-Rasmussen's
fragment. Of another longish piece, found in Copenhagen at the end of
the seventeenth century by Johannes Laverentzen, and belonging to a
codex burnt in the fire of 1728, a copy still extant in the Copenhagen
Museum, was made by Otto Sperling. For fragments, either extant or
alluded to, of the later books, the student should consult the carefully
collated text of Holder. The whole MS. material, therefore, covers but a
little of Saxo's work, which was practically saved for Europe by the
perseverance and fervour for culture of a single man, Bishop Urne.

SAXO AS A WRITER.

Saxo's countrymen have praised without stint his remarkable style, for
he has a style. It is often very bad; but he writes, he is not in vain
called Grammaticus, the man of letters. His style is not merely
remarkable considering its author's difficulties; it is capable at need
of pungency and of high expressiveness. His Latin is not that of the
Golden Age, but neither is it the common Latin of the Middle Ages. There
are traces of his having read Virgil and Cicero. But two writers in
particular left their mark on him. The first and most influential is
Valerius Maximus, the mannered author of the "Memorabilia", who lived in
the first half of the first century, and was much relished in the Middle
Ages. From him Saxo borrowed a multitude of phrases, sometimes apt but
often crabbed and deformed, as well as an exemplary and homiletic turn
of narrative. Other idioms, and perhaps the practice of interspersing
verses amid prose (though this also was a twelfth century Icelandic
practice), Saxo found in a fifth-century writer, Martianus Capella, the
pedantic author of the "De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii" Such models
may have saved him from a base mediaeval vocabulary; but they were not
worthy of him, and they must answer for some of his falsities of style.
These are apparent. His accumulation of empty and motley phrase, like a
garish bunch of coloured bladders; his joy in platitude and pomposity,
his proneness to say a little thing in great words, are only too easy to
translate. We shall be well content if our version also gives some
inkling of his qualities; not only of what Erasmus called his "wonderful
vocabulary, his many pithy sayings, and the excellent variety of his
images"; but also of his feeling for grouping, his barbaric sense of
colour, and his stateliness. For he moves with resource and strength
both in prose and verse, and is often only hindered by his own wealth.
With no kind of critical tradition to chasten him, his force is often
misguided and his work shapeless; but he stumbles into many splendours.

FOLK LORE INDEX.

The mass of archaic incidents, beliefs, and practices recorded by the
12th-century writer seemed to need some other classification than a bare
alphabetic index. The present plan, a subject-index practically, has
been adopted with a view to the needs of the anthropologist and
folk-lorist. Its details have been largely determined by the bulk and
character of the entries themselves. No attempt has been made to supply
full parallels from any save the more striking and obvious old
Scandinavian sources, the end being to classify material rather than to
point out its significance of geographic distribution. With regard to
the first three heads, the reader who wishes to see how Saxo compares
with the Old Northern poems may be referred to the Grimm Centenary
papers, Oxford, 1886, and the Corpus Poeticurn Boreale, Oxford, 1883.

POLITICAL INSTITUTIONS.

King -- As portrayed by Saxo, the ideal king should be (as in "Beowulf's
Lay") generous, brave and just. He should be a man of accomplishments,
of unblemished body, presumably of royal kin (peasant-birth is
considered a bar to the kingship), usually a son or a nephew, or brother
of his foregoer (though no strict rule of succession seems to appear in
Saxo), and duly chosen and acknowledged at the proper place of election.
In Denmark this was at a stone circle, and the stability of these stones
was taken as an omen for the king's reign. There are exceptional
instances noted, as the serf-king Eormenric (cf. Guthred-Canute of
Northumberland), whose noble birth washed out this blot of his
captivity, and there is a curious tradition of a conqueror setting his
hound as king over a conquered province in mockery.

The king was of age at twelve. A king of seven years of age has twelve
Regents chosen in the Moot, in one case by lot, to bring him up and rule
for him till his majority. Regents are all appointed in Denmark, in one
case for lack of royal blood, one to Scania, one to Zealand, one to
Funen, two to Jutland. Underkings and Earls are appointed by kings, and
though the Earl's office is distinctly official, succession is sometimes
given to the sons of faithful fathers. The absence of a settled
succession law leads (as in Muslim States) to rebellions and plots.

Kings sometimes abdicated, giving up the crown perforce to a rival, or
in high age to a kinsman. In heathen times, kings, as Thiodwulf tells us
in the case of Domwald and Yngwere, were sometimes sacrificed for better
seasons (African fashion), and Wicar of Norway perishes, like
Iphigeneia, to procure fair winds. Kings having to lead in war, and
sometimes being willing to fight wagers of battle, are short-lived as a
rule, and assassination is a continual peril, whether by fire at a time
of feast, of which there are numerous examples, besides the classic one
on which Biarea-mal is founded and the not less famous one of Hamlet's
vengeance, or whether by steel, as with Hiartuar, or by trick, as in
Wicar's case above cited. The reward for slaying a king is in one case
120 gold lbs.; 19 "talents" of gold from each ringleader, 1 oz. of gold
from each commoner, in the story of Godfred, known as Ref's gild, "i.e.,
Fox tax". In the case of a great king, Frode, his death is concealed for
three years to avoid disturbance within and danger from without. Captive
kings were not as a rule well treated. A Slavonic king, Daxo, offers
Ragnar's son Whitesark his daughter and half his realm, or death, and
the captive strangely desires death by fire. A captive king is exposed,
chained to wild beasts, thrown into a serpent-pit, wherein Ragnar is
given the fate of the elder Gunnar in the Eddic Lays, Atlakvida. The
king is treated with great respect by his people, he is finely clad, and
his commands are carried out, however abhorrent or absurd, as long as
they do not upset customary or statute law. The king has slaves in his
household, men and women, besides his guard of housecarles and his
bearsark champions. A king's daughter has thirty slaves with her, and
the footmaiden existed exactly as in the stories of the Wicked Waiting
Maid. He is not to be awakened in his slumbers (cf. St. Olaf's Life,
where the naming of King Magnus is the result of adherence to this
etiquette). A champion weds the king's leman.

His thanes are created by the delivery of a sword, which the king bolds
by the blade and the thane takes by the hilt. (English earls were
created by the girding with a sword. "Taking treasure, and weapons and
horses, and feasting in a hall with the king" is synonymous with
thane-hood or gesith-ship in "Beowulf's Lay"). A king's thanes must
avenge him if he falls, and owe him allegiance. (This was paid in the
old English monarchies by kneeling and laying the head down at the
lord's knee.)

The trick by which the Mock-king, or King of the Beggars (parallel to
our Boy-bishop, and perhaps to that enigmatic churls' King of the "O. E.
Chronicle", s.a. 1017, Eadwiceorla- kyning) gets allegiance paid to him,
and so secures himself in his attack on the real king, is cleverly
devised. The king, besides being a counsel giver himself, and speaking
the law, has "counsellors", old and wise men, "sapientes" (like the 0.
E. Thyle). The aged warrior counsellor, as Starcad here and Master
Hildebrand in the "Nibelungenlied", is one type of these persons,
another is the false counsellor, as Woden in guise of Bruni, another the
braggart, as Hunferth in "Beowulf's Lay". At "moots" where laws are
made, kings and regents chosen, cases judged, resolutions taken of
national importance, there are discussions, as in that armed most the
host.

The king has, beside his estates up and down the country, sometimes
(like Hrothgar with his palace Heorot in "Beowulf's Lay") a great fort
and treasure house, as Eormenric, whose palace may well have really
existed. There is often a primitive and negroid character about
dwellings of formidable personages, heads placed on stakes adorn their
exterior, or shields are ranged round the walls.

The provinces are ruled by removable earls appointed by the king, often
his own kinsmen, sometimes the heads of old ruling families. The
"hundreds" make up the province or subkingdom. They may be granted to
king's thanes, who became "hundred- elders". Twelve hundreds are in one
case bestowed upon a man.

The "yeoman's" estate is not only honourable but useful, as Starcad
generously and truly acknowledges. Agriculture should be fostered and
protected by the king, even at the cost of his life.

But gentle birth and birth royal place certain families above the common
body of freemen (landed or not); and for a commoner to pretend to a
king's daughter is an act of presumption, and generally rigorously
resented.

The "smith" was the object of a curious prejudice, probably akin to that
expressed in St. Patrick's "Lorica", and derived from the smith's having
inherited the functions of the savage weapon-maker with his poisons and
charms. The curious attempt to distinguish smiths into good and useful
swordsmiths and base and bad goldsmiths seems a merely modern
explanation: Weland could both forge swords and make ornaments of metal.
Starcad's loathing for a smith recalls the mockery with which the
Homeric gods treat Hephaistos.

Slavery. -- As noble birth is manifest by fine eyes and personal beauty,
courage and endurance, and delicate behaviour, so the slave nature is
manifested by cowardice, treachery, unbridled lust, bad manners,
falsehood, and low physical traits. Slaves had, of course, no right
either of honour, or life, or limb. Captive ladies are sent to a
brothel; captive kings cruelly put to death. Born slaves were naturally
still less considered, they were flogged; it was disgraceful to kill
them with honourable steel; to accept a slight service from a
slave-woman was beneath old Starcad's dignity. A man who loved another
man's slave- woman, and did base service to her master to obtain her as
his consort, was looked down on. Slaves frequently ran away to escape
punishment for carelessness, or fault, or to gain liberty.

CUSTOMARY LAW.

The evidence of Saxo to archaic law and customary institutions is pretty
much (as we should expect) that to be drawn from the Icelandic Sagas,
and even from the later Icelandic rimur and Scandinavian kaempe-viser.
But it helps to complete the picture of the older stage of North
Teutonic Law, which we are able to piece together out of our various
sources, English, Icelandic, and Scandinavian. In the twilight of Yore
every glowworm is a helper to the searcher.

There are a few MAXIMS of various times, but all seemingly drawn from
custom cited or implied by Saxo as authoritative: --

"It is disgraceful to be ruled by a woman." -- The great men of Teutonic
nations held to this maxim. There is no Boudicea or Maidhbh in our own
annals till after the accession of the Tudors, when Great Eliza rivals
her elder kins-women's glories. Though Tacitus expressly notices one
tribe or confederacy, the Sitones, within the compass of his Germania,
ruled by a woman, as an exceptional case, it was contrary to the feeling
of mediaeval Christendom for a woman to be emperor; it was not till late
in the Middle Ages that Spain saw a queen regnant, and France has never
yet allowed such rule. It was not till long after Saxo that the great
queen of the North, Margaret, wielded a wider sway than that rejected by
Gustavus' wayward daughter.

"The suitor ought to urge his own suit." -- This, an axiom of the most
archaic law, gets evaded bit by bit till the professional advocate takes
the place of the plaintiff. "Njal's Saga", in its legal scenes, shows
the transition period, when, as at Rome, a great and skilled chief was
sought by his client as the supporter of his cause at the Moot. In
England, the idea of representation at law is, as is well known, late
and largely derived from canon law practice.

"To exact the blood-fine was as honourable as to take vengeance." --
This maxim, begotten by Interest upon Legality, established itself both
in Scandinavia and Arabia. It marks the first stage in a progress which,
if carried out wholly, substitutes law for feud. In the society of the
heathen Danes the maxim was a novelty; even in Christian Denmark men
sometimes preferred blood to fees.

MARRIAGE. -- There are many reminiscences of "archaic marriage customs
in Saxo." The capture marriage has left traces in the guarded king's
daughters, the challenging of kings to fight or hand over their
daughters, in the promises to give a daughter or sister as a reward to a
hero who shall accomplish some feat. The existence of polygamy is
attested, and it went on till the days of Charles the Great and Harold
Fairhair in singular instances, in the case of great kings, and finally
disappeared before the strict ecclesiastic regulations.

But there are evidences also of later customs, such as "marriage by
purchase", already looked on as archaic in Saxo's day; and the free
women in Denmark had clearly long had a veto or refusal of a husband for
some time back, and sometimes even free choice. "Go- betweens" negotiate
marriages.

Betrothal was of course the usage. For the groom to defile an espoused
woman is a foul reproach. Gifts made to father-in-law after bridal by
bridegroom seem to denote the old bride-price. Taking the bride home in
her car was an important ceremony, and a bride is taken to her future
husband's by her father. The wedding-feast, as in France in Rabelais'
time, was a noisy and drunken and tumultuous rejoicing, when
bone-throwing was in favor, with other rough sports and jokes. The three
days after the bridal and their observance in "sword-bed" are noticed
below.

A commoner or one of slave-blood could not pretend to wed a high- born
lady. A woman would sometimes require some proof of power or courage at
her suitor's hands; thus Gywritha, like the famous lady who weds Harold
Fairhair, required her husband Siwar to be over-king of the whole land.
But in most instances the father or brother betrothed the girl, and she
consented to their choice. Unwelcome suitors perish.

The prohibited degrees were, of course, different from those established
by the mediaeval church, and brother weds brother's widow in good
archaic fashion. Foster-sister and foster-brother may marry, as Saxo
notices carefully. The Wolsung incest is not noticed by Saxo. He only
knew, apparently, the North-German form of the Niflung story. But the
reproachfulness of incest is apparent.

Birth and beauty were looked for in a bride by Saxo's heroes, and
chastity was required. The modesty of maidens in old days is eulogised
by Saxo, and the penalty for its infraction was severe: sale abroad into
slavery to grind the quern in the mud of the yard. One of the tests of
virtue is noticed, "lac in ubere".

That favourite "motif", the "Patient Grizzle", occurs, rather, however,
in the Border ballad than the Petrarcan formú

"Good wives" die with their husbands as they have vowed, or of grief for
their loss, and are wholly devoted to their interests. Among "bad wives"
are those that wed their husband's slayer, run away from their husbands,
plot against their husbands' lives. The penalty for adultery is death to
both, at husband's option -- disfigurement by cutting off the nose of
the guilty woman, an archaic practice widely spread. In one case the
adulterous lady is left the choice of her own death. Married women's
Homeric duties are shown.

There is a curious story, which may rest upon fact, and not be merely
typical, where a mother who had suffered wrong forced her daughter to
suffer the same wrong.

Captive women are reduced to degrading slavery as "harlots" in one case,
according to the eleventh century English practice of Gytha.

THE FAMILY AND BLOOD REVENGE. -- This duty, one of the strongest links
of the family in archaic Teutonic society, has left deep traces in Saxo.

To slay those most close in blood, even by accident, is to incur the
guilt of parricide, or kin-killing, a bootless crime, which can only be
purged by religious ceremonies; and which involves exile, lest the gods'
wrath fall on the land, and brings the curse of childlessness on the
offender until he is forgiven.

BOOTLESS CRIMES. -- As among the ancient Teutons, botes and were- gilds
satisfy the injured who seek redress at law rather than by the steel.
But there are certain bootless crimes, or rather sins, that imply
"sacratio", devotion to the gods, for the clearing of the community.
Such are treason, which is punishable by hanging; by drowning in sea.

Rebellion is still more harshly treated by death and forfeiture; the
rebels' heels are bored and thonged under the sinew, as Hector's feet
were, and they are then fastened by the thongs to wild bulls, hunted by
hounds, till they are dashed to pieces (for which there are classic
parallels), or their feet are fastened with thongs to horses driven
apart, so that they are torn asunder.

For "parricide", i.e., killing within near degrees, the criminal is hung
up, apparently by the heels, with a live wolf (he haying acted as a wolf
which will slay its fellows). Cunning avoidance of the guilt by trick is
shown.

For "arson" the appropriate punishment is the fire.

For "incestuous adultery" of stepson with his stepmother, hanging is
awarded to the man. In the same case Swanwhite, the woman, is punished,
by treading to death with horses. A woman accomplice in adultery is
treated to what Homer calls a "stone coat." Incestuous adultery is a
foul slur.

For "witchcraft", the horror of heathens, hanging was the penalty.

"Private revenge" sometimes deliberately inflicts a cruel death for
atrocious wrong or insult, as when a king, enraged at the slaying of his
son and seduction of his daughter, has the offender hanged, an instance
famous in Nathan's story, so that Hagbard's hanging and hempen necklace
were proverbial.

For the slayer by a cruel death of their captive father, Ragnar's sons
act the blood-eagle on Ella, and salt his flesh. There is an undoubted
instance of this act of vengeance (the symbolic meaning of which is not
clear as yet) in the "Orkney Saga".

But the story of Daxo and of Ref's gild show that for such wrongs
were-gilds were sometimes exacted, and that they were considered highly
honourable to the exactor.

Among OFFENCES NOT BOOTLESS, and left to individual pursuit, are: --

"Highway robbery". -- There are several stories of a type such as that
of Ingemund and Ioknl (see "Landnamaboc") told by Saxo of highwaymen;
and an incident of the kind that occurs in the Theseus story (the
Bent-tree, which sprung back and slew the wretch bound to it) is given.
The romantic trick of the mechanic bed, by which a steel-shod beam is
let fall on the sleeping traveller, also occurs. Slain highwaymen are
gibbeted as in Christian days.

"Assassination", as distinct from manslaughter in vengeance for a wrong,
is not very common. A hidden mail-coat foils a treacherous javelin-cast
(cf. the Story of Olaf the Stout and the Blind King, Hrorec); murderers
lurk spear-armed at the threshold, sides, as in the Icelandic Sagas; a
queen hides a spear-head in her gown, and murders her husband (cf. Olaf
Tryggvason's Life). Godfred was murdered by his servant (and
Ynglingatal).

"Burglary". -- The crafty discovery of the robber of the treasury by
Hadding is a variant of the world-old Rhampsinitos tale, but less
elaborate, possibly abridged and cut down by Saxo, and reduced to a mere
moral example in favour of the goldenness of silence and the danger of
letting the tongue feed the gallows.

Among other disgraceful acts, that make the offender infamous, but do
not necessarily involve public action: --

"Manslaughter in Breach of Hospitality". -- Probably any gross breach of
hospitality was disreputable and highly abhorred, but "guest-slaughter"
is especially mentioned. The ethical question as to whether a man should
slay his guest or forego his just vengeance was often a "probleme du
jour" in the archaic times to which these traditions witness. Ingeld
prefers his vengeance, but Thuriswend, in the Lay cited by Paul the
Deacon, chooses to protect his guest. Heremod slew his messmates in his
wrath, and went forth alone into exile. ("Beowulf's Lay".)

"Suicide". \~- This was more honourable than what Earl Siward of
Northumberland called a "cow-death." Hadding resolves to commit suicide
at his friend's death. Wermund resolves to commit suicide if his son be
slain (in hopelessness of being able to avenge him, cf. "Njal's Saga",
where the hero, a Christian, prefers to perish in his burning house than
live dishonoured, "for I am an old man and little fitted to avenge my
sons, but I will not live in shame"). Persons commit suicide by slaying
each other in time of famine; while in England (so Baeda tells) they
"decliffed" themselves in companies, and, as in the comic little
Icelandic tale Gautrec s birth, a Tarpeian death is noted as the
customary method of relieving folks from the hateful starvation death.
It is probable that the violent death relieved the ghost or the
survivors of some inconveniences which a "straw death" would have
brought about.

"Procedure by Wager of Battle". -- This archaic process pervades Saxo's
whole narrative. It is the main incident of many of the sagas from which
he drew. It is one of the chief characteristics of early Teutonic
custom-law, and along with "Cormac's Saga", "Landnamaboc", and the
Walter Saga, our author has furnished us with most of the information we
have upon its principles and practice.

Steps in the process are the Challenge, the Acceptance and Settlement of
Conditions, the Engagement, the Treatment of the vanquished, the Reward
of the conqueror, and there are rules touching each of these, enough
almost to furnish a kind of "Galway code".

A challenge could not, either to war or wager of battle, be refused with
honor, though a superior was not bound to fight an inferior in rank. An
ally might accept for his principal, or a father for a son, but it was
not honourable for a man unless helpless to send a champion instead of
himself.

Men were bound to fight one to one, and one man might decline to fight
two at once. Great champions sometimes fought against odds.

The challenged man chose the place of battle, and possibly fixed the
time. This was usually an island in the river.

The regular weapons were swords and shields for men of gentle blood.
They fought by alternate separate strokes; the senior had the first
blow. The fight must go on face to face without change of place; for the
ground was marked out for the combatants, as in our prize ring, though
one can hardly help fancying that the fighting ground so carefully
described in "Cormac's Saga", ch. 10, may have been Saxo's authority.
The combatants change places accidentally in the struggle in one story.

The combat might last, like Cuchullin's with Ferdia, several days; a
nine days' fight occurs; but usually a few blows settled the matter.
Endurance was important, and we are told of a hero keeping himself in
constant training by walking in a mail coat.

The conqueror ought not to slay his man if he were a stripling, or
maimed, and had better take his were-gild for his life, the holmslausn
or ransom of "Cormac's Saga" (three marks in Iceland); but this was a
mere concession to natural pity, and he might without loss of honor
finish his man, and cut off his head, though it was proper, if the slain
adversary has been a man of honor, to bury him afterward.

The stakes are sometimes a kingdom or a kingdom's tribute, often a lady,
or the combatants fought for "love" or the point of honor. Giants and
noted champions challenge kings for their daughters (as in the
fictitious parts of the Icelandic family sagas) in true archaic fashion,
and in true archaic fashion the prince rescues the lady from a
disgusting and evil fate by his prowess.

The champion's fee or reward when he was fighting for his principal and
came off successful was heavy -- many lands and sixty slaves. Bracelets
are given him; a wound is compensated for at ten gold pieces; a fee for
killing a king is 120 of the same.

Of the incidents of the combat, beside fair sleight of fence, there is
the continual occurrence of the sword-blunting spell, often cast by the
eye of the sinister champion, and foiled by the good hero, sometimes by
covering his blade with thin skin, sometimes by changing the blade,
sometimes by using a mace or club.

The strength of this tradition sufficiently explains the necessity of
the great oath against magic taken by both parties in a wager of battle
in Christian England.

The chief combats mentioned by Saxo are: --

    Sciold v. Attila.
    Sciold v. Scate, for the hand of Alfhild.
    Gram v. Swarin and eight more, for the crown of the Swedes.
    Hadding v. Toste, by challenge.
    Frode v. Hunding, on challenge.
    Frode v. Hacon, on challenge.
    Helge v. Hunding, by challenge at Stad.
    Agnar v. Bearce, by challenge.
    Wizard v. Danish champions, for truage of the Slavs.
    Wizard v. Ubbe, for truage of the Slavs.
    Coll v. Horwendill, on challenge.
    Athisl v. Frowine, meeting in battle.
    Athisl v. Ket and Wig, on challenge.
    Uffe v. Prince of Saxony and Champion, by challenge.
    Frode v. Froger, on challenge.
    Eric v. Grep's brethren, on challenge, twelve a side.
    Eric v. Alrec, by challenge.
    Hedin v. Hogni, the mythic everlasting battle.
    Arngrim v. Scalc, by challenge.
    Arngrim v. Egtheow, for truage of Permland.
    Arrow-Odd and Hialmar v. twelve sons of Arngrim Samsey fight.
    Ane Bow-swayer v. Beorn, by challenge.
    Starkad v. Wisin, by challenge.
    Starkad v. Tanlie, by challenge.
    Starkad v. Wasce--Wilzce, by challenge.
    Starkad v. Hame, by challenge.
    Starkad v. Angantheow and eight of his brethren, on challenge.
    Halfdan v. Hardbone and six champions, on challenge.
    Halfdan v. Egtheow, by challenge.
    Halfdan v. Grim, on challenge.
    Halfdan v. Ebbe, on challenge, by moonlight.
    Halfdan v. Twelve champions, on challenge.
    Halfdan v. Hildeger, on challenge.
    Ole v. Skate and Hiale, on challenge.
    Homod and Thole v. Beorn and Thore, by challenge.
    Ref. v. Gaut, on challenge.
    Ragnar and three sons v. Starcad of Sweden and seven sons, on challenge.

CIVIL PROCEDURE. -- "Oaths" are an important art of early procedure, and
noticed by Saxo; one calling the gods to witness and therefor, it is
understood, to avenge perjury if he spake not truth.

"Testification", or calling witnesses to prove the steps of a legal
action, was known, "Glum's Saga" and "Landnamaboc", and when a manslayer
proceeded (in order to clear himself of murder) to announce the
manslaughter as his act, he brings the dead man's head as his proof,
exactly as the hero in the folk-tales brings the dragon's head or tongue
as his voucher.

A "will" is spoken of. This seems to be the solemn declaration of a
childless man to his kinsfolk, recommending some person as his
successor. Nothing more was possible before written wills were
introduced by the Christian clergy after the Roman fashion.

STATUTE LAWS.

"Lawgivers". -- The realm of Custom had already long been curtailed by
the conquests of Law when Saxo wrote, and some epochs of the invasion
were well remembered, such as Canute's laws. But the beginnings were
dim, and there were simply traditions of good and bad lawyers of the
past; such were "Sciold" first of all the arch-king, "Frode" the model
lawgiver, "Helge" the tyrant, "Ragnar" the shrewd conqueror.

"Sciold", the patriarch, is made by tradition to fulfil, by abolishing
evil customs and making good laws, the ideal of the Saxon and Frankish
Coronation oath formula (which may well go back with its two first
clauses to heathen days). His fame is as widely spread. However, the
only law Saxo gives to him has a story to it that he does not plainly
tell. Sciold had a freedman who repaid his master's manumission of him
by the ingratitude of attempting his life. Sciold thereupon decrees the
unlawfulness of manumissions, or (as Saxo puts it), revoked all
manumissions, thus ordaining perpetual slavery on all that were or might
become slaves. The heathen lack of pity noticed in Alfred's preface to
"Gregory's Handbook" is illustrated here by contrast with the
philosophic humanity of the Civil Law, and the sympathy of the mediaeval
Church.

But FRODE (known also to the compiler of "Beowulf's Lay", 2025) had, in
the Dane's eyes, almost eclipsed Sciold as conqueror and lawgiver. His
name Frode almost looks as if his epithet Sapiens had become his popular
appellation, and it befits him well. Of him were told many stories, and
notably the one related of our Edwin by Bede (and as it has been told by
many men of many rulers since Bede wrote, and before). Frode was able to
hang up an arm-ring of gold in three parts of his kingdom that no thief
for many years dared touch. How this incident (according to our version
preserved by Saxo), brought the just king to his end is an archaic and
interesting story. Was this ring the Brosinga men?

Saxo has even recorded the Laws of Frode in four separate bits, which we
give as A, B, C, D.

A. is mainly a civil and military code of archaic kind:

\(a\) The division of spoil shall be -- gold to captains, silver to
privates, arms to champions, ships to be shared by all. Cf. Jomswickinga
S. on the division of spoil by the law of the pirate community of Jom.

\(b\) No house stuff to be locked; if a man used a lock he must pay a
gold mark.

\(c\) He who spares a thief must bear his punishment.

\(d\) The coward in battle is to forfeit all rights (cf. "Beowulf",
2885).

\(e\) Women to have free choice (or, at least, veto) in taking husbands.

\(f\) A free woman that weds a slave loses rank and freedom (cf. Roman
Law).

\(g\) A man must marry a girl he has seduced.

\(h\) An adulterer to be mutilated at pleasure of injured husband.

\(i\) Where Dane robbed Dane, the thief to pay double and peace- breach.

\(k\) Receivers of stolen goods suffer forfeiture and flogging at most.

\(l\) Deserter bearing shield against his countrymen to lose life and
property.

\(m\) Contempt of fyrd-summons or call to military service involves
outlawry and exile.

\(n\) Bravery in battle to bring about increase in rank (cf. the old
English "Ranks of Men").

\(o\) No suit to lie on promise and pledge; fine of « gold lb. for
asking pledge.

\(p\) Wager of battle is to be the universal mode of proof.

\(q\) If an alien kill a Dane two aliens must suffer. (This is
practically the same principle as appears in the half weregild of the
Welsh in West Saxon Law.)

B. An illustration of the more capricious of the old enactments and the
jealousy of antique kings.

\(a\) Loss of gifts sent to the king involves the official responsible;
he shall be hanged. (This is introduced as illustration of the
cleverness of Eric and the folly of Coll.)

C. Saxo associates another set of enactments with the completion of a
successful campaign of conquest over the Ruthenians, and shows Frode
chiefly as a wise and civilising statesman, making conquest mean
progress.

\(a\) Every free householder that fell in war was to be set in his
barrow with horse and arms (cf. "Vatzdaela Saga", ch. 2).

The body-snatcher was to be punished by death and the lack of sepulture.

Earl or king to be burned in his own ship.

Ten sailors may be burnt on one ship.

\(b\) Ruthenians to have the same law of war as Danes.

\(c\) Ruthenians must adopt Danish sale-marriage. (This involves the
abolition of the Baltic custom of capture-marriage. That
capture-marriage was a bar to social progress appears in the legislation
of Richard II, directed against the custom as carried out on the borders
of the Palatine county of Chester, while cases such as the famous one of
Rob Roy's sons speak to its late continuance in Scotland. In Ireland it
survived in a stray instance or two into this century, and songs like
"William Riley" attest the sympathy of the peasant with the eloping
couple.)

\(d\) A veteran, one of the Doughty, must be such a man as will attack
one foe, will stand two, face three without withdrawing more than a
little, and be content to retire only before four. (One of the
traditional folk-sayings respecting the picked men, the Doughty or Old
Guard, as distinguished from the Youth or Young Guard, the new-comers in
the king's Company of House- carles. In Harald Hardrede's Life the
Norwegians dread those English house-carles, "each of whom is a match
for four," who formed the famous guard that won Stamford Bridge and fell
about their lord, a sadly shrunken band, at Senlake.)

\(f\) The house-carles to have winter-pay. The house-carle three pieces
of silver, a hired soldier two pieces, a soldier who had finished his
service one piece.

(The treatment of the house-carles gave Harald Harefoot a reputation
long remembered for generosity, and several old Northern kings have won
their nicknames by their good or ill feeding and rewarding their
comitatus.)

D. Again a civil code, dealing chiefly with the rights of travellers.

\(a\) Seafarers may use what gear they find (the "remis" of the text may
include boat or tackle).

\(b\) No house is to be locked, nor coffer, but all thefts to be
compensated threefold. (This, like A, b, which it resembles, seems a
popular tradition intended to show the absolute security of Frode's
reign of seven or three hundred years. It is probably a gloss wrongly
repeated.)

\(c\) A traveller may claim a single supper; if he take more he is a
thief (the mark of a prae-tabernal era when hospitality was waxing cold
through misuse).

\(d\) Thief and accomplices are to be punished alike, being hung up by a
line through the sinews and a wolf fastened beside. (This, which
contradicts A, i, k, and allots to theft the punishment proper for
parricide, seems a mere distorted tradition.)

But beside just Frode, tradition spoke of the unjust Kinge HELGE, whose
laws represent ill-judged harshness. They were made for conquered races,
(a) the Saxons and (b) the Swedes.

\(a\) Noble and freedmen to have the same were-gild (the lower, of
course, the intent being to degrade all the conquered to one level, and
to allow only the lowest were-gild of a freedman, fifty pieces,
probably, in the tradition).

\(b\) No remedy for wrong done to a Swede by a Dane to be legally
recoverable. (This is the traditional interpretation of the conqueror's
haughty dealing; we may compare it with the Middle- English legends of
the pride of the Dane towards the conquered English. The Tradition sums
up the position in such concrete forms as this Law of Helge's.)

Two statutes of RAGNAR are mentioned: --

\(a\) That any householder should give up to his service in war the
worst of his children, or the laziest of his slaves (a curious
tradition, and used by Saxo as an opportunity for patriotic exaltation).

\(b\) That all suits shall be absolutely referred to the judgment of
twelve chosen elders (Lodbroc here appearing in the strange character of
originator of trial by jury).

"Tributes". -- Akin to laws are the tributes decreed and imposed by
kings and conquerors of old. Tribute infers subjection in archaic law.
The poll-tax in the fourteenth century in England was unpopular, because
of its seeming to degrade Englishmen to the level of Frenchmen, who paid
tribute like vanquished men to their absolute lord, as well as for other
reasons connected with the collection of the tax.

The old fur tax (mentioned in "Egil's Saga") is here ascribed to FRODE,
who makes the Finns pay him, every three years, a car full or sledge
full of skins for every ten heads; and extorts one skin per head from
the Perms. It is Frode, too (though Saxo has carved a number of Frodes
out of one or two kings of gigantic personality), that made the Saxons
pay a poll-tax, a piece of money per head, using, like William the
Conqueror, his extraordinary revenue to reward his soldiers, whom he
first regaled with double pay. But on the conquered folks rebelling, he
marked their reduction by a tax of a piece of money on every limb a
cubit long, a "limb-geld" still more hateful than the "neb-geld."

HOTHERUS (Hodr) had set a tribute on the Kurlanders and Swedes, and
HROLF laid a tribute on the conquered Swedes.

GODEFRIDUS-GOTRIC is credited with a third Saxon tribute, a heriot of
100 snow-white horses payable to each Danish king at his succession, and
by each Saxon chief on his accession: a statement that, recalling sacred
snow-white horses kept in North Germany of yore makes one wish for
fuller information. But Godefridus also exacted from the Swedes the
"Ref-gild", or Fox- money; for the slaying of his henchman Ref, twelve
pieces of gold from each man of rank, one from every commoner. And his
Friesland tribute is stranger still, nor is it easy to understand from
Saxo's account. There was a long hall built, 240 feet, and divided up
into twelve "chases" of 20 feet each (probably square). There was a
shield set up at one end, and the taxpayers hurled their money at it; if
it struck so as to sound, it was good; if not, it was forfeit, but not
reckoned in the receipt. This (a popular version, it may be, of some
early system of treasury test) was abolished, so the story goes, by
Charles the Great.

RAGNAR'S exaction from Daxo, his son's slayer, was a yearly tribute
brought by himself and twelve of his elders barefoot, resembling in part
such submissions as occur in the Angevin family history, the case of the
Calais burgesses, and of such criminals as the Corporation of Oxford,
whose penance was only finally renounced by the local patriots in our
own day.
