<span class="small"></span>

[Sacred Texts Index](../../index)  [Northern European Index](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saxo052)  [Next](saxo07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Danish History, Book Six

After the death of Frode, the Danes wrongly supposed that Fridleif, who
was being reared in Russia, had perished; and, thinking that the
sovereignty halted for lack of an heir, and that it could no longer be
kept on in the hands of the royal line, they considered that the sceptre
would be best deserved by the man who should affix to the yet fresh
grave of Frode a song of praise in his glorification, and commit the
renown of the dead king to after ages by a splendid memorial. Then one
HIARN, very skilled in writing Danish poetry, wishing to give the fame
of the hero some notable record of words, and tempted by the enormous
prize, composed, after his own fashion, a barbarous stave. Its purport,
expressed in four lines, I have transcribed as follows:

"Frode, whom the Danes would have wished to live long, they bore long
through their lands when he was dead. The great chief's body, with this
turf heaped above it, bare earth covers under the lucid sky."

When the composer of this song had uttered it, the Danes rewarded him
with the crown. Thus they gave a kingdom for an epitaph, and the weight
of a whole empire was presented to a little string of letters. Slender
expense for so vast a guerdon! This huge payment for a little poem
exceeded the glory of Caesar's recompense; for it was enough for the
divine Julius to pension with a township the writer and glorifier of
those conquests which he had achieved over the whole world. But now the
spendthrift kindness of the populace squandered a kingdom on a churl.
Nay, not even Africanus, when he rewarded the records of his deed, rose
to the munificence of the Danes. For there the wage of that laborious
volume was in mere gold, while here a few callow verses won a sceptre
for a peasant.

At the same time Erik, who held the governorship of Sweden, died of
disease; and his son Halfdan, who governed in his father's stead,
alarmed by the many attacks of twelve brothers of Norwegian birth, and
powerless to punish their violence, fled, hoping for reinforcements, to
ask aid of Fridleif, then sojourning in Russia. Approaching him with a
suppliant face, he lamented that he was himself shattered and bruised by
a foreign foe, and brought a dismal plaint of his wrongs. From him
Fridleif heard the tidings of his father's death, and granting the aid
he sought, went to Norway in armed array. At this time the aforesaid
brothers, their allies forsaking them, built a very high rampart within
an island surrounded by a swift stream, also extending their earthworks
along the level. Trusting to this refuge, they harried the neighborhood
with continual raids. For they built a bridge on which they used to get
to the mainland when they left the island. This bridge was fastened to
the gate of the stronghold; and they worked it by the guidance of ropes,
in such a way that it turned as if on some revolving hinge, and at one
time let them pass across the river; while at another, drawn back from
above by unseen cords, it helped to defend the entrance.

These warriors were of valiant temper, young and stalwart, of splendid
bodily presence, renowned for victories over giants, full of trophies of
conquered nations, and wealthy with spoil. I record the names of some of
them -- for the rest have perished in antiquity -- Gerbiorn, Gunbiorn,
Arinbiorn, Stenbiorn, Esbiorn, Thorbiorn, and Biorn. Biorn is said to
have had a horse which was splendid and of exceeding speed, so that when
all the rest were powerless to cross the river it alone stemmed the
roaring eddy without weariness. This rapid comes down in so swift and
sheer a volume that animals often lose all power of swimming in it, and
perish. For, trickling from the topmost crests of the hills, it comes
down the steep sides, catches on the rocks, and is shattered, falling
into the deep valleys with a manifold clamour of waters; but, being
straightway rebuffed by the rocks that bar the way, it keeps the speed
of its current ever at the same even pace. And so, along the whole
length of the channel, the waves are one turbid mass, and the white foam
brims over everywhere. But, after rolling out of the narrows between the
rocks, it spreads abroad in a slacker and stiller flood, and turns into
an island a rock that lies in its course. On either side of the rock
juts out a sheer ridge, thick with divers trees, which screen the river
from distant view. Biorn had also a dog of extraordinary fierceness, a
terribly vicious brute, dangerous for people to live with, which had
often singly destroyed twelve men. But, since the tale is hearsay rather
than certainty, let good judges weigh its credit. This dog, as I have
heard, was the favourite of the giant Offot (Un-foot), and used to watch
his herd amid the pastures.

Now the warriors, who were always pillaging the neighbourhood, used
often to commit great slaughters. Plundering houses, cutting down
cattle, sacking everything, making great hauls of booty, rifling houses,
then burning them, massacring male and female promiscuously -- these,
and not honest dealings, were their occupations. Fridleif surprised them
while on a reckless raid, and drove them all back for refuge to the
stronghold; he also seized the immensely powerful horse, whose rider, in
the haste of his panic, had left it on the hither side of the river in
order to fly betimes; for he durst not take it with him over the bridge.
Then Fridleif proclaimed that he would pay the weight of the dead body
in gold to any man who slew one of those brothers. The hope of the prize
stimulated some of the champions of the king; and yet they were fired
not so much with covetousness as with valour; so, going secretly to
Fridleif, they promised to attempt the task, vowing to sacrifice their
lives if they did not bring home the severed heads of the robbers.
Fridleif praised their valour and their vows, but bidding the onlookers
wait, went in the night to the river, satisfied with a single companion.
For, not to seem better provided with other men's valour than with his
own, he determined to forestall their aid by his own courage. Thereupon
he crushed and killed his companion with a shower of flints, and flung
his bloodless corpse into the waves, having dressed it in his own
clothes; which he stripped off, borrowing the cast-off garb of the
other, so that when the corpse was seen it might look as if the king had
perished. He further deliberately drew blood from the beast on which he
had ridden, and bespattered it, so that when it came back into camp he
might make them think he himself was dead. Then he set spur to his horse
and drove it into the midst of the eddies, crossed the river and
alighted, and tried to climb over the rampart that screened the
stronghold by steps set up against the mound. When he got over the top
and could grasp the battlements with his hand, he quietly put his foot
inside, and, without the knowledge of the watch, went lightly on tiptoe
to the house into which the bandits had gone to carouse. And when he had
reached its hall, he sat down under the porch overhanging the door. Now
the strength of their fastness made the warriors feel so safe that they
were tempted to a debauch; for they thought that the swiftly rushing
river made their garrison inaccessible, since it seemed impossible
either to swim over or to cross in boats. For no part of the river
allowed of fording.

Biorn, moved by the revel, said that in his sleep he had seen a beast
come out of the waters, which spouted ghastly fire from its mouth,
enveloping everything in a sheet of flame. Therefore the holes and
corners of the island should, he said, be searched; nor ought they to
trust so much to their position, as rashly to let overweening confidence
bring them to utter ruin. No situation was so strong that the mere
protection of nature was enough for it without human effort. Moreover
they must take great care that the warning of his slumbers was not
followed by a yet more gloomy and disastrous fulfilment. So they all
sallied forth from the stronghold, and narrowly scanned the whole
circuit of the island; and finding the horse they surmised that Fridleif
had been drowned in the waters of the river. They received the horse
within the gates with rejoicing, supposing that it had flung off its
rider and swum over. But Biorn, still scared with the memory of the
visions of the night, advised them to keep watch, since it was not safe
for them yet to put aside suspicion of danger. Then he went to his room
to rest, with the memory of his vision deeply stored in his heart.

Meanwhile the horse, which Fridleif, in order to spread a belief in his
death, had been loosed and besprinkled with blood (though only with that
which lies between flesh and skin), burst all bedabbled into the camp of
his soldiers. They went straight to the river, and finding the carcase
of the slave, took it for the body of the king; the hissing eddies
having cast it on the bank, dressed in brave attire. Nothing helped
their mistake so much as the swelling of the battered body; inasmuch as
the skin was torn and bruised with the flints, so that all the features
were blotted out, bloodless and wan. This exasperated the champions who
had just promised Fridleif to see that the robbers were extirpated: and
they approached the perilous torrent, that they might not seem to
tarnish the honour of their promise by a craven neglect of their vow.
The rest imitated their boldness, and with equal ardour went to the
river, ready to avenge their king or to endure the worst. When Fridleif
saw them he hastened to lower the bridge to the mainland; and when he
had got the champions he cut down the watch at the first attack. Thus he
went on to attack the rest and put them to the sword, all save Biorn;
whom he tended very carefully and cured of his wounds; whereupon, under
pledge of solemn oath, he made him his colleague, thinking it better to
use his services than to boast of his death. He also declared it would
be shameful if such a flower of bravery were plucked in his first youth
and perished by an untimely death.

Now the Danes had long ago had false tidings of Fridleif's death, and
when they found that he was approaching, they sent men to fetch him, and
ordered Hiarn to quit the sovereignty, because he was thought to be
holding it only on sufferance and carelessly. But he could not bring
himself to resign such an honour, and chose sooner to spend his life for
glory than pass into the dim lot of common men. Therefore he resolved to
fight for his present estate, that he might not have to resume his
former one stripped of his royal honours. Thus the land was estranged
and vexed with the hasty commotion of civil strife; some were of Hiarn's
party, while others agreed to the claims of Fridleif, because of the
vast services of Frode; and the voice of the commons was perplexed and
divided, some of them respecting things as they were, others the memory
of the past. But regard for the memory of Frode weighed most, and its
sweetness gave Fridleif the balance of popularity.

Many wise men thought that a person of peasant rank should be removed
from the sovereignty; since, contrary to the rights of birth, and only
by the favour of fortune, he had reached an unhoped-for eminence; and in
order that the unlawful occupant might not debar the rightful heir to
the office, Fridleif told the envoys of the Danes to return, and request
Hiarn either to resign the kingdom or to meet him in battle. Hiarn
thought it more grievous than death to set lust of life before honour,
and to seek safety at the cost of glory. So he met Fridleif in the
field, was crushed, and fled into Jutland, where, rallying a band, he
again attacked his conqueror. But his men were all consumed with the
sword, and he fled unattended, as the island testifies which has taken
its name from his (Hiarno). And so, feeling his lowly fortune, and
seeing himself almost stripped of his forces by the double defeat, he
turned his mind to craft, and went to Fridleif with his face disguised,
meaning to become intimate, and find an occasion to slay him
treacherously.

Hiarn was received by the king, hiding his purpose under the pretence of
servitude. For, giving himself out as a salt- distiller, he performed
base offices among the servants who did the filthiest work. He used also
to take the last place at meal- time, and he refrained from the baths,
lest his multitude of scars should betray him if he stripped. The king,
in order to ease his own suspicions, made him wash; and when he knew his
enemy by the scars, he said: "Tell me now, thou shameless bandit, how
wouldst thou have dealt with me, if thou hadst found out plainly that I
wished to murder thee?" Hiarn, stupefied, said: "Had I caught thee I
would have first challenged thee, and then fought thee, to give thee a
better chance of wiping out thy reproach." Fridleif presently took him
at his word, challenged him and slew him, and buried his body in a
barrow that bears the dead man's name.

Soon after FRIDLEIF was admonished by his people to think about
marrying, that he might prolong his line; but he maintained that the
unmarried life was best, quoting his father Frode, on whom his wife's
wantonness had brought great dishonour. At last, yielding to the
persistent entreaties of all, he proceeded to send ambassadors to ask
for the daughter of Amund, King of Norway. One of these, named Frok, was
swallowed by the waves in mid-voyage, and showed a strange portent at
his death. For when the closing flood of billows encompassed him, blood
arose in the midst of the eddy, and the whole face of the sea was
steeped with an alien redness, so that the ocean, which a moment before
was foaming and white with tempest, was presently swollen with crimson
waves, and was seen to wear a colour foreign to its nature.

Around implacably declined to consent to the wishes of the king, and
treated the legates shamefully, declaring that he spurned the embassy
because the tyranny of Frode had of old borne so heavily upon Norway.
But Amund's daughter, Frogertha, not only looking to the birth of
Fridleif, but also honouring the glory of his deeds, began to upbraid
her father, because he scorned a son-in- law whose nobility was perfect,
being both sufficient in valour and flawless in birth. She added that
the portentous aspect of the sea, when the waves were suddenly turned
into blood, simply and solely signified the defeat of Norway, and was a
plain presage of the victory of Denmark. And when Fridleif sent a
further embassy to ask for her, wishing to vanquish the refusal by
persistency, Amund was indignant that a petition he had once denied
should be obstinately pressed, and hurried the envoys to death, wishing
to offer a brutal check to the zeal of this brazen wooer. Fridleif heard
news of this outrage, and summoning Halfdan and Biorn, sailed round
Norway. Amund, equipped with his native defences, put out his fleet
against him. The firth into which both fleets had mustered is called
Frokasund. Here Fridleif left the camp at night to reconnoitre; and,
hearing an unusual kind of sound close to him as of brass being beaten,
he stood still and looked up, and heard the following song of three
swans, who were crying above him:

"While Hythin sweeps the sea and cleaves the ravening tide, his serf
drinks out of gold and licks the cups of milk. Best is the estate of the
slave on whom waits the heir, the king's son, for their lots are rashly
interchanged." Next, after the birds had sung, a belt fell from on high,
which showed writing to interpret the song. For while the son of Hythin,
the King of Tellemark, was at his boyish play, a giant, assuming the
usual appearance of men, had carried him off, and using him as an
oarsman (having taken his skiff over to the neighbouring shore), was
then sailing past Fridleif while he was occupied reconnoitering. But the
king would not suffer him to use the service of the captive youth, and
longed to rob the spoiler of his prey. The youth warned him that he must
first use sharp reviling against the giant, promising that he would
prove easy to attack, if only he were assailed with biting verse. Then
Fridleif began thus:

"Since thou art a giant of three bodies, invincible, and almost reachest
heaven with thy crest, why does this silly sword bind thy thigh? Why
doth a broken spear gird thy huge side? Why, perchance, dost thou defend
thy stalwart breast with a feeble sword, and forget the likeness of thy
bodily stature, trusting in a short dagger, a petty weapon? Soon, soon
will I balk thy bold onset, when with blunted blade thou attemptest war.
Since thou art thyself a timid beast, a lump lacking proper pith, thou
art swept headlong like a flying shadow, having with a fair and famous
body got a heart that is unwarlike and unstable with fear, and a spirit
quite unmatched to thy limbs. Hence thy frame totters, for thy goodly
presence is faulty through the overthrow of thy soul, and thy nature in
all her parts is at strife. Hence shall all tribute of praise quit thee,
nor shalt thou be accounted famous among the brave, but shalt be
reckoned among ranks obscure."

When he had said this he lopped off a hand and foot of the giant, made
him fly, and set his prisoner free. Then he went straightway to the
giant's headland, took the treasure out of his cave, and carried it
away. Rejoicing in these trophies, and employing the kidnapped youth to
row him over the sea, he composed with cheery voice the following
strain:

"In the slaying of the swift monster we wielded our blood-stained swords
and our crimsoned blade, whilst thou, Amund, lord of the Norwegian ruin,
wert in deep slumber; and since blind night covers thee, without any
light of soul, thy valour has melted away and beguiled thee. But we
crushed a giant who lost use of his limbs and wealth, and we pierced
into the disorder of his dreary den. There we seized and plundered his
piles of gold. And now with oars we sweep the wave-wandering main, and
joyously return, rowing back to the shore our booty-laden ship; we fleet
over the waves in a skiff that travels the sea; gaily let us furrow
those open waters, lest the dawn come and betray us to the foe. Lightly
therefore, and pulling our hardest, let us scour the sea, making for our
camp and fleet ere Titan raise his rosy head out of the clear waters;
that when fame noises the deed about, and Frogertha knows that the spoil
has been won with a gallant struggle, her heart may be stirred to be
more gentle to our prayer."

On the morrow there was a great muster of the forces, and Fridleif had a
bloody battle with Amund, fought partly by sea and partly by land. For
not only were the lines drawn up in the open country, but the warriors
also made an attack with their fleet. The battle which followed cost
much blood. So Biorn, when his ranks gave back, unloosed his hound and
sent it against the enemy; wishing to win with the biting of a dog the
victory which he could not achieve with the sword. The enemy were by
this means shamefully routed, for a square of the warriors ran away when
attacked with its teeth.

There is no saying whether their flight was more dismal or more
disgraceful. Indeed, the army of the Northmen was a thing to blush for;
for an enemy crushed it by borrowing the aid of a brute. Nor was it
treacherous of Fridleif to recruit the failing valour of his men with
the aid of a dog. In this war Amund fell; and his servant Ane, surnamed
the Archer, challenged Fridleif to fight him; but Biorn, being a man of
meaner estate, not suffering the king to engage with a common fellow,
attacked him himself. And when Biorn had bent his bow and was fitting
the arrow to the string, suddenly a dart sent by Ane pierced the top of
the cord. Soon another arrow came after it and struck amid the joints of
his fingers. A third followed, and fell on the arrow as it was laid to
the string. For Ane, who was most dexterous at shooting arrows from a
distance, had purposely only struck the weapon of his opponent, in order
that, by showing it was in his power to do likewise to his person, he
might recall the champion from his purpose. But Biorn abated none of his
valour for this, and, scorning bodily danger, entered the fray with
heart and face so steadfast, that he seemed neither to yield anything to
the skill of Ane, nor lay aside aught of his wonted courage. Thus he
would in nowise be made to swerve from his purpose, and dauntlessly
ventured on the battle. Both of them left it wounded; and fought another
also on Agdar Ness with an emulous thirst for glory.

By the death of Amund, Fridleif was freed from a most bitter foe, and
obtained a deep and tranquil peace; whereupon he forced his savage
temper to the service of delight; and, transferring his ardour to love,
equipped a fleet in order to seek the marriage which had once been
denied him. At last he set forth on his voyage; and his fleet being
becalmed, he invaded some villages to look for food; where, being
received hospitably by a certain Grubb, and at last winning his daughter
in marriage, he begat a son named Olaf. After some time had passed he
also won Frogertha; but, while going back to his own country, he had a
bad voyage, and was driven on the shores of an unknown island. A certain
man appeared to him in a vision, and instructed him to dig up a treasure
that was buried in the ground, and also to attack the dragon that
guarded it, covering himself in an ox-hide to escape the poison;
teaching him also to meet the envenomed fangs with a hide stretched over
his shield. Therefore, to test the vision, he attacked the snake as it
rose out of the waves, and for a long time cast spears against its scaly
side; in vain, for its hard and shelly body foiled the darts flung at
it. But the snake, shaking its mass of coils, uprooted the trees which
it brushed past by winding its tail about them. Moreover, by constantly
dragging its body, it hollowed the ground down to the solid rock, and
had made a sheer bank on either hand, just as in some places we see
hills parted by an intervening valley. So Fridleif, seeing that the
upper part of the creature was proof against attack, assailed the lower
side with his sword, and piercing the groin, drew blood from the
quivering beast. When it was dead, he unearthed the money from the
underground chamber and had it taken off in his ships.

When the year had come to an end, he took great pains to reconcile Biorn
and Ane, who had often challenged and fought one another, and made them
exchange their hatred for friendship; and even entrusted to them his
three-year-old son, Olaf, to rear. But his mistress, Juritha, the mother
of Olaf, he gave in marriage to Ane, whom he made one of his warriors;
thinking that she would endure more calmly to be put away, if she wedded
such a champion, and received his robust embrace instead of a king's.

The ancients were wont to consult the oracles of the Fates concerning
the destinies of their children. In this way Fridleif desired to search
into the fate of his son Olaf; and, after solemnly offering up his vows,
he went to the house of the gods in entreaty; where, looking into the
chapel, he saw three maidens, sitting on three seats. The first of them
was of a benignant temper, and bestowed upon the boy abundant beauty and
ample store of favour in the eyes of men. The second granted him the
gift of surpassing generosity. But the third, a woman of more
mischievous temper and malignant disposition, scorning the unanimous
kindness of her sisters, and likewise wishing to mar their gifts, marked
the future character of the boy with the slur of niggardliness. Thus the
benefits of the others were spoilt by the poison of a lamentable doom;
and hence, by virtue of the twofold nature of these gifts Olaf got his
surname from the meanness which was mingled with his bounty. So it came
about that this blemish which found its way into the gift marred the
whole sweetness of its first benignity.

When Fridleif had returned from Norway, and was traveling through
Sweden, he took on himself to act as ambassador, and sued successfully
for Hythin's daughter, whom he had once rescued from a monster, to be
the wife of Halfdan, he being still unwedded. Meantime his wife
Frogertha bore a son FRODE, who afterwards got his surname from his
noble munificence. And thus Frode, because of the memory of his
grandsire's prosperity, which he recalled by his name, became from his
very cradle and earliest childhood such a darling of all men, that he
was not suffered even to step or stand on the ground, but was
continually cherished in people's laps and kissed. Thus he was not
assigned to one upbringer only, but was in a manner everybody's
fosterling. And, after his father's death, while he was in his twelfth
year, Swerting and Hanef, the kings of Saxony, disowned his sway, and
tried to rebel openly. He overcame them in battle, and imposed on the
conquered peoples a poll-tax of a coin, which they were to pay as his
slaves. For he showed himself so generous that he doubled the ancient
pay of the soldiers: a fashion of bounty which then was novel. For he
did not, as despots do, expose himself to the vulgar allurements of
vice, but strove to covet ardently whatsoever he saw was nearest honour;
to make his wealth public property; to surpass all other men in bounty,
to forestall them all in offices of kindness; and, hardest of all, to
conquer envy by virtue. By this means the youth soon won such favour
with all men, that he not only equalled in renown the honours of his
forefathers, but surpassed the most ancient records of kings.

At the same time one Starkad, the son of Storwerk, escaped alone, either
by force or fortune, from a wreck in which his friends perished, and was
received by Frode as his guest for his incredible excellence both of
mind and body. And, after being for some little time his comrade, he was
dressed in a better and more comely fashion every day, and was at last
given a noble vessel, and bidden to ply the calling of a rover, with the
charge of guarding the sea. For nature had gifted him with a body of
superhuman excellence; and his greatness of spirit equalled it, so that
folk thought him behind no man in valour. So far did his glory spread,
that the renown of his name and deeds continues famous even yet. He
shone out among our own countrymen by his glorious roll of exploits, and
he had also won a most splendid record among all the provinces of the
Swedes and Saxons. Tradition says that he was born originally in the
country which borders Sweden on the east, where barbarous hordes of
Esthonians and other nations now dwell far and wide. But a fabulous yet
common rumour has invented tales about his birth which are contrary to
reason and flatly incredible. For some relate that he was sprung from
giants, and betrayed his monstrous birth by an extraordinary number of
hands, four of which, engendered by the superfluity of his nature, they
declare that the god Thor tore off, shattering the framework of the
sinews and wrenching from his whole body the monstrous bunches of
fingers; so that he had but two left, and that his body, which had
before swollen to the size of a giant's, and, by reason of its shapeless
crowd of limbs looked gigantic, was thenceforth chastened to a better
appearance, and kept within the bounds of human shortness.

For there were of old certain men versed in sorcery, Thor, namely, and
Odin, and many others, who were cunning in contriving marvellous
sleights; and they, winning the minds of the simple, began to claim the
rank of gods. For, in particular, they ensnared Norway, Sweden and
Denmark in the vainest credulity, and by prompting these lands to
worship them, infected them with their imposture. The effects of their
deceit spread so far, that all other men adored a sort of divine power
in them, and, thinking them either gods or in league with gods, offered
up solemn prayers to these inventors of sorceries, and gave to
blasphemous error the honour due to religion. Hence it has come about
that the holy days, in their regular course, are called among us by the
names of these men; for the ancient Latins are known to have named these
days severally, either after the titles of their own gods, or after the
planets, seven in number. But it can be plainly inferred from the mere
names of the holy days that the objects worshipped by our countrymen
were not the same as those whom the most ancient of the Romans called
Jove and Mercury, nor those to whom Greece and Latium paid idolatrous
homage. For the days, called among our countrymen Thors-day or
Odins-day, the ancients termed severally the holy day of Jove or of
Mercury. If, therefore, according to the distinction implied in the
interpretation I have quoted, we take it that Thor is Jove and Odin
Mercury, it follows that Jove was the son of Mercury; that is, if the
assertion of our countrymen holds, among whom it is told as a matter of
common belief, that Thor was Odin's son. Therefore, when the Latins,
believing to the contrary effect, declare that Mercury was sprung from
Jove, then, if their declaration is to stand, we are driven to consider
that Thor was not the same as Jove, and that Odin was also different
from Mercury. Some say that the gods, whom our countrymen worshipped,
shared only the title with those honoured by Greece or Latium, but that,
being in a manner nearly equal to them in dignity, they borrowed from
them the worship as well as the name. This must be sufficient discourse
upon the deities of Danish antiquity. I have expounded this briefly for
the general profit, that my readers may know clearly to what worship in
its heathen superstition our country has bowed the knee. Now I will go
back to my subject where I left it.

Ancient tradition says that Starkad, whom I mentioned above, offered the
first-fruits of his deeds to the favour of the gods by slaying Wikar,
the king of the Norwegians. The affair, according to the version of some
people, happened as follows: --

Odin once wished to slay Wikar by a grievous death; but, loth to do the
deed openly, he graced Starkad, who was already remarkable for his
extraordinary size, not only with bravery, but also with skill in the
composing of spells, that he might the more readily use his services to
accomplish the destruction of the king. For that was how he hoped that
Starkad would show himself grateful for the honour he paid him. For the
same reason he also endowed him with three spans of mortal life, that he
might be able to commit in them as many abominable deeds. So Odin
resolved that Starkad's days should be prolonged by the following crime:
Starkad presently went to Wikar and dwelt awhile in his company, hiding
treachery under homage. At last he went with him sea- roving. And in a
certain place they were troubled with prolonged and bitter storms; and
when the winds checked their voyage so much that they had to lie still
most of the year, they thought that the gods must be appeased with human
blood. When the lots were cast into the urn it so fell that the king was
required for death as a victim. Then Starkad made a noose of withies and
bound the king in it; saying that for a brief instant he should pay the
mere semblance of a penalty. But the tightness of the knot acted
according to its nature, and cut off his last breath as he hung. And
while he was still quivering Starkad rent away with his steel the
remnant of his life; thus disclosing his treachery when he ought to have
brought aid. I do not think that I need examine the version which
relates that the pliant withies, hardened with the sudden grip, acted
like a noose of iron.

When Starkad had thus treacherously acted he took Wikar's ship and went
to one Bemon, the most courageous of all the rovers of Denmark, in order
to take up the life of a pirate. For Bemon's partner, named Frakk, weary
of the toil of sea-roving, had lately withdrawn from partnership with
him, after first making a money- bargain. Now Starkad and Bemon were so
careful to keep temperate, that they are said never to have indulged in
intoxicating drink, for fear that continence, the greatest bond of
bravery, might be expelled by the power of wantonness. So when, after
overthrowing provinces far and wide, they invaded Russia also in their
lust for empire, the natives, trusting little in their walls or arms,
began to bar the advance of the enemy with nails of uncommon sharpness,
that they might check their inroad, though they could not curb their
onset in battle; and that the ground might secretly wound the soles of
the men whom their army shrank from confronting in the field. But not
even such a barrier could serve to keep off the foe. The Danes were
cunning enough to foil the pains of the Russians. For they straightway
shod themselves with wooden clogs, and trod with unhurt steps upon the
points that lay beneath their soles. Now this iron thing is divided into
four spikes, which are so arranged that on whatsoever side chance may
cast it, it stands steadily on three equal feet. Then they struck into
the pathless glades, where the woods were thickets, and expelled Flokk,
the chief of the Russians, from the mountain hiding-places into which he
had crept. And here they got so much booty, that there was not one of
them but went back to the fleet laden with gold and silver.

Now when Bemon was dead, Starkad was summoned because of his valour by
the champions of Permland. And when he had done many noteworthy deeds
among them, he went into the land of the Swedes, where he lived at
leisure for seven years' space with the sons of Frey. At last he left
them and betook himself to Hakon, the tyrant of Denmark, because when
stationed at Upsala, at the time of the sacrifices, he was disgusted by
the effeminate gestures and the clapping of the mimes on the stage, and
by the unmanly clatter of the bells. Hence it is clear how far he kept
his soul from lasciviousness, not even enduring to look upon it. Thus
does virtue withstand wantonness.

Starkad took his fleet to the shore of Ireland with Hakon, in order that
even the furthest kingdoms of the world might not be untouched by the
Danish arms. The king of the island at this time was Hugleik, who,
though he had a well-filled treasury, was yet so prone to avarice, that
once, when he gave a pair of shoes which had been adorned by the hand of
a careful craftsman, he took off the ties, and by thus removing the
latches turned his present into a slight. This unhandsome act blemished
his gift so much that he seemed to reap hatred for it instead of thanks.
Thus he used never to be generous to any respectable man, but to spend
all his bounty upon mimes and jugglers. For so base a fellow was bound
to keep friendly company with the base, and such a slough of vices to
wheedle his partners in sin with pandering endearments.

Still Hugleik had the friendship of Geigad and Swipdag, nobles of tried
valour, who, by the lustre of their warlike deeds, shone out among their
unmanly companions like jewels embedded in ordure; these alone were
found to defend the riches of the king. When a battle began between
Hugleik and Hakon, the hordes of mimes, whose light-mindedness
unsteadied their bodies, broke their ranks and scurried off in panic;
and this shameful flight was their sole requital for all their king's
benefits. Then Geigad and Swipdag faced all those thousands of the enemy
single- handed, and fought with such incredible courage, that they
seemed to do the part not merely of two warriors, but of a whole army.
Geigad, moreover, dealt Hakon, who pressed him hard, such a wound in the
breast that he exposed the upper part of his liver. It was here that
Starkad, while he was attacking Geigad with his sword, received a very
sore wound on the head; wherefore he afterwards related in a certain
song that a ghastlier wound had never befallen him at any time; for,
though the divisions of his gashed head were bound up by the surrounding
outer skin, yet the livid unseen wound concealed a foul gangrene below.

Starkad conquered, killed Hugleik and routed the Irish; and had the
actors beaten whom chance made prisoner; thinking it better to order a
pack of buffoons to be ludicrously punished by the loss of their skins
than to command a more deadly punishment and take their lives. Thus he
visited with a disgraceful chastisement the baseborn throng of
professional jugglers, and was content to punish them with the
disgusting flouts of the lash. Then the Danes ordered that the wealth of
the king should be brought out of the treasury in the city of Dublin and
publicly pillaged. For so vast a treasure had been found that none took
much pains to divide it strictly.

After this, Starkad was commissioned, together with Win, the chief of
the Sclavs, to check the revolt of the East. They, having fought against
the armies of the Kurlanders, the Sembs, the Sangals, and, finally, all
the Easterlings, won splendid victories everywhere.

A champion of great repute, named Wisin, settled upon a rock in Russia
named Ana-fial, and harried both neighbouring and distant provinces with
all kinds of outrage. This man used to blunt the edge of every weapon by
merely looking at it. He was made so bold in consequence, by having lost
all fear of wounds, that he used to carry off the wives of distinguished
men and drag them to outrage before the eyes of their husbands. Starkad
was roused by the tale of this villainy, and went to Russia to destroy
the criminal; thinking nothing too hard to overcome, he challenged
Wisin, attacked him, made even his tricks useless to him, and slew him.
For Starkad covered his blade with a very fine skin, that it might not
met the eye of the sorcerer; and neither the power of his sleights nor
his great strength were any help to Wisin, for he had to yield to
Starkad. Then Starkad, trusting in his bodily strength, fought with and
overcame a giant at Byzantium, reputed invincible, named Tanne, and
drove him to fly an outlaw to unknown quarters of the earth. Therefore,
finding that he was too mighty for any hard fate to overcome him, he
went to the country of Poland, and conquered in a duel a champion whom
our countrymen name Wasce; but the Teutons, arranging the letters
differently, call him Wilzce.

Meanwhile the Saxons began to attempt a revolt, and to consider
particularly how they could destroy Frode, who was unconquered in war,
by some other way than an open conflict. Thinking that it would be best
done by a duel, they sent men to provoke the king with a challenge,
knowing that he was always ready to court any hazard, and that his high
spirit would not yield to any admonition whatever. They fancied that
this was the best time to attack him, because they knew that Starkad,
whose valour most men dreaded, was away on business. But while Frode
hesitated, and said that he would talk with his friends about the answer
to be given, Starkad, who had just returned from his sea-roving,
appeared, and blamed such a challenge, principally (he said) because it
was fitting for kings to fight only with their equals, and because they
should not take up arms against men of the people; but it was more
fitting for himself, who was born in a lowlier station, to manage the
battle.

The Saxons approached Hame, who was accounted their most famous
champion, with many offers, and promised him that, if he would lend his
services for the duel they would pay him his own weight in gold. The
fighter was tempted by the money, and, with all the ovation of a
military procession, they attended him to the ground appointed for the
combat. Thereupon the Danes, decked in warlike array, led Starkad, who
was to represent his king, out to the duelling-ground. Hame, in his
youthful assurance, despised him as withered with age, and chose to
grapple rather than fight with an outworn old man. Attacking Starkad, he
would have flung him tottering to the earth, but that fortune, who would
not suffer the old man to be conquered, prevented him from being hurt.
For he is said to have been so crushed by the fist of Hame, as he dashed
on him, that he touched the earth with his chin, supporting himself on
his knees. But he made up nobly for his tottering; for, as soon as he
could raise his knee and free his hand to draw his sword, he clove Hame
through the middle of the body. Many lands and sixty bondmen apiece were
the reward of the victory.

After Hame was killed in this manner the sway of the Danes over the
Saxons grew so insolent, that they were forced to pay every year a small
tax for each of their limbs that was a cubit (ell) long, in token of
their slavery. This Hanef could not bear, and he meditated war in his
desire to remove the tribute. Steadfast love of his country filled his
heart every day with greater compassion for the oppressed; and, longing
to spend his life for the freedom of his countrymen, he openly showed a
disposition to rebel. Frode took his forces over the Elbe, and killed
him near the village of Hanofra (Hanover), so named after Hanef. But
Swerting, though he was equally moved by the distress of his countrymen,
said nothing about the ills of his land, and revolved a plan for freedom
with a spirit yet more dogged than Hanef's. Men often doubt whether this
zeal was liker to vice or to virtue; but I certainly censure it as
criminal, because it was produced by a treacherous desire to revolt. It
may have seemed most expedient to seek the freedom of the country, but
it was not lawful to strive after this freedom by craft and treachery.
Therefore, since the deed of Swerting was far from honourable, neither
will it be called expedient; for it is nobler to attack openly him whom
you mean to attack, and to exhibit hatred in the light of day, than to
disguise a real wish to do harm under a spurious show of friendship. But
the gains of crime are inglorious, its fruits are brief and fading. For
even as that soul is slippery, which hides its insolent treachery by
stealthy arts, so is it right that whatsoever is akin to guilt should be
frail and fleeting. For guilt has been usually found to come home to its
author; and rumour relates that such was the fate of Swerting. For he
had resolved to surprise the king under the pretence of a banquet, and
burn him to death; but the king forestalled and slew him, though slain
by him in return. Hence the crime of one proved the destruction of both;
and thus, though the trick succeeded against the foe, it did not bestow
immunity on its author.

Frode was succeeded by his son Ingild, whose soul was perverted from
honour. He forsook the examples of his forefathers, and utterly
enthralled himself to the lures of the most wanton profligacy. Thus he
had not a shadow of goodness and righteousness, but embraced vices
instead of virtue; he cut the sinews of self-control, neglected the
duties of his kingly station, and sank into a filthy slave of riot.
Indeed, he fostered everything that was adverse or ill-fitted to an
orderly life. He tainted the glories of his father and grandfather by
practising the foulest lusts, and bedimmed the brightest honours of his
ancestors by most shameful deeds. For he was so prone to gluttony, that
he had no desire to avenge his father, or repel the aggressions of his
foes; and so, could he but gratify his gullet, he thought that decency
and self-control need be observed in nothing. By idleness and sloth he
stained his glorious lineage, living a loose and sensual life; and his
soul, so degenerate, so far perverted and astray from the steps of his
fathers, he loved to plunge into most abominable gulfs of foulness.
Fowl-fatteners, scullions, frying-pans, countless cook-houses, different
cooks to roast or spice the banquet -- the choosing of these stood to
him for glory. As to arms, soldiering, and wars, he could endure neither
to train himself to them, nor to let others practise them. Thus he cast
away all the ambitions of a man and aspired to those of women; for his
incontinent itching of palate stirred in him love of every
kitchen-stench. Ever breathing of his debauch, and stripped of every rag
of soberness, with his foul breath he belched the undigested filth in
his belly. He was as infamous in wantonness as Frode was illustrious in
war. So utterly had his spirit been enfeebled by the untimely seductions
of gluttony. Starkad was so disgusted at the excess of Ingild, that he
forsook his friendship, and sought the fellowship of Halfdan, the King
of Swedes, preferring work to idleness. Thus he could not bear so much
as to countenance excessive indulgence. Now the sons of Swerting,
fearing that they would have to pay to Ingild the penalty of their
father's crime, were fain to forestall his vengeance by a gift, and gave
him their sister in marriage. Antiquity relates that she bore him sons,
Frode, Fridleif, Ingild, and Olaf (whom some say was the son of Ingild's
sister).

Ingild's sister Helga had been led by amorous wooing to return the flame
of a certain low-born goldsmith, who was apt for soft words, and
furnished with divers of the little gifts which best charm a woman's
wishes. For since the death of the king there had been none to honour
the virtues of the father by attention to the child; she had lacked
protection, and had no guardians. When Starkad had learnt this from the
repeated tales of travellers, he could not bear to let the wantonness of
the smith pass unpunished. For he was always heedful to bear kindness in
mind, and as ready to punish arrogance. So he hastened to chastise such
bold and enormous insolence, wishing to repay the orphan ward the
benefits he had of old received from Frode. Then he travelled through
Sweden, went into the house of the smith, and posted himself near the
threshold muffling his face in a cap to avoid discovery. The smith, who
had not learnt the lesson that "strong hands are sometimes found under a
mean garment", reviled him, and bade him quickly leave the house, saying
that he should have the last broken victuals among the crowd of paupers.
But the old man, whose ingrained self-control lent him patience, was
nevertheless fain to rest there, and gradually study the wantonness of
his host. For his reason was stronger than his impetuosity, and curbed
his increasing rage. Then the smith approached the girl with open
shamelessness, and cast himself in her lap, offering the hair of his
head to be combed out by her maidenly hands.

Also he thrust forward his loin cloth, and required her help in picking
out the fleas; and exacted from this woman of lordly lineage that she
should not blush to put her sweet fingers in a foul apron. Then,
believing that he was free to have his pleasure, he ventured to put his
longing palms within her gown and to set his unsteady hands close to her
breast. But she, looking narrowly, was aware of the presence of the old
man whom she once had known, and felt ashamed. She spurned the wanton
and libidinous fingering, and repulsed the unchaste hands, telling the
man also that he had need of arms, and urging him to cease his lewd
sport.

Starkad, who had sat down by the door, with the hat muffling his head,
had already become so deeply enraged at this sight, that he could not
find patience to hold his hand any longer, but put away his covering and
clapped his right hand to his sword to draw it. Then the smith, whose
only skill was in lewdness, faltered with sudden alarm, and finding that
it had come to fighting, gave up all hope of defending himself, and saw
in flight the only remedy for his need. Thus it was as hard to break out
of the door, of which the enemy held the approach, as it was grievous to
await the smiter within the house. At last necessity forced him to put
an end to his delay, and he judged that a hazard wherein there lay but
the smallest chance of safety was more desirable than sure and manifest
danger. Also, hard as it was to fly, the danger being so close, yet he
desired flight because it seemed to bring him aid, and to be the nearer
way to safety; and he cast aside delay, which seemed to be an evil
bringing not the smallest help, but perhaps irretrievable ruin. But just
as he gained the threshold, the old man watching at the door smote him
through the hams, and there, half dead, he tottered and fell. For the
smiter thought he ought carefully to avoid lending his illustrious hands
to the death of a vile cinder-blower, and considered that ignominy would
punish his shameless passion worse than death. Thus some men think that
he who suffers misfortune is worse punished than he who is slain
outright. Thus it was brought about, that the maiden, who had never had
parents to tend her, came to behave like a woman of well-trained nature,
and did the part, as it were, of a zealous guardian to herself. And when
Starkad, looking round, saw that the household sorrowed over the late
loss of their master, he heaped shame on the wounded man with more
invective, and thus began to mock:

"Why is the house silent and aghast? What makes this new grief? Or where
now rest that doting husband whom the steel has just punished for his
shameful love? Keeps he still aught of his pride and lazy wantonness?
Holds he to his quest, glows his lust as hot as before? Let him while
away an hour with me in converse, and allay with friendly words my
hatred of yesterday. Let your visage come forth with better cheer; let
not lamentation resound in the house, or suffer the faces to become
dulled with sorrow.

"Wishing to know who burned with love for the maiden, and was deeply
enamoured of my beloved ward, I put on a cap, lest my familiar face
might betray me. Then comes in that wanton smith, with lewd steps,
bending his thighs this way and that with studied gesture, and likewise
making eyes as he ducked all ways. His covering was a mantle fringed
with beaver, his sandals were inlaid with gems, his cloak was decked
with gold. Gorgeous ribbons bound his plaited hair, and a many-coloured
band drew tight his straying locks. Hence grew a sluggish and puffed-up
temper; he fancied that wealth was birth, and money forefathers, and
reckoned his fortune more by riches than by blood. Hence came pride unto
him, and arrogance led to fine attire. For the wretch began to think
that his dress made him equal to the high-born; he, the cinder-blower,
who hunts the winds with hides, and puffs with constant draught, who
rakes the ashes with his fingers, and often by drawing back the bellows
takes in the air, and with a little fan makes a breath and kindles the
smouldering fires! Then he goes to the lap of the girl, and leaning
close, says, \`Maiden, comb my hair and catch the skipping fleas, and
remove what stings my skin.' Then he sat and spread his arms that
sweated under the gold, lolling on the smooth cushion and leaning back
on his elbow, wishing to flaunt his adornment, just as a barking brute
unfolds the gathered coils of its twisted tail. But she knew me, and
began to check her lover and rebuff his wanton hands; and, declaring
that it was I, she said, \`Refrain thy fingers, check thy promptings,
take heed to appease the old man sitting close by the doors. The sport
will turn to sorrow. I think Starkad is here, and his slow gaze scans
thy doings.' The smith answered: \`Turn not pale at the peaceful raven
and the ragged old man; never has that mighty one whom thou fearest
stooped to such common and base attire. The strong man loves shining
raiment, and looks for clothes to match his courage.' Then I uncovered
and drew my sword, and as the smith fled I clove his privy parts; his
hams were laid open, cut away from the bone; they showed his entrails.
Presently I rise and crush the girl's mouth with my fist, and draw blood
from her bruised nostril. Then her lips, used to evil laughter, were wet
with tears mingled with blood, and foolish love paid for all the sins it
committed with soft eyes. Over is the sport of the hapless woman who
rushed on, blind with desire, like a maddened mare, and makes her lust
the grave of her beauty. Thou deservest to be sold for a price to
foreign peoples and to grind at the mill, unless blood pressed from thy
breasts prove thee falsely accused, and thy nipple's lack of milk clear
thee of the crime. Howbeit, I think thee free from this fault; yet bear
not tokens of suspicion, nor lay thyself open to lying tongues, nor give
thyself to the chattering populace to gird at. Rumour hurts many, and a
lying slander often harms. A little word deceives the thoughts of common
men. Respect thy grandsires, honour thy fathers, forget not thy parents,
value thy forefathers; let thy flesh and blood keep its fame. What
madness came on thee? And thou, shameless smith, what fate drove thee in
thy lust to attempt a high-born race? Or who sped thee, maiden, worthy
of the lordliest pillows, to loves obscure? Tell me, how durst thou
taste with thy rosy lips a mouth reeking of ashes, or endure on thy
breast hands filthy with charcoal, or bring close to thy side the arms
that turn the live coals over, and put the palms hardened with the use
of the tongs to thy pure cheeks, and embrace the head sprinkled with
embers, taking it to thy bright arms?

"I remember how smiths differ from one another, for once they smote me.
All share alike the name of their calling, but the hearts beneath are
different in temper. I judge those best who weld warriors' swords and
spears for the battle, whose temper shows their courage, who betoken
their hearts by the sternness of their calling, whose work declares
their prowess. There are also some to whom the hollow mould yields
bronze, as they make the likeness of divers things in molten gold, who
smelt the veins and recast the metal. But Nature has fashioned these of
a softer temper, and has crushed with cowardice the hands which she has
gifted with rare skill. Often such men, while the heat of the blast
melts the bronze that is poured in the mould, craftily filch flakes of
gold from the lumps, when the vessel thirsts after the metal they have
stolen."

So speaking, Starkad got as much pleasure from his words as from his
works, and went back to Halfdan, embracing his service with the closest
friendship, and never ceasing from the exercise of war; so that he
weaned his mind from delights, and vexed it with incessant application
to arms.

Now Ingild had two sisters, Helga and Asa; Helga was of full age to
marry, while Asa was younger and unripe for wedlock. Then Helge the
Norwegian was moved with desire to ask for Helga for his wife, and
embarked. Now he had equipped his vessel so luxuriously that he had
lordly sails decked with gold, held up also on gilded masts, and tied
with crimson ropes. When he arrived Ingild promised to grant him his
wish if, to test his reputation publicly, he would first venture to meet
in battle the champions pitted against him. Helge did not flinch at the
terms; he answered that he would most gladly abide by the compact. And
so the troth-plight of the future marriage was most ceremoniously
solemnized.

A story is remembered that there had grown up at the same time, on the
Isle of Zealand, the nine sons of a certain prince, all highly gifted
with strength and valour, the eldest of whom was Anganty. This last was
a rival suitor for the same maiden; and when he saw that the match which
he had been denied was promised to Helge, he challenged him to a
struggle, wishing to fight away his vexation. Helge agreed to the
proposed combat. The hour of the fight was appointed for the wedding-day
by the common wish of both. For any man who, being challenged, refused
to fight, used to be covered with disgrace in the sight of all men. Thus
Helge was tortured on the one side by the shame of refusing the battle,
on the other by the dread of waging it. For he thought himself attacked
unfairly and counter to the universal laws of combat, as he had
apparently undertaken to fight nine men single-handed. While he was thus
reflecting his betrothed told him that he would need help, and
counselled him to refrain from the battle, wherein it seemed he would
encounter only death and disgrace, especially as he had not stipulated
for any definite limit to the number of those who were to be his
opponents. He should therefore avoid the peril, and consult his safety
by appealing to Starkad, who was sojourning among the Swedes; since it
was his way to help the distressed, and often to interpose successfully
to retrieve some dismal mischance.

Then Helge, who liked the counsel thus given very well, took a small
escort and went into Sweden; and when he reached its most famous city,
Upsala, he forbore to enter, but sent in a messenger who was to invite
Starkad to the wedding of Frode's daughter, after first greeting him
respectfully to try him. This courtesy stung Starkad like an insult. He
looked sternly on the youth, and said, "That had he not had his beloved
Frode named in his instructions, he should have paid dearly for his
senseless mission. He must think that Starkad, like some buffoon or
trencherman, was accustomed to rush off to the reek of a distant kitchen
for the sake of a richer diet." Helge, when his servant had told him
this, greeted the old man in the name of Frode's daughter, and asked him
to share a battle which he had accepted upon being challenged, saying
that he was not equal to it by himself, the terms of the agreement being
such as to leave the number of his adversaries uncertain. Starkad, when
he had heard the time and place of the combat, not only received the
suppliant well, but also encouraged him with the offer of aid, and told
him to go back to Denmark with his companions, telling him that he would
find his way to him by a short and secret path. Helge departed, and if
we may trust report, Starkad, by sheer speed of foot, travelled in one
day's journeying over as great a space as those who went before him are
said to have accomplished in twelve; so that both parties, by a chance
meeting, reached their journey's end, the palace of Ingild, at the very
same time. Here Starkad passed, just as the servants did, along the
tables filled with guests; and the aforementioned nine, howling horribly
with repulsive gestures, and running about as if they were on the stage,
encouraged one another to the battle. Some say that they barked like
furious dogs at the champion as he approached. Starkad rebuked them for
making themselves look ridiculous with such an unnatural visage, and for
clowning with wide grinning cheeks; for from this, he declared, soft and
effeminate profligates derived their wanton incontinence. When Starkad
was asked banteringly by the nine whether he had valour enough to fight,
he answered that doubtless he was strong enough to meet, not merely one,
but any number that might come against him. And when the nine heard this
they understood that this was the man whom they had heard would come to
the succour of Helge from afar. Starkad also, to protect the
bride-chamber with a more diligent guard, voluntarily took charge of the
watch; and, drawing back the doors of the bedroom, barred them with a
sword instead of a bolt, meaning to post himself so as to give
undisturbed quiet to their bridal.

When Helge woke, and, shaking off the torpor of sleep, remembered his
pledge, he thought of buckling on his armour. But, seeing that a little
of the darkness of night yet remained, and wishing to wait for the hour
of dawn, he began to ponder the perilous business at hand, when sleep
stole on him and sweetly seized him, so that he took himself back to bed
laden with slumber. Starkad, coming in on him at daybreak, saw him
locked asleep in the arms of his wife, and would not suffer him to be
vexed with a sudden shock, or summoned from his quiet slumbers; lest he
should seem to usurp the duty of wakening him and breaking upon the
sweetness of so new a union, all because of cowardice. He thought it,
therefore, more handsome to meet the peril alone than to gain a comrade
by disturbing the pleasure of another. So he quietly retraced his steps,
and scorning his enemies, entered the field which in our tongue is
called Roliung, and finding a seat under the slope of a certain hill, he
exposed himself to wind and snow. Then, as though the gentle airs of
spring weather were breathing upon him, he put off his cloak, and set to
picking out the fleas. He also cast on the briars a purple mantle which
Helga had lately given him, that no clothing might seem to lend him
shelter against the raging shafts of hail. Then the champions came and
climbed the hill on the opposite side; and, seeking a spot sheltered
from the winds wherein to sit, they lit a fire and drove off the cold.
At last, not seeing Starkad, they sent a man to the crest of the hill,
to watch his coming more clearly, as from a watch-tower. This man
climbed to the top of the lofty mountain, and saw, on its sloping side,
an old man covered shoulder-high with the snow that showered down. He
asked him if he was the man who was to fight according to the promise.
Starkad declared that he was. Then the rest came up and asked him
whether he had resolved to meet them all at once or one by one. But he
said, "Whenever a surly pack of curs yelps at me, I commonly send them
flying all at once, and not in turn." Thus he let them know that he
would rather fight with-them all together than one by one, thinking that
his enemies should be spurned with words first and deeds afterwards.

The fight began furiously almost immediately, and he felled six of them
without receiving any wound in return; and though the remaining three
wounded him so hard in seventeen places that most of his bowels gushed
out of his belly, he slew them notwithstanding, like their brethren.
Disembowelled, with failing strength, he suffered from dreadful straits
of thirst, and, crawling on his knees in his desire to find a draught,
he longed for water from the streamlet that ran close by. But when he
saw it was tainted with gore he was disgusted at the look of the water,
and refrained from its infected draught. For Anganty had been struck
down in the waves of the river, and had dyed its course so deep with his
red blood that it seemed now to flow not with water, but with some ruddy
liquid. So Starkad thought it nobler that his bodily strength should
fail than that he should borrow strength from so foul a beverage.
Therefore, his force being all but spent, he wriggled on his knees, up
to a rock that happened to be lying near, and for some little while lay
leaning against it. A hollow in its surface is still to be seen, just as
if his weight as he lay had marked it with a distinct impression of his
body. But I think this appearance is due to human handiwork, for it
seems to pass all belief that the hard and uncleavable rock should so
imitate the softness of wax, as, merely by the contact of a man leaning
on it, to present the appearance of a man having sat there, and assume
concavity for ever.

A certain man, who chanced to be passing by in a cart, saw Starkad
wounded almost all over his body. Equally aghast and amazed, he turned
and drove closer, asking what reward he should have if he were to tend
and heal his wounds. But Starkad would rather be tortured by grievous
wounds than use the service of a man of base estate, and first asked his
birth and calling. The man said that his profession was that of a
sergeant. Starkad, not content with despising him, also spurned him with
revilings, because, neglecting all honourable business, he followed the
calling of a hanger-on; and because he had tarnished his whole career
with ill repute, thinking the losses of the poor his own gains;
suffering none to be innocent, ready to inflict wrongful accusation upon
all men, most delighted at any lamentable turn in the fortunes of
another; and toiling most at his own design, namely of treacherously
spying out all men's doings, and seeking some traitorous occasion to
censure the character of the innocent.

As this first man departed, another came up, promising aid and remedies.
Like the last comer, he was bidden to declare his condition; and he said
that he had a certain man's handmaid to wife, and was doing peasant
service to her master in order to set her free. Starkad refused to
accept his help, because he had married in a shameful way by taking a
slave to his embrace. Had he had a shred of virtue he should at least
have disdained to be intimate with the slave of another, but should have
enjoyed some freeborn partner of his bed. What a mighty man, then, must
we deem Starkad, who, when enveloped in the most deadly perils, showed
himself as great in refusing aid as in receiving wounds!

When this man departed a woman chanced to approach and walk past the old
man. She came up to him in order to wipe his wounds, but was first
bidden to declare what was her birth and calling. She said that she was
a handmaid used to grinding at the mill. Starkad then asked her if she
had children; and when he was told that she had a female child, he told
her to go home and give the breast to her squalling daughter; for he
thought it most uncomely that he should borrow help from a woman of the
lowest degree. Moreover, he knew that she could nourish her own flesh
and blood with milk better than she could minister to the wounds of a
stranger.

As the woman was departing, a young man came riding up in a cart. He saw
the old man, and drew near to minister to his wounds. On being asked who
he was, he said his father was a labourer, and added that he was used to
the labours of a peasant. Starkad praised his origin, and pronounced
that his calling was also most worthy of honour; for, he said, such men
sought a livelihood by honourable traffic in their labour, inasmuch as
they knew not of any gain, save what they had earned by the sweat of
their brow. He also thought that a country life was justly to be
preferred even to the most splendid riches; for the most wholesome
fruits of it seemed to be born and reared in the shelter of a middle
estate, halfway between magnificence and squalor. But he did not wish to
pass the kindness of the youth unrequited, and rewarded the esteem he
had shown him with the mantle he had cast among the thorns. So the
peasant's son approached, replaced the parts of his belly that had been
torn away, and bound up with a plait of withies the mass of intestines
that had fallen out. Then he took the old man to his car, and with the
most zealous respect carried him away to the palace.

Meantime Helga, in language betokening the greatest wariness, began to
instruct her husband, saying that she knew that Starkad, as soon as he
came back from conquering the champions, would punish him for his
absence, thinking that he had inclined more to sloth and lust than to
his promise to fight as appointed. Therefore he must withstand Starkad
boldly, because he always spared the brave but loathed the coward. Helge
respected equally her prophecy and her counsel, and braced his soul and
body with a glow of valorous enterprise. Starkad, when he had been
driven to the palace, heedless of the pain of his wounds, leaped swiftly
out of the cart, and just like a man who was well from top to toe, burst
into the bridal-chamber, shattering the doors with his fist. Then Helge
leapt from his bed, and, as he had been taught by the counsel of his
wife, plunged his blade full at Starkad's forehead. And since he seemed
to be meditating a second blow, and to be about to make another thrust
with his sword, Helga flew quickly from the couch, caught up a shield,
and, by interposing it, saved the old man from impending destruction;
for, notwithstanding, Helge with a stronger stroke of his blade smote
the shield right through to the boss. Thus the praiseworthy wit of the
woman aided her friend, and her hand saved him whom her counsel had
injured; for she protected the old man by her deed, as well as her
husband by her warning. Starkad was induced by this to let Helge go
scot-free; saying that a man whose ready and assured courage so surely
betokened manliness, ought to be spared; for he vowed that a man ill
deserved death whose brave spirit was graced with such a dogged will to
resist.

Starkad went back to Sweden before his wounds had been treated with
medicine, or covered with a single scar. Halfdan had been killed by his
rivals; and Starkad, after quelling certain rebels, set up Siward as the
heir to his father's sovereignty. With him he sojourned a long time; but
when he heard -- for the rumour spread -- that Ingild, the son of Frode
(who had been treacherously slain), was perversely minded, and instead
of punishing his father's murderers, bestowed upon them kindness and
friendship, he was vexed with stinging wrath at so dreadful a crime.
And, resenting that a youth of such great parts should have renounced
his descent from his glorious father, he hung on his shoulders a mighty
mass of charcoal, as though it were some costly burden, and made his way
to Denmark. When asked by those he met why he was taking along so
unusual a load, he said that he would sharpen the dull wits of King
Ingild to a point by bits of charcoal. So he accomplished a swift and
headlong journey, as though at a single breath, by a short and speedy
track; and at last, becoming the guest of Ingild, he went up, as his
custom was, in to the seat appointed for the great men; for he had been
used to occupy the highest post of distinction with the kings of the
last generation.

When the queen came in, and saw him covered over with filth and clad in
the mean, patched clothes of a peasant, the ugliness of her guest's
dress made her judge him with little heed; and, measuring the man by the
clothes, she reproached him with crassness of wit, because he had gone
before greater men in taking his place at table, and had assumed a seat
that was too good for his boorish attire. She bade him quit the place,
that he might not touch the cushions with his dress, which was fouler
than it should have been. For she put down to crassness and brazenness
what Starkad only did from proper pride; she knew not that on a high
seat of honour the mind sometimes shines brighter than the raiment. The
spirited old man obeyed, though vexed at the rebuff, and with marvellous
self-control choked down the insult which his bravery so ill deserved;
uttering at this disgrace he had received neither word nor groan. But he
could not long bear to hide the bitterness of his anger in silence.
Rising, and retreating to the furthest end of the palace, he flung his
body against the walls; and strong as they were, he so battered them
with the shock, that the beams quaked mightily; and he nearly brought
the house down in a crash. Thus, stung not only with his rebuff, but
with the shame of having poverty cast in his teeth, he unsheathed his
wrath against the insulting speech of the queen with inexorable
sternness.

Ingild, on his return from hunting, scanned him closely, and, when he
noticed that he neither looked cheerfully about, nor paid him the
respect of rising, saw by the sternness written on his brow that it was
Starkad. For when he noted his hands horny with fighting, his scars in
front, the force and fire of his eye, he perceived that a man whose body
was seamed with so many traces of wounds had no weakling soul. He
therefore rebuked his wife, and charged her roundly to put away her
haughty tempers, and to soothe and soften with kind words and gentle
offices the man she had reviled; to comfort him with food and drink, and
refresh him with kindly converse; saying, that this man had been
appointed his tutor by his father long ago, and had been a most tender
guardian of his childhood. Then, learning too late the temper of the old
man, she turned her harshness into gentleness, and respectfully waited
on him whom she had rebuffed and railed at with bitter revilings. The
angry hostess changed her part, and became the most fawning of
flatterers. She wished to check his anger with her attentiveness; and
her fault was the less, inasmuch as she was so quick in ministering to
him after she had been chidden. But she paid dearly for it, for she
presently beheld stained with the blood of her brethren the place where
she had flouted and rebuffed the brave old man from his seat.

Now, in the evening, Ingild took his meal with the sons of Swerting, and
fell to a magnificent feast, loading the tables with the profusest
dishes. With friendly invitation he kept the old man back from leaving
the revel too early; as though the delights of elaborate dainties could
have undermined that staunch and sturdy virtue! But when Starkad had set
eyes on these things, he scorned so wanton a use of them; and, not to
give way a whit to foreign fashions, he steeled his appetite against
these tempting delicacies with the self-restraint which was his greatest
strength. He would not suffer his repute as a soldier to be impaired by
the allurements of an orgy. For his valour loved thrift, and was a
stranger to all superfluity of food, and averse to feasting in excess.
For his was a courage which never at any moment had time to make luxury
of aught account, and always forewent pleasure to pay due heed to
virtue. So, when he saw that the antique character of self-restraint,
and all good old customs, were being corrupted by new-fangled luxury and
sumptuosity, he wished to be provided with a morsel fitter for a
peasant, and scorned the costly and lavish feast.

Spurning profuse indulgence in food, Starkad took some smoky and rather
rancid fare, appeasing his hunger with a bitter relish because more
simply; and being unwilling to enfeeble his true valour with the tainted
sweetness of sophisticated foreign dainties, or break the rule of
antique plainness by such strange idolatries of the belly. He was also
very wroth that they should go, to the extravagance of having the same
meat both roasted and boiled at the same meal; for he considered an
eatable which was steeped in the vapours of the kitchen, and which the
skill of the cook rubbed over with many kinds of flavours, in the light
of a monstrosity.

Unlike Starkad Ingild flung the example of his ancestors to the winds,
and gave himself freer licence of innovation in the fashions of the
table than the custom of his fathers allowed. For when he had once
abandoned himself to the manners of Teutonland, he did not blush to
yield to its unmanly wantonness. No slight incentives to debauchery have
flowed down our country's throat from that sink of a land. Hence came
magnificent dishes, sumptuous kitchens, the base service of cooks, and
all sorts of abominable sausages. Hence came our adoption, wandering
from the ways of our fathers, of a more dissolute dress. Thus our
country, which cherished self-restraint as its native quality, has gone
begging to our neighbours for luxury; whose allurements so charmed
Ingild, that he did not think it shameful to requite wrongs with
kindness; nor did the grievous murder of his father make him heave one
sigh of bitterness when it crossed his mind.

But the queen would not depart without effecting her purpose. Thinking
that presents would be the best way to banish the old man's anger, she
took off her own head a band of marvellous handiwork, and put it in his
lap as he supped: desiring to buy his favour since she could not blunt
his courage. But Starkad, whose bitter resentment was not yet abated,
flung it back in the face of the giver, thinking that in such a gift
there was more scorn than respect. And he was wise not to put this
strange ornament of female dress upon the head that was all bescarred
and used to the helmet; for he knew that the locks of a man ought not to
wear a woman's head-band. Thus he avenged slight with slight, and repaid
with retorted scorn the disdain he had received; thereby bearing himself
well-nigh as nobly in avenging his disgrace as he had borne himself in
enduring it.

To the soul of Starkad reverence for Frode was grappled with hooks of
love. Drawn to him by deeds of bounty, countless kindnesses, he could
not be wheedled into giving up his purpose of revenge by any sort of
alluring complaisance. Even now, when Frode was no more, he was eager to
pay the gratitude due to his benefits, and to requite the kindness of
the dead, whose loving disposition and generous friendship he had
experienced while he lived. For he bore graven so deeply in his heart
the grievous picture of Frode's murder, that his honour for that most
famous captain could never be plucked from the inmost chamber of his
soul; and therefore he did not hesitate to rank his ancient friendship
before the present kindness. Besides, when he recalled the previous
affront, he could not thank the complaisance that followed; he could not
put aside the disgraceful wound to his self-respect. For the memory of
benefits or injuries ever sticks more firmly in the minds of brave men
than in those of weaklings. For he had not the habits of those who
follow their friends in prosperity and quit them in adversity, who pay
more regard to fortune than to looks, and sit closer to their own gain
than to charity toward others.

But the woman held to her purpose, seeing that even so she could not win
the old man to convivial mirth. Continuing with yet more lavish courtesy
her efforts to soothe him, and to heap more honours on the guest, she
bade a piper strike up, and started music to melt his unbending rage.
For she wanted to unnerve his stubborn nature by means of cunning
sounds. But the cajolery of pipe or string was just as powerless to
enfeeble that dogged warrior. When he heard it, he felt that the respect
paid him savoured more of pretence than of love. Hence the crestfallen
performer seemed to be playing to a statue rather than a man, and learnt
that it is vain for buffoons to assail with, their tricks a settled and
weighty sternness, and that a mighty mass cannot be shaken with the idle
puffing of the lips. For Starkad had set his face so firmly in his
stubborn wrath, that he seemed not a whit easier to move than ever. For
the inflexibility which he owed his vows was not softened either by the
strain of the lute or the enticements of the palate; and he thought that
more respect should be paid to his strenuous and manly purpose than to
the tickling of the ears or the lures of the feast. Accordingly he flung
the bone, which he had stripped in eating the meat, in the face of the
harlequin, and drove the wind violently out of his puffed cheeks, so
that they collapsed. By this he showed how his austerity loathed the
clatter of the stage; for his ears were stopped with anger and open to
no influence of delight. This reward, befitting an actor, punished an
unseemly performance with a shameful wage. For Starkad excellently
judged the man's deserts, and bestowed a shankbone for the piper to pipe
on, requiting his soft service with a hard fee. None could say whether
the actor piped or wept the louder; he showed by his bitter flood of
tears how little place bravery has in the breasts of the dissolute. For
the fellow was a mere minion of pleasure, and had never learnt to bear
the assaults of calamity. This man's hurt was ominous of the carnage
that was to follow at the feast. Right well did Starkad's spirit,
heedful of sternness, hold with stubborn gravity to steadfast revenge;
for he was as much disgusted at the lute as others were delighted, and
repaid the unwelcome service by insultingly flinging a bone; thus
avowing that he owed a greater debt to the glorious dust of his mighty
friend than to his shameless and infamous ward.

But when Starkad saw that the slayers of Frode were in high favour with
the king, his stern glances expressed the mighty wrath which he
harboured, and his face betrayed what he felt. The visible fury of his
gaze betokened the secret tempest in his heart. At last, when Ingild
tried to appease him with royal fare, he spurned the dainty. Satisfied
with cheap and common food, he utterly spurned outlandish delicacies; he
was used to plain diet, and would not pamper his palate with any
delightful flavour. When he was asked why he had refused the generous
attention of the king with such a clouded brow, he said that he had come
to Denmark to find the son of Frode, not a man who crammed his proud and
gluttonous stomach with rich elaborate feasts. For the Teuton
extravagance which the king favoured had led him, in his longing for the
pleasures of abundance, to set to the fire again, for roasting, dishes
which had been already boiled. Thereupon he could not forbear from
attacking Ingild's character, but poured out the whole bitterness of his
reproaches on his head. He condemned his unfilial spirit, because he
gaped with repletion and vented his squeamishness in filthy hawkings;
because, following the lures of the Saxons, he strayed and departed far
from soberness; because he was so lacking in manhood as not to pursue
even the faintest shadow of it. But, declared Starkad, he bore the
heaviest load of infamy, because, even when he first began to see
service, he forgot to avenge his father, to whose butchers, forsaking
the law of nature, he was kind and attentive. Men whose deserts were
most vile he welcomed with loving affection; and not only did he let
those go scot-free, whom he should have punished most sharply, but he
even judged them fit persons to live with and entertain at his table,
whereas he should rather have put them to death. Hereupon Starkad is
also said to have sung as follows:

"Let the unwarlike youth yield to the aged, let him honour all the years
of him that is old. When a man is brave, let none reproach the number of
his days.

"Though the hair of the ancient whiten with age, their valour stays
still the same; nor shall the lapse of time have power to weaken their
manly heart.

"I am elbowed away by the offensive guest, who taints with vice his
outward show of goodness, whilst he is the slave of his belly and
prefers his daily dainties to anything.

"When I was counted as a comrade of Frode, I ever sat in the midst of
warriors on a high seat in the hall, and I was the first of the princes
to take my meal.

"Now, the lot of a nobler age is reversed; I am shut in a corner, I am
like the fish that seeks shelter as it wanders to and fro hidden in the
waters.

"I, who used surely in the former age to lie back on a couch handsomely
spread, am now thrust among the hindmost and driven from the crowded
hall.

"Perchance I had been driven on my back at the doors, had not the wall
struck my side and turned me back, and had not the beam, in the way made
it hard for me to fly when I was thrust forth.

"I am baited with the jeers of the court-folk; I am not received as a
guest should be; I am girded at with harsh gibing, and stung with
babbling taunts.

"I am a stranger, and would gladly know what news are spread abroad by
busy rumour; what is the course of events; what the order of the land;
what is doing in your country.

"Thou, Ingild, buried in sin, why dost thou tarry in the task of
avenging thy father? Wilt thou think tranquilly of the slaughter of thy
righteous sire?

"Why dost thou, sluggard, think only of feasting, and lean thy belly
back in ease, more effeminate than harlots? Is the avenging of thy
slaughtered father a little thing to thee?

"When last I left thee, Frode, I learned by my prophetic soul that thou,
mightiest of kings, wouldst surely perish by the sword of enemies.

"And while I travelled long in the land, a warning groan rose in my
soul, which augured that thereafter I was never to see thee more.

"Wo is me, that then I was far away, harrying the farthest peoples of
the earth, when the traitorous guest aimed craftily at the throat of his
king.

"Else I would either have shown myself the avenger of my lord, or have
shared his fate and fallen where he fell, and would joyfully have
followed the blessed king in one and the same death.

"I have not come to indulge in gluttonous feasting, the sin whereof I
will strive to chastise; nor will I take mine ease, nor the delights of
the fat belly.

"No famous king has ever set me before in the middle by the strangers. I
have been wont to sit in the highest seats among friends.

"I have come from Sweden, travelling over wide lands, thinking that I
should be rewarded, if only I had the joy to find the son of my beloved
Frode.

"But I sought a brave man, and I have come to a glutton, a king who is
the slave of his belly and of vice, whose liking has been turned back
towards wantonness by filthy pleasure.

"Famous is the speech men think that Halfdan spoke: he warned us it
would soon come to pass that an understanding father should beget a
witless son.

"Though the heir be deemed degenerate, I will not suffer the wealth of
mighty Frode to profit strangers or to be made public like plunder."

At these words the queen trembled, and she took from her head the ribbon
with which she happened, in woman's fashion, to be adorning her hair,
and proffered it to the enraged old man, as though she could avert his
anger with a gift. Starkad in anger flung it back most ignominiously in
the face of the giver, and began again in a loud voice:

"Take hence, I pray thee, thy woman's gift, and set back thy headgear on
thy head; no brave man assumes the chaplets that befit Love only.

"For it is amiss that the hair of men that are ready for battle should
be bound back with wreathed gold; such attire is right for the throngs
of the soft and effeminate.

"But take this gift to thy husband, who loves luxury, whose finger
itches, while he turns over the rump and handles the flesh of the bird
roasted brown.

"The flighty and skittish wife of Ingild longs to observe the fashions
of the Teutons; she prepares the orgy and makes ready the artificial
dainties.

"For she tickles the palate with a new-fangled feast; she pursues the
zest of an unknown flavour, raging to load all the tables with dishes
yet more richly than before.

"She gives her lord wine to drink in bowls, pondering all things with
zealous preparation; she bids the cooked meats be roasted, and intends
them for a second fire.

"Wantonly she feeds her husband like a hog; a shameless whore,
trusting....

"She roasts the boiled, and recooks the roasted meats, planning the meal
with spendthrift extravagance, careless of right and wrong, practising
sin, a foul woman.

"Wanton in arrogance, a soldier of Love, longing for dainties, she
abjures the fair ways of self-control, and also provides devices for
gluttony.

"With craving stomach she desires turnip strained in a smooth pan, cakes
with thin juice, and shellfish in rows.

"I do not remember the Great Frode putting his hand to the sinews of
birds, or tearing the rump of a cooked fowl with crooked thumb.

"What former king could have been so gluttonous as to stir the stinking
filthy flesh, or rummage in the foul back of a bird with plucking
fingers?

"The food of valiant men is raw; no need, methinks, of sumptuous tables
for those whose stubborn souls are bent on warfare.

"It had been fitter for thee to have torn the stiff beard, biting hard
with thy teeth, than greedily to have drained the bowl of milk with thy
wide mouth.

"We fled from the offence of the sumptuous kitchen; we stayed our
stomach with rancid fare; few in the old days loved cooked juices.

"A dish with no sauce of herbs gave us the flesh of rams and swine. We
partook temperately, tainting nothing with bold excess.

"Thou who now lickest the milk-white fat, put on, prithee, the spirit of
a man; remember Frode, and avenge thy father's death.

"The worthless and cowardly heart shall perish, and shall not parry the
thrust of death by flight, though it bury itself in a valley, or crouch
in darkling dens.

"Once we were eleven princes, devoted followers of King Hakon, and here
Geigad sat above Helge in the order of the meal.

"Geigad used to appease the first pangs of hunger with a dry rump of
ham; and plenty of hard crust quelled the craving of his stomach.

"No one asked for a sickly morsel; all took their food in common; the
meal of mighty men cost but slight display.

"The commons shunned foreign victual, and the greatest lusted not for a
feast; even the king remembered to live temperately at little cost.

"Scorning to look at the mead, he drank the fermented juice of Ceres; he
shrank not from the use of undercooked meats, and hated the roast.

"The board used to stand with slight display, a modest salt- cellar
showed the measure of its cost; lest the wise ways of antiquity should
in any wise be changed by foreign usage.

"Of old, no man put flagons or mixing-bowls on the tables; the steward
filled the cup from the butt, and there was no abundance of adorned
vessels.

"No one who honoured past ages put the smooth wine-jars beside the
tankards, and of old no bedizened lackey heaped the platter with
dainties.

"Nor did the vainglorious host deck the meal with little salt- shell or
smooth cup; but all has been now abolished in shameful wise by the
new-fangled manners.

"Who would ever have borne to take money in ransom for the death of a
lost parent, or to have asked a foe for a gift to atone for the murder
of a father?

"What strong heir or well-starred son would have sat side by side with
such as these, letting a shameful bargain utterly unnerve the warrior?

"Wherefore, when the honours of kings are sung, and bards relate the
victories of captains, I hide my face for shame in my mantle, sick at
heart.

"For nothing shines in thy trophies, worthy to be recorded by the pen;
no heir of Frode is named in the roll of the honourable.

"Why dost thou vex me with insolent gaze, thou who honourest the foe
guilty of thy father's blood, and art thought only to take thy vengeance
with loaves and warm soup?

"When men speak well of the avengers of crimes, then long thou to lose
thy quick power of hearing, that thy impious spirit may not be ashamed.

"For oft has the virtue of another vexed a heart that knows its guilt,
and the malice in the breast is abashed by the fair report of the good.

"Though thou go to the East, or live sequestered in the countries of the
West, or whether, driven thence, thou seek the midmost place of the
earth;

"Whether thou revisit the cold quarter of the heaven where the pole is
to be seen, and carries on the sphere with its swift spin, and looks
down upon the neighbouring Bear;

"Shame shall accompany thee far, and shall smite thy countenance with
heavy disgrace, when the united assembly of the great kings is taking
pastime.

"Since everlasting dishonour awaits thee, thou canst not come amidst the
ranks of the famous; and in every clime thou shalt pass thy days in
infamy.

"The fates have given Frode an offspring born into the world when gods
were adverse, whose desires have been enthralled by crime and ignoble
lust.

"Even as in a ship all things foul gather to the filthy hollow of the
bilge, even so hath a flood of vices poured into Ingild.

"Therefore, in terror of thy shame being published, thou shalt lie
crushed in the corners of the land, sluggish on thy foul hearth, and
never to be seen in the array of the famous.

"Then shalt thou shake thy beard at thine evil fate, kept down by the
taunts of thy mistresses, when thy paramour galls thy ear with her
querulous cries.

"Since chill fear retards thy soul, and thou dreadest to become the
avenger of thy sire, thou art utterly degenerate, and thy ways are like
a slave's.

"It would have needed scant preparation to destroy thee; even as if a
man should catch and cut the throat of a kid, or slit the weazand of a
soft sheep and butcher it.

"Behold, a son of the tyrant Swerting shall take the inheritance of
Denmark after thee; he whose slothful sister thou keepest in infamous
union.

"Whilst thou delightest to honour thy bride, laden with gems and shining
in gold apparel, we burn with all indignation that is linked with shame,
lamenting thy infamies.

"When thou art stirred by furious lust, our mind is troubled, and
recalls the fashion of ancient times, and bids us grieve sorely.

"For we rate otherwise than thou the crime of the foes whom now thou
holdest in honour; wherefore the face of this age is a burden to me,
remembering the ancient ways.

"I would crave no greater blessing, O Frode, if I might see those guilty
of thy murder duly punished for such a crime."

Now he prevailed so well by this stirring counsel, that his reproach
served like a flint wherewith to strike a blazing flame of valour in the
soul that had been chill and slack. For the king had at first heard the
song inattentively; but, stirred by the earnest admonition of his
guardian, he conceived in his heart a tardy fire of revenge; and,
forgetting the reveller, he changed into the foeman. At last he leapt up
from where he lay, and poured the whole flood of his anger on those at
table with him; insomuch that he unsheathed his sword upon the sons of
Swerting with bloody ruthlessness, and aimed with drawn blade at the
throats of those whose gullets he had pampered with the pleasures of the
table. These men he forthwith slew; and by so doing he drowned the holy
rites of the table in blood. He sundered the feeble bond of their
league, and exchanged a shameful revel for enormous cruelty; the host
became the foe, and that vilest slave of excess the bloodthirsty agent
of revenge. For the vigorous pleading of his counsellor bred a breath of
courage in his soft and unmanly youth; it drew out his valour from its
lurking-place, and renewed it, and so fashioned it that the authors of a
most grievous murder were punished even as they deserved. For the young
man's valour had been not quenched, but only in exile, and the aid of an
old man had drawn it out into the light; and it accomplished a deed
which was all the greater for its tardiness; for it was somewhat nobler
to steep the cups in blood than in wine. What a spirit, then, must we
think that old man had, who by his eloquent adjuration expelled from
that king's mind its infinite sin, and who, bursting the bonds of
iniquity, implanted a most effectual seed of virtue. Starkad aided the
king with equal achievements; and not only showed the most complete
courage in his own person, but summoned back that which had been rooted
out of the heart of another. When the deed was done, he thus begun:

"King Ingild, farewell; thy heart, full of valour, hath now shown a deed
of daring. The spirit that reigns in thy body is revealed by its fair
beginning; nor did there lack deep counsel in thy heart, though thou
wert silent till this hour; for thou dost redress by thy bravery what
delay had lost, and redeemest the sloth of thy spirit by mighty valour.
Come now, let us rout the rest, and let none escape the peril which all
alike deserve. Let the crime come home to the culprit; let the sin
return and crush its contriver.

"Let the servants take up in a car the bodies of the slain, and let the
attendant quickly bear out the carcases. Justly shall they lack the last
rites; they are unworthy to be covered with a mound; let no funeral
procession or pyre suffer them the holy honour of a barrow; let them be
scattered to rot in the fields, to be consumed by the beaks of birds;
let them taint the country all about with their deadly corruption.

"Do thou too, king, if thou hast any wit, flee thy savage bride, lest
the she-wolf bring forth a litter like herself, and a beast spring from
thee that shall hurt its own father.

"Tell me, Rote, continual derider of cowards, thinkest thou that we have
avenged Frode enough, when we have spent seven deaths on the vengeance
of one? Lo, those are borne out dead who paid homage not to thy sway in
deed, but only in show, and though obsequious they planned treachery.
But I always cherished this hope, that noble fathers have noble
offspring, who will follow in their character the lot which they
received by their birth. Therefore, Ingild, better now than in time past
dost thou deserve to be called lord of Leire and of Denmark.

"When, O King Hakon, I was a beardless youth, and followed thy leading
and command in warfare, I hated luxury and wanton souls, and practiced
only wars. Training body and mind together, I banished every unholy
thing from my soul, and shunned the pleasures of the belly, loving deeds
of prowess. For those that followed the calling of arms had rough
clothing and common gear and short slumbers and scanty rest. Toil drove
ease far away, and the time ran by at scanty cost. Not as with some men
now, the light of whose reason is obscured by insatiate greed with its
blind maw. Some one of these clad in a covering of curiously wrought
raiment effeminately guides the fleet-footed (steed), and unknots his
dishevelled locks, and lets his hair fly abroad loosely.

"He loves to plead often in the court, and to covet a base pittance, and
with this pursuit he comforts his sluggish life, doing with venal tongue
the business entrusted to him.

"He outrages the laws by force, he makes armed assault upon men's
rights, he tramples on the innocent, he feeds on the wealth of others,
he practices debauchery and gluttony, he vexes good fellowship with
biting jeers, and goes after harlots as a hoe after the grass.

"The coward falls when battles are lulled in peace. Though he who fears
death lie in the heart of the valley, no mantlet shall shelter him. His
final fate carries off every living man; doom is not to be averted by
skulking. But I, who have shaken the whole world with my slaughters,
shall I enjoy a peaceful death? Shall I be taken up to the stars in a
quiet end? Shall I die in my bed without a wound?"
