<span class="small"></span>

[Sacred Texts Index](../../index)  [Northern European Index](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](saxo082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# The Danish History, Book Nine

After Gotrik's death reigned his son OLAF; who, desirous to avenge his
father, did not hesitate to involve his country in civil wars, putting
patriotism after private inclination. When he perished, his body was put
in a barrow, famous for the name of Olaf, which was built up close by
Leire.

He was succeeded by HEMMING, of whom I have found no deed worthy of
record, save that he made a sworn peace with Kaiser Ludwig; and yet,
perhaps, envious antiquity hides many notable deeds of his time, albeit
they were then famous.

After these men there came to the throne, backed by the Skanians and
Zealanders, SIWARD, surnamed RING. He was the son, born long ago, of the
chief of Norway who bore the same name, by Gotrik's daughter. Now Ring,
cousin of Siward, and also a grandson of Gotrik, was master of Jutland.
Thus the power of the single kingdom was divided; and, as though its two
parts were contemptible for their smallness, foreigners began not only
to despise but to attack it. These Siward assailed with greater hatred
than he did his rival for the throne; and, preferring wars abroad to
wars at home, he stubbornly defended his country against dangers for
five years; for he chose to put up with a trouble at home that he might
the more easily cure one which came from abroad. Wherefore Ring
(desiring his) command, seized the opportunity, tried to transfer the
whole sovereignty to himself, and did not hesitate to injure in his own
land the man who was watching over it without; for he attacked the
provinces in the possession of Siward, which was an ungrateful requital
for the defence of their common country. Therefore, some of the
Zealanders who were more zealous for Siward, in order to show him firmer
loyalty in his absence, proclaimed his son Ragnar as king, when he was
scarcely dragged out of his cradle. Not but what they knew he was too
young to govern; yet they hoped that such a gage would serve to rouse
their sluggish allies against Ring. But, when Ring heard that Siward had
meantime returned from his expedition, he attacked the Zealanders with a
large force, and proclaimed that they should perish by the sword if they
did not surrender; but the Zealanders, who were bidden to choose between
shame and peril, were so few that they distrusted their strength, and
requested a truce to consider the matter. It was granted; but, since it
did not seem open to them to seek the favour of Siward, nor honourable
to embrace that of Ring, they wavered long in perplexity between fear
and shame. In this plight even the old were at a loss for counsel; but
Ragnar, who chanced to be present at the assembly, said: "The short bow
shoots its shaft suddenly. Though it may seem the hardihood of a boy
that I venture to forestall the speech of the elders, yet I pray you to
pardon my errors, and be indulgent to my unripe words. Yet the
counsellor of wisdom is not to be spurned, though he seem contemptible;
for the teaching of profitable things should be drunk in with an open
mind. Now it is shameful that we should be branded as deserters and
runaways, but it is just as foolhardy to venture above our strength; and
thus there is proved to be equal blame either way. We must, then,
pretend to go over to the enemy, but, when a chance comes in our way, we
must desert him betimes. It will thus be better to forestall the wrath
of our foe by reigned obedience than, by refusing it, to give him a
weapon wherewith to attack us yet more harshly; for if we decline the
sway of the stronger, are we not simply turning his arms against our own
throat? Intricate devices are often the best nurse of craft. You need
cunning to trap a fox." By this sound counsel he dispelled the wavering
of his countrymen, and strengthened the camp of the enemy to its own
hurt.

The assembly, marvelling at the eloquence as much as at the wit of one
so young, gladly embraced a proposal of such genius, which they thought
excellent beyond his years. Nor were the old men ashamed to obey the
bidding of a boy when they lacked counsel themselves; for, though it
came from one of tender years, it was full, notwithstanding, of weighty
and sound instruction. But they feared to expose their adviser to
immediate peril, and sent him over to Norway to be brought up. Soon
afterwards, Siward joined battle with Ring and attacked him. He slew
Ring, but himself received an incurable wound, of which he died a few
days afterwards.

He was succeeded on the throne by RAGNAR. At this time Fro (Frey?), the
King of Sweden, after slaying Siward, the King of the Norwegians, put
the wives of Siward's kinsfolk in bonds in a brothel, and delivered them
to public outrage. When Ragnar heard of this, he went to Norway to
avenge his grandfather. As he came, many of the matrons, who had either
suffered insult to their persons or feared imminent peril to their
chastity, hastened eagerly to his camp in male attire, declaring that
they would prefer death to outrage. Nor did Ragnar, who was to punish
this reproach upon the women, scorn to use against the author of the
infamy the help of those whose shame he had come to avenge. Among them
was Ladgerda, a skilled amazon, who, though a maiden, had the courage of
a man, and fought in front among the bravest with her hair loose over
her shoulders. All-marvelled at her matchless deeds, for her locks
flying down her back betrayed that she was a woman.

Ragnar, when he had justly cut down the murderer of his grandfather,
asked many questions of his fellow soldiers concerning the maiden whom
he had seen so forward in the fray, and declared that he had gained the
victory by the might of one woman. Learning that she was of noble birth
among the barbarians, he steadfastly wooed her by means of messengers.
She spurned his mission in her heart, but feigned compliance. Giving
false answers, she made her panting wooer confident that he would gain
his desires; but ordered that a bear and a dog should be set at the
porch of her dwelling, thinking to guard her own room against all the
ardour of a lover by means of the beasts that blocked the way. Ragnar,
comforted by the good news, embarked, crossed the sea, and, telling his
men to stop in Gaulardale, as the valley is called, went to the dwelling
of the maiden alone. Here the beasts met him, and he thrust one through
with a spear, and caught the other by the throat, wrung its neck, and
choked it. Thus he had the maiden as the prize of the peril he had
overcome. By this marriage he had two daughters, whose names have not
come down to us, and a son Fridleif. Then he lived three years at peace.

The Jutlanders, a presumptuous race, thinking that because of his recent
marriage he would never return, took the Skanians into alliance, and
tried to attack the Zealanders, who preserved the most zealous and
affectionate loyalty towards Ragnar. He, when he heard of it, equipped
thirty ships, and, the winds favouring his voyage, crushed the Skanians,
who ventured to fight, near the stead of Whiteby, and when the winter
was over he fought successfully with the Jutlanders who dwelt near the
Liim-fjord in that region. A third and a fourth time he conquered the
Skanians and the Hallanders triumphantly.

Afterwards, changing his love, and desiring Thora, the daughter of the
King Herodd, to wife, Ragnar divorced himself from Ladgerda; for he
thought ill of her trustworthiness, remembering that she had long ago
set the most savage beasts to destroy him. Meantime Herodd, the King of
the Swedes, happening to go and hunt in the woods, brought home some
snakes, found by his escort, for his daughter to rear. She speedily
obeyed the instructions of her father, and endured to rear a race of
adders with her maiden hands. Moreover, she took care that they should
daily have a whole ox-carcase to gorge upon, not knowing that she was
privately feeding and keeping up a public nuisance. The vipers grew up,
and scorched the country-side with their pestilential breath. Whereupon
the king, repenting of his sluggishness, proclaimed that whosoever
removed the pest should have his daughter.

Many warriors were thereto attracted by courage as much as by desire;
but all idly and perilously wasted their pains. Ragnar, learning from
men who travelled to and fro how the matter stood, asked his nurse for a
woolen mantle, and for some thigh-pieces that were very hairy, with
which he could repel the snake-bites. He thought that he ought to use a
dress stuffed with hair to protect himself, and also took one that was
not unwieldy, that he might move nimbly. And when he had landed in
Sweden, he deliberately plunged his body in water, while there was a
frost falling, and, wetting his dress, to make it the less penetrable,
he let the cold freeze it. Thus attired, he took leave of his
companions, exhorted them to remain loyal to Fridleif, and went on to
the palace alone. When he saw it, he tied his sword to his side, and
lashed a spear to his right hand with a thong. As he went on, an
enormous snake glided up and met him. Another, equally huge, crawled up,
following in the trail of the first. They strove now to buffet the young
man with the coils of their tails, and now to spit and belch their venom
stubbornly upon him. Meantime the courtiers, betaking themselves to
safer hiding, watched the struggle from afar like affrighted little
girls. The king was stricken with equal fear, and fled, with a few
followers, to a narrow shelter. But Ragnar, trusting in the hardness of
his frozen dress, foiled the poisonous assaults not only with his arms,
but with his attire, and, singlehanded, in unweariable combat, stood up
against the two gaping creatures, who stubbornly poured forth their
venom upon him. For their teeth he repelled with his shield, their
poison with his dress. At last he cast his spear, and drove it against
the bodies of the brutes, who were attacking him hard. He pierced both
their hearts, and his battle ended in victory.

After Ragnar had thus triumphed the king scanned his dress closely, and
saw that he was rough and hairy; but, above all, he laughed at the
shaggy lower portion of his garb, and chiefly the uncouth aspect of his
breeches; so that he gave him in jest the nickname of Lodbrog. Also he
invited him to feast with his friends, to refresh him after his labours.
Ragnar said that he would first go back to the witnesses whom he had
left behind. He set out and brought them back, splendidly attired for
the coming feast. At last, when the banquet was over, he received the
prize that was appointed for the victory. By her he begot two nobly-
gifted sons, Radbard and Dunwat. These also had brothers -- Siward,
Biorn, Agnar, and Iwar.

Meanwhile, the Jutes and Skanians were kindled with an unquenchable fire
of sedition; they disallowed the title of Ragnar, and gave a certain
Harald the sovereign power. Ragnar sent envoys to Norway, and besought
friendly assistance against these men; and Ladgerda, whose early love
still flowed deep and steadfast, hastily sailed off with her husband and
her son. She brought herself to offer a hundred and twenty ships to the
man who had once put her away. And he, thinking himself destitute of all
resources, took to borrowing help from folk of every age, crowded the
strong and the feeble all together, and was not ashamed to insert some
old men and boys among the wedges of the strong. So he first tried to
crush the power of the Skanians in the field which in Latin is called
Laneus (Woolly); here he had a hard fight with the rebels. Here, too,
Iwar, who was in his seventh year, fought splendidly, and showed the
strength of a man in the body of a boy. But Siward, while attacking the
enemy face to face, fell forward upon the ground wounded. When his men
saw this, it made them look round most anxiously for means of flight;
and this brought low not only Siward, but almost the whole army on the
side of Ragnar. But Ragnar by his manly deeds and exhortations comforted
their amazed and sunken spirits, and, just when they were ready to be
conquered, spurred them on to try and conquer.

Ladgerda, who had a matchless spirit though a delicate frame, covered by
her splendid bravery the inclination of the soldiers to waver. For she
made a sally about, and flew round to the rear of the enemy, taking them
unawares, and thus turned the panic of her friends into the camp of the
enemy. At last the lines of HARALD became slack, and HARALD himself was
routed with a great slaughter of his men. LADGERDA, when she had gone
home after the battle, murdered her husband.... in the night with a
spear-head, which she had hid in her gown. Then she usurped the whole of
his name and sovereignty; for this most presumptuous dame thought it
pleasanter to rule without her husband than to share the throne with
him.

Meantime, Siward was taken to a town in the neighbourhood, and gave
himself to be tended by the doctors, who were reduced to the depths of
despair. But while the huge wound baffled all the remedies they applied,
a certain man of amazing size was seen to approach the litter of the
sick man, and promised that Siward should straightway rejoice and be
whole, if he would consecrate unto him the souls of all whom he should
overcome in battle. Nor did he conceal his name, but said that he was
called Rostar. Now Siward, when he saw that a great benefit could be got
at the cost of a little promise, eagerly acceded to this request. Then
the old man suddenly, by the help of his hand, touched and banished the
livid spot, and suddenly scarred the wound over. At last he poured dust
on his eyes and departed. Spots suddenly arose, and the dust, to the
amaze of the beholders, seemed to become wonderfully like little snakes.

I should think that he who did this miracle wished to declare, by the
manifest token of his eyes, that the young man was to be cruel in
future, in order that the more visible part of his body might not lack
some omen of his life that was to follow. When the old woman, who had
the care of his draughts, saw him showing in his face signs of little
snakes; she was seized with an extraordinary horror of the young man,
and suddenly fell and swooned away. Hence it happened that Siward got
the widespread name of Snake-Eye.

Meantime Thora, the bride of Ragnar, perished of a violent malady, which
caused infinite trouble and distress to the husband, who dearly loved
his wife. This distress, he thought, would be best dispelled by
business, and he resolved to find solace in exercise and qualify his
grief by toil. To banish his affliction and gain some comfort, he bent
his thoughts to warfare, and decreed that every father of a family
should devote to his service whichever of his children he thought most
contemptible, or any slave of his who was lazy at his work or of
doubtful fidelity. And albeit that this decree seemed little fitted for
his purpose, he showed that the feeblest of the Danish race were better
than the strongest men of other nations; and it did the young men great
good, each of those chosen being eager to wipe off the reproach of
indolence. Also he enacted that every piece of litigation should be
referred to the judgment of twelve chosen elders, all ordinary methods
of action being removed, the accuser being forbidden to charge, and the
accused to defend. This law removed all chance of incurring litigation
lightly. Thinking that there was thus sufficient provision made against
false accusations by unscrupulous men, he lifted up his arms against
Britain, and attacked and slew in battle its king, Hame, the father of
Ella, who was a most noble youth. Then he killed the earls of Scotland
and of Pictland, and of the isles that they call the Southern or
Meridional (Sudr-eyar), and made his sons Siward and Radbard masters of
the provinces, which were now without governors. He also deprived Norway
of its chief by force, and commanded it to obey Fridleif, whom he also
set over the Orkneys, from which he took their own earl.

Meantime, some of the Danes who were most stubborn in their hatred
against Ragnar were obstinately bent on rebellion. They rallied to the
side of Harald, once an exile, and tried to raise the fallen fortunes of
the tyrant. By this hardihood they raised up against the king the most
virulent blasts of civil war, and entangled him in domestic perils when
he was free from foreign troubles. Ragnar, setting out to check them
with a fleet of the Danes who lived in the isles, crushed the army of
the rebels, drove Harald, the leader of the conquered army, a fugitive
to Germany, and forced him to resign unbashfully an honour which he had
gained without scruple. Nor was he content simply to kill his prisoners:
he preferred to torture them to death, so that those who could not be
induced to forsake their disloyalty might not be so much as suffered to
give up the ghost save under the most grievous punishment. Moreover, the
estates of those who had deserted with Harald he distributed among those
who were serving as his soldiers, thinking that the fathers would be
worse punished by seeing the honour of their inheritance made over to
the children whom they had rejected, while those whom they had loved
better lost their patrimony. But even this did not sate his vengeance,
and he further determined to attack Saxony, thinking it the refuge of
his foes and the retreat of Harald. So, begging his sons to help him, he
came on Karl, who happened then to be tarrying on those borders of his
empire. Intercepting his sentries, he eluded the watch that was posted
on guard. But while he thought that all the rest would therefore be easy
and more open to his attacks, suddenly a woman who was a soothsayer, a
kind of divine oracle or interpreter of the will of heaven, warned the
king with a saving prophecy, and by her fortunate presage forestalled
the mischief that impended, saying that the fleet of Siward had moored
at the mouth of the river Seine. The emperor, heeding the warning, and
understanding that the enemy was at hand, managed to engage with and
stop the barbarians, who were thus pointed out to him. A battle was
fought with Ragnar; but Karl did not succeed as happily in the field as
he had got warning of the danger. And so that tireless conqueror of
almost all Europe, who in his calm and complete career of victory had
travelled over so great a portion of the world, now beheld his army,
which had vanquished all these states and nations, turning its face from
the field, and shattered by a handful from a single province.

Ragnar, after loading the Saxons with tribute, had sure tidings from
Sweden of the death of Herodd, and also heard that his own sons, owing
to the slander of Sorle, the king chosen in his stead, had been robbed
of their inheritance. He besought the aid of the brothers Biorn,
Fridleif, and Ragbard (for Ragnald, Hwitserk, and Erik, his sons by
Swanloga, had not yet reached the age of bearing arms), and went to
Sweden. Sorle met him with his army, and offered him the choice between
a public conflict and a duel; and when Ragnar chose personal combat, he
sent against him Starkad, a champion of approved daring, with his band
of seven sons, to challenge and fight with him. Ragnar took his three
sons to share the battle with him, engaged in the sight of both armies,
and came out of the combat triumphant.

Biorn, having inflicted great slaughter on the foe without hurt to
himself, gained from the strength of his sides, which were like iron, a
perpetual name (Ironsides). This victory emboldened Ragnar to hope that
he could overcome any peril, and he attacked and slew Sorle with the
entire forces he was leading. He presented Biorn with the lordship of
Sweden for his conspicuous bravery and service. Then for a little
interval he rested from wars, and chanced to fall deeply in love with a
certain woman. In order to find some means of approaching and winning
her the more readily, he courted her father (Esbern) by showing him the
most obliging and attentive kindness. He often invited him to banquets,
and received him with lavish courtesy. When he came, he paid him the
respect of rising, and when he sat, he honoured him with a set next to
himself. He also often comforted him with gifts, and at times with the
most kindly speech. The man saw that no merits of his own could be the
cause of all this distinction, and casting over the matter every way in
his mind, he perceived that the generosity of his monarch was caused by
his love for his daughter, and that he coloured this lustful purpose
with the name of kindness. But, that he might balk the cleverness of the
lover, however well calculated, he had the girl watched all the more
carefully that he saw her beset by secret aims and obstinate methods.
But Ragnar, who was comforted by the surest tidings of her consent, went
to the farmhouse in which she was kept, and fancying that love must find
out a way, repaired alone to a certain peasant in a neighbouring
lodging. In the morning he exchanged dress with the women, and went in
female attire, and stood by his mistress as she was unwinding wool.
Cunningly, to avoid betrayal, he set his hands to the work of a maiden,
though they were little skilled in the art. In the night he embraced the
maiden and gained his desire. When her time drew near, and the girl
growing big, betrayed her outraged chastity, the father, not knowing to
whom his daughter had given herself to be defiled, persisted in asking
the girl herself who was the unknown seducer. She steadfastly affirmed
that she had had no one to share her bed except her handmaid, and he
made the affair over to the king to search into. He would not allow an
innocent servant to be branded with an extraordinary charge, and was not
ashamed to prove another's innocence by avowing his own guilt. By this
generosity he partially removed the woman's reproach, and prevented an
absurd report from being sown in the ears of the wicked. Also he added,
that the son to be born of her was of his own line, and that he wished
him to be named Ubbe. When this son had grown up somewhat, his wit,
despite his tender years, equalled the discernment of manhood. For he
took to loving his mother, since she had had converse with a noble bed,
but cast off all respect for his father, because he had stooped to a
union too lowly.

After this Ragnar prepared an expedition against the Hellespontines, and
summoned an assembly of the Danes, promising that he would give the
people most wholesome laws. He had enacted before that each father of a
household should offer for service that one among his sons whom he
esteemed least; but now he enacted that each should arm the son who was
stoutest of hand or of most approved loyalty. Thereon, taking all the
sons he had by Thora, in addition to Ubbe, he attacked, crushed in
sundry campaigns, and subdued the Hellespont with its king Dia. At last
he involved the same king in disaster after disaster, and slew him.
Dia's sons, Dia and Daxo, who had before married the daughters of the
Russian king, begged forces from their father- in-law, and rushed with
most ardent courage to the work of avenging their father. But Ragnar,
when he saw their boundless army, distrusted his own forces; and he put
brazen horses on wheels that could be drawn easily, took them round on
carriages that would turn, and ordered that they should be driven with
the utmost force against the thickest ranks of the enemy. This device
served so well to break the line of the foe, that the Danes' hope of
conquest seemed to lie more in the engine than in the soldiers: for its
insupportable weight overwhelmed whatever it struck. Thus one of the
leaders was killed, while one made off in flight, and the whole army of
the area of the Hellespont retreated. The Scythians, also, who were
closely related by blood to Daxo on the mother's side, are said to have
been crushed in the same disaster. Their province was made over to
Hwitserk, and the king of the Russians, trusting little in his own
strength, hastened to fly out of the reach of the terrible arms of
Ragnar.

Now Ragnar had spent almost five years in sea-roving, and had quickly
compelled all other nations to submit; but he found the Perms in open
defiance of his sovereignty. He had just conquered them, but their
loyalty was weak. When they heard that he had come they cast spells upon
the sky, stirred up the clouds, and drove them into most furious storms.
This for some time prevented the Danes from voyaging, and caused their
supply of food to fail. Then, again, the storm suddenly abated, and now
they were scorched by the most fervent and burning heat; nor was this
plague any easier to bear than the great and violent cold had been. Thus
the mischievous excess in both directions affected their bodies
alternately, and injured them by an immoderate increase first of cold
and then of heat. Moreover, dysentery killed most of them. So the mass
of the Danes, being pent in by the dangerous state of the weather,
perished of the bodily plague that arose on every side. And when Ragnar
saw that he was hindered, not so much by a natural as by a factitious
tempest, he held on his voyage as best he could, and got to the country
of the Kurlanders and Sembs, who paid zealous honour to his might and
majesty, as if he were the most revered of conquerors. This service
enraged the king all the more against the arrogance of the men of
Permland, and he attempted to avenge his slighted dignity by a sudden
attack. Their king, whose name is not known, was struck with panic at
such a sudden invasion of the enemy, and at the same time had no heart
to join battle with them; and fled to Matul, the prince of Finmark. He,
trusting in the great skill of his archers, harassed with impunity the
army of Ragnar, which was wintering in Permland. For the Finns, who are
wont to glide on slippery timbers (snowskates), scud along at whatever
pace they will, and are considered to be able to approach or depart very
quickly; for as soon as they have damaged the enemy they fly away as
speedily as they approach, nor is the retreat they make quicker than
their charge. Thus their vehicles and their bodies are so nimble that
they acquire the utmost expertness both in advance and flight.

Ragnar was filled with amazement at the poorness of his fortunes when he
saw that he, who had conquered Rome at its pinnacle of power, was
dragged by an unarmed and uncouth race into the utmost peril. He,
therefore, who had signally crushed the most glorious flower of the
Roman soldiery, and the forces of a most great and serene captain, now
yielded to a base mob with the poorest and slenderest equipment; and he
whose lustre in war the might of the strongest race on earth had failed
to tarnish, was now too weak to withstand the tiny band of a miserable
tribe. Hence, with that force which had helped him bravely to defeat the
most famous pomp in all the world and the weightiest weapon of military
power, and to subdue in the field all that thunderous foot, horse, and
encampment; with this he had now, stealthily and like a thief, to endure
the attacks of a wretched and obscure populace; nor must he blush to
stain by a treachery in the night that noble glory of his which had been
won in the light of day, for he took to a secret ambuscade instead of
open bravery. This affair was as profitable in its issue as it was
unhandsome in the doing.

Ragnar was equally as well pleased at the flight of the Finns as he had
been at that of Karl, and owned that he had found more strength in that
defenceless people than in the best equipped soldiery; for he found the
heaviest weapons of the Romans easier to bear than the light darts of
this ragged tribe. Here, after killing the king of the Perms and routing
the king of the Finns, Ragnar set an eternal memorial of his victory on
the rocks, which bore the characters of his deeds on their face, and
looked down upon them.

Meanwhile Ubbe was led by his grandfather, Esbern, to conceive an unholy
desire for the throne; and, casting away all thought of the reverence
due to his father, he claimed the emblem of royalty for his own head.

When Ragnar heard of his arrogance from Kelther and Thorkill, the earls
of Sweden, he made a hasty voyage towards Gothland. Esbern, finding that
these men were attached with a singular loyalty to the side of Ragnar,
tried to bribe them to desert the king. But they did not swerve from
their purpose, and replied that their will depended on that of Biorn,
declaring that not a single Swede would dare to do what went against his
pleasure. Esbern speedily made an attempt on Biorn himself, addressing
him most courteously through his envoys. Biorn said that he would never
lean more to treachery than to good faith, and judged that it would be a
most abominable thing to prefer the favour of an infamous brother to the
love of a most righteous father. The envoys themselves he punished with
hanging, because they counselled him to so grievous a crime. The Swedes,
moreover, slew the rest of the train of the envoys in the same way, as a
punishment for their mischievous advice. So Esbern, thinking that his
secret and stealthy manoeuvres did not succeed fast enough, mustered his
forces openly, and went publicly forth to war. But Iwar, the governor of
Jutland, seeing no righteousness on either side of the impious conflict,
avoided all unholy war by voluntary exile.

Ragnar attacked and slew Esbern in the bay that is called in Latin
Viridis; he cut off the dead man's head and bade it be set upon the
ship's prow, a dreadful sight for the seditious. But Ubbe took to
flight, and again attacked his father, having revived the war in
Zealand. Ubbe's ranks broke, and he was assailed single-handed from all
sides; but he felled so many of the enemy's line that he was surrounded
with a pile of the corpses of the foe as with a strong bulwark, and
easily checked his assailants from approaching. At last he was
overwhelmed by the thickening masses of the enemy, captured, and taken
off to be laden with public fetters. By immense violence he disentangled
his chains and cut them away. But when he tried to sunder and rend the
bonds that were (then) put upon him, he could not in any wise escape his
bars. But when Iwar heard that the rising in his country had been
quelled by the punishment of the rebel, he went to Denmark. Ragnar
received him with the greatest honour, because, while the unnatural war
had raged its fiercest, he had behaved with the most entire filial
respect.

Meanwhile Daxo long and vainly tried to overcome Hwitserk, who ruled
over Sweden; but at last he enrapped him under pretence of making a
peace, and attacked him. Hwitserk received him hospitably, but Daxo had
prepared an army with weapons, who were to feign to be trading, ride
into the city in carriages, and break with a night-attack into the house
of their host. Hwitserk smote this band of robbers with such a slaughter
that he was surrounded with a heap of his enemies' bodies, and could
only be taken by letting down ladders from above. Twelve of his
companions, who were captured at the same time by the enemy, were given
leave to go back to their country; but they gave up their lives for
their king, and chose to share the dangers of another rather than be
quit of their own.

Daxo, moved with compassion at the beauty of Hwitserk, had not the heart
to pluck the budding blossom of that noble nature, and offered him not
only his life, but his daughter in marriage, with a dowry of half his
kingdom; choosing rather to spare his comeliness than to punish his
bravery. But the other, in the greatness of his soul, valued as nothing
the life which he was given on sufferance, and spurned his safety as
though it were some trivial benefit. Of his own will he embraced the
sentence of doom, saying, that Ragnar would exact a milder vengeance for
his son if he found that he had made his own choice in selecting the
manner of his death. The enemy wondered at his rashness, and promised
that he should die by the manner of death which he should choose for
this punishment. This leave the young man accepted as a great kindness,
and begged that he might be bound and burned with his friends. Daxo
speedily complied with his prayers that craved for death, and by way of
kindness granted him the end that he had chosen. When Ragnar heard of
this, he began to grieve stubbornly even unto death, and not only put on
the garb of mourning, but, in the exceeding sorrow of his soul, took to
his bed and showed his grief by groaning. But his wife, who had more
than a man's courage, chid his weakness, and put heart into him with her
manful admonitions. Drawing his mind off from his woe, she bade him be
zealous in the pursuit of war; declaring that it was better for so brave
a father to avenge the bloodstained ashes of his son with weapons than
with tears. She also told him not to whimper like a woman, and get as
much disgrace by his tears as he had once earned glory by his valour.
Upon these words Ragnar began to fear lest he should destroy his ancient
name for courage by his womanish sorrow; so, shaking off his melancholy
garb and putting away his signs of mourning, he revived his sleeping
valour with hopes of speedy vengeance. Thus do the weak sometimes nerve
the spirits of the strong. So he put his kingdom in charge of Iwar, and
embraced with a father's love Ubbe, who was now restored to his ancient
favour. Then he transported his fleet over to Russia, took Daxo, bound
him in chains, and sent him away to be kept in Utgard. (1)

Ragnar showed on this occasion the most merciful moderation towards the
slayer of his dearest son, since he sufficiently satisfied the vengeance
which he desired, by the exile of the culprit rather than his death.
This compassion shamed the Russians out of any further rage against such
a king, who could not be driven even by the most grievous wrongs to
inflict death upon his prisoners. Ragnar soon took Daxo back into
favour, and restored him to his country, upon his promising that he
would every year pay him his tribute barefoot, like a suppliant, with
twelve elders, also unshod. For he thought it better to punish a
prisoner and a suppliant gently, than to draw the axe of bloodshed;
better to punish that proud neck with constant slavery than to sever it
once and for all. Then he went on and appointed his son Erik, surnamed
Wind-hat, over Sweden. Here, while Fridleif and Siward were serving
under him, he found that the Norwegians and the Scots had wrongfully
conferred the title of king on two other men. So he first overthrew the
usurper to the power of Norway, and let Biorn have the country for his
own benefit.

Then he summoned Biorn and Erik, ravaged the Orkneys, landed at last on
the territory of the Scots, and in a three-days' battle wearied out
their king Murial, and slew him. But Ragnar's sons, Dunwat and Radbard,
after fighting nobly, were slain by the enemy. So that the victory their
father won was stained with their blood. He returned to Denmark, and
found that his wife Swanloga had in the meantime died of disease.
Straightway he sought medicine for his grief in loneliness, and
patiently confined the grief of his sick soul within the walls of his
house. But this bitter sorrow was driven out of him by the sudden
arrival of Iwar, who had been expelled from the kingdom. For the Gauls
had made him fly, and had wrongfully bestowed royal power on a certain
Ella, the son of Hame. Ragnar took Iwar to guide him, since he was
acquainted with the country, gave orders for a fleet, and approached the
harbour called York. Here he disembarked his forces, and after a battle
which lasted three days, he made Ella, who had trusted in the valour of
the Gauls, desirous to fly. The affair cost much blood to the English
and very little to the Danes. Here Ragnar completed a year of conquest,
and then, summoning his sons to help him, he went to Ireland, slew its
king Melbrik, besieged Dublin, which was filled with wealth of the
barbarians, attacked it, and received its surrender. There he lay in
camp for a year; and then, sailing through the midland sea, he made his
way to the Hellespont. He won signal victories as he crossed all the
intervening countries, and no ill-fortune anywhere checked his steady
and prosperous advance.

Harald, meanwhile, with the adherence of certain Danes who were
cold-hearted servants in the army of Ragnar, disturbed his country with
renewed sedition, and came forward claiming the title of king. He was
met by the arms of Ragnar returning from the Hellespont; but being
unsuccessful, and seeing that his resources of defence at home were
exhausted, he went to ask help of Ludwig, who was then stationed at
Mainz. But Ludwig, filled with the greatest zeal for promoting his
religion, imposed a condition on the Barbarian, promising him help if he
would agree to follow the worship of Christ. For he said there could be
no agreement of hearts between those who embraced discordant creeds.
Anyone, therefore, who asked for help, must first have a fellowship in
religion. No men could be partners in great works who were separated by
a different form of worship. This decision procured not only salvation
for Ludwig's guest, but the praise of piety for Ludwig himself, who, as
soon as Harald had gone to the holy font, accordingly strengthened him
with Saxon auxiliaries. Trusting in these, Harald built a temple in the
land of Sleswik with much care and cost, to be hallowed to God. Thus he
borrowed a pattern of the most holy way from the worship of Rome. He
unhallowed, pulled down the shrines that had been profaned by the error
of misbelievers, outlawed the sacrificers, abolished the (heathen)
priesthood, and was the first to introduce the religion of Christianity
to his uncouth country. Rejecting the worship of demons, he was zealous
for that of God. Lastly, he observed with the most scrupulous care
whatever concerned the protection of religion. But he began with more
piety than success. For Ragnar came up, outraged the holy rites he had
brought in, outlawed the true faith, restored the false one to its old
position, and bestowed on the ceremonies the same honour as before. As
for Harald, he deserted and cast in his lot with sacrilege. For though
he was a notable ensample by his introduction of religion, yet he was
the first who was seen to neglect it, and this illustrious promoter of
holiness proved a most infamous forsaker of the same.

Meanwhile, Ella betook himself to the Irish, and put to the sword or
punished all those who were closely and loyally attached to Ragnar. Then
Ragnar attacked him with his fleet, but, by the just visitation of the
Omnipotent, was openly punished for disparaging religion. For when he
had been taken and cast into prison, his guilty limbs were given to
serpents to devour, and adders found ghastly substance in the fibres of
his entrails. His liver was eaten away, and a snake, like a deadly
executioner, beset his very heart. Then in a courageous voice he
recounted all his deeds in order, and at the end of his recital added
the following sentence: "If the porkers knew the punishment of the
boar-pig, surely they would break into the sty and hasten to loose him
from his affliction." At this saying, Ella conjectured that some of his
sons were yet alive, and bade that the executioners should stop and the
vipers be removed. The servants ran up to accomplish his bidding; but
Ragnar was dead, and forestalled the order of the king. Surely we must
say that this man had a double lot for his share? By one, he had a fleet
unscathed, an empire well-inclined, and immense power as a rover; while
the other inflicted on him the ruin of his fame, the slaughter of his
soldiers, and a most bitter end. The executioner beheld him beset with
poisonous beasts, and asps gorging on that heart which he had borne
steadfast in the face of every peril. Thus a most glorious conqueror
declined to the piteous lot of a prisoner; a lesson that no man should
put too much trust in fortune.

Iwar heard of this disaster as he happened to be looking on at the
games. Nevertheless, he kept an unmoved countenance, and in nowise broke
down. Not only did he dissemble his grief and conceal the news of his
father's death, but he did not even allow a clamour to arise, and
forbade the panic-stricken people to leave the scene of the sports.
Thus, loth to interrupt the spectacle by the ceasing of the games, he
neither clouded his countenance nor turned his eyes from public
merriment to dwell upon his private sorrow; for he would not fall
suddenly into the deepest melancholy from the height of festal joy, or
seem to behave more like an afflicted son than a blithe captain.

But when Siward heard the same tidings, he loved his father more than he
cared for his own pain, and in his distraction plunged deeply into his
foot the spear he chanced to be holding, dead to all bodily troubles in
his stony sadness. For he wished to hurt some part of his body severely,
that he might the more patiently bear the wound in his soul. By this act
he showed at once his bravery and his grief, and bore his lot like a son
who was more afflicted and steadfast. But Biorn received the tidings of
his father's death while he was playing at dice, and squeezed so
violently the piece that he was grasping that he wrung the blood from
his fingers and shed it on the table; whereon he said that assuredly the
cast of fate was more fickle than that of the very die which he was
throwing. When Ella heard this, he judged that his father's death had
been borne with the toughest and most stubborn spirit by that son of the
three who had paid no filial respect to his decease; and therefore he
dreaded the bravery of Iwar most.

Iwar went towards England, and when he saw that his fleet was not strong
enough to join battle with the enemy, he chose to be cunning rather than
bold, and tried a shrewd trick on Ella, begging as a pledge of peace
between them a strip of land as great as he could cover with a horse's
hide. He gained his request, for the king supposed that it would cost
little, and thought himself happy that so strong a foe begged for a
little boon instead of a great one; supposing that a tiny skin would
cover but a very little land. But Iwar cut the hide out and lengthened
it into very slender thongs, thus enclosing a piece of ground large
enough to build a city on. Then Ella came to repent of his lavishness,
and tardily set to reckoning the size of the hide, measuring the little
skin more narrowly now that it was cut up than when it was whole. For
that which he had thought would encompass a little strip of ground, he
saw lying wide over a great estate. Iwar brought into the city, when he
founded it, supplies that would serve amply for a siege, wishing the
defences to be as good against scarcity as against an enemy.

Meantime, Siward and Biorn came up with a fleet of 400 ships, and with
open challenge declared war against the king. This they did at the
appointed time; and when they had captured him, they ordered the figure
of an eagle to be cut in his back, rejoicing to crush their most
ruthless foe by marking him with the cruellest of birds. Not satisfied
with imprinting a wound on him, they salted the mangled flesh. Thus Ella
was done to death, and Biorn and Siward went back to their own kingdoms.

Iwar governed England for two years. Meanwhile the Danes were stubborn
in revolt, and made war, and delivered the sovereignty publicly to a
certain SIWARD and to ERIK, both of the royal line. The sons of Ragnar,
together with a fleet of 1,700 ships, attacked them at Sleswik, and
destroyed them in a conflict which lasted six months. Barrows remain to
tell the tale. The sound on which the war was conducted has gained equal
glory by the death of Siward. And now the royal stock was almost
extinguished, saving only the sons of Ragnar. Then, when Biorn and Erik
had gone home, Iwar and Siward settled in Denmark, that they might curb
the rebels with a stronger rein, setting Agnar to govern England. Agnar
was stung because the English rejected him, and, with the help of
Siward, chose, rather than foster the insolence of the province that
despised him, to dispeople it and leave its fields, which were matted in
decay, with none to till them. He covered the richest land of the island
with the most hideous desolation, thinking it better to be lord of a
wilderness than of a headstrong country. After this he wished to avenge
Erik, who had been slain in Sweden by the malice of a certain Osten. But
while he was narrowly bent on avenging another, he squandered his own
blood on the foe; and while he was eagerly trying to punish the
slaughter of his brother, sacrificed his own life to brotherly love.

Thus SIWARD, by the sovereign vote of the whole Danish assembly,
received the empire of his father. But after the defeats he had
inflicted everywhere he was satisfied with the honour he received at
home, and liked better to be famous with the gown than with the sword.
He ceased to be a man of camps, and changed from the fiercest of despots
into the most punctual guardian of peace. He found as much honour in
ease and leisure as he had used to think lay in many victories. Fortune
so favoured his change of pursuits, that no foe ever attacked him, nor
he any foe. He died, and ERIK, who was a very young child, inherited his
nature, rather than his realm or his tranquillity. For Erik, the brother
of Harald, despising his exceedingly tender years, invaded the country
with rebels, and seized the crown; nor was he ashamed to assail the
lawful infant sovereign, and to assume an unrightful power. In thus
bringing himself to despoil a feeble child of the kingdom he showed
himself the more unworthy of it. Thus he stripped the other of his
throne, but himself of all his virtues, and cast all manliness out of
his heart, when he made war upon a cradle: for where covetousness and
ambition flamed, love of kindred could find no place. But this brutality
was requited by the wrath of a divine vengeance. For the war between
this man and Gudorm, the son of Harald, ended suddenly with such
slaughter that they were both slain, with numberless others; and the
royal stock of the Danes, now worn out by the most terrible massacres,
was reduced to the only son of the above Siward.

This man (Erik) won the fortune of a throne by losing his kindred; it
was luckier for him to have his relations dead than alive. He forsook
the example of all the rest, and hastened to tread in the steps of his
grandfather; for he suddenly came out as a most zealous practitioner of
roving. And would that he had not shown himself rashly to inherit the
spirit of Ragnar, by his abolition of Christian worship! For he
continually tortured all the most religious men, or stripped them of
their property and banished them. But it were idle for me to blame the
man's beginnings when I am to praise his end. For that life is more
laudable of which the foul beginning is checked by a glorious close,
than that which begins commendably but declines into faults and
infamies. For Erik, upon the healthy admonitions of Ansgarius, laid
aside the errors of his impious heart, and atoned for whatsoever he had
done amiss in the insolence thereof; showing himself as strong in the
observance of religion as he had been in slighting it. Thus he not only
took a draught of more wholesome teaching with obedient mind, but wiped
off early stains by his purity at the end. He had a son KANUTE by the
daughter of Gudorm, who was also the granddaughter of Harald; and him he
left to survive his death.

While this child remained in infancy a guardian was required for the
pupil and for the realm. But inasmuch it seemed to most people either
invidious or difficult to give the aid that this office needed, it was
resolved that a man should be chosen by lot. For the wisest of the
Danes, fearing much to make a choice by their own will in so lofty a
matter, allowed more voice to external chance than to their own
opinions, and entrusted the issue of the selection rather to luck than
to sound counsel. The issue was that a certain Enni-gnup (Steep-brow), a
man of the highest and most entire virtue, was forced to put his
shoulder to this heavy burden; and when he entered on the administration
which chalice had decreed, he oversaw, not only the early rearing of the
king, but the affairs of the whole people. For which reason some who are
little versed in our history give this man a central place in its
annals. But when Kanute had passed through the period of boyhood, and
had in time grown to be a man, he left those who had done him the
service of bringing him up, and turned from an almost hopeless youth to
the practice of unhoped-for virtue; being deplorable for this reason
only, that he passed from life to death without the tokens of the
Christian faith.

But soon the sovereignty passed to his son FRODE. This man's fortune,
increased by arms and warfare, rose to such a height of prosperity that
he brought back to the ancient yoke the provinces which had once
revolted from the Danes, and bound them in their old obedience. He also
came forward to be baptised with holy water in England, which had for
some while past been versed in Christianity. But he desired that his
personal salvation should overflow and become general, and begged that
Denmark should be instructed in divinity by Agapete, who was then Pope
of Rome. But he was cut off before his prayers attained this wish. His
death befell before the arrival of the messengers from Rome: and indeed
his intention was better than his fortune, and he won as great a reward
in heaven for his intended piety as others are vouchsafed for their
achievement.

His son GORM, who had the surname of "The Englishman," because he was
born in England, gained the sovereignty in the island on his father's
death; but his fortune, though it came soon, did not last long. He left
England for Denmark to put it in order; but a long misfortune was the
fruit of this short absence. For the English, who thought that their
whole chance of freedom lay in his being away, planned an open revolt
from the Danes, and in hot haste took heart to rebel. But the greater
the hatred and contempt of England, the greater the loyal attachment of
Denmark to the king. Thus while he stretched out his two hands to both
provinces in his desire for sway, he gained one, but lost the lordship
of the other irretrievably; for he never made any bold effort to regain
it. So hard is it to keep a hold on very large empires.

After this man his son HARALD came to be king of Denmark; he is
half-forgotten by posterity, and lacks all record for famous deeds,
because he rather preserved than extended the possessions of the realm.

After this the throne was obtained by GORM, a man whose soul was ever
hostile to religion, and who tried to efface all regard for Christ's
worshippers, as though they were the most abominable of men. All those
who shared this rule of life he harassed with divers kinds of injuries
and incessantly pursued with whatever slanders he could. Also, in order
to restore the old worship to the shrines, he razed to its lowest
foundations, as though it were some unholy abode of impiety, a temple
which religious men had founded in a stead in Sleswik; and those whom he
did not visit with tortures he punished by the demolition of the holy
chapel. Though this man was thought notable for his stature, his mind
did not answer to his body; for he kept himself so well sated with power
that he rejoiced more in saving than increasing his dignity, and thought
it better to guard his own than to attack what belonged to others:
caring more to look to what he had than to swell his havings.

This man was counselled by the elders to celebrate the rites of
marriage, and he wooed Thyra, the daughter of Ethelred, the king of the
English, for his wife. She surpassed other women in seriousness and
shrewdness, and laid the condition on her suitor that she would not
marry him till she had received Denmark as a dowry. This compact was
made between them, and she was betrothed to Gorm. But on the first night
that she went up on to the marriage-bed, she prayed her husband most
earnestly that she should be allowed to go for three days free from
intercourse with man. For she resolved to have no pleasure of love till
she had learned by some omen in a vision that her marriage would be
fruitful. Thus, under pretence of self-control, she deferred her
experience of marriage, and veiled under a show of modesty her wish to
learn about her issue. She put off lustful intercourse, inquiring, under
the feint of chastity, into the fortune she would have in continuing her
line. Some conjecture that she refused the pleasures of the nuptial
couch in order to win her mate over to Christianity by her abstinence.
But the youth, though he was most ardently bent on her love, yet chose
to regard the continence of another more than his own desires, and
thought it nobler to control the impulses of the night than to rebuff
the prayers of his weeping mistress; for he thought that her
beseechings, really coming from calculation, had to do with modesty.
Thus it befell that he who should have done a husband's part made
himself the guardian of her chastity so that the reproach of an infamous
mind should not be his at the very beginning of his marriage; as though
he had yielded more to the might of passion than to his own
self-respect. Moreover that he might not seem to forestall by his
lustful embraces the love which the maiden would not grant, he not only
forbore to let their sides that were next one another touch, but even
severed them by his drawn sword, and turned the bed into a divided
shelter for his bride and himself. But he soon tasted in the joyous form
of a dream the pleasure which he postponed from free loving kindness.
For, when his spirit was steeped in slumber, he thought that two birds
glided down from the privy parts of his wife, one larger than the other;
that they poised their bodies aloft and soared swiftly to heaven, and,
when a little time had elapsed, came back and sat on either of his
hands. A second, and again a third time, when they had been refreshed by
a short rest, they ventured forth to the air with outspread wings. At
last the lesser of them came back without his fellow, and with wings
smeared with blood. He was amazed with this imagination, and, being in a
deep sleep, uttered a cry to betoken his astonishment, filling the whole
house with an uproarious shout. When his servants questioned him, he
related his vision; and Thyra, thinking that she would be blest with
offspring, forbore her purpose to put off her marriage, eagerly relaxing
the chastity for which she had so hotly prayed. Exchanging celibacy for
love, she granted her husband full joy of herself, requiting his
virtuous self-restraint with the fulness of permitted intercourse, and
telling him that she would not have married him at all, had she not
inferred from these images in the dream which he had related, the
certainty of her being fruitful.

By a device as cunning as it was strange, Thyra's pretended modesty
passed into an acknowledgment of her future offspring. Nor did fate
disappoint her hopes. Soon she was the fortunate mother of Kanute and
Harald. When these princes had attained man's estate, they put forth a
fleet and quelled the reckless insolence of the Sclavs. Neither did they
leave England free from an attack of the same kind. Ethelred was
delighted with their spirit, and rejoiced at the violence his nephews
offered him; accepting an abominable wrong as though it were the richest
of benefits. For he saw far more merit in their bravery than in piety.
Thus he thought it nobler to be attacked by foes than courted by
cowards, and felt that he saw in their valiant promise a sample of their
future manhood.

For he could not doubt that they would some day attack foreign realms,
since they so boldly claimed those of their mother. He so much preferred
their wrongdoing to their service, that he passed over his daughter, and
bequeathed England in his will to these two, not scrupling to set the
name of grandfather before that of father. Nor was he unwise; for he
knew that it beseemed men to enjoy the sovereignty rather than women,
and considered that he ought to separate the lot of his unwarlike
daughter from that of her valiant sons. Hence Thyra saw her sons
inheriting the goods of her father, not grudging to be disinherited
herself. For she thought that the preference above herself was
honourable to her, rather than insulting.

Kanute and Harald enriched themselves with great gains from sea-roving,
and most confidently aspired to lay hands on Ireland. Dublin, which was
considered the capital of the country, was beseiged. Its king went into
a wood adjoining the city with a few very skilled archers, and with
treacherous art surrounded Kanute (who was present with a great throng
of soldiers witnessing the show of the games by night), and aimed a
deadly arrow at him from afar. It struck the body of the king in front,
and pierced him with a mortal wound. But Kanute feared that the enemy
would greet his peril with an outburst of delight. He therefore wished
his disaster to be kept dark; and summoning voice with his last breath,
he ordered the games to be gone through without disturbance. By this
device he made the Danes masters of Ireland ere he made his own death
known to the Irish.

Who would not bewail the end of such a man, whose self-mastery served to
give the victory to his soldiers, by reason of the wisdom that outlasted
his life? For the safety of the Danes was most seriously endangered, and
was nearly involved in the most deadly peril; yet because they obeyed
the dying orders of their general they presently triumphed over those
they feared.

Germ had now reached the extremity of his days, having been blind for
many years, and had prolonged his old age to the utmost bounds of the
human lot, being more anxious for the life and prosperity of his sons
than for the few days he had to breathe. But so great was his love for
his elder son that he swore that he would slay with his own hand
whosoever first brought him news of his death. As it chanced, Thyra
heard sure tidings that this son had perished. But when no man durst
openly hint this to Germ, she fell back on her cunning to defend her,
and revealed by her deeds the mischance which she durst not speak
plainly out. For she took the royal robes off her husband and dressed
him in filthy garments, bringing him other signs of grief also, to
explain the cause of her mourning; for the ancients were wont to use
such things in the performance of obsequies, bearing witness by their
garb to the bitterness of their sorrow. Then said Germ: "Dost thou
declare to me the death of Kanute?" (2) And Thyra said: "That is
proclaimed by thy presage, not by mine." By this answer she made out her
lord a dead man and herself a widow, and had to lament her husband as
soon as her son. Thus, while she announced the fate of her son to her
husband, she united them in death, and followed the obsequies of both
with equal mourning; shedding the tears of a wife upon the one and of a
mother upon the other; though at that moment she ought to have been
cheered with comfort rather than crushed with disasters.

\[End of "The Danish History", Books I-IX\]

ENDNOTES:  
(1) Utgard. Saxo, rationalising as usual, turns the mythical home of the
giants into some terrestrial place in his vaguely-defined Eastern
Europe.

\(2\) Kanute. Here the vernacular is far finer. The old king notices
"Denmark is drooping, dead must my son be!", puts on the signs of
mourning, and dies.
