[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29000)  [Next](cc29002) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii"></span>

<span id="ii-p1"></span>TRANSLATOR’S PREFACE.

<span id="ii-p2"></span>The present Volume, though it contains the Works
of These Prophets, is yet considerably smaller in size than the
preceding Volumes; but the last will more than compensate for this
deficiency.

<span id="ii-p3"></span>The two first Prophets, Habakkuk and Zephaniah,
lived before the Captivity; and the other, Haggai began his prophetic
office about sixteen years after the return of the great body of the
people from Babylon by the permission given them by King Cyrus.

<span id="ii-p4"></span>It is commonly thought that Habbakuk prophesied
*after* Zephaniah, though placed before him in our Bibles. The reign of
Jehoiakin is assigned as his age, about 608 years before Christ, while
Zephaniah performed his office in the reign of Josiah, about 30 years
earlier. Like the other prophets he is mainly engaged in reproving the
extreme wickedness of the people, on account of which he denounces on
them the judgments of God, while he gives occasional intimations of a
better state of things, and affords some glimpses of the blessings of
the gospel.

<span id="ii-p5"></span>In the *first* Chapter he begins with a
complaint as to the oppression which he witnessed, foretells the
dreadful invasion of the Chaldeans, describes the severity which would
be exercised by them, and appeals to God on the subject. In the *second*
he waits for an answer, receives it, and predicts the downfal of the
Chaldeans, and refers to blessings in reserve for God’s people. The
*third* contains what is called the “Prayer of Habakkuk,” an ode of a
singular character, in which he briefly describes, for the encouragement
of the faithful, the past interpositions of God on behalf of his people,
and concludes with expressing a full and joyful confidence in God,
notwithstanding’ the evils which were coming on the nation.

<span id="ii-p6"></span>“The style of Habakkuk,” Says Bishop *Lowth,*
“is poetical, especially in his Ode, which may justly be deemed one of
the most complete of its kind.”  <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0) And
in *describing* the character of this ode he says — “The Prophet indeed
embellishes the whole of this poem with a magnificence equal to its
commencement, selecting from so great an abundance of wonderful events
the grandest, and setting them forth in the most splendid dress, by
images and figures, and the most elevated diction; the high sublimity of
which he augments and *enhances* by the *elegance* of a *remarkable
conclusion:* so that hardly any thing of this kind would be more
beautiful or more perfect than this poem, were it not for one or two
spots of obscurity which are to be found in it, occasioned, as it seems,
by its ancientness.”  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1)

<span id="ii-p9"></span>Zephaniah was in part contemporary with
Jeremiah, that is, during the former portion of the reign of Josiah. He
foretells the Fall Of Nineveh, (<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>[Zep
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013)<span id="ii-p9.1"></span>,) and
mentions “the remnant of Baal,” (<span id="ii-p9.2"></span>[Zep
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004)<span id="ii-p9.2"></span>,) two
things which prove that he prophesied during the former half of that
king’s reign; for Nineveh was destroyed about the sixteenth year of his
reign, and it was after that time that the worship of Baal was
demolished by that king.

<span id="ii-p10"></span>The sins of The Jews and their approaching
judgments occupy *the first* Chapter. The *second* contains an
exhortation to Repentance, encouraged by a promise of protection during
the evils that God would bring on neighboring nations. In the *third*
the Prophet particularizes the sins of Jerusalem, announces its
punishment, and then refers to the future blessings which God would
freely confer on His Church.

<span id="ii-p11"></span>The style of Zephaniah has been represented as
being in some parts prosaic; and *Lowth* says that “he seems to possess
nothing remarkable or superior in the arrangement of his matter or in
the elegance of his diction.”  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) But it
is *Henderson’s* opinion that *“many* of the censures that have been
passed on his language are either without foundation or much
exaggerated.” He appears to be as poetic in his ideas as most of the
Prophets, and in the manner in which he arranges them, though he deals
not much in parallelisms, which constitute a prominent feature in Hebrew
poetry.

<span id="ii-p13"></span>The matters handled by the Prophet are said by
*Marckius* to be “most worthy of God, whether we regard His serious
reproofs or His severe threatenings, or His kind warnings, or His
gracious promises, which especially appertain to the dispensation of the
New Testament. In all these particulars he not only agrees with the
other prophets, but also adopts their expressions.”  <span
id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) He then gives the following examples: —

<span id="ii-p15"></span>**<span id="ii-p15.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006)<span id="ii-p15.1"></span>**
compared with <span id="ii-p15.2"></span>[Jer
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006)<span id="ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p16"></span>**<span id="ii-p16.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015)<span id="ii-p16.1"></span>**
compared with <span id="ii-p16.2"></span>[Joel
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002)<span id="ii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p17"></span>**<span id="ii-p17.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018)<span id="ii-p17.1"></span>**
compared with <span id="ii-p17.2"></span>[Eze
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#019)<span id="ii-p17.2"></span>, and
<span id="ii-p17.3"></span>[Jer
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027)<span id="ii-p17.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p18"></span>**<span id="ii-p18.1"></span>[Zeph.
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008),
[9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009)<span id="ii-p18.1"></span>**
compared with <span id="ii-p18.2"></span>[Jer
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002)<span id="ii-p18.2"></span>, and
<span id="ii-p18.3"></span>[Eze
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#001)<span id="ii-p18.3"></span>

<span id="ii-p19"></span>**<span id="ii-p19.1"></span>[Zeph.
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#003),
[4](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#004)<span id="ii-p19.1"></span>**
compared with <span id="ii-p19.2"></span>[Ezek.
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#027),
[28](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#028)<span id="ii-p19.2"></span>, etc.

<span id="ii-p20"></span>It does not appear at what time Haggai returned
from exile, though probably at the first return of the Jews under
Zerubbabel, before Christ 536. But he did not commence his prophetic
office till about sixteen years after; and he delivered what his Book
contains in the space of *three* months. His messages, which are *five,*
 <span id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) are very short; and hence some have
concluded that they are but summaries of what he had delivered.

<span id="ii-p22"></span>Much of this Book is historical, interspersed
with what is conveyed in a poetic style. The Prophet, in the *first*
Chapter, remonstrates with the people, who were very attentive to their
own private concerns, but neglected to build the Lord’s Temple; he
refers to the judgments with which they had been visited on this
account, encourages them to undertake the work, and promises them the
favor of God; and then he tells us of his success. In the *second*
Chapter he removes an apparent ground of discouragement, the temple then
in building being not so splendid as the former, and promises an
additional glory to it, evidently referring to the Gospel times. He then
warns them against relaxing in their work and thinking it enough merely
to offer sacrifices, assures them of God’s blessing, and concludes with
a special promise to Zerubbabel.

<span id="ii-p23"></span>*What Lowth* says of this Prophet’s style, that
*“it* is altogether prosaic,” is not strictly true; for there are some
parts highly poetical. See <span id="ii-p23.1"></span>[Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)<span id="ii-p23.1"></span>*,* and
from 8 to 11 inclusive. “The style of Haggai*,”* observes *Henderson,*
“is not distinguished by any peculiar excellence; yet he is not
destitute of pathos and vehemence, when reproving his countrymen for
their negligence, exhorting them to the performance of duty.”

<span id="ii-p24"></span>Though in some instances our Commentator may
not give the precise import of a passage, yet he never advances but what
is consistent with Divine Truth, and always useful and practical, and
often what betokens a profound acquaintance with the operations of the
human mind under the various trials and temptations which we meet with
in this life; so that the observations made are ever interesting and
instructive. Calvin never deduces from a passage what is in itself
erroneous or unsound, though in all cases he may not deduce what the
text may legitimately warrant. There is, therefore, nothing dangerous in
what he advances, though it. may not be included in the passage
explained. But for the most part his application of doctrine is what may
be fully justified, and is often very striking, and calculated to
instruct and edify.

<span id="ii-p25"></span>Some may think that our Author does not always
give that full range of meaning to the promises and predictions which he
explains. A reason for this may probably be found in the fact, that most
of the Commentators who had preceded him had indulged in very great
extravagancies on the subject; and a reaction generally drives men to an
opposite extreme. But it is very seldom that Calvin can be justly
charged with a fault of this kind; for, entertaining the profoundest
veneration for the Word of God, he strictly followed what he conceived
the words imported, and what he apprehended to be the general drift of a
passage. Possibly, in the estimation of those who possess a very vivid
imagination, he may be thought to have kept too closely to what the text
and the context require; but in explaining the Divine Oracles, nothing
is more to be avoided than to let loose the imagination, and nothing is
more necessary than to possess a sound judgment, and to exercise it in
the fear of God, and with prayer for His guidance and direction.

<span id="ii-p26"></span>J.O.  
THRUSSINGTON  
October 1848.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1](cc29001.htm#fr_0) <span id="ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p7"></span> <span id="ii-p7.1"></span>Poeticus est
Habbaccuci stylus; sed maxime in Oda, quae inter absolutissimas in eo
genere merito numerari *potest* — *Proel,* 21.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc29001.htm#fr_1) <span id="ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii-p8"></span> <span id="ii-p8.1"></span>Equidem totum hunc
locum pari qua ingressus est magnificentia exornat vates; ex tanta rerum
admirandarum copia nobilissima quaeque seligens, eaque coloribus
splendidissimis, imaginibus, figuris, dictione elatissima illustrans;
quorum summam sublimitatem cumulat et commendat singu-laris clausulae
elegantia: ita ut, nisi una atque altera ei insideret obscuri-tatis
nebula vetustate, ut videtur, inducta, vix quidquam hoc poemate in suo
genere extaret luculentius aut perfectius. — *Proel.* 28.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc29001.htm#fr_2) <span id="ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p12"></span> <span id="ii-p12.1"></span>Is nihil videtur
hahere singulare aut eximium, in dispositione rerum, vel colore
dictionis. — *Proel,* 21.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc29001.htm#fr_3) <span id="ii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p14"></span> <span id="ii-p14.1"></span>Est vaticiniorum
ejus argumentum Deo dignissimum, sive serias ejus redargutiones, sive
severas comminationes, sive amicas monitiones, sive blandas
promissiones, ad gratiam N. T. quam maxime protensas, spectemus. In
quabus omnibus non tantum quoad rem consentientes alios habet vates, sed
et phrases adhibuit — *Anal. Tseph. Exeg.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc29001.htm#fr_4) <span id="ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii-p21"></span> **I.** <span id="ii-p21.1"></span>[Haggai
1:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)<span id="ii-p21.1"></span>.  
**II.** <span id="ii-p21.3"></span>[Haggai
1:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012)<span id="ii-p21.3"></span>.  
**III.** <span id="ii-p21.5"></span>[Haggai
2:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001)<span id="ii-p21.5"></span>.  
**IV.** <span id="ii-p21.7"></span>[Haggai
2:10-19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010)<span id="ii-p21.7"></span>.  
**V.** <span id="ii-p21.9"></span>[Haggai
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020)<span id="ii-p21.9"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on Habakkuk](cc29002)
