[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc29008)  [Next](cc29010.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iv.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Eighteenth

<span id="iv.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** The word of the LORD which came
unto Zephaniah the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of
Amariah, the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah the son of Amon, king
of Judah.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Sermo Jehovae, qui fuit ad
Zephaniam, filium Chusi, filii Gedoliae, filii Amariae, filii Chizkiae,
in diebus Josiae, filii Amon, regis Jehudah.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p6"></span>Zephaniah first mentions the time in which
he prophesied; it was under the king Josiah. The reason why he puts down
the name of his father Amon does not appear to me. The Prophet would
not, as a mark of honor, have made public a descent that was disgraceful
and infamous. Amon was the son of Manasseh, an impious and wicked king;
and he was nothing better than his father. We hence see that his name is
recorded, not for the sake of honor, but rather of reproach; and it may
have been that the Prophet meant to intimate, what was then well known
to all, that the people had become so obdurate in their superstitions,
that it was no easy matter to restore them to a sound mind. But we
cannot bring forward anything but conjecture; I therefore leave the
matter without pretending to decide it.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p7"></span>With regard to the pedigree of the
Prophet, I have mentioned elsewhere what the Jews affirm — that when the
Prophets put down the names of their fathers, they themselves had
descended from Prophets. But Zephaniah mentions not only his father and
grandfather, but also his great-grandfather and his
great-great-grandfather; and it is hardly credible that they were all
Prophets, and there is not a word respecting them in Scripture. I do not
think, as I have said elsewhere, that such a rule is well-founded; but
the Jews in this case, according to their manner, deal in trifles; for
in things unknown they hesitate not to assert what comes to their minds,
though it may not have the least appearance of truth. It is possible
that the father, grandfather, the great-grandfather, and the
great-great-grandfather of the Prophet, were persons who excelled in
piety; but this also is uncertain. What is especially worthy of being
noticed is — that he begins by saying that he brought nothing of his
own, but faithfully, and, as it were, by the hand, delivered what he had
received from God.

<span id="iv.ii.ii-p8"></span>With regard, then, to his pedigree, it is
a matter of no great moment; but it is of great importance to know that
God was the author of his doctrine, and that Zephaniah was his faithful
minister, who introduced not his own devices, but was only the announcer
of celestial truth. Let us now proceed to the contents -

<span id="iv.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#002.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** I will utterly consume all
*things* from off the land, saith the Lord

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Perdendo perdam (*vel*, colligendo
colligam) omnia ex superficie terrae, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p4"></span>**3.** I will consume man and beast; I
will consume the fowls of the heaven, and the fishes of the sea, and the
stumblingblocks with the wicked; and I will cut off man from off the
land, saith the Lord.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3.** Perdam (*vel*, colligam) hominem
et bestiam; perdam autem avem coelorum, et pisces maris; et offendicula
erunt impiis; et excidam hominem e superficie terrae, dicit Jehova.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p8"></span>It might seem at the first view that the
Prophet dealt too severely in thus fulminating against his own nation;
for he ought to have begun with doctrine, as this appears to be the just
order of things. But the Prophet denounces ruin, and shows at the same
time why God was so grievously displeased with the people. We must
however remember, that the Prophet, living at the same period with
Jeremiah, had regard to the stubbornness of the people, who had been
already with more than sufficient evidence proved to have been guilty.
Hence he darts forth as of a sudden and denounces the wickedness of the
people, which had been already exposed; so there was to be no more
contention on the subject, for their iniquity had become quite ripe. And
no doubt it was ever the object of the Prophets to unite their endeavors
so as to assist one another: and this united effort ought ever to be
among all the servants of God, that no one may do anything apart, but
with joined efforts they may promote the same object, and at the same
time strive mutually to confirm the common truth. This is what our
Prophet is now doing.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p9"></span>He knew that God would have used various
means to restore them, had not the corruption of the people become now
past recovery. Having observed that all others had spent their labor in
vain, he directly attacks the wicked men who had, as it were designedly,
cast aside every fear of God, and shook off every shame. Since, then, it
was openly evident that with determined rebellion they resisted God, it
was no wonder that the Prophet began with so much severity.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p10"></span>But here a difficulty meets us. He said
in the first verse, that he thus spoke under Josiah; but we know that
the land was then cleansed from its superstitions. For we learn, that
when that pious king attained manhood, he labored most strenuously to
restore the pure worship of God; and when all places were full of wicked
superstitions, he not only constrained the tribe of Judah to adopt the
true worship of God, but he also stimulated his neighbors who had
remained and were dispersed through the land of Israel. Since, then, the
pious king had strenuously and courageously promoted the interest of
true religion, it seems a wonder that God was still so much displeased.
But we must remember, that though Josiah sincerely worshipped God, yet
the people were not really changed; for it has often happened, that God
roused the chief men and leaders, while few, or hardly any, followed
them, but only yielded a feigned obedience. This was no doubt the case
in the time of Josiah; the hearts of the people were alienated from God
and true religion, so that they chose rather to rot in their filth than
to return to the true worship of God. And that this was the case soon
appeared by the event; for Josiah did not reign long after he had
cleansed the land from its defilements, and Jehoahaz succeeded him; and
then the people immediately relapsed into their idolatry; and though for
three months only his successor reigned, yet true religion was in that
short time abolished. It is hence an obvious conclusion, that the people
had ever been wedded to impiety, and that its roots were hidden in their
hearts; though they apparently pretended to worship God, and, in order
to please the king, embraced the worship divinely prescribed in their
law; yet the event proved that it was a mere act of dissimulation, yea,
of perfidy. Then after Jehoahaz followed Jehoiakim, and no better was
their condition down to the time of Zedekiah; in short, no remedy could
be found for their unhealable wound.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p11"></span>It hence plainly appears, that though
Josiah made use of all means to revive the true and unadulterated
worship of God in Judea, he did not yet gain his object. And we hence
clearly learn how hard were the trials he sustained, seeing that he
effected nothing, though at great hazard he attempted to restore the
worship of God. When he found that he labored in vain, he no doubt had
to contend with great difficulties; and this we know by our own
experience. When hope of success shines on us, we easily overcome all
troubles, however arduous our work may be; but when we see that we
strive in vain, we become dejected: and when we see that our labor
succeeds only for a few years, our spirit grows faint. Josiah surmounted
these two difficulties; for the perverseness of the people was
sufficiently evident, and he was also reminded by two Prophets, Jeremiah
and Zephaniah, that the people would still cherish their impious
perverseness. When, therefore, he plainly saw that his labor was almost
in vain, he might have fainted in the middle of his course, or, as they
say, at the starting-place. And since the benefit was so small during
his reign, what could he have hoped after his death?

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p12"></span>This example ought at this day to be
carefully observed: for though God now appears to the world in full
light, yet very few there are who submit themselves to his word; and of
this small number fewer still there are who sincerely and without any
dissimulation embrace sound doctrine. We indeed see how great is their
inconstancy and indifference. For they who pretend great zeal for a time
very soon vanish and fall away. Since then the perversity of the world
is so great, sufficient to deject the minds of God’s servants a hundred
times, let us learn to look to Josiah, who in his own time left undone
nothing, which might serve to establish the true worship of God; and
when he saw that he effected but little and next to nothing, he still
persevered, and with firm and invincible greatness of mind proceeded in
his course.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p13"></span>We may also derive hence an admonition
no less useful not to regard ours as the golden age, because some
portion of men profess the pure worship of God: for many, by no means
wicked men, think, that almost all mortals are like angels, as soon as
they testify in words their approbation of the gospel: and the sacred
name of Reformation is at this day profaned, when any one who shows as
it were by a nod only that he is not wholly an enemy to the gospel, is
immediately lauded as a person of extraordinary piety. Though then many
show some regard for religion, let us yet know that among so large a
number there are many hypocrites, and that there is much chaff mixed
with the wheat: and that our senses may not deceive us, we may see here,
as in a mirror, how difficult it is to restore the world to the
obedience of God, and utterly to root up all corruptions, though idols
may be taken away and superstitions be abolished. No doubt Josiah had
regard to everything calculated to cleanse the Church, and had recourse
to the advice of Jeremiah and also of Zephaniah; we yet see that he did
not attain the object he wished, for God now became more grievously
displeased with his people than under Manasseh, or under Amon. These
wicked kings had attempted to extinguish all true religion; they had
cruelly raged against all God’s servants, so that Jerusalem became
almost drenched with innocent blood: and yet God seems here to have
manifested greater displeasure under Josiah than during the previous
cruelty and so many impieties. But as I have already said, there is no
reason why we should despond, though the world by its ingratitude may
close up the way against us; and however much may Satan also by this
artifice strive to discourage us, let us still perseveringly go on
according to the duties of our calling.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14"></span>But it may be now asked, why God
denounces his vengeance on *the beasts of the field, the birds of
heaven, and the fishes of the sea*; for how much soever the Jews may
have provoked him by their sins, innocent animals ought to have been
spared. If a son is not to be punished for the fault of his father,
<span id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>[Eze
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>, but that the soul that has sinned is to
die, why did God turn his wrath against fishes and other animals? This
seems to have been a hasty and unreasonable infliction. But let this
rule be first borne in mind — that it is preposterous in us to estimate
God’s doings according to our judgment, as froward and proud men do in
our day; for they are disposed to judge of God’s works with such
presumption, that whatever they do not approve, they think it right
wholly to condemn. But it behaves us to judge modestly and soberly, and
to confess that God’s judgments are a deep abyss: and when a reason for
them does not appear, we ought reverently and with due humility to hook
for the day of their full revelation. This is one thing. Then it is meet
at the same time to remember, that as animals were created for man’s
use, they must undergo a lot in common with him: for God made
subservient to man both the birds of heaven, and the fishes of the sea,
and all other animals. It is then no matter of wonder, that the
condemnation of him, who enjoys a sovereignty over the whole earth,
should reach to animals. And we know that the world was not made subject
to corruption willingly — that is, naturally; but because the contagion
from Adam’s fall diffused itself through heaven and earth. Hence the sun
and the moon, and all the stars, and also all the animals, the earth
itself, and the whole world, bear marks of God’s wrath, not because they
have provoked it through their own fault, but because the whole world is
involved in man’s curse. The reason then is, because all things were
created for the sake of man. Hence there is no ground to conclude, that
God acts with too much severity when he executes his vengeance on
innocent animals, for he can justly involve in the same ruin with man
whatever he has created for his use.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p15"></span>But the reason also is sufficiently
plain, why the Prophet speaks here of the beasts of the earth, the
fishes of the sea, and the birds of heaven: for we find that men grow
torpid, or rather stupid in their own indifference, except they are
forcibly roused. It was, therefore, necessary for the Prophet, when he
saw the people so hardened in their wickedness, and that he had to do
with men past recovery, to set clearly before them these judgments of
God, as though he had said — "Ye lie down securely, and indulge
yourselves, when God is coming forth prepared for vengeance: but his
wrath shall not only proceed against you, but will also lay hold on the
harmless animals; for ye shall see a horrible judgment executed on your
oxen and asses, on the birds and the fishes. What will become of you
when God’s wrath shall be thus kindled against the unhappy creatures who
have committed no sins? Shall ye indeed escape unpunished?” We now
understand why the Prophet does not speak here of men only, but collects
with them the beasts of the earth, the fishes of the sea, and the birds
of the air.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p16"></span>He says first, *By removing I will
remove all things from the face of the land*; he afterwards enumerates
particulars: but immediately after he clearly shows, that God would not
act rashly and inconsiderately while executing his vengeance, for his
sole purpose was to punish the wicked, *There shall be*, he says,
*stumblingblocks to the ungodly*;  <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md)
it is the same as though he said — “When I cite to God’s tribunal both
the fishes of the sea and the birds of heaven, think not that God’s
controversy is with these creatures which are void of reason, but they
are to sustain a part of God’s vengeance, which ye have through your
sins deserved.” The Prophet then does here briefly show, that what he
had before threatened brute creatures with, would come upon them on
men’s account; for God’s design was to execute vengeance on the wicked;
and as he saw that they were extremely torpid, he tried to awaken them
by manifest tokens, so that they might see God the avenger as it were in
a striking picture. And at the same time he also adds, *I will remove
man from the face of the land*. He does not speak now of fishes or of
other animals, but refers to men only. Hence appears more clearly what I
have said — that the Prophet was under the necessity of speaking as he
did, owing to the insensibility of the people. He now adds —

<span id="iv.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** I will also stretch out mine hand
upon Judah, and upon all the inhabitants of Jerusalem; and I will cut
off the remnant of Baal from this place, *and* the name of the Chemarims
with the priests;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Et extendam manum meam super
Jehudah, et super omnes incolas Jerusalem; et excidam ex loco hoc
reliquias Baal, et nomen cultorum cum sacerdotibus.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet explains still more clearly
why he directed his discourse in the last verse against the beasts of
the earth and the birds of heaven, even for this end — that the Jews
might understand that God was angry with them. *I will stretch forth, he
says, my hand on Judah and on Jerusalem*. God, then, by executing his
vengeance on animals, intended to exhibit to the Jews, as in a picture,
the dreadfulness of his wrath, which yet they despised and regarded as
nothing. The stretching forth of God’s hand I have elsewhere explained;
and it means even this — that he stretches forth his hand when he acts
in an unusual manner, and employs means beyond what is common. We indeed
know that God has no hands, and we also know that he performs all things
by his command alone: but as everything seen in the world is called the
work of his hands, so he is said to stretch forth his hand when he
mentions a work that is remarkable and worthy of being remembered. In a
like manner, when I intend to do some slight work, I only move my hand;
but when I have some difficult work to do, I prepare myself more
carefully, and also stretch forth my arms. This metaphor, then, is
intended only for this purpose, to render men more attentive to God’s
works, when he is set forth as stretching forth his hand.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p7"></span>But he says, on *Judah* and on the
inhabitants of *Jerusalem*. The kingdom of Israel had now been
abolished, and the ten tribes had been led into exile; and a few only of
the lowest and the poorest remained. The Jews thought themselves safe
for ever, because they had escaped that calamity. This is the reason why
the Prophet declares that God’s judgment was impending not only over the
kingdom of Judah, but also over the holy city, which thought itself
exempt from all such evil, because there were the sacrifices performed,
and there was the royal city, and, in short, because God had testified
that his habitation was to be there for ever. Since, then, by this vain
confidence the inhabitants of Jerusalem deceived themselves and others,
Zephaniah specifically addresses them. And as he had before spoken of
the wicked, he intended here, no doubt, sharply to reprove the Jews, as
though he said by way of anticipation, There is no reason for you to
enquire who are the wicked; for ye yourselves are they, even ye who are
the holy people of God and God’s chosen inheritance, ye who are the race
of Abraham, who flatter yourselves so much on account of your
excellency; ye are the wicked, who have not hitherto ceased to provoke
the vengeance of God. And at the same time he shows, as it were by the
finger, some of their sins, though he mentions others afterwards: but he
speaks now of their superstitions.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p8"></span>*I will cut off*, he says, *the remnants
of Baal and the name of Chamerim*. The severity of the Prophet may seem
here again to be excessive, for being so incensed against superstitions
which had been abolished by the great zeal and singular diligence of the
king; but, as we have already intimated, he regarded not so much the
king as the people. For though they dared not openly to adulterate God’s
worship, they yet cherished those corruptions at home to which they had
before been accustomed, as we see to be done at this day. For when it is
not allowed to worship idols, many mutter their prayers in secret and
invoke their idols: and, in short, they are restrained only by the fear
of men from manifesting their own impiety; and in the meantime, they
retain before God the same abominations. So it was in the time of
Josiah; the people were wedded to their corruptions, and this we may
easily conclude from the words of Zephaniah: for the remnants of Baal
were not seen in the temple, nor in the streets, nor in their chapels,
nor in the high places; but their hidden impiety is here discovered by
the Spirit of God; and no doubt their sin was the more heinous and less
excusable, because the people refused to follow their pious leader. It
was indeed the most abominable ingratitude; for when they saw that the
right worship was restored to them, they preferred to remain fixed in
their own filth, rather than to return to God, even when they had
liberty to do so, and also when that pious king extended his hand to
them.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9"></span>As to the word <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>כמרים, *camerim*, it designated either the
worshipers of Baal or some such men as our monks at this day: and they
are supposed by some to have been thus called, because they were clothed
in black vestments; while others think that they derived this name from
their fervor, because they were madly devoted to their superstitions, or
because they had marks on their foreheads, or because they imposed, as
is commonly the case, on the simple by the ardor of their zeal. The name
is also found in <span id="iv.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>[2Ki
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>
in the account given of Josiah: for it is said there, that the <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p9.3"></span>כמרים, *camerim*, were taken away, together
with other abominations of superstition. But as Zephaniah connects
priests with them, it is probable that they were a kind of people like
the monks, who did not themselves offer sacrifices, but were a sort of
attendants, who undertook vows and offered prayers in the name of the
whole people. For what some think, that they were thus called because
they burnt incense, appears not to me probable; for then they must have
been priests. They were then inferior to the sacrificers, and occupying
a station between them and the people, like the monks and hermits of
this day, who deceive foolish men by their sanctity. Such, then, were
the Camerim.  <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md)

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p15"></span>But as Josiah could not attain his
object, so as immediately to cleanse the land from these pollutions, we
need not wonder that at this day we are not able immediately to remove
superstitions from the world: but let us in the meantime ever proceed in
our course. Let those endued with authority, who bear the sword, that
is, all magistrates, perform their office with greater diligence,
inasmuch as they see how difficult and protracted is the contest with
the ministers of idolatry. Let also the ministers of the gospel
earnestly cry against idolatry, and all ungodly ceremonies, and not
desist. Though they may not effect as much as they wish, yet let them
follow the example of Josiah. If God should in the meantime thunder from
heaven, let them not be discouraged, but, on the contrary, know that
their labor is approved by him, and never doubt of their own safety; for
though all were destroyed, their godly efforts would not be in vain, nor
fail of a reward before God. Thus, then, ought all God’s servants to
animate themselves, each in his particular sphere and vocation, whenever
they have to contend with superstitions, and with such corruptions as
vitiate and adulterate the pure worship of God.

<span id="iv.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.v-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.ii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are so
prone to corruptions, and so easily turn from the right course after
having commenced it, and so easily degenerate from the truth once known,
— O grant, that, being strengthened by thy Spirit, we may persevere to
the end in the right way which thou showest to us in thy word, and that
we may also labor to restore the many who abandon themselves to various
errors; and though we may effect nothing, let us not yet be led away
after them, but remain firm in the obedience of faith, until having at
length finished all these contests, we shall be gathered into that
blessed rest which is prepared for us in heaven, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Nineteenth

<span id="iv.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p2"></span>**5.** And them that worship the host of
heaven upon the housetops; and them that worship *and* that swear by the
LORD, and that swear by Malcham;

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p3"></span>**5.** Et super eos qui adorant super
tecta militiam coelorum, et eos qui adorant et jurant per Jehovam, et
jurant per regem suum.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p6"></span>Zephaniah pursues the subject contained
in the verse I explained yesterday. For as the majority of the people
still adhered to their superstitions, though the pure worship of the law
had been restored by Josiah, the Prophet threatens here, that God would
punish such ingratitude. As then he had spoken in the last verse of the
worshipers of Baal and their sacrifices, so now he proceeds farther —
that the Lord would execute vengeance on the whole people, who prayed to
the host of heaven, or bowed themselves down before the host of heaven.
It is well known that those stars are thus called in Scripture to which
the gentiles ascribed, on account of their superior lustre, some sort of
divinity. Hence it was, that they worshipped the sun as God, called the
moon the queen of heaven, and also paid adoration to the stars. The
people, then, did not only sin in worshipping Baal, but were also
addicted to many superstitions, as we see to be the case whenever men
degenerate from the genuine doctrine of true religion; they then seek
out various inventions on all sides, so that they observe no limits and
keep within no boundaries.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p7"></span>But he says, that they *worshipped* the
stars on their *roofs*. It is probable that they chose this higher
place, as interpreters remind us, because they thought that they were
more seen by the stars the nearer they were to them. For as men are
gross in their ideas they never think God propitious to them except he
exhibits some proof or sign of a bodily presence; in short, they always
seek God according to their own earthly notions. Since, then, the Jews
thought that there were so many Gods as there are stars in heaven, it is
no wonder that they ascended to the roofs of their houses, that they
might be, as it were, in the sight of their gods, and thus not lose
their labor; for the superstitious never think that their devotion is
observed by God, unless they have before their eyes, as we have just
said, some sign of his presence.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p8"></span>We now then see how this verse stands
connected with the last. God declares that he would punish all
idolaters; but as the Jews worshipped Baal, the Prophet first condemned
that strange religion; and now he adds other devices, to which the Jews
perversely devoted themselves; for they worshipped also all the stars,
ascribing to them some sort of divinity. Then he mentions all those who
*worshipped* and *swore* by *their own king*, and swore by *Jehovah*

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p9"></span>By these last words the Prophet
intimates, that the Jews had not so repudiated the law of God but that
they boasted that they still worshipped the God who had adopted them,
and by whom they had been redeemed, who had commanded the temple to be
built for him, and an altar on mount Sion. They then did not openly
reject the worship of the true God, but formed such a mixture for
themselves, that they joined to the true God their own idols, as we see
to be the state of things at this day under the Papacy. It seems a
sufficient excuse to foolish men that they retain the name of God; and
they confidently boast that the true God is worshipped by them; and yet
we see that they mix together with this worship many of the delusions of
Satan; for under the Papacy there is no end to their inventions. When
any devise some peculiar mode of worship, it is then connected with the
rest; and thus they form such a mixture, that from one God, divided into
many parts, they bring forth a vast troop of deities. As then at this
day the Papists worship God and idols too, so Zephaniah had to condemn
the same wickedness among the Jews.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10"></span>We here learn that God’s name was not
then wholly obliterated, as though the world had openly fallen away from
God; for though they worshipped Jupiter, Mercury, Apollo, and other
fictitious gods, they yet professed to worship the only true and eternal
God, the Creator of heaven and earth. What then was it that the Prophet
condemned that they were not content with what the law simply and
plainly prescribed, but that they devised for themselves various and
strange modes of worship; for when men take to themselves such a liberty
as this, they no longer worship the true God, how much soever they may
pretend to do so, inasmuch as God repudiates all spurious modes of
worship, as he testifies especially in <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span>[Ezekiel
20](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p10.1"></span> —
Go ye, he says, worship your idols. He shows that all kinds of worship
are abominable to him whenever men depart in any measure from his pure
word. For we must hold this as the main principle — that obedience is
more valued by God than all sacrifices. Whenever men run after their own
inventions they depart from the true God; for they refuse to render to
him what he principally requires, even obedience.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p11"></span>But our Prophet speaks according to the
common notions of men; for they pretended to be the true worshipers of
God, while they still adhered to their own inventions. They did not,
indeed, properly speaking, worship the true God; but as they thought,
and openly professed to do this, Zephaniah, making this concession, says
— God will not suffer his own worship to be thus profaned: ye seek to
blend it with that of your idols; this he will not endure. Ye worship
the true God, and ye worship your idols; but he would have himself to be
worshipped alone; and this he deserves. But the partition which ye make
is nothing else than the mangling of true worship; and God will not have
himself to be thus in part worshipped. We now understand what the
Prophet means here; for the Jews covered their abominations with the
pretext that their purpose was to worship the God of Abraham: the
Prophet does not simply deny this to be done by them, but declares that
this worship was useless and disapproved by God; nay, he proceeds
farther, and says that this worship, made up of various inventions, was
an abominable corruption which God would punish; for he can by no means
bear that there should be such an alliance — that idols should be
substituted in his place, and that a part of his glory should be
transferred to the inventions of men. This is the true meaning.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p12"></span>We hence learn how greatly deceived the
Papists are, who think it enough, provided they depart not wholly from
the worship of the only true God; for God allows and approves of no
worship except when we attend to his voice, and turn not aside either to
the left hand or to the right, but acquiesce only in what he has
prescribed.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p13"></span>It is nothing strange that he connects
swearing with worship, for it is a kind of divine worship. Hence the
Scripture, stating a part for the whole, often mentions swearing in this
sense, as including the service due to God. But the Prophet pronounces
here generally a curse on all the superstitious, who worshipped
fictitious gods; and then he adds one kind of worship, and that is
swearing. I shall not here speak at large, nor is it — necessary, on the
subject of swearing. We know that the use of an oath is lawful when God
is appealed to as a witness and a judge, on important occasions; for
God’s name may be interposed when a matter requires proof, and when it
is important; but God’s name is not to be introduced thoughtlessly.
Hence two things are especially required in an oath — that all who swear
by his name should present themselves with reverence before his
tribunal, and acknowledge him to be the avenger if they take his name
falsely or inconsiderately This is one thing. Then the matter itself, on
account of which we swear, must be considered; for if men allow
themselves to swear by God’s name respecting things which are trifling
and frivolous, it is a shameful profanation, and by no means to be
borne. For it is a singular favor on the part of God, that he allows us
to take his name when there is any controversy among us, and when a
confirmation is necessary. As then we thus receive through kindness the
name of God, it is surely a great favor; for how great is the sanctity
of that name, though it serves even earthly concerns? God then does so
far accommodate himself to us, that it is lawful for us to swear by his
name. Hence a greater seriousness ought to be observed by us in oaths,
so that no one should dare to interpose an oath except when necessity
requires; and we should also especially take heed lest God be called a
witness to what is false. For how great a sacrilege it is to cover a
falsehood with his name, who is the eternal and immutable truth! They
then who swear falsely by his name change God, as far as they can, into
what he is not. We now sufficiently understand how swearing is a kind of
divine worship, because his honor is thereby given to God; for his
majesty is, as it were, brought before us, and as it is his peculiar
office to know and to discover hidden things, and also to maintain the
truth, this his own work is ascribed to him. Now when any one swears by
a mortal, or by the sun, or by the moon, or by creatures, he deprives
God in part of his own honor.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p14"></span>We hence see that in superstitious oaths
there was a clear proof of idolatry. This is the reason why the Prophet
here condemns those who did *swear by Jehovah and by Malkom*; that is,
who joined their idols with the true and eternal God when they swore.
For it is a clear precept of God’s law, ‘By the name of thy God shalt
thou swear.’ <span id="iv.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>[De
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p14.1"></span>. And when the Prophets speak of the
renovation of the Church, they use this form — ‘Ye shall swear by the
name of God;’ ‘To me shall bend every knee;’ ‘Every tongue shall swear
to me.’ What does all this mean? The whole world shall acknowledge me as
the true God; and as every knee shall bow to me, so every one will
submit himself to my judgment. We may hence doubtlessly conclude, that
God is deprived of his right, whenever we swear by the sun, or by the
moon, or by the dead, or by any creatures.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p15"></span>This evil has been common in all ages;
and it prevails still at this day under the Papacy. They swear by the
Virgin, by angels, and by the dead. They do not think that they thus
take away anything from the sovereignty of the only true God; but we see
what he declares respecting them. The Papists therefore foolishly excuse
themselves, when they swear by their saints: for they cannot elude the
charge of sacrilege, which the Holy Spirit has stamped with perpetual
infamy, since he has said, that all those are abominable in the sight of
God who swear by any other name than his own: and the reason is evident,
for the sun, moon, and stars, and also dead or living men, are honored
with the name of God, when they are set up as judges. For they who swear
by the sun, do the same as though they said — The sun is my witness and
judge; that is, The sun is my God. They who swear by the name of a king,
or as profane men swore formerly, By the genius of their king, ascribe
to a mortal what is peculiar to the true God alone. But when any one
swears by heaven or the temple, and does not think that there is any
divinity in the heavens or in the temple, it is the same as though he
swore by God himself, as it appears from <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
23:20-22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>; and Christ, when he forbade us to swear by
heaven or by the earth, did not condemn such modes of swearing as
inconsistent with his word, but as only useless and vain. At the same
time he showed that God’s name is profaned by such expressions: ‘They
who swear by heaven, swear also by him who inhabits heaven; they who
swear by the temple, swear also by him who is worshipped in the temple,
and to whom sacrifices are offered.’ When one swears by his head or by
his life, it is a protestation, as though he said — As my life is dear
to me. But they who swear by the saints, either living or dead, ascribe
to mortals what is due to God. They who swear by the sun, place a dead
created thing on the throne of God himself.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p16"></span>As to the term <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>מלכם, *melkom*, it may be properly rendered,
their king; for <span id="iv.ii.vii-p16.2"></span>מלך, *melak*, as it is
well known, means a king; but it is here put in construction, <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p16.3"></span>מלכם, *melkom*, their king; *they swear by
their own, king*  <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) The Prophet, I
doubt not, alludes to the word <span id="iv.ii.vii-p19.2"></span>מולך,
*Molok*, which is derived from the verb, to reign: for though that word
was commonly used by all as a proper name, it is yet certain that that
false god was so called, as though he was a king: and the Prophet
increases the indignity by saying — *They swear by Malkom*. He might
have simply said, They swear by Moloch; but he says, *They swear by
Malkom*; that is, They forget that I am their king, and transfer my
sovereignty to a dead and empty image. God then does here, by an implied
contrast, exaggerate the sin of the Jews, as they sought another king
for themselves, when they knew that under his protection they always
enjoyed a sure and real safety. Let us now proceed —

<span id="iv.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#006.md)<span id="iv.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p2"></span>**6.** And them that are turned back
from the LORD; and *those* that have not sought the LORD, nor enquired
for him.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p3"></span>**6.** Et qui retro aguntur, ne
sequantur Jehovam, (*ad verbum est*, de-post Jehovam.) et qui non
quaerunt Jehovam, neque investigant eum.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p6"></span>The Prophet seems here to include, as it
were, in one bundle, the proud despisers of God, as well as those
idolaters of whom he had spoken. It may yet be, that he describes the
same persons in different words, and that he means that they were
addicted to their own superstitions, because they were unwilling to
serve God sincerely and from the heart, and even shunned everything that
might lead their attention to true religion. And this view I mostly
approve; for what some imagine, that their gross contempt of God is here
pointed out, is not sufficiently supported. I therefore rather think
that the idolaters are here reproved, that they might not suppose that
they could by subterfuges wash away their guilt; for they were wont to
cover themselves with the shield of ignorance, when they were overcome,
and their impiety was fully proved: I did not think so; but, on the
contrary, my purpose was to worship God. Since, then, the superstitious
are wont to hide themselves under the covering of ignorance, the Prophet
here defines the idolatry of the people, and briefly shows that it was
connected with obstinacy and wickedness.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p7"></span>They did *not seek Jehovah*; but, on the
contrary, they turned willfully away from him, and sought, as it were
designedly, to extinguish true religion. Nor was it to be wondered at,
that so grievous and severe a sentence was pronounced on them; for they
had been taught by the law how God was to be served. How was it, then,
that errors so gross had crept in? Doubtless, God had kindled the light
of celestial truth, which clearly showed the way of true religion; but
as men ever seek to perform some frivolous trifles, the Israelites and
the Jews, when they felt ashamed openly and manifestly to reject the
true God, labored at the same time to add many ceremonies, that their
impiety might be thus concealed. This is the reason why the Prophet says
that they turned back; that is, that they could not be excused on the
ground of ignorance, but that they were perfidious and apostates, who
had preferred their own idols to the true God; though they knew that he
could not be rightly worshipped, but according to the rule prescribed in
the law, they yet neglected this, and heaped together many
superstitions.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p8"></span>And, doubtless, we shall find that the
fountain of all false worship is this — that men are unwilling truly and
from the heart to serve God; and, at the same time, they wish to retain
some appearance of religion. For there is nothing omitted in the law
that is needful for the perfect worship of God: but as God requires in
the law a spiritual worship, hence it is that men seek hiding-places,
and devise for themselves many ceremonies, that they may turn back from
God, and yet pretend that they come to him. While they sedulously labor
in their own ceremonies, it is indeed true that the worship of God and
religion are continually on their lips: but, as I have said, it is all
hypocrisy and deception; for they accumulate ceremonies, that there
might be something intervening between God and them. It is not,
therefore, without reason that the Prophet here accuses the Jews that
they *turned back from Jehovah, and that they sought him not*. How so?
For there was no need of a long, or of a difficult, or of a perplexed
enquiry; for the Lord had freely offered himself to them. How, then, was
it that they were blind in the midst of light, except that they
knowingly and willfully followed their own inventions?  <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md)

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p10"></span>The same is the case at this day with
the Papists: for though they may glamour a hundred times that they seek
to worship God, it is quite evident that they willfully go astray;
inasmuch as they so delight themselves with their own inventions, that
they do not purely and from the heart devote and consecrate themselves
to God.

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p11"></span>We now, then, see that this verse was
added, as an explanation, by the Prophet, that he might deprive the Jews
of their false plea of ignorance, and show that they sinned willfully;
for they would have been sufficiently taught by the law, had they not
adopted their own inventions, which dazzled their eyes and all their
senses. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:7-9](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** Hold thy peace at the presence of
the Lord God: for the day of the Lord *is* at hand: for the Lord hath
prepared a sacrifice, he hath bid his guests.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Tace a facie Domini Jehovae, quia
propinquus dies Jehova, quia paravit Jehova sacrificium, (*vel*,
ordinavit, \[זיכה\],) sanctificavit invitatos suos.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p4"></span>**8.** And it shall come to pass in the
day of the Lord’s sacrifice, that I will punish the princes, and the
king’s children, and all such as are clothed with strange apparel.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p5"></span>**8.** Et erit, in die sacrificii Jehovae
tunc visitabo super Principes, et super filios Regis, et super omnes qui
induti sunt vestitu extraneo.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p6"></span>**9.** In the same day also will I punish
all those that leap on the threshold, which fill their masters’ houses
with violence and deceit.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p7"></span>**9.** Et visitabo super omnem qui
tripudiat super limen in die illo, qui replent domum dominorum suorum
violentia et fraude.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p8"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p9"></span><span id="iv.ii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p10"></span>The Prophet confirms here what he has
previously taught, when he bids all *to be silent before God*; for this
mode of speaking is the same as though he had said, that he did not
terrify the Jews in vain, but seriously set before them God’s judgment,
which they would find by experience to be even more than terrible. He
also records some of their sins, that the Jews might know that he did
not threaten them for nothing, but that there were just causes why God
declared that he would punish them. This is the substance of the whole.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p11"></span>Let us first see what the Prophet means
by the word, silence. Something has been said of this on the second
chapter of Habakkuk. We said then that by silence is meant submission;
and to make the thing more clear, we said that we were to notice the
contrast between the silence to which men calmly submit, and the
contumacy, which is ever clamorous: for when men seek to be wise of
themselves, and acquiesce not in God’s word, it is then said, that they
are not silent, for they refuse to give a hearing to his word; and when
men give loose reins to their own will, they observe no bounds. Until
God then obtains authority in the world, all places are full of clamor,
and the whole life of men is in a state of confusion, for they run to
and fro in their wanderings; and there is no restraint where God is not
heard. It is for the same reason that the Prophet now demands silence:
but the expression is accommodated to the subject which he handles. To
be silent at the presence of God, it is true, is to submit to God’s
authority; but the connection is to be considered; for Zephaniah saw
then that God’s judgment was despised and regarded as nothing; and he
intimates here that God had so spoken, that the execution was nigh at
hand. Hence he says, *Be silent*,  <span id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md)
that is, Know ye, that I have not spoken merely for the purpose of
terrifying you; but as God is prepared to execute vengeance, of this he
now reminds you, that if there be any hope of repentance, ye may in time
seek to return into favor with him; if not, that ye may be without
excuse.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p17"></span>We now then understand why the Prophet
bids them to be *silent before the Lord Jehovah*: and the context is a
confirmation of the same view; for the reason is added, *Because the day
of Jehovah is nigh*. For profane men ever promise to themselves some
respite, and think that they gain much by delay: the Prophet, on the
contrary, does now expose to scorn this self-security, and says, that
the day of Jehovah was nigh at hand. It is then the same thing as though
he had said, that his judgment ought to have been quickly anticipated,
and even with fear and trembling.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p18"></span>He afterwards employs a metaphor to set
forth what he taught, — that God had *prepared a sacrifice*, yea, that
he had already *appointed* and *set apart his guests*. By the word,
sacrifice, the Prophet reminded them, that the punishment of which he
had spoken would be just, and that the glory of God would thereby shine
forth. We indeed know how ready the world is to make complaints; when it
is pressed by God’s hand, it expostulates on account of too much rigor;
and many in an open manner give utterance to their blasphemies. As then
they own not God’s justice in his punishment, the Prophet calls it a
sacrifice; and sacrifices, we know, are evidences of divine worship, and
he who offers a sacrifice to God, owns him to be just. So also by this
kind of speaking Zephaniah intimates that God would not act a cruel part
in cutting off the city Jerusalem and its inhabitants; for this would be
a sacrifice, according to the language often employed by the Prophets,
and especially by Isaiah, who says of Bozrah, ‘A sacrifice is prepared
in Bozrah,’ <span id="iv.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>[Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p18.1"></span>;) and who says also of Jerusalem itself,
‘Oh! Ariel! Ariel!’ <span id="iv.ii.ix-p18.2"></span>[Isa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#001.md)<span id="iv.ii.ix-p18.2"></span>,
where Jerusalem itself is represented as the altar; as though he had
said, In all the streets, in the open places, there shall be altars to
me; for I will collect together great masses of men, whom I shall slay
as a sacrifice to me. For all who were not willing to render worship to
God, and who did not freely offer themselves as spiritual victims to
him, were to be drawn to the slaughter, and were at the same time called
sacrifices. So the executions on the gallows, when the wicked suffer,
may be said to be sacrifices to God: for the Lord arms the magistrate
with the sword to restrain wickedness, that the wicked may not have such
liberty as to banish all equity from the world. The cities also, which,
being forcibly taken, are subject to a slaughter, and the fields, where
armies are slain, become altars, for God makes the rebellious a
sacrifice, because they refuse willingly to offer themselves.

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p19"></span>So also in this place the Prophet says,
*Jehovah has prepared for himself a sacrifice*, — Where? At Jerusalem,
through the whole city, as it has appeared from the quotation from
Isaiah; for as they had not rightly sacrificed to God on Mount Sion, but
vitiated his whole worship, God himself declares, that he would become a
priest, that he might slay, as he thought right, those beasts, who had
obstinately refused his yoke: *And he has prepared his guests*. But I
cannot finish today.

<span id="iv.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.x-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.ii.x-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we continue in
so many ways to provoke against us thy wrath, we may patiently bear the
punishment, by which thou wouldest correct our faults, and also
anticipate thy judgment: and since thou art pleased to recall us in due
time to thyself, let us not turn deaf ears to thy counsels, but so obey
and submit ourselves to thee, that we may become partakers of that
mercy, which thou offerest to us, provided we seek to be reconciled to
thee, and so proceed in thy service, that under the government of Christ
thy Son, whom thou hast appointed to be our supreme and only king, we
may so strive to be wholly devoted to thee that thou mayest be glorified
through our whole life, until we become at length partakers of that
celestial glory, which has been procured for us by the blood of thy
only-begotten Son. Amen

<span id="iv.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twentieth

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p2"></span>We stated yesterday why God compares the
slaughter of the wicked to a sacrifice, — because in punishing the
ungodly, he shows himself to be the judge of the world: and this slaying
is a sacrifice of sweet odour, because it makes known this glory. And he
immediately adds, that he had *prepared his guests*. The word he uses is
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p2.1"></span>קדש, *kodash*, which means to sanctify,
but is often to be taken in a different sense. It may be explained as
meaning, that God had prepared his guests: but as there is an express
mention made of sacrifice, Zephaniah, I have no doubt, continues the
same metaphor. The meaning then is, that the Chaldeans, who were
ministers of God’s vengeance, were already not only chosen for the
purpose of executing it, but were divinely consecrated for that end: and
this unwelcome saying was uttered by the Prophet, that he might more
sharply touch the feelings of his own nation. The Jews ought indeed to
have acknowledged God’s judgment even when executed by heathens; but
this they would not have done, had they not understood, that these were,
in exercising their cruelty, as it were, the priests of God; for the
royal priesthood at Jerusalem had been profaned. We now then see why the
Prophet says, that those were sanctified by the Lord who had been
invited to feed on the flesh of the chosen people, as they were wont to
eat of the remainder of their sacrifices on festal days.  <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) Let us now proceed.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p4"></span>I yesterday repeated this verse, *And it
shall be, on the day of the sacrifice of Jehovah, that I will then visit
the princes, and the sons of the king, and those who are clothed with
strange apparel*. The Prophet shows, that he not only threatened the
common people, but also the chief leaders, so that he spared not even
the king’s sons. He attacks then here the principal men among the
people; for they were justly led to punishment in the first place, as
they had been to others the cause of their errors. We indeed know, that
they who excel in dignity give a much greater offense when they abuse
their power in promoting what is sinful. Hence it was, that God seemed
often to have sent his Prophets to them only. For though the low and the
humble in the community were not exempt from punishment, yet it was but
reasonable that God should more severely punish their leaders. Hence the
Prophet now says, that God would *visit the princes and the king’s sons*
 <span id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) He did not indeed intend here to
flatter obscure men, as though God meant to overlook them: but as the
king and his counselors had more grievously sinned, the more angry was
God with them. We also know, that kings and others, who exercise power,
are not easily moved, for the splendor of their fortune blinds them; and
they think that they are in a manner exempt from laws, because they
occupy a higher station. We now then see why the Prophet speaks
especially of the princes and the king’s sons.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p6"></span>He also adds, *And those who wear foreign
apparel*  <span id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) Some refer this to the
worshipers of Baal, or his priests; but the context does not allow us to
apply it to any but to courtiers, whose great delight was in apparel:
for what Christ says is proved by the experience of all ages to be too
true, — that they who wear soft clothing are in king’s courts. <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p7.2"></span>[Mt
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p7.2"></span>.
And it is probable, that courtiers, through a foolish affectation, often
changed their clothes; as it is the case with men who seek to appear
great, they devise daily some new way for spending money; and though
they may be more splendidly clothed than needful, yet they think it
almost too sordid to wear the same apparel for a whole month; and that
their prodigality may be more evident, they change also the forms of
their dress. This affectation prevails far too much at this day in the
world. But even then in the age of the Prophet, as it appears, the
courtiers and those who had power among the people, often changed their
dress, that they might the more display their pomp and attract the
admiration of the simple and poor people. And it was not simple
ambition, but it brought with it a contempt for others; for the rich in
this way upbraided the poor, that they themselves were alone worthy of
this superfluity and opulence. It was not enough for them, that they
were clothed for their own comfort, and also that ornament and splendor
were added; but they would have willingly made bare all others: and as
it was a shame to do this, they yet showed, as far as they could, by
their superfluous abundance, that they were alone worthy of such
display. It was then no wonder that the Lord threatened them with so
much severity.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p8"></span>As this vice in course of time had greatly
increased, this passage of the Prophet deserves particular notice. And
the more luxurious men become and the more they indulge in such
varieties, and thus manifest their pride, the more carefully we ought to
learn to restrain the desires of our flesh, that they may not leap over
the bounds of moderation; and let those who abound in wealth be
contented with what is modest and becoming; and let them especially
abstain from that absurd affectation, which the Prophet evidently
condemns here. It may however have been, that the Jews then sought new
and unusual fashions as to their clothes from remote countries, like the
French at this day, who delight in the Turkish habit; for they have too
much intercourse with Turkey. So also at that time a foolish desire had
possessed the hearts of the people, so as to wish to ingratiate
themselves with the Chaldeans, and to make friends of them by a likeness
in dress. And we may learn this from a passage in Ezekiel, where he
compares them to harlots or to foolish lovers <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>[Eze
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>,
etc.:) for as lovers paint harlots on walls, and whoremongers and
adulterers do the same; so Ezekiel accuses the Jews, that they were so
inflamed with a mad desire of making a covenant with the Chaldean
nation, that they had their images painted in their chambers. They also
no doubt imitated their dress, in order to show that they regarded it a
great happiness, if they became their friends and confederates.

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p9"></span>Now follows what I repeated also
yesterday, *I will visit every one who danceth on the threshold*. Some
explain this of the worshipers of Baal, but improperly; for as I have
already said, the context will not allow us to understand this except of
the servants of princes, who cruelly harassed the people and deprived
helpless men of their property, who were not able to resist them. The
Prophet then, after having spoken of the chief governors of the kingdom
and of the king’s sons, now comes to their servants, who, like hunting
dogs, were ready to seize everywhere on the prey. They who understand
this to be said of the sacrifices of Baal, adduce a passage from sacred
history, — that since the image of Dagon had been found on the threshold
of the temple, they dared not to tread on the threshold, but leaped over
it: but this is too far-fetched. Others also bring expositions of a
different kind; but the Prophet, I have no doubt, refers here to the
liberty they took in plundering, when he says, that they danced on the
threshold, as persons triumphing; for he afterwards adds, that they
*filled, by rapine and fraud, the houses* of the princes. To leap or
dance then on the threshold is no other thing than to take possession of
the houses of other people, and insolently to triumph over them, as it
is usually done by conquerors. For he who takes possession of what
belongs to another, does not quietly rest there as in his own
habitation, but boasts and exults. So also here, the Prophet paints to
the life that wantonness, which the servants of princes showed, when
they entered into the houses of others. He therefore says, that *they
danced*, and said, This is my house; and who will dare to say a word to
the contrary? Since then the servants of princes took so much liberty,
the Prophet here denounces on them the vengeance of God.  <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md)

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p11"></span>He then adds, that they filled their
masters’ houses by *rapine and fraud*. By rapine and fraud he means the
prey gathered, partly by armed force, and partly by deceit and craft;
for courtiers have their nets by which they lay in wait for helpless
men. But if they cannot obtain by fraud what they hope for, they leave
recourse to armed force. However this may be, they enrich themselves,
sometimes by plundering, and sometimes by fraud. Hence the Prophet
mentions both here. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010.md)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And it shall come to pass in that
day, saith the LORD, *that there shall be* the noise of a cry from the
fish gate, and an howling from the second, and a great crashing from the
hills.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et erit in die illa, dicit
Iehova, vox clamoris a porta piscium, et ululatus a secundda (*ad
verbum*; *sed multi intelligunt* scholam,) et contritio magna a
collibus.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p6"></span>He confirms here the same truth, and
amplifies and illustrates it by a striking description; for we know how
much a lively representation avails to touch the feelings, when the
event itself is not only narrated, but placed as it were before our
eyes. So the Prophet is not content with plain words, but presents a
scene, that the future destruction of Jerusalem might appear in a
clearer light. But as I have elsewhere explained this mode of speaking,
I shall not dwell on the subject now.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p7"></span>He says, that there would be *the voice
of crying from the gate of the fishes*. He names here three places in
Jerusalem, and afterwards he adds a fourth. But as we do not understand
the situation of the city, sufficient for us is this probable
conjecture, — that he refers to parts opposite to one another; as though
he had said, that no corner of the city would be in a quiet state, when
the Lord roused up war. Let us then suppose it to be triangular, and let
the gate of the fishes be one side, and let the second gate or the
school be on the other; and let the part nigh the hills form the third
side. What some say, that the hills mean palaces, I do not approve of;
nor is it consistent with the context: but we ought to bear in mind what
I have already stated, that the Prophet here denounces ruin on every
part of the city, so that the Jews would in vain seek refuges for
themselves; for by running here and there, they would find all places
full of crying and howling. *There shall be then the voice of crying
from the gate of the fishes*. Why the Prophet calls it the gate of the
fishes we cannot for certainty say, except that it is a probable
conjecture, that either some fish-pond was near it, or that the
fish-market was nigh.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p8"></span>As to the word <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>משנה, *meshene*, the majority of interpreters
think that it means the place where the priests explained the law and
devoted themselves to the study of it; and they adduce a passage from
<span id="iv.ii.xii-p8.2"></span>[2Ki
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p8.2"></span>, where it seems, as there is mention made of
priests, the word is taken in this sense. But as gates are spoken of
here, and as the Hebrews often call whatever is second in order by this
word, as the second part in buildings and also in towns and in other
places, is thus called, we may take it here in this sense, that is, as
meaning that gate which was next to the first in general esteem. But as
the subject has little to do with the main point, I dismiss it.  <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md)

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p13"></span>He says in the last place, that there
*would be a great breach in the hills*. He refers, I have no doubt, to
that part of the city which was contiguous to the mountains. However
this may be, it was the Prophet’s object to include here the whole city,
that he might shake off from the Jews all vain confidence, and show that
there would be no escape, when the Lord stretched forth his hand to
punish their sins. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#011.md)<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Howl, ye inhabitants of Maktesh,
for all the merchant people are cut down; all they that bear silver are
cut off.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Ululate habitatores loci
concavi; quia exterminatus est populos mercatorum, excisi sunt omnes
onusti pecunia.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet addresses the merchants here
who inhabited the middle part of the city, and hence thought themselves
farther off from all danger and trouble. As then they were concealed as
it were in their hiding-places, they thought that no danger was nigh
them; and thus security blinded them the more. After having spoken of
the king’s palace and of the princes and their servants, Zephaniah now
turns his discourse to the merchants.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7"></span>And he calls them the inhabitants of the
hollow place, <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7.1"></span>מכתש, *mecatesh*. The
verb <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p7.2"></span>כתש, *catash*, means to be
hollow; hence the Hebrews call a hollow place <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p7.3"></span>מכתש, *mecatesh*. So Solomon calls a mortar
by this name, because it is hollow:  <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) and we learn also from other parts of
scripture that the word means sometimes either a cavern or some low
place. But we know that merchants have for the most part their streets
on level ground, and it is for their advantage, as they have goods to
carry. It may then have been, that at Jerusalem there was a large
company of merchants in that part of the city, which was in its
situation low. But they who regard it as a proper name, bring nothing
either of reason or probability to confirm their opinion: and it is also
evident from the context that merchants are here addressed, *for cut
off*, he says, *is the mercantile people*. The word <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.1"></span>כנען, *canon*, means a merchant. Some think
that the Jews are here, as often elsewhere, called Canaan, because they
were become degenerate, and more like the Canaanites than the holy
fathers, from whom they descended.  <span id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md)
But the Prophet speaks here no doubt of merchants, for an explanation
immediately follows, *all who are laden with money*. And he says that
merchants were laden with money, because they would not transact
business without making payments and counting money, and also, because
merchants for the most part engrossed by their gainful arts a great
portion of the wealth of the world.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12"></span>We now then understand what the Prophet
means: He threatens howling to the merchants, who were concealed in
their hidden places, for they occupied that part of the city, as I have
already said, which was below the hills; and he then makes use of the
word <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>כנען, *canon*, a trafficker; and
lastly he speaks of their wealth, as it is probable that they became
rich through frauds and most dishonest means, and shows that their money
would be useless to them, for they would find in it no defense, when the
Lord extended his hand to punish them. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#012.md)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** And it shall come to pass at that
time, *that* I will search Jerusalem with candles, and punish the men
that are settled on their lees: that say in their heart, The LORD will
not do good, neither will he do evil.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Et erit in tempore illo,
serutabor Ierusalem in lucernis, et visitabo super homines, qui
congelati sunt in faecibus suis, et dicunt in cordibus suis, Neque
benefaciet Iehova, neque malefaciet.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet addresses here generally the
despisers of God, who were become hardened in their wickedness. But
before he openly names them, he says that the visitation would be such,
that God would search every corner, so that no place would remain
unexplored. For to visit with candles, or to search with candles, is so
to examine all hidden places or coverts, that nothing may escape. When
one intends to plunder a city, he first enters into the houses, and
takes away whatever he finds; but when he thinks that there are some
hidden treasures, he descends into the secret cells; and then if there
be no light there, he lights a candle, and carefully looks here and
there, that he may not overlook anything. By this comparison then God
intimates, that Jerusalem would be so plundered, that nothing whatever
would remain. Hence he says, *I will search it with candles*. We indeed
know that nothing is hid from God; but it is evident, that he is
constrained to borrow comparisons from the common practice of men,
because he could not otherwise express what is necessary for us to know.
The world indeed deal with God as men do with one another; for they
think that he can be deceived by their craftiness. He therefore laughs
to scorn this folly, and says, that he would have candles to search out
whatever was concealed.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p7"></span>Now, as impiety had possessed the minds
of almost all the people, he says, *I will visit the men, who on their
lees are congealed*. This may indeed be only understood of the rich, who
flattered themselves in their prosperity, and feared nothing, and were
thus congealed on their lees: but Zephaniah shows in the words which
follow, that he had in view something more atrocious, that is, that they
said that *neither good nor evil proceeded from God*. At the same time,
these two things may be suitably joined together — that he reproves here
their self-security, produced by wealth — and that he also accuses the
careless Jews of that gross contempt of God which is afterwards
mentioned. And I am disposed to take this view, that is, that the Jews,
inebriated with prosperity, became hardened, as men contract hardness
often by labor — and that they so collected lees through too much
quietness and abundance of things, that they became wholly stupid, and
could be touched by no truth made known to them. Hence in the first
place the Prophet says, that God would visit with punishment a
carelessness so extreme, when men not only slumbered in their
prosperity, but also became congealed in their own stupidity, so as to
be almost void of sense and understanding. When one addresses a dead
mass, he can effect nothing: and so the Prophet compares careless men to
a dead and congealed mass; for stupidity had so bound up all their
senses, that they could not be either allured by the goodness of God, or
terrified by his threatenings. Congealing then is nothing else but that
hardness or contumacy, which is contracted by self-indulgences, and
particularly when the minds of men become almost stupefied.  <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) And by *lees* he means sinful
indulgences, which so infatuate all the senses of men, that no light nor
sincerity remains.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p9"></span>He then mentions what they said in their
hearts. He expresses here what that carelessness which he condemned
brings with it — even that wicked men fearlessly mock God. What it is to
speak in the heart, is evident from many parts of Scripture; it means to
determine anything within: for though the ungodly do not openly proclaim
what they determine in their minds, they yet reason within themselves,
and settle this point — that either there is no God, or that he rests
idly in heaven. ‘Said has the ungodly in his heart, No God is.’ Why in
the heart? Because shame or fear prevents men from openly avowing their
impiety; yet they cherish such thoughts in the heart and assent to them.
Now here is described by the Prophet the height of impiety, when he
says, that men drunk with pleasures robbed God of his office as a judge,
saying, that he does neither good nor evil. And it is probable that
there were then many at Jerusalem and throughout Judea who thus
insolently despised God as a judge. But Zephaniah especially speaks of
the chief men; for such above all others deride God, as the giants did,
and look down as from on high on his judgments. There is indeed much
insensibility among the common people; but there is more madness in the
pride of great men, who, trusting in their power, think themselves
exempt from the authority of God.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p10"></span>But what I have just said must be borne
in mind, that an unhealable impiety is described by the Prophet, when he
accuses the Jews, that they did not think God to be the author either of
good or of evil; because God is thus deprived of his dignity; for except
he is owned as the judge of the world, what becomes of his dignity? The
majesty, or the authority, or the glory of God does not consist in some
imaginary brightness, but in those works which so necessarily belong to
him, that they cannot be separated from his very essence. It is what
peculiarly belongs to God, to govern the world, and to exercise care
over mankind, and also to make a difference between good and evil, to
help the miserable, to punish all wickedness, to check injustice and
violence. When any one takes away these things from God, he leaves him
an idol only. Since, then, the glory of God consists in his justice,
wisdom, judgment, power, and other attributes, all who deny God to be
the governor of the world entirely extinguish, as much as they can, his
glory. Even so do heathen writers accuse Epicures; for as he dared not
to deny the existence of some god, like Diagoras and some others, he
confessed that there are some gods, but shut them up in heaven, that
they might enjoy there their leisure and delights. But this is to
imagine a god, who is not a god. It is then no wonder that the Prophet
condemns with so much sharpness the stupidity of the Jews, as they
thought that neither good nor evil proceeded from God. But there was
also a greater reason why God should be so indignant at such
senselessness: for whence was it that men entertained such an opinion or
such a delirious thought, as to deny that God did either good or evil,
except that they attempted to drive God far away from them, that they
might not be subject to his judgment. They therefore who seek to
extinguish the distinction between right and wrong in their consciences,
invent for themselves the delirious notion, that God concerns not
himself with human affairs, that he is contented with his own celestial
felicity, and descends not to us, and that adversity as well as
prosperity happens to men by chance.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p11"></span>We hence see how men seek willfully and
designedly to indulge the notion, that neither good nor evil comes from
God: they do this, that they may stupefy their own consciences, and thus
precipitate themselves with greater liberty into sin, as though they
were free to do anything with impunity, and as though there was no judge
to whom an account is to be rendered.

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p12"></span>And hence I have said, that it is the
very summit of impiety when men strengthen themselves in this error,
that God rests in heaven, and that whatever miseries they endure in this
world happen through fortunes and that whatever good things they have
are to be ascribed either to their own industry or to chance. And so the
Prophet briefly shows in this passage that the Jews were past recovery,
that no one might feel surprised, that God should punish with so much
severity a people who had been his friends, and whom he had adopted in
preference to the whole world: for he had set apart the race of Abraham,
as it is well known, as his chosen and holy people. God’s vengeance on
the children of Abraham might have appeared cruel or extremely rigid,
had it not been expressly declared that they had advanced so far in
impiety as to seek to exclude God from the government of the world, and
to deprive him of his own peculiar office, even that of punishing sin,
of defending his own people, of delivering them from all evils, of
relieving all their miseries. Since, then, they thus shut up God in
heaven, and gave the governing power on earth to fortune, it was an
intolerable stupidity, nay, wholly diabolical. It was therefore no
wonder that God was so severely indignant, and stretched forth his hand
to punish their sin, as their disease had become now incurable.

<span id="iv.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.ii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as almost the
whole world breaks out into such excesses, that there is no moderation,
no reason, — O grant, that we may learn not only to confine ourselves
within those limits which thou dost approve and command, but also to
delight and glory in the smallness of our portion, inasmuch as the
wealth, and honors, and pleasures of the world so fascinate the hearts
and minds of all, that they elevate themselves into heaven, and carry on
war, as it were, avowedly with thee. Grant also to us, that in our
limited portion we may be in such a way humbled under thy powerful hand,
as never to doubt but that thou wilt be our deliverer even in our
greatest miseries; and that ascribing to thee the power over life and
death, we may feel fully assured, that whatever afflictions happen to
us, proceed from thy just judgment, so that we may be led to repentance,
and daily exercise ourselves in it, until we shall at length come to
that blessed rest which is laid up for us in heaven, through Christ our
Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-First

<span id="iv.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#013.md)<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** Therefore their goods shall
become a booty, and their houses a desolation: they shall also build
houses, but not inhabit *them*; and they shall plant vineyards, but not
drink the wine thereof.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Et erit substantia eorum in
direptionem, et domus eorum in vastitatem; et aedificabunt domos, neque
habitabunt; et plantabunt vineas, neque bibent vinum earum.

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xvii-p6"></span>Zephaniah pursues the same subject —
that God, after long forbearance, would punish his rebellious and
obstinate people. Hence he says, that they were now delivered, even by
God himself, into the hands of their enemies. They indeed knew that many
were inimical to them; but they did not consider God’s judgment, as God
himself elsewhere complains — that they did not regard the hand of him
who smote them. <span id="iv.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>[Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p6.1"></span>. Our Prophet, therefore, declares now that
they were given up to destruction, and that their enemies would find no
trouble nor difficulty in invading the land, since all places would be
open to plunder. And he recites what is found in <span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p6.2"></span>[Le
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#020.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xvii-p6.2"></span>; for the Prophets were interpreters of the
law, and the only difference between Moses and them is, that they apply
his general truth to their own time. The Prophet now pursues this
course, as though he had said, that God had not in vain or to no purpose
threatened this evil in his law; for the Jews would find by experience
that this would really be the case, and that it had been truly said,
that the fruit of the land, their habitations, and other comforts of
life, would be transferred to others. It now follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** The great day of the Lord *is*
near, *it is* near, and hasteth greatly, *even* the voice of the day of
the Lord: the mighty man shall cry there bitterly.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Propinquus dies Jehovae magnus,
propinquus et festinans valde; vox diei Jehovae amara (ut alii vertunt,)
vociferabitur illic fortis (vel, amarum, aut, amare illic vociferabitur
fortis; alii secus ditinguunt, Vox diei Jehovae amara vociferabitur,
aut, amare; postea, illic fortis.)

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p6"></span>The Prophet in this verse expresses
more clearly what I have already stated — That God would be the author
of all the evils which would happen to the Jews; for as they grew more
insensible in their sins, they more and more provoked God’s wrath
against themselves. It is therefore no common wisdom to consider God’s
hand when he strikes or chastens us. This is the reason why the Prophet
now calls the attention of the Jews to God, that they might not fix
their minds, as it is commonly done, on men only. At the same time, he
tries to shake off their torpor by declaring that the day would be
terrible, and that it was also now near at hand. We indeed know that
hypocrites trifle with God, except they feel the weight of his wrath,
and that they protract time, and promise themselves so long a respite,
that they never awake to repentance. Hence the Prophet in the first
place shows, that whatever evils then impended over the Jews were not
only from men, but especially from God. This is one thing; and then, in
order thoroughly to touch stupid hearts, he says, that *the day would be
terrible*; and lastly, that they might not deceive themselves by vain
flatteries, he declares that the day was at hand. These three things
must be noticed in order that we understand the Prophet’s object.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p7"></span>But he says at the beginning of the
verse, that *the great day of Jehovah was nigh*. In these words he
includes the three things to which I have already referred. By calling
it the *day of Jehovah*, he means, that whatever evils the Jews
suffered, ought to have been ascribed to his judgment; and by calling it
*the great day*, his object was to strike terror; as well as by saying,
in the third place, that it was nigh. We hence see that three things are
included in these words. But the Prophet more fully explains what might,
on account of the brevity of his words, have seemed not quite clear.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p8"></span>Near, he says, *is the day, and quickly
hastens*. Men, we know, are wont to extend time, that they may cherish
their sins; for though they cannot divest themselves of every feeling as
to religion, or shake it off, they yet imagine for themselves a long
distance between them and God; and by such an imagination they find ease
for themselves. Hence the Prophet declares *the day* to be *nigh*; and
as it was hardly credible that the destruction of which he spake was
near, he adds, that the day was *quickly hastening*; as though he had
said, that they ought not to judge by the present state of things what
God would do, for in a moment his wrath would pass through from east to
west like lightning. Men need long preparation when they determine to
execute their vengeance; but God has no need of much preparation, for
his own power is sufficient for him when he resolves to destroy the
wicked. We now, then, see why it was added by the Prophet, that the day
would quickly hasten.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p9"></span>He now repeats that the *day of
Jehovah* and *his voice would cry out bitterly*. I have stated three
renderings as given by interpreters. Some read thus — The day of Jehovah
shall be bitter; there the strong shall cry aloud. This meaning is
admissible, and a useful instruction may from it be elicited; as though
the Prophet had said, that no courage could bring help to men, or be an
aid to them, against God’s vengeance. Others give this rendering, that
the day would bitterly cry out, for there would be the strong, that is,
the strength of enemies would break down whatever courage the Jews might
have. But this second meaning seems forced; and I am disposed to adopt
the third — that the voice of the day of Jehovah would bitterly cry out.
And he means the voice of those who would have really to know God as a
judge, whom they had previously despised; for God would then put forth
his power, which had been an object of contempt, until the Jews had by
experience felt it.  <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md)

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p17"></span>As to the Prophet’s design, there is
no ambiguity: for he seeks here to rouse the Jews from their
insensibility, who had so hardened themselves against all threatening,
that the Prophets were not able to convince them. Since, then, they had
thus hardened themselves against every instruction and all warnings, the
Prophet here says, that the voice of God’s day would be different: for
God’s voice had sounded through the mouth of the Prophets, but it
availed not with the deaf. An awful change is here announced; for the
Jews shall then cry aloud, as the roaring of the divine voice shall then
terrify them, when God shall really show that he is the avenger of
wickedness — When therefore he shall ascend his tribunal, then ye shall
cry. His messengers now cry to you in vain, for ye close up your ears;
ye shall cry in your turn, but it will be in vain.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p18"></span>But if one prefers to take it as one
sentence, The voice of the day of Jehovah, there strong, shall bitterly
cry out, the meaning will be the same as to the main point. I would not,
therefore, contend about words, provided we bear in mind what I have
already said — that Zephaniah sets here the cry of the distressed people
in opposition to the voices of the Prophets, which they had despised,
yea, and for the most part, as it appears from other places, treated
with ridicule. However this may have been, he indirectly condemns their
false confidence, when he speaks of the strong; as though he had said,
that they were strong only for their own ruin, while they opposed God
and his servants; for this strength falls at length, nay, it breaks
itself by its own weight, when God rises to judgment. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#015.md),
[16](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#016.md)<span id="iv.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p2"></span>**15.** That day *is* a day of wrath, a
day of trouble and distress, a day of wasteness and desolation, a day of
darkness and gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness,

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p3"></span>**15.** Dies excandescentiae, dies ille,
dies angustiae et afflictionis, dies tumultus, et vastationis, dies
tumultus et vastationis, dies tenebrarum et caliginis, dies nubis et
nebulae;

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p4"></span>**16.** A day of the trumpet and alarm
against the fenced cities, and against the high towers.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p5"></span>**16.** Dies tubae et clangoris super
urbes munitas, et super arces excelsas.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p7"></span><span id="iv.ii.xix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p8"></span>The Prophet shows here how foolish they
were who extenuated God’s vengeance, as hypocrites and all wicked men
are wont to do. Hence he accuses the Jews of madness, that they thought
that the way of reconciliation would be easy to them, when they had by
their perverseness provoked God to come against them as an armed enemy.
For though the ungodly do not promise to themselves anything of God’s
favor, yet they entertain vain imaginations, as though he might with no
trouble be pacified: they do not think that he will be propitious to
them, and yet in the meantime they deride his vengeance. Against this
kind of senselessness the Prophet now inveighs. We have stated in other
places, that these kinds of figurative expressions were intended solely
for this end — to constrain men to entertain some fear, for they
willfully deluded themselves: for the Prophets had to do, partly with
open despisers of God, and partly with his masked worshipers, whose
holiness was hypocrisy.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p9"></span>This, then, was the reason why he said,
that that day would be a day of wrath, and also a *day of distress and
of affliction,*  <span id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) *of tumult and
desolation,*  <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) *of darkness and of
thick darkness, of clouds and of mist*. In short, he intended to remove
from the Jews that confidence with which they flattered themselves, yea,
the confidence which they derived from their contempt of God: for the
flesh is secure, while it has coverts, where it may withdraw itself from
the presence of God. True confidence cannot exceed moderation, that is,
the confidence that is founded on God’s word, for thus men come nigh to
God: but the flesh wishes for no other rest but in the forgetfulness of
God. And we have already seen in the Prophet Amos, (<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.6"></span>[Am
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#018.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.6"></span>,) why the day of Jehovah is painted as
being so dreadful; he had, as I have said, to contend with hypocrites,
who made an improper use of God’s name, and at the same time slumbered
in gross insensibility. Hence Amos said, It will be a day, not of light,
but of darkness; not of joy, but of sorrow. Why then do ye anxiously
expect the day of the Lord? For the Jews, glorying in being the chosen
people of God, and trusting only in their false title of adoption,
thought that everything was lawful for them, as though God had renounced
his own authority. And thus hypocrites ever flatter themselves, as
though they held God bound to them. Our Prophet does not, as Amos,
distinctly express these sentiments, yet the meaning of the words is the
same, and that is, that when God ascends his tribunal, there is no hope
for pardon. He at the same time cuts off from them all their vain
confidences; for though God excludes all escapes, yet hypocrites look
here and there, before and behind, to the right hand and to the left.

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p12"></span>The Prophet therefore intimates, that
there would be everywhere darkness and thick darkness, clouds and mists,
affliction and distress, — Why? because it would be the day of wrath;
for God, after having borne patiently a long time with the Jews, and
seen that they perversely abused his patience, would at length put forth
his power. And that they might not set up their own strongholds against
God, he says, that war was proclaimed *against the fortified cities and
high citadels*. We hence see that he deprives the Jews of all help, in
order that they might understand that they were to perish, except they
repented, and thus return into favor with God. *It shall then be a day
of the trumpet and of shouting*,  <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) —
How? *on all fortified cities*. For the Jews, as it is usually done,
compared the strength of their enemies with their own. It was not their
purpose to go forth beyond their own borders: and they thought that they
would be able to resist, and be sufficiently fortified, if any foreign
enemy invaded them. The Prophet laughs to scorn this notion, for God had
declared war against their fortified cities. It follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p1"></span><span id="iv.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#017.md)<span id="iv.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p2"></span>**17.** And I will bring distress upon
men, that they shall walk like blind men, because they have sinned
against the LORD: and their blood shall be poured out as dust, and their
flesh as the dung.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p3"></span>**17.** Et coarctabo hominem (vel,
homines,) et ambulabunt tanquam caeci, quia contra Iehovam impie
egerunt; et fundetur sanguis quasi pulvis; et caro eorum erit tanquam
stercora.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p6"></span>He confirms what I have already stated —
that though other enemies, the Assyrians or Chaldeans, attacked the
Jews, yet God would be the principal leader of the war. God then claims
here for himself what the Jews transferred to their earthly enemies: and
the Prophet has already often called it the day of Jehovah; for God
would then make known his power, which had been a sport to them. He
therefore declares in this place, that he would *reduce man to
distress*, so that the whole nation would *walk like the blind* — that,
being void of counsel, they would stumble and fall, and not be able to
proceed in their course: for they are said to go astray like the blind,
who see no end to their evils, who find no means to escape ruin, but are
held as it were fast bound. And we must ever bear in mind what I have
already said — that the Jews were inflated with such pride, that they
heedlessly despised all the Prophets. Since then they were thus wise in
themselves, God denounces blindness on them.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p7"></span>He subjoins the reason, *Because they had
acted impiously towards Jehovah*  <span id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md)
By these words he confirms what I have already explained — that the
intermediate causes are not to be considered, though the Chaldeans took
vengeance on the Jews; for there is a higher principle, and another
cause of this evil, even the contempt of God and of his celestial truth;
for they had acted impiously towards God. And by these words the Prophet
reminds the Jews, that no alleviation was to be expected, as they had
not only men hostile to them, but God himself, whom they had extremely
provoked.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p11"></span>Hence he adds, *Poured forth shall be
your blood as dust*  <span id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md) They whom God
delivered up to extreme reproach were deserving of this, because he had
been despised by them. *Their flesh*,  <span
id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) he says, *shall be as dung*. Now, we know
how much the Jews boasted of their preeminence; and God had certainly
given them occasion to boast, had they made a right and legitimate use
of his benefits; but as they had despised him, they deserved in their
turn to be exposed to every ignominy and reproach. Hence the Prophet
here lays prostrate all their false boastings by which they were
inflated; for they wished to be honorable, while God was despised by
them. At last he adds —

<span id="iv.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p1"></span><span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#018.md)<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p2"></span>**18.** Neither their silver nor their
gold shall be able to deliver them in the day of the Lord’s wrath; but
the whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his jealousy: for he
shall make even a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the land.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p3"></span>**18.** Etiam argentum eorum, etiam aurum
eorum, nihil proficiet ad liberandos ipsos in die excandescentiae
Jehovae, et in igne indignationis ejus evorabitur omnis terra; quia
consumptionem et quidem definitam (vel, horribilem, vel, celerem) facet
cum omnibus incolis terrae.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p5"></span><span id="iv.ii.xxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p6"></span>He repeats what he has already said —
that the helps which the Jews hoped would be in readiness to prevent
God’s vengeance would be vain. For though men dare not openly to resist
God, yet they hope by some winding courses to find out some way by which
they may avert his judgment. As then the Jews, trusting in their wealth,
and in their fortified cities, became insolent towards God, the Prophet
here declares, that neither *gold nor silver* should be a help to them.
Let them, he says, accumulate wealth; though by the mass of their gold
and silver they form high mountains for themselves, yet they shall not
be able to turn aside the hand of God, nor be able to deliver
themselves, — and why? He repeats again the same thing, that it would be
*the day of wrath*. We indeed know, that the most savage enemies are
sometimes pacified by money, for avarice mitigates their cruelty; but
the Prophet declares here, that as God would be the ruler in that war,
there would be no redemption, and therefore money would be useless: for
God could by no means receive them into favor, except they repented and
truly humbled themselves before him.

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p7"></span>He therefore adds, that the land would be
*devoured by the fire of God’s jealousy*, or indignation. He compares
God’s wrath to fire; for no agreement can be made when fire rages, but
the more materials there are the more will there be to increase the
fire. So then the Prophet excludes the Jews from any hope of
deliverance, except they reconciled themselves to God by true and
sincere repentance; *for a consummation*, he says, *he will make as to
all the inhabitants of the land, and one indeed very quick* or speedy.
 <span id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) In short, he means, that as the
Jews had hardened themselves against every instruction, they would find
God’s vengeance to be such as would wholly consume them, as they would
not anticipate it, but on the contrary enhance it by their pride and
stupidity, and even deride it. Now follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_68"></span>[69](cc29009.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p17"></span> This clause stands connected with the
preceding words; “the stumblingblocks” were the idols, and they were to
be taken away “along with the wicked,” according to *Henderson*, and
according to the version of *Symmachus*, συν ἀσεβέσι, though *Newcome*,
with less accuracy, renders the words thus, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p18"></span>And the stumblingblocks of the wicked.

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19"></span>The whole verse is poetical in its
language; the collective singular, and not the plural, is used; and the
first verb, \[<span id="iv.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>אםף\], in its most
common meaning, is very expressive, and denotes the manner of the ruin
that awaited the Jews. They were “gathered” and led into captivity. The
two verses may be thus literally rendered, —

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p20"></span>2. *Gatherings I will gather
everything  
From off the face of the land, saith Jehovah;*

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p21"></span>3. *I will gather man and best;  
I will gather the bird of heaven and the fish of the sea,  
And the stumblingblocks together with the wicked;  
And I will cut them off, together with man,  
From the face of the land, saith Jehovah.*

<span id="iv.ii.iii-p22"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_69"></span>[70](cc29009.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10"></span> The word is found in two other places,
<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>[2Ki
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10.1"></span>,
and <span id="iv.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>[Ho
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p10.2"></span>.
In the latter text the priests of the calf of Bethaven are thus called;
in the former, they are said to be those who “burnt incense in the high
places.” From this fact, *Parkhurst* concludes, that they were called
*scorched*, as the word means, by their fumigating fires.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11"></span>The “priests” mentioned here were the
sacrifices, while the “Camerim” were the incense-burners. There were
“altars” (not an altar) reared for Baal in the temple; one, as it seems,
for sacrifices, and the other for incense. See <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>[2Ki
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>.
In <span id="iv.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>[2 Chr.
34:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#004.md),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>,
the priests and sacrificers are alone mentioned; but in <span
id="iv.ii.iv-p11.3"></span>[2Ki
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.iv-p11.3"></span>,
where the same things are recorded, the Camerim and incense are alone
named. The Prophet in this passage mentions both.

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p12"></span>Some, as *Cocceius* and *Henderson*, have
been disposed to think that the unfaithful priests of the true God are
here meant. But the other view is more consistent with the whole
passage. If we retain not the original word, we may thus render the
line, —

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p13"></span>The name of the incense-burners with the
priests;

<span id="iv.ii.iv-p14"></span>That is, those who burnt incense and
those who offered sacrifices to Baal. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_70"></span>[71](cc29009.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p16.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17"></span> It appears that this idol had two
names, Moloc and Milcom, or Molcam. It is called Moloc, or Molec, in
<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>[Le
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>, and in seven other places; but Milcom in
<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.2"></span>[1 Kings
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033.md)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.2"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.3"></span>[2Ki
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#014.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p17.3"></span>; as well as here, and also in <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p17.4"></span>[Jer.
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001.md),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md)<span id="iv.ii.vii-p17.4"></span>,
though improperly rendered in our version, "their king.” The Ammonites
are the people spoken of.

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p18"></span>The swearing is here differently
expressed: it is *to* \[(<span id="iv.ii.vii-p18.1"></span>ל)\] Jehovah;
and by \[(<span id="iv.ii.vii-p18.2"></span>ב)\] Milcam. To swear *to*,
is to make a promise to another by an oath, or, in this instance, to
swear allegiance to God: but to swear *by*, is to appeal to another as
witness to an engagement. We have the two forms together in <span
id="iv.ii.vii-p18.3"></span>[Jos
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p18.3"></span>. The Jews made a solemn profession of
obedience to God, and yet they acknowledged Melcam as God, by appealing
to him as a witness to the truth. It is called the abomination of the
Ammonites, <span id="iv.ii.vii-p18.4"></span>[1Ki
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033.md)<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.vii-p19"></span>The image of this god, according to the
Rabbins, was hollow, made of brass, and had seven compartments. In the
first, they put flour — in the second, turtles — in the third, an ewe —
in the fourth, a ram — in the fifth, a calf — in the sixth, an ox — and
in the seventh, a child! All these were burnt together by heating the
image in the inside! To drown the cries and noises that might be made,
they used drums and other instruments. See \[<span
id="iv.ii.vii-p19.1"></span>מלך\] in *Parkhurst*. How cruel is
superstition! and yet how wedded to it is man by nature! Though the Jews
had knowledge of the religion of him who is the God of love and mercy;
yet they preferred the religion of savages and barbarians. How strongly
does this fact prove man’s natural antipathy to God! — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_71"></span>[72](cc29009.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.viii-p9"></span> *Calvin* has omitted to notice the last
words in the verse, “Nor enquire of him;” which *Henderson*, adopting a
modern phraseology, has rendered, “nor apply to him.” The reading ought
to be, as many MSS. have it, \[<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>דרשוהו\]. The verb means to enquire of, to
consult, and also to regard or to care for. They did not enquire of God
as to his will, or they did not show any regard for him. See <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p9.2"></span>[Genesis
25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#000.md)<span id="iv.ii.viii-p9.2"></span>:
22; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p9.3"></span>[Eze
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#001.md)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p9.3"></span>; and also <span
id="iv.ii.viii-p9.4"></span>[De
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#012.md)<span
id="iv.ii.viii-p9.4"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.viii-p9.5"></span>[Job
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.viii-p9.5"></span>.
To *seek* the Lord is to seek his favor and communion with him; to
*enquire* of the Lord is to seek the knowledge of his will in any
difficulty. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_72"></span>[73](cc29009.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="iv.ii.ix-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p12"></span> The word is \[<span
id="iv.ii.ix-p12.1"></span>הט\], and is evidently an interjection
enjoining silence, Hush! or, Silence!

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p13"></span>7. *Silence at the presence of the Lord
Jehovah!  
For nigh is the day of Jehovah,  
For prepared hath Jehovah a sacrifice,  
Selected hath he his guests!*

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p14"></span>The passage is remarkably forcible and
striking. Jehovah was coming, and everything was prepared, and all were
to be silent. And then follows what is no less striking and expressive,
—

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p15"></span>8. *And it shall be in the day of
Jehovah’s sacrifice,  
That I will visit the princes and the king’s sons,  
And all who wear foreign apparel.  
*9. *I will also visit, in that day,  
Every one who leaps on the threshold,  
Who fill the house of their master  
By plunder and by fraud.*

<span id="iv.ii.ix-p16"></span>There is in the last line a metonymy; the
act is put for what was acquired by it: they filled the house of their
master by spoils gained by plunder or violence, and by fraud or
cheating. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_73"></span>[74](cc29009.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3"></span> The first idea of the verb \[<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p3.1"></span>קדש\], is evidently to set apart, to separate
either men or things for a certain purpose. For this meaning *Parkhurst*
refers to <span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>[Le
20:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#024.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.2"></span>,
compared with version 26, and to <span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.3"></span>[Deut.
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#002.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.3"></span>,
compared with <span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.4"></span>[Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.4"></span>.
This idea seems the most suitable here, "I have set apart (or selected)
my guests.” *Newcome* renders it “appointed,” and *Henderson*,
“consecrated,” as *Calvin* does. “<span
id="iv.ii.xi-p3.5"></span>Segregavit — set apart,” is the version of
*Drusius*, and *Junius* has “<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.6"></span>preparavit
— prepared.” When the verb is followed by “*war*,” it is rendered
“prepare” in our version. See <span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.7"></span>[Jer
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.7"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.8"></span>[Joe
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.8"></span>;
<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.9"></span>[Mic
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#005.md)<span id="iv.ii.xi-p3.9"></span>.
The explanation given by *Theodosius* is ἀφωρισε — he separated or
selected. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_74"></span>[75](cc29009.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p5"></span> This was a prophecy: though the king
Josiah had no children at this time, yet he had some afterwards; and
they proved themselves deserving of the judgment here announced, and it
was inflicted on them. *Henderson’s* objection, that as Josiah had then
no children, the prophecy could not apply to them personally, seems
wholly inadmissable: it was a *prophecy*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_75"></span>[76](cc29009.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p7"></span> Or, literally, “the garment of a
foreigner or stranger,” \[<span id="iv.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>נכרי\]. The
singular is used poetically for the plural, instead of “the garments of
foreigners.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_76"></span>[77](cc29009.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xi-p10"></span> *Marckius*, following the *Septuagint*,
and some of the fathers, *Cyril*, *Theodoret*, *Jerome*, etc., think
that the thoughless intruders into the temple are here meant, and such
as brought there as sacrifices and gifts the fruits of plunder and
fraud. But the passage cannot possibly bear this meaning according to
the Hebrew text: nor is such a meaning consistent with the context. The
view given here is that of *Kimki*, *Drusius*, *Newcome*, and
*Henderson*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_77"></span>[78](cc29009.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p9"></span> *Junius*, *Piscator*, *Newcome*, and
*Henderson* think that it means the second city, a part of Jerusalem,
being so called, as they supposed, in <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>[Ne
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#009.md)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>:
where our version is considered to be wrong, and the clause ought to be,
“and Judah, the son of Jeruiah, was over the second city” — \[<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p9.2"></span>משנה על-העיר\]. So it is deemed improperly
rendered “college” in <span id="iv.ii.xii-p9.3"></span>[2Ki
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014.md)<span id="iv.ii.xii-p9.3"></span>
and <span id="iv.ii.xii-p9.4"></span>[2Ch
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#022.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p9.4"></span>; where it ought to be “in the second city.”
But the passage in Nehemiah is not decisive on the subject; and our
version is countenanced by the former part of the verse, where “Joel” is
said to be the “overseer,” and “Judah” is mentioned as being next to
him, the second in office: and it is so rendered in the *Septuagint.* As
to the other text, the word is by itself as here. What *Calvin*, after
*Cyril* and *Theodoret*, suggests, is the most probable solution.

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p10"></span>The word rendered by *Calvin* “<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p10.1"></span>contritio — breach,” and by *Henderson,*
“destruction,” is \[<span id="iv.ii.xii-p10.2"></span>שבר\]. As “crying”
and “howling” are said to proceed from the other parts, so something
similar must have proceeded from “the hills.” The word means breaking,
and it is often applied to the heart — “a broken heart,” <span
id="iv.ii.xii-p10.3"></span>[Ps.
34:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#018.md), [Ps.
51:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#019.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p10.3"></span>, etc. It seems to mean here the breaking
out into weeping and wailing. The parallelism of the verse would thus be
complete —

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p11"></span>*And there shall be in that day, saith
Jehovah,  
The voice of crying from the fish-gate,  
And howling from the second* gate, *  
And great wailing from the hills.*

<span id="iv.ii.xii-p12"></span>Wailing is the breaking out of anguish
and pangs. The word is used in <span id="iv.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>[Eze
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>, for acute pain in the loins, and may be
considered as used here metonymically. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_78"></span>[79](cc29009.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p8"></span> This original meaning of the word is
much more probable than what lexicographers generally give. The braying
or pounding is evidently derived from the noun, and the noun from the
form of the mortar. Most agree that the word here means the *lower* part
of the city — the hollow, from the circumstance of being surrounded by
hills. The “hills” were those on which a part of the city was built,
such as Zion, Moriah and Ophal. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_79"></span>[80](cc29009.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9"></span> This opinion has been entertained,
because the Jews are so called in <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>[Ho
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.1"></span>. That the word means a trader or merchant
is evident from <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>[Job
41:6](../../../bib/kjv/job041.htm#006.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.2"></span>, (in the Hebrew Bibles, 40:30;) <span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>[Isa
23:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#008.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>[Eze
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p9.4"></span>. In the last passage it is rendered
“traffic” in our version; and it may be so rendered here — “all the
people of traffic,” or of trade. The version of *Newcome* is, “all the
trafficking people.” The verse may be thus literally rendered, —

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p10"></span>Howl ye, the inhabitants of the lower
part,  
For reduced to silence have been all the people of trade,  
Cut off have been all the laden with silver.

<span id="iv.ii.xiii-p11"></span>They are called to howl, as though
their calamity had already taken place, a mode of speaking often used by
the Prophets. That the event was future is clear from the context,
especially from the next verse. “Reduced to silence” — \[<span
id="iv.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>נדמה\], is literally the meaning, not
“destroyed;” and appropriate is the term, as people of trade create much
bustle and noise. “The laden with silver,” may be rendered, as *Newcome*
does, “the bearers of silver:” and silver is here for money. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc29009.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8"></span> There is a similar meaning in <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>[Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>; but the verb is different, \[<span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.2"></span>שקט\], which means to be still, to rest, to
settle, while the verb here is \[<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.3"></span>קפא\],
which signifies to be condensed, or to be congealed, <span
id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.4"></span>[Ex
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008.md)<span id="iv.ii.xiv-p8.4"></span>.
But as things congelaed become fixed, the verb seems to have the meaning
of fixedness here; as wines on the lees, to which allusion is made, do
not become congealed, the comparison seems to be, that as wine kept
still on the lees increases in strength and flavor so the Jews, settling
on their dregs — their sins — became strengthened and confirmed in their
wickedness and atheistic notions. But *Newcome* and *Henderson* take
another view of the metaphor, and consider that “the thoughtless
tranquillity of the rich is compared to the fixed unbroken surface of
fermented liquors.” Our version favors the former idea, as the verb is
rendered “settled.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc29009.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p10"></span> The Rabbinical punctuation has
destroyed the simplicity of this passage by connecting "bitter” with the
latter clause. *Jerome,* *Pagninus*, *Newcome*, as well as the
*Septuagint*, connect it with the former clause. The literal rendering
of the two lines is as follows —

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p11"></span>The voice of the day of Jehovah shall
be grievous;  
Roar out there (or then) shall the brave.

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12"></span>“The voice of the day,” etc., means
the voice uttered on that day, as *Drusius* explains it. \[<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.1"></span>מר\] is no doubt “bitter;” but it is often
applied in scripture to express what is grievous, afflictive, or
sorrowful. If we render \[<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.2"></span>שט\],
“there,” it refers to Jerusalem, verse 12; but it is sometimes used as
an adverb of time, “then,” see <span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.3"></span>[Ps
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.3"></span>; <span id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.4"></span>[Ne
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015.md)<span
id="iv.ii.xviii-p12.4"></span>. “The meaning is,” says *Drusius*, “that
the voice of that day, which they who excel in strength of mind and body
shall utter, shall be bitter.” The whole verse is remarkably concise and
emphatical, —

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p13"></span>14. *Nigh is the great day of
Jehovah,  
Nigh and hastening quickly:  
The voice of the day of Jehovah shall be grievous;  
Roar out then shall the brave.*

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p14"></span>Then the following verse is not to
begin, as in our version, which as been followed by *Newcome* and
*Henderson*, “That day *is* a day of wrath,” but thus —

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p15"></span>*A day of wrath* shall be *that day.*

<span id="iv.ii.xviii-p16"></span>This is the order of the original, and
as there is no verb, it must be supplied and regulated as to its tense
by the context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc29009.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p10"></span> The original words are similar in sound
and meaning; the first, \[<span id="iv.ii.xix-p10.1"></span>צרה\], comes
from a verb which means to inclose, to confine, to straiten, and it may
be rendered, narrowness, confinement, straitness, distress. The other,
\[<span id="iv.ii.xix-p10.2"></span>מצוקה\], is oppression, as the verb
means to press down, to press close.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc29009.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xix-p10.3"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p11"></span> Waste or confusion is, \[<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.1"></span>משואה ,שאה\], derived from the same root,
may be rendered desolation. The two next words, “darkness” and “thick
darkness,” occur in <span id="iv.ii.xix-p11.2"></span>[Joe
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002.md)<span id="iv.ii.xix-p11.2"></span>.
In the same passage we have also “the day of cloudiness and of entire
darkness,” literally, bare or naked darkness; for the word is, \[<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.3"></span>ערפל\], derived, as I conceive, from \[<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.4"></span>ער\], bare, and \[<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p11.5"></span>אפל\], thick darkness. There is a gradation
in the words used in each line; the second word is stronger than the
first. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_84"></span>[85](cc29009.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xix-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p13"></span> Rather “acclamation,” the triumphant
voice of conquerors. As an attempt to preserve the distinctive character
of each word in this singular passage, I offer the following version —

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p14"></span>15. *A day of extreme wrath shall be
that day,  
A day of distress and oppression,  
A day of waste and of desolation,  
A day of darkness and of thick darkness,  
A day of cloudiness and of entire darkness;*

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p15"></span>16. *A day of the trumpet and of
acclamation  
Over the cities that are inclosed,  
And over the towers which are lofty.*

<span id="iv.ii.xix-p16"></span>The word \[<span
id="iv.ii.xix-p16.1"></span>עברה\], “extreme wrath,” means such wrath as
passes over all bounds — overflowing wrath. We are obliged to use the
word darkness three times for lack of suitable terms. The first is the
common darkness of the night, the second is a grosser darkness, and the
third is complete darkness. The words “gloominess” and “obscurity,” used
by *Newcome* and *Henderson*, are not sufficiently strong, and convey
not the meaning. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_85"></span>[86](cc29009.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p8"></span> The Hebrew words are literally,

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p9"></span>For against Jehovah have they sinned.

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p10"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_86"></span>[87](cc29009.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p12"></span> “Copiously and in contempt,” says
*Marckius*; “as a thing of no value,” says *Grotius*; “as worthless as
dust,” says *Drusius*. The comparison is evidently intended to show that
their blood, or their life, would be treated with contempt, and no more
regarded than dust. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_87"></span>[88](cc29009.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xx-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xx-p13"></span> The word is \[<span
id="iv.ii.xx-p13.1"></span>לחט\], usually rendered food; here it means
what is fed, the carcass, the body. It is rendered “flesh” by the
Septuagint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_88"></span>[89](cc29009.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p8"></span> Quickness rather than terror is what is
evidently meant. See version 14. Most agree in this respect. *Newcome*
renders it “speedy,” and *Henderson* “sudden.” The word “riddance,” for
\[<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p8.1"></span>כלה\], in our version, is improper.
It is rendered “full end” by *Newcome*, and “consummation” by
*Henderson*, and “συντέλειαν — end” by the Septuagint. The particle
\[<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p8.2"></span>אך\] does not mean “altogether,” as
rendered by *Henderson*, but it is an asseveration — surely, indeed,
certainly, doubtless. The \[<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p8.3"></span>אח\] before
“inhabitants” has evidently here the meaning of κατα, with regard to. It
is rendered επι, upon, in the Septuagint, and “with” by *Marckius* and
*Newcome*. The whole verse is as follows, —

<span id="iv.ii.xxi-p9"></span>**18.** <span
id="iv.ii.xxi-p9.1"></span>Neither their silver nor their gold  
Shall be able to deliver them  
In the day of the extreme-wrath of Jehovah;  
By the fire of his jealousy  
Shall be consumed the whole land;  
For an end, doubtless sudden, will he make,  
As to all the inhabitants of the land.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc29010.md)
