[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](cc29014)  [Next](cc29016.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="v.iii.i"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
2:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** 1 In the seventh *month*, in the one
and twentieth *day* of the month, came the word of the Lord by the
prophet Haggai, saying,

<span id="v.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** In septimo et vicesimo uno mensis
(*hoc est*, septimo mense, vicesima prima die mensis) fuit sermo Iehovae
in manu Chaggai Prophetae, dicendo.

<span id="v.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Speak now to Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the
high priest, and to the residue of the people, saying,

<span id="v.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Dic nunc ad Zerubbabel, filium
Sealtiel, ducem Jehudah, et ad Jehosuah, filium Jehosadak, sacerdotem
magnum, et ad reliquias populi, dicendo.

<span id="v.iii.i-p6"></span>**3.** Who *is* left among you that saw
this house in her first glory? and how do ye see it now? *is it* not in
your eyes in comparison of it as nothing?

<span id="v.iii.i-p7"></span>**3.** Quis in vobis superstes (*vel*,
residuus, *ad verbum*) qui viderit domum hanc in gloria sua priore, et
quam vos videtis hanc nunc, annon prae illa sicut nihilum in oculis
vestris?

<span id="v.iii.i-p8"></span>**4.** Yet now be strong, O Zerubbabel,
saith the LORD; and be strong, O Joshua, son of Josedech, the high
priest; and be strong, all ye people of the land, saith the Lord, and
work: for I *am* with you, saith the Lord of hosts:

<span id="v.iii.i-p9"></span>**4.** Et nunc (*vel*, nunc tamen) fortis
sis Zerubbabel, dicit Iehova, et fortis sis Jehosuah, fili Jehosadak,
sacerdos magne, et fortis sis omnis populus terrae, dicit Iehova, et
operamini, quia ego vobiscum, dicit Iehovah exercituum,

<span id="v.iii.i-p10"></span>**5.** *According to* the word that I
covenanted with you when ye came out of Egypt, so my spirit remaineth
among you: fear ye not.

<span id="v.iii.i-p11"></span>**5.** Secundum verbum quod pepigi
vobiscum dum egressi estis ex Egypto; et spiritus meus stabit (*vel*,
perseverabit) in medio vestri, ne timeatis.

<span id="v.iii.i-p12"></span><span id="v.iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.i-p13"></span>The Prophet now states another reason why
he had been sent by God, in order that he might obviate a temptation
which might have hindered the work that was begun. We have seen that
they were all stirred up by the celestial spirit to undertake the
building of the Temple. But as Satan, by his many arts, attempts to turn
back the godly from their course, so he had devised a reason by which
the desire of the people might have been checked. Inasmuch as the old
people, who had seen the splendor of the former temple, considered this
temple no better than a cottage, all their zeal evaporated; for, as we
have said, without a promise there will continue in men no ardor, no
perseverance. Now we know what had been predicted by Ezekiel, and what
all the other Prophets had testified, especially Isaiah, who had spoken
highly of the excellency of the Church, and shown that it was to be
superior to its ancient state. (<span id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>[Isa
33:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#021.md)<span
id="v.iii.i-p13.1"></span>.) Besides, Ezekiel describes the form of the
Temple, and states its dimensions. (<span id="v.iii.i-p13.2"></span>[Eze
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#001)<span id="v.iii.i-p13.2"></span>..md)
As then the faithful had learnt from these prophecies that the new
Temple would be more splendid than the ancient, they were in danger, not
only of becoming cold in the business, but also of being wholly
discouraged, when they perceived that the new Temple in no respect
reached the excellency and grandeur of the ancient Temple. And these
things are described at large by Josephus.

<span id="v.iii.i-p14"></span>But we may easily conclude, from the words
of the Prophet, that there was then a danger lest they should lay aside
the work they had begun, except they were encouraged by a new
exhortation. And he says that this happened in the seventh month, and on
the first day of the month.

<span id="v.iii.i-p15"></span>Here arises a question, How was it that
they so soon compared the new with the old building. Seven or eight days
had passed since the work was begun: nothing, doubtless, could have been
then constructed, which might have afforded a ground of comparison. It
seems then strange, that the Prophet had been so soon sent to them. An
answer to this will be easily found, if we bear in mind. that what I
have stated at the beginning of the first chapter, that the foundations
of the Temple had been previously laid, but that there had been a long
interruption: for the people had turned to their own private concerns,
and all had become so devoted to their own advantages, that they
neglected the building of the Temple. For it is wholly a false notion,
that the people had returned from exile before the appointed time, and
it has been sufficiently refuted by clear proofs; for scripture
expressly declares, that both Cyrus and Darius had been led by a divine
impulse to allow the return of the people. Hence, when the Jews returned
to their country, they immediately began to build the Temple; but
afterwards, as I have said, either avarice, or too anxious a desire for
their own private benefit, laid hold on their minds. As then the
building of the Temple had been for some time neglected, they were again
encouraged, as our Prophet has shown to us. They had now hardly applied
their hands to the work, when, through the artifice of Satan, such
suggestions as these crept in — “What are ye doing, ye miserable men! Ye
wish to build a Temple to your God; but what sort of Temple will it be?
Certainly it will not be that which all the Prophets have celebrated.
For what do we read in Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Ezekiel? Have not all these
testified that the Temple which would be rebuilt after our return from
Babylonian exile would be more splendid than the other? But we now build
a shed. Surely this is done without authority. We do not then fight
under the guidance of God; and it would be better for us to leave off
the work; for our service cannot be approved of God, except it be
founded on his Word. And we see how far this Temple comes short of what
God has promised.”

<span id="v.iii.i-p16"></span>We now hence learn, that it was not
without reason that Haggai was sent on the eighth day to recover the
people from their indifference. And hence also we may learn how
necessary it is for us to be constantly stimulated; for Satan can easily
find out a thousand impediments, by which he may turn us aside from the
right course, except God often repeats his exhortations to keep us
awake. Eight days only have elapsed, and the people would have ceased
from their work, had not Haggai been sent to encourage them again.

<span id="v.iii.i-p17"></span>Now the cause of this cessation, which the
Prophet designed to obviate and to remove, ought to be especially
noticed. The people had before ceased to work, because they were
immoderately devoted to their own interest, which was a proof of base
ingratitude and of profane impiety: for those who had no care for
building the Temple were most ungrateful to God; and then their impiety
was intolerable, inasmuch as they sought boarded houses to dwell in,
being not content with decent houses without having them adorned, while
the Temple was left, as it were, a wilderness. But the cause was
different, when Haggai was sent the second time; for their indifference
then arose from a good principle and a genuine feeling of religion. But
we hence see what a subtle contriver Satan is, who not only draws us
away openly from God’s service, but insinuates himself in a clandestine
manner, so as to turn us aside, under the cover of zeal, from the course
of our vocation. How was it that the people became negligent after they
had begun the work? even because it grieved the old men to see the glory
of the second, so far inferior to the first Temple. For though the
people animated themselves by the sound of trumpets, yet the old among
them drowned the sound by their lamentations. Whence was this? even
because they saw, as I have said, that this Temple was in no way equal
to the ancient one; and hence they thought that God was not as yet
reconciled to them. Had they said, that so great an expense was not
necessary, that God did not require much money to be laid out, their
impiety should have been openly manifested; but when they especially
wished that the splendor of the Temple would be such, as might surely
prove that the restoration of the Church was come, such as had been
promised by all the Prophets, we doubtless perceive their pious feeling.

<span id="v.iii.i-p18"></span>But we are thus reminded, that we ought
always to beware of the intrigues of Satan, when they appear under the
cover of truth. When, therefore, our minds are disposed to piety, Satan
is ever to be feared, lest he should stealthily suggest to us what may
turn us aside from our duty; for we see that some leave the Church
because they require in it the highest perfection. They are indignant at
vices which they deem intolerable, when they cannot be corrected: and
thus, under the pretext of zeal, they separate themselves and seek to
form for themselves a new world, in which there is to be a perfect
Church; and they lay hold on those passages in which the Holy Spirit
recommends purity to the Church, as when Paul says, that it was
purchased by Christ, that it might be without spot or wrinkle. As then
these are inflamed with a zeal so rigid that they depart from God
himself and violate the unity of the Church; so also there are many
proud men who despise the Church of God, because it shines not forth
among them in great pomp; and they think that God does not dwell in the
midst of us, because we are obscure and of no great importance, and also
because they regard our few number with contempt.

<span id="v.iii.i-p19"></span>In all these there is some appearance of
piety. How so? Because they would have God to be reverenced, so that
they would have the whole world to be filled with the fear of his
majesty; or they would have much wealth to be gathered, so that
sumptuous offerings might be made. But, as I have already said, Satan
thus cunningly insinuates himself; and hence we ought to fear his
intrigues, lest, under plausible pretences, he should dazzle our eyes.
But the best way of caution is to regard what God commands, and so to
rely on his promises as to proceed steadily in our course, though the
accomplishment of the promises does not immediately correspond with our
desires; for God designedly keeps us in suspense in order to try our
faith. Though then he may not as yet fulfill what he has promised, let
it yet be our course to attempt nothing rashly, while we are obeying his
command. It will then be our chief wisdom, by which we may escape all
the crafts of Satan, simply to obey God’s word, and to exercise our hope
so as patiently to wait the seasonable time, when he will fulfill what
he now promises.

<span id="v.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.iii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are not
only alienated in mind from thee, but also often relapse after having
been once stirred up by thee, either into perverseness, or into our own
vanity, or are led astray by various things, so that nothing is more
difficult than to pursue our course until we reach the end of our race,
— O grant that we may not confide in our own strength, nor claim for
ourselves more than what is right, but, with our hearts raised above,
depend on thee alone, and constantly call on thee to supply us with new
strength, and so to confirm us that we may persevere to the end in the
discharge of our duty, until we shall at length attain the true and
perfect form of that temple which thou commandest us to build, in which
thy perfect glory shines forth, and into which we are to be transformed
by Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.iii.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-first

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span>The Prophet, after having declared why it
was necessary to add new stimulants, now exhorts Zerubbabel and Joshua,
and also the people, to be courageous, and thus to proceed with the
work. And he again repeats what he had said, that the Lord was with
them; *I am with you*, he says. Now this one thing is enough for us,
that is, when God declares that he is with us; for his aid, we know, is
stronger than the whole world, however Satan may on every side attempt
to resist us.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p3"></span>He also adds, that his *Spirit would be
in the midst* of them; and then he says, that there was no reason for
them to *fear*. By his Spirit God means the power by which he
strengthened their minds, that they might not give way to their trials,
or, that fear might not hinder them. And what is particular is joined to
what is general; for God is present with his own in various ways: but he
especially shows, that he is present when, by his Spirit, he confirms
weak minds. He then bids them all to be of a courageous mind. This is
one thing. But he also shows whence this courage proceeded; for he
sustained them by his Spirit when they were growing faint, or when they
were not able to resist fears. The Prophet reminds them by these words,
that courage was to be sought from God.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p4"></span>We hence learn that what belongs to our
calling and duty is not required from us as though we were able to
perform everything; but when the Lord, according to his own right,
commands, he offers the help of his Spirit; and thus we ought to connect
the promise of grace with the precept, of which foolish men take no
notice, who deduce free will from what is commanded: for they thus
reason — that it is in vain to require from us what is above our
ability, and that as God requires us to form our life according to the
rule of the highest perfection, it is therefore in our power to perform
the highest justice. But the Prophet here, in the first place, exhorts
Joshua and Zerubbabel, and the whole people, to be courageous, and then,
he immediately adds, that the *Spirit* of God *would be in the midst of
them*; as though he had said, that there was no reason for them to
despond, though they had not sufficient strength in themselves; for
courage was to be sought from the Spirit of God, who would dwell among
them. In short, the Prophet teaches us that the faithful are so to
strive as not to arrogate anything to themselves, but to offer
themselves to be ruled by the Lord, that he may supply them with weapons
as well as with strength, and thus conquer in them; for though the
victory is ascribed to us it is yet certain that God conquers in us.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p5"></span>He then adds, *According to the word*;
for so I render the particle <span id="v.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>את, *at*
 <span id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144.md) They who think that the Jews
are here reminded that it was their duty to obey God, and purely to
serve him, and truly to keep his law, according to what he had commanded
them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt, far depart from the
design of the Prophet; for the Prophet pursues the same subject; and in
the latter clause he confirms what I have just mentioned — that the
*Spirit* of God *would be in the midst of them*. He therefore shows that
he promises nothing new, but what God had formerly engaged to give to
their fathers. If any one prefers taking the particle <span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>את, *at* in an explicative sense, I do not
object; for the meaning would be the same — that this is the word which
he had promised. The object of the Prophet is by no means doubtful; for
he means to teach us that God is faithful and constant in his promises,
and that the Jews would find this to be the case, for he would perform
what he had formerly promised to their fathers. *The word*, he says,
*which I had covenanted with you when I brought you out of Egypt*. For
the Prophets were wont to remind the faithful of the ancient covenant,
that they might gain more credit to their special prophecies. We indeed
know that whatever God had promised to the Jews, was founded on their
first adoption. When, therefore, the Prophets brought forward the
ancient covenant, it was the same as though they led the Jews back to
the fountain itself; for the promises, which now and then occurred, were
like streams which flowed from the first spring, even their gratuitous
covenant.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p11"></span>We now then see why an express mention
is made of the ancient compact which God had made with the chosen people
at their departure out of Egypt.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p12"></span>It must also be observed, that God
became then the Redeemer of his people, in order to be their eternal
Father, and thus to be the perpetual guardian of their safety. Hence the
design of what the Prophet says is to show that their fathers were not
formerly redeemed, that their children might reject God, but that he
might continue his favor to his people to the end. But the ultimate
issue is to be found in Christ, that is, the full accomplishment; for
God does not cease to show kindness in him to his chosen people, but
performs much more fully and abundantly what he had previously exhibited
under types and shadows. For whatever he conferred on his ancient
Church, was, as it were, a prelude of his vast bounty, which was at
length made known by the coming of Christ.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p13"></span>We now clearly apprehend what the
Prophet meant: For he upbraided the Jews for their stupidity, because
they did not consider that their fathers were formerly delivered from
Egypt, that God might defend them to the end. Hence he bids them
maturely to examine the design and character of the covenant which God
made at their departure from Egypt; for he entered into covenant with
them, that he might be their Redeemer, and confer on them the fullness
of all blessings. Since it is so, he says, the time is now come when God
will perform what he then promised to your fathers; and whatever
faithfulness ye have hitherto found in God, ought to be applied for this
end — that ye may feel assured that ye have been now restored to your
country, in order that he might re-establish his Church, and that ye
might not continue in that low condition, which now depresses your
minds. As then ye ought to look for that fullness of happiness which God
formerly promised, either his covenant is void and he unfaithful, or ye
ought with cheerfulness and alacrity to proceed with the work. It
follows —

<span id="v.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
2:6-9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p2"></span>**6.** For thus saith the LORD of hosts;
Yet once, it *is* a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the
earth, and the sea, and the dry *land*;

<span id="v.iii.iv-p3"></span>**6.** Quia sit dicit Iehova exercituum,
Adhuc unum modicum hoc, et ego commovebo coelos et terram et mare et
aridam;

<span id="v.iii.iv-p4"></span>**7.** And I will shake all nations, and
the desire of all nations shall come: and I will fill this house with
glory, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p5"></span>**7.** Et commovebo omnes gentes, et
venient, desiderium omnium gentium; et implebo domum hance gloria, dicit
Iehova exercituum.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p6"></span>**8.** The silver *is* mine, and the gold
*is* mine, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p7"></span>**8.** Meum argentum, et meum aurum, dicit
Iehova exercituum.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p8"></span>**9.** The glory of this latter house
shall be greater than of the former, saith the LORD of hosts: and in
this place will I give peace, saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p9"></span>**9.** Major erit gloria domus hujus
secundae (posterioris, ad verbum,) quam prioris dicit Iehova exercituum:
et in loco hoc dabo pacem, dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p10"></span><span id="v.iii.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p11"></span>Here the Prophet expresses more clearly,
and confirms more fully, what I have said — that God would in time bring
help to the miserable Jews, because he would not disappoint the
assurance given to the fathers. This declaration, then, depends on the
covenant before mentioned; and hence the causative particle is used,
*For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, as yet a small one it is, or, yet
shortly, I will fill this house with glory*. The expression a small
thing, most interpreters aptly to time. Yet there are those who think
the subject itself is denoted. The more received opinion is, that it
means a small duration, a short time, because God would soon make a
change for the better. “Though then there does not as yet appear the
accomplishment of the promises, by which ye have hitherto supported your
faith and your hope, yet after a short time God will really prove that
he has spoken nothing falsely to you.”

<span id="v.iii.iv-p12"></span>There are yet some, as I have said, who
think that the matter itself is denoted by the Prophet, even that the
Temple did not yet appear in splendor before the eyes of men, *a small
one it is*, that is, Ye see not indeed a building such as that was,
before the Assyrians and the Chaldeans took possession of the city; but
let not your eyes remain fixed on the appearance of this Temple. Let
then *this small one as yet* pass by; but in a short time *this house
will be filled with glory*

<span id="v.iii.iv-p13"></span>With regard to the main object, it was
the Prophet’s design to strengthen the minds of the godly, that they
might not think that the power of God was inefficient, though he had not
as yet performed what they had hoped. In short, they were not to judge
by present appearances of what had been previously said of their
redemption. We said yesterday that the minds of the godly were heavily
depressed, because the Prophets had spoken in high terms of the Temple
as well as of the kingdom: the kingdom was as yet nothing; and the
temple was more like a shed than what might have been compared in glory
with the former Temple. It was hence necessary for the Prophet to meet
this objection; and this is the reason why he bids them to overlook the
present appearance, and to think of the glory which was yet hidden. As
yet, he says, it is a small one; that is, “There is no reason for you to
despair, though the grandeur of the Temple does not as yet appear to be
so great as you have conceived; but, on the contrary, let your minds
pass over to that restoration which is still far distant. *As yet then a
small one it is; and I will move the heavens and the earth*.”  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145.md)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p20"></span>In a word, God here bids them to exercise
patience, until he should put forth the ineffable power of his hand to
restore fully his Church; and this is what is meant by the shaking of
the heaven and the earth.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p21"></span>But this is a remarkable passage. The
Jews indeed, who are very absurd in everything connected with the
kingdom of Christ, pervert what is here said by the Prophet, and even
reduce it to nothing. But the Apostle in <span
id="v.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>[Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p21.1"></span>
reminds us of what God means here. For this passage contains an implied
contrast between the law and the gospel, between redemption, just
mentioned here, and that which was to be expected, and was at length
made known by the coming of Christ. God, then, when he redeemed his
people from Egypt, as well as from Babylon, moved the earth: but the
Prophet announces here something greater — that God would shake the
heaven and the earth. But that the meaning of the Prophet may appear
more evident, each sentence must be examined in order.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p22"></span>He says first, *this once, shortly*. I am
inclined to apply this to time, that I may not depart from what is
commonly received. But there is no reason for us to contend on the
subject, because it makes little or no difference as to the main point.
For we have said that what the Prophet had in view was to show that the
Jews were not to fix their eyes and their minds on the appearance of the
Temple at the time: “Allow,” he says, “and give place to hope, because
your present state shall not long remain; for the Lord will shake the
heaven and the earth; think then of God’s power, how great it is; does
he not by his providence rule both the earth and the heaven? And he will
shake all things above and below, rather than not to restore his Church;
he will rather change the appearance of the whole world, than that
redemption should not be fully accomplished. Be not then unwilling to be
satisfied with these preludes, but know what God’s power can do: for
though it may be necessary to throw the heaven and the earth into
confusions, yet this shall be done, rather than that your enemies should
prevent that full restoration, of which the Prophets have so often
spoken.” But the Apostle very justly says, that the gospel is here set
in contrast with the law; for God exhibited his wonderful power, when
the law was promulgated on mount Sinai; but a fuller power shone forth
at the coming of Christ, for then the heaven, as well as the earth, was
shaken. It is not, then, without reason that the Apostle concludes that
God speaks now to us from heaven, for his majesty appears more splendid
in the gospel than formerly in the law: and hence we are less excusable,
if we despise him now speaking in the person of his only begotten Son,
and thus speaking to show to us that the whole world is subject to him.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p23"></span>He then adds, *I will move all the
nations, and they shall come*. After having mentioned the heaven and the
earth, he now shows that he would arrest the attention of all mortals,
so as to turn them according to his will, in any way it may please him:
*Come*, he says, *shall* all nations — How? because I shall shake them.
Here again the Prophet teaches us that men come not to Christ except
through the wonderful agency of God. He might have spoken more simply, I
will lead all nations, as it is said elsewhere; but his purpose was to
express something more, even that the impulse by which God moves his
elect to betake themselves to the fold of Christ is supernatural.
Shaking seems a forcible act. Lest men, then, should obscure the power
of God, by which they are roused that they may obey Christ, and submit
to his authority, it is here by the Prophet expressed by this term, in
order that they might understand that the Lord does not work in an usual
or common manner, when they are thus changed.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p24"></span>But it must be also observed, that men
are thus powerfully, and in an extraordinary or supernatural manner
influenced, so that they follow spontaneously at the same time. The
operation of God is then twofold; for it is first necessary to shake
men, that they may unlearn their whole character, that is, that
forgetting their former nature, they may willingly receive the yoke of
Christ. We indeed know how great is our perverseness, and how unnameable
we are, until God subdues us by his Spirit. There is need in such a case
of a violent shaking. But we are not forced to obey Christ, as lions and
wild beasts are, who indeed yield, but still retain their inward
ferocity, and roar, though led in chains and subdued by scourges and
beatings. We are not, then, so shaken, that our inward rebellion remains
in us; but we are shaken, so that our disposition is changed, and we
receive willingly the yoke of Christ. This is the reason why the Prophet
says, *I will shake all nations, and they shall come*; that is, there
will be indeed a wonderful conversion, when the nations who previously
despised God, and regarded true religion and piety with the utmost
hatred, shall habituate themselves to the ruling power of God: and they
shall come, because they shall be so drawn by his hidden influence, that
the obedience they shall render will be voluntary. We now perceive the
meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p25"></span>He afterwards adds, *The desire of all
nations*. This admits of two explanations. The first is, that nations
shall come and bring with them everything that is precious, in order to
consecrate it to the service of God; for the Hebrews call whatever is
valuable a desire; so that under this term they include all riches,
honors, pleasures, and everything of this kind. Hence some render the
passage thus, I will shake all nations, and come shall the desire of all
nations. As there is a change of number; others will have <span
id="v.iii.iv-p25.1"></span>ב, *beth*, or <span
id="v.iii.iv-p25.2"></span>מ, *mem*, to be understood, They shall come
with what they desire; that is, the nations shall not come empty, but
shall gather all their treasures to be a holy oblation to God. But we
may understand what he says of Christ, *Come shall the desire of all
nations, and I will fill this house with glory*. We indeed know that
Christ was the expectation of the whole world, according to what is said
by Isaiah. And it may be properly said, that when the desire of all
nations shall come, that is, when Christ shall be manifested, in whom
the wishes of all ought to center, the glory of the second Temple shall
then be illustrious; but as it immediately follows, *Mine is the silver,
and mine is the gold*, the more simple meaning is that which I first
stated — that the nations would come, bringing with them all their
riches, that they might offer themselves and all their possessions as a
sacrifice to God.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p26"></span>It is, then, better to read what follows
as an explanation, *Mine is the silver, mine is the gold, saith
Jehovah*; that is, “I have not through want of money deferred hitherto
the complete building of the Temple; for what can hinder me from
amassing gold and silver from all quarters? Should it so please me, I
could in a short time build a Temple by all the wealth of the world. Is
it not indeed in my power to create mountains of gold and silver, by
which I might erect for myself a Temple? Ye hence see that wealth is not
wanting to me to build the Temple which I have promised; but the time is
not arrived. Therefore they who believe the preceding predictions, ought
to wait and to look forward, until the suitable time shall come.” This
is the import of the passage.  <span id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146.md)

<span id="v.iii.iv-p35"></span>He at length declares that *the glory* of
the second *Temple* would be *greater* than that of *the first*, and
that there would be *peace in that place*. As to the words there is
nothing obscure; but we ought especially to attend to what is said.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p36"></span>It must, indeed, be first observed, that
what is said here of the future glory of the Temple is to be applied to
the excellency of those spiritual blessings which appeared when Christ
was revealed, and are still conspicuous to us through faith; for ungodly
men are so blind that they see them not. And this we must bear in mind,
lest we dream like some gross interpreters, who think that what is here
said was in part fulfilled when Herod reconstructed the Temple. For
though that was a sumptuous building, yet there is no doubt but that it
was an attempt of the Devil to delude the Jews, that they might cease to
hope for Christ. Such was also, probably, the craft of Herod. We indeed
know that he was only a half-Jew. He professed himself to be one of
Abraham’s children; but he accommodated his habits, we know, to those of
the Jews, oddly for his own advantage. That they might not look for
Christ, this delusive and empty spectacle was presented to them, so as
almost to astound them. Though this, however, may not have entered into
the mind of Herod, it is yet certain that the Devil’s design was to
present to the Jews this deceptive shade, that they might not raise up
their thoughts to look for the coming of Christ, as the time was then
near at hand.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p37"></span>God might, indeed, immediately at the
beginning have caused a magnificent temple to be built: as he had
allowed a return to the people, so he might have given them courage, and
supplied them with materials, to render the latter Temple equal or even
superior to the Temple of Solomon. But Cyrus prohibited by an edict the
Temple to be built so high, and he also made its length somewhat
smaller: Why was this done? and why also did Darius do the same, who yet
liberally helped the Jews, and spared no expense in building the Temple?
How was it that both these kings, though guided by the Spirit of God,
did not allow the Temple to be built with the same splendor with which
it had been previously erected? This did not happen without the
wonderful counsel of God; for we know how gross in their notions the
Jews had been, and we see that even the Apostles were entangled in the
same error; for they expected that the kingdom of Christ would be no
other than an earthly one. Had then this Temple been equally magnificent
with the former, and had the kingdom become such as it had been, the
Jews would have acquiesced in these outward pomps; so that Christ would
have been despised, and God’s spiritual favor would have been esteemed
as nothing. Since, then, they were so bent on earthly happiness, it was
necessary for them to be awakened; and the Lord had regard to their
weakness, by not allowing a splendid Temple to be built. But in
suffering a counterfeit Temple to be built by Herod, when the
manifestation of Christ was nigh, he manifested his vengeance by
punishing their ingratitude, rather than his favor; and I call it
counterfeit, because its splendor was never approved by God. Though
Herod spent great treasures on that building, he yet profaned rather
than adorned the Temple. Foolishly, then, do some commemorate what
Helena, queen of Adiabenians, had laid out, and think that thus a credit
is in some measure secured to this prophecy. But it was on the contrary
Satan who attempted to deceive by such impostures and crafts, that he
might draw away the minds of the godly from the beauty of the spiritual
Temple.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p38"></span>But why does the prophet mention gold and
silver? He did this in conformity with what was usual and common; for
whenever the Prophets speak of the kingdom of Christ, they delineate or
describe its splendor in figurative terms, suitable to their own age.
When Isaiah foretells the restoration of the Church, he declares that
the Church would be all gold and silver, and whatever glittered with
precious stones; and in <span id="v.iii.iv-p38.1"></span>[Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p38.1"></span>
he especially sets forth the magnificence of the Temple, as though
nations from all parts were to bring for sacrifice all their precious
things. But Isaiah speaks figuratively, as all the other Prophets do. So
then what we read of gold and of silver ought to be so explained as to
be applied mystically to the kingdom of Christ; as we have already
observed respecting <span id="v.iii.iv-p38.2"></span>[Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p38.2"></span>
—

<span id="v.iii.iv-p39"></span>‘They shall offer to me, saith the
Lord,  
pure sacrifices from the rising to the setting of the sun.’

<span id="v.iii.iv-p40"></span>What are these sacrifices? Are heifers
yet to be offered, or lambs, or other animals? By no means; but we must
regard the spiritual character of the priesthood; for as the gold of
which the Prophet now speaks, and the silver, ought to be taken in a
spiritual sense; for since Christ has appeared in the world, it is not
God’s will to be served with gold and silver vessels; so also there is
no altar on which victims are to be sacrificed, and no candlestick; in a
word, all the symbols of the law have ceased. It hence follows that the
Prophet speaks of the spiritual ornaments of the Temple. And thus we
perceive how the glory of the second Temple is to be greater than that
of the first.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p41"></span>It then follows, that God *would give
peace in this place*; as though he had said that it would be well with
the Jews if they only waited patiently for the complete fulfillment of
redemption. But it must be observed, that this peace was not so evident
to them that they could enjoy it according to the perception of the
flesh; but it was that kind of peace of which Paul speaks, and which, he
says, exceeds all understanding (<span id="v.iii.iv-p41.1"></span>[Php
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.iv-p41.1"></span>..md)
In short, the people could not have comprehended what the Prophet
teaches here respecting the future splendor of the Temple, except they
leaped over all the obstacles which seemed to obstruct the progress of
complete redemption; and so it was ever necessary for them to have
recourse to this truth — *yet a little while*; as though he said that
they were patiently to endure while God was exercising their faith: but
that the time would come, and that shortly, when the Lord would fill
that house with glory that is, when Christ would bring witch him all
fullness of glory; for though they were to gather the treasures of a
thousand worlds into one mass, such a glory would yet be corruptible;
but when God the Father appeared in the person of his own Son, he then
glorified indeed his Temple; and his majesty shone forth so much that
there was nothing wanting to a complete perfection.

<span id="v.iii.v"></span>

<span id="v.iii.v-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.iii.v-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since we are by
nature extremely prone to superstition, we may carefully consider what
is the true and right way of serving thee, such as thou dost desire and
approve, even that we offer ourselves spiritually to thee, and seek no
other altar but Christ, and relying on no other priest, hope to be
acceptable and devoted to thee, that he may imbue us with the Spirit
which has been fully poured on him, so that we may from the heart devote
ourselves to thee, and thus proceed patiently in our course, that with
minds raised upwards we may ever go on towards that glory which is as
yet hid under hope, until it shall at length be manifested in due time,
when thine only-begotten Son shall appear with the elect angels for our
final redemption. Amen.

<span id="v.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vi-p1"></span>Lecture one hundred and Thirty-second

<span id="v.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
2:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010.md)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p2"></span>**10.** In the four and twentieth *day*
of the ninth *month*, in the second year of Darius, came the word of the
LORD by Haggai the prophet, saying,

<span id="v.iii.vii-p3"></span>**10.** Vicesimo quarto noni (mensis,
*subaudiendum*,) anno secundo Darii, fuit sermo Iehovae ad Chaggai
Prophetam, dicendo.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p4"></span>**11.** Thus saith the LORD of hosts; Ask
now the priests *concerning* the law, saying,

<span id="v.iii.vii-p5"></span>**11.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum,
Interroga Sacerdotes de Lege, dicendo,

<span id="v.iii.vii-p6"></span>**12.** If one bear holy flesh in the
skirt of his garment, and with his skirt do touch bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or any meat, shall it be holy? And the priests answered
and said, No.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p7"></span>**12.** Si sustulerit vir (quispiam)
carnem sanctam in ala vestis suae, et tetegerit ala sua panem, et
coctionem, et vinum, et olcum, et quodvis edulium, an sanctificabitur?
Et responderunt Sacerdotes et dixerunt, Non.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p8"></span>**13.** Then said Haggai, If *one that
is* unclean by a dead body touch any of these, shall it be unclean? And
the priests answered and said, It shall be unclean.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p9"></span>**13.** Et dixit Chaggai, Si tetegerit
pollutus in anima omne hoc, an polluetur? Responderunt Sacerdotes, et
dixerunt, Polluetur.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p10"></span>**14.** Then answered Haggai, and said,
So *is* this people, and so *is* this nation before me, saith the LORD;
and so *is* every work of their hands; and that which they offer there
*is* unclean.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p11"></span>**14.** Et respondi Chaggai et dixit,
Sic populus iste, et sic gens ista in conspectu meo, dicit Iehova: et
sic omne opus manuum ipsorum, et quod obtulerint illic, pollutum erit.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p12"></span><span id="v.iii.vii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p13"></span>Though interpreters seem to perceive the
meaning of the Prophet, yet no one really and clearly expresses what he
means and intends to teach us: nay, they adduce nothing but what is
jejune and frigid; for they refer all these things to this point, — that
sacrifices were not acceptable to God before the people had begun to
build the Temple, but that from that time they were pleasing to God,
because the people, in offering sacrifices in a waste place, proved by
such negligence that they disregarded the command of God: but when their
hands were applied to the work, God was appeased, and thus he began to
accept their sacrifices which before he had rejected. This is, indeed, a
part of what is meant, but not the whole; and the Prophet’s main object
seems to me to be wholly different. He has been hitherto exhorting the
people to build the Temple; he now exhorts them to build from a pure
motive, and not to think that they had done everything when the Temple
assumed a fine appearance before the eyes of men, for God required
something else. Hence, I have no doubt but that the Prophet intended
here to raise up the minds of the people to the spiritual worship of
God.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p14"></span>It was, indeed, necessary diligently to
build the Temple, but the end was also to be regarded; for God never
cared for external ceremonies; nor was he delighted with that building
as men are with their splendid houses. As the Jews absurdly ascribed
these gross feelings to God, the Prophet here shows why so strict a
command had been given as to the building of the Temple; and the reason
was, — that God might be worshipped in a pure and holy manner.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p15"></span>I will repeat again what I have said,
that the explanation may be more familiar to you. When the people
neglected the building of the Temple, they manifested their in-piety and
their contempt of Divine worship: for what was the cause of their delay
and tardiness, except that each of them regarded nothing but just his
own private interest? Now, when all of them strenuously undertook the
work of building the Temple, their industry was indeed laudable, for it
was a proof of their piety: but when the people thought that God
required nothing more than a splendid Temple, it was manifest
superstition: for the worship of God, we know, is corrupted when it is
confined to external things; for, in this manner God is transformed into
a nature not his own: as he is a Spirit, so he must be spiritually
worshipped by us. Whosoever then obtrudes on him only external pomps in
order to pacify him, most childishly trifles with him. This second part,
in my view, is what the Prophet now undertakes to handle. From the
seventh to the ninth month they had been diligently engaged in the work
which the Lord had commanded them to do: but men, as we know, busy
themselves with external things and neglect spiritual worship; hence it
was necessary to join what is said here, that the people might
understand, that it was not enough to satisfy God, though they spared
neither expense nor labor in building the Temple; but that something
greater was required, even to worship God in it in a pure and holy
manner. This is the design of the whole passage. But we must first
examine the Prophet’s words, and then it will be easier to gather the
whole import of his doctrine.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p16"></span>He says then that he was ordered by God,
*on the twenty fourth day of the month, in the same year, in the second
year of Darius, to ask the priests concerning the law*  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147.md) Haggai is not bid to inquire
respecting the whole law, but only that the priests should answer a
question according to the Word of God, or the doctrine of the law
according to what is commonly said — What is law, is the question: for
it was not allowed to the priests to allege anything they pleased
indiscriminately; but they were only interpreters of the law. This is
the reason why God bids his Prophet to inquire what the law of Moses
defines as to the ceremony mentioned here. And the design was, that the
people, being convinced as to the legal ceremonies, might not contend
nor glamour, but acknowledge that all socks are condemned as sinful
which flow not from a pure and sincere heart.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p18"></span>Haggai asks first, *If a man takes holy
flesh* — that is, some part of the sacrifice, — if any one takes and
carries it in a sleeve or skirt, that is, in any part of his vestment,
and then touches bread, or oil, or any eatable thing, will anything
connected with that holy flesh be sanctified by mere touch? *The priests
answer, No*. Here also interpreters grossly mistake: for they take
sanctified as meaning polluted, altogether falsely; for there is here a
twofold question proposed. Whether holy flesh sanctifies anything it may
touch? and then, whether an impure and a polluted man contaminates
whatever he may touch? As to the first question, the priests wisely and
truly answer, that there is no such efficacy in sacrifices, as that they
can sanctify what they may touch: and this is true. The second
definition is also most proper, that whatever is touched by an unclean
man is polluted, as the law everywhere declares.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p19"></span>The Prophet then accommodates this to
his present case, *So*, he says, *is this people, and this nation, and
the work of their hands*. For as long as they are polluted, however they
may spend money in sacrifices, and greatly weary themselves in
worshipping God, not only is their labor vain, but whatever they offer
is polluted, and is an abomination only. We now understand the words of
the Prophet, and so we may now consider the subject.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p20"></span>But before I speak generally of the
present subject, I shall first notice what the Prophet says here, that
he *inquired respecting the law*; for it was not allowed to the priests
to allege anything they pleased. We indeed know, that they had advanced
into such licentiousness, as arbitrarily to demand what God had never
commanded, and also to forbid the people what was lawful, the use of
which had been permitted by God’s law. But Haggai does not here allow
such a liberty to the priests; he does not ask what they thought, but
what was required by the law of the Lord. And this is worthy of being
noticed; for it is a pernicious evil to exercise an arbitrary control
over the conscience. And yet the devil has ever corrupted the worship of
God, and the whole system of religion, under the pretense of extolling
the authority of the Church. It is indeed true, that the sacerdotal
office was very honorable and worthy of respect; but we must ever take
heed lest men assume too much, and lest what is thoughtlessly conceded
to them should deprive God of what belongs to him; as the case is, we
know, under the Papacy. When the Pope seeks to show that all his
commands ought without any dispute to be obeyed, he quotes what is found
in <span id="v.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>[De
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#008.md)<span id="v.iii.vii-p20.1"></span>
—

<span id="v.iii.vii-p21"></span>‘If a question arises about the law,  
the high priest shall judge between what is sacred and profane.’

<span id="v.iii.vii-p22"></span>This is indeed true; but was it
permitted to the high priest to disregard God’s law, and foolishly to
allege this or that according to his own judgement? Nay, the priest was
only an interpreter of the law. Whenever then God bids those pastors to
be heard whom he sets over his Church, his will is, as it has been
before stated, that he himself should be heard through their mouth. In
short, whatever authority is exercised in the Church ought to be
subjected to this rule — that God’s law is to retain its own
pre-eminence, and that men blend nothing of their own, but only define
what is right according to the Word of the Lord. Now this is by the way;
I come now to the main point.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p23"></span>*The priests answered*, that neither
flesh, nor oil, nor wine, was sanctified by touching a piece or part of
a sacrifice. Why? because a sacrifice sanctifies not things unclean,
except by way of expiation; for this, we know, was the design of
sacrifices — that men who were polluted might reconcile themselves to
God. A right answer was then given by the priests, that unclean flesh or
unclean oil is not sanctified by the touch of holy flesh. Why? because
the flesh itself was not dedicated to God for this end — to purify what
was unclean by a mere touch. Yet, on the other hand, it is most true,
that when a man was unclean he polluted whatever he touched. It is
commonly thought, that he is said to be unclean in his soul who had
defiled himself by touching a corpse; but I differ from this. The word
soul is often taken in the law for man himself. —

<span id="v.iii.vii-p24"></span>‘The soul that eats of what died of
itself is polluted;  
the soul that touches a corpse is polluted.’  
(<span id="v.iii.vii-p24.3"></span>[Le
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015.md)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p24.3"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p25"></span>Hence he is here said to be polluted in
his soul, who had an outward uncleanness, as we say in French, *Pollu en
sa personne*. Whosoever then is unclean pollutes by touch only whatever
might have been otherwise clean; and the conclusion sufficiently proves
that this is the purport of this passage.  <span
id="fr_148"></span>[149](#fn_148.md) I have said enough of what the design
of the Prophet is, but the subject must be more fully explained.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p27"></span>We know how heedlessly men are wont to
deal with God; for they trifle with him like children with their
puppets. And this presumption has been condemned, as it is well known,
even by heathens. Hardly a Prophet could have inveighed more severely
against this gross superstition than Persius, who compares sacrifices,
so much thought of by all, to puppets, and shows that other things are
required by God, even

<span id="v.iii.vii-p28"></span>A well ordered condition and piety of
soul, and an inward purity  
of mind, and a heart imbued with generous virtue.  <span
id="fr_149"></span>[150](#fn_149.md)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p30"></span>He means then that men ought to be
imbued with true holiness, and that inwardly, so that there should be
nothing fictitious or feigned. He says that they who are such, that is,
who have imbibed the true fear of God, do rightly serve him, thought
they may bring only a crumb of incense, and that others only profane the
worship of God, though they may bring many oxen; for whatever they think
avails to cover their filth is polluted by new and repeated filth. And
this is what has been expressed by heathen authors: another poet says, -

<span id="v.iii.vii-p31"></span>An impious right hand does not rightly
worship the celestials.  <span id="fr_150"></span>[151](#fn_150.md)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p33"></span>So they spoke according to the common
judgement of natural knowledge. As to the Philosophers, they ever hold
this principle — that no sacrifice is rightly offered to God except the
mind be right and pure. But yet the Philosophers, as well as the Poets,
adopted this false notion, by which Satan beguiled all men, from the
least to the greatest — that God is pacified by ceremonies: hence have
proceeded so many expiations, in which foolish men trusted, and by which
they thought that God would be propitious to them, thought they
obstinately continued daily to procure for themselves new punishments,
and, as it were, avowedly to carry on war with God himself.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p34"></span>They admit at this day, under the
Papacy, this principle that the true fear of God is necessary, as
hypocrisy contaminates all the works of men; nor will they indeed dare
to commend those who seek feignedly and triflingly to satisfy God, when
they are filled with pride, contempt, and impiety. And yet they will
never receive what the Prophet says here — that men not only lose all
their labor, but also contract new pollution, when they seek to pacify
God by their sacrifices, unaccompanied by inward purity. For whence is
that partial righteousness which the Papists imagine? For they say, that
if one does not keep the whole law, yet obedience in part is approved by
God; and nothing is more common among them than this expression, partial
righteousness. If then an adulterer refrains from theft, and lays out in
alms some of his wealth, they will have this to be charity, and declare
it to be acceptable. Though it proceeds from an unclean man, it is yet
made a covering, which is deemed sufficient in some way or another to
pacify God. Thus the Papists seek, without exercising any
discrimination, to render God bound to them by their works, though they
may be full of all uncleanness. We hence see that this error has not
sprung up today or yesterday for the first time; but it is inherent in
the bones and marrows of men; for they have ever thought that their
services please God, though they may be unclean themselves.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p35"></span>Hence this definition must be borne in
mind — that works, however splendid they may appear before our eyes, are
of no value or importance before God, except they flow from a pure
heart. Augustine has very wisely explained this in his fourth book
against Julia. He says, that it would be an absurd thing for the
faithful to judge of works by the outward appearance; but that they
ought to be estimated according to the fountain from which they proceed,
and also according to their design. Now the fountain of works I consider
to be integrity of heart, and the design or end is, when the object of
men is to obey God and to consecrate their life to him. Hence then we
learn the difference between good and evil works, between vices and
virtues, that is, from the inward state of the mind, and from the object
in view. This is the subject of the Prophet in the first clause; and he
drew an answer from the priests, which was wholly consistent with the
law; and it amounted to this, that no work, however praised and
applauded by the world, is valued before God’s tribunal, except it
proceeds from a pure heart.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p36"></span>Now as to the second part, it is no less
difficult to convince men of its truth — that whatever they touch is
contaminated, when they are themselves unclean; and yet this is what God
had plainly made known to the Jews: and the priests hesitated not nor
doubted, but immediately returned an answer, as though the matter was
well known — that an unclean man contaminates whatever thing he touches.
But when we come to apply the subject, men then reject what they had
been clearly taught; nay, what they are forced to confess, until they
see the matter brought home to them, and then they begin to accuse God
of too much rigour: “Why is this, that whatever we touch is polluted,
though we might leave some defilement? Are not our works still deserving
of some praise, as they are good works?” And hence also is the common
saying, That works, which are in their kind good, are always in a
measure meritorious, and though they are without faith, they yet avail
to merit the gift of faith, inasmuch as they are in themselves
praiseworthy, as chastity, liberality, sobriety, temperance,
beneficence, and all alms giving. But God declares that these virtues
are polluted, though men may admire them, and that they are only
abominable filth, except the heart be really cleansed and purified. Why
so? because nothing can flow from an impure and polluted fountain but
what is impure and polluted.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p37"></span>It is now easy to understand how
suitably the Prophet had led the priests and the whole people to see
this difference. For if he had abruptly said this to them — that no work
pleased Cod, except the doer himself had been cleansed from every
defilement, there would have arisen immediately many disputations: “Why
will God reject what is in itself worthy of praise? When one observes
chastity, when another liberally lays out a part of his property, when a
third devotes himself wholly to promote the good of the public, when
magnanimity and firmness shine forth in one, when another cultivates the
liberal arts — are not these such virtues as deserve some measure of
praise!” Thus a great glamour would have been raised among the people,
had not Haggai made this kind of preface — that according to the law
what is unclean is not sanctified by the touch of holy flesh, and also
that whatever is touched by an unclean person is polluted. What the law
then prescribed in its rituals silenced all those clamours, which might
have immediately arisen among the people. Moreover, though ceremonies
have now ceased and are no longer in use, yet what God has once declared
still retains its force — that whatever we touch is polluted by us,
except there be a real purity of heart to sanctify our works.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p38"></span>Let us now inquire how our works please
God: for no one is ever found to be pure and perfect, as the most
perfect are defiled with some vices; so that their works are always
sprinkled with some spots and blemishes, and contract some uncleanness
from the hidden filth of their hearts. In answer to this, I say first,
that all our works are corrupt before God and abominable in his sight,
for the heart is naturally corrupt: but when God purifies our hearts by
faith, then our works begin to be approved, and obtain praise before
him; for the heart is cleansed by faith, and purity is diffused over our
works, so that they begin to be pleasing to God. For this reason Moses
says, that Abel pleased God with his sacrifices,

<span id="v.iii.vii-p39"></span>“The Lord had respect to Abel and to his
gifts.”  
(<span id="v.iii.vii-p39.2"></span>[Ge
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004.md)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p39.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.iii.vii-p40"></span>Had Moses said only, that the sacrifices
of Abel were approved by God, he would have spoken unadvisedly, or at
least obscurely; for he would have been silent on the main thing. But he
begins with the person, as though he had said, that Abel pleased God,
because he worshipped him with an upright and sincere heart. He
afterwards adds, that his sacrifices were approved, for they proceeded
from the true fear of God and sincere piety. So Paul, when speaking of
the real keeping of the law, says, that the end of the law is love from
a pure heart and faith unfeigned. (<span
id="v.iii.vii-p40.1"></span>[1Ti
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005.md)<span
id="v.iii.vii-p40.1"></span>.) He shows then that no work is deemed
right before God, except it proceeds from that fountain, even faith
unfeigned, which is always connected with an upright and sincere heart.
This is one thing.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p41"></span>Secondly, we must bear in mind how God
purifies our hearts by faith. There is indeed a twofold purification: He
first forms us in his image, and engraves on us true and real fear, and
an obedient disposition. This purity of the heart diffuses itself over
our works; for when we are imbued with true piety, we have no other
object but to offer ourselves and all we have to God. Far indeed are
they who are hypocrites and profane men from having this feeling; nay,
they are wholly alienated from it: they offer liberally their own things
to God, but they wish to be their own masters; for a hypocrite will
never give up himself as a spiritual sacrifice to God. We hence see how
faith purifies our hearts, and also purifies our works: for having been
regenerated by the Spirit of God, we offer to him first ourselves and
then all that we have. But as this purgation is never found complete in
man, it is therefore necessary that there should come an aid from
gratuitous acceptance. Our hearts then are purified by faith, because
God imputes not to us that uncleanness which remains, and which defiles
our works. As then God regards with gracious acceptance that purity
which is not as yet perfect, so he causes that its contagion should not
reach to our works. When Abel offered sacrifices to God, he was indeed
perfect, inasmuch as there was nothing feigned or hypocritical in him:
but he was a man, we know, encompassed with infirmity. It was therefore
necessary for his remaining pollution to have been purified by the grace
of Christ. Hence it was that his sacrifices were accepted: for as he was
accepted, so God graciously received whatever proceeded from him.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p42"></span>We now then see how men, while in a
state of nature, displease God by their works, and can bring nothing but
what is corrupt, filthy, and abominable. We farther see how the children
of God, after having been renewed by his Spirit, come pure to him and
offer him pure sacrifices: they come pure, because it is their object to
devote themselves to God without any dissimulation; but as this
devotedness is never perfect, God supplies the defect by a gratuitous
imputation, for he embraces them as his servants in the same manner as
though they were entirely formed in all righteousness. And in the same
way he approves of their works, for all their spots are wiped away, yea,
those very spots, which might justly prevent all favor; were not all
uncleanness washed away by the blood of Christ, and that through faith.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p43"></span>We hence learn, that there is no ground
for any one to deceive himself with vain delusions, by attempting to
please God with great pomp: for the first thing of which the Prophet
treats here is always required, that is, that a person must be pure in
his heart, that inward purity must precede every work. And though this
truth meets us everywhere in all the Prophets, yet as hypocrisy dazzles
our eyes and blinds all our senses, it ought to be seriously considered
by us; and we ought to notice in an especial manner not only this
passage but other similar passages where the Prophets ridicule the
solicitude of the people, when they busied themselves with sacrifices
and outward observances, and neglected the principal thing — real purity
of heart.

<span id="v.iii.vii-p44"></span>We must also take notice of what the
Prophet says in the last verse, that *so was every work of their hand
and whatever they offered*  <span id="fr_151"></span>[152](#fn_151.md) It
seems apparently a hard matter, that the very sacrifices were condemned
as polluted. But it is no wonder that fictitious modes of worship, by
which profane men dishonor God, should be repudiated by him; for they
seek to transform him according to their own fancy, as though he might
be soothed by playthings or such trifles. It is therefore a most
disgraceful mockery when men deal thus with God, offering him only
external ceremonies, and disregarding his nature: for they make no
account of spiritual worship, and yet think that they please him. We
must then, in a word, make this remark — that the Prophet teaches us
here, that it is not enough for men to show obedience to God, to offer
sacrifices, to spend labor in building the Temple, except these things
were rightly done — and how rightly? by a sincere heart, so there should
be no dissimulation, no duplicity.

<span id="v.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.viii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.iii.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that inasmuch as we
come from our mother’s womb wholly impure and polluted, and afterwards
continually contract so many new defilements, — O grant that we may flee
to the fountain, which alone can cleanse us. And as there is no other
way by which we can be cleansed from all the defilements of the flesh,
except we be sprinkled by the blood of thy only begotten Son, and that
by the hidden power of thy Spirit, and thus renounce all our vices, — O
grant that we may so strive truly and sincerely to devote ourselves to
thee, as daily to renounce more and more all our evil affections, and to
have nothing else as our object, but to submit our minds and all our
affections to thee, by really denying ourselves, and to exercise
ourselves in this strenuous effort as long as we are in this world,
until we attain to that true and perfect purity, which is laid up for us
in thine only-begotten Son, when we shall be fully united to him, having
been transformed into that glory into which he has been received. Amen.

<span id="v.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="v.iii.ix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Thirty-third

<span id="v.iii.x"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
2:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#015.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p2"></span>**15.** And now, I pray you, consider from
this day and upward, from before a stone was laid upon a stone in the
temple of the LORD:

<span id="v.iii.x-p3"></span>**15.** Et nunc ponite quaeso (*vel*,
agedum) super cor vestrum a die hac et supra, antequam poneretur lapis
super lapidem in templo Iehovae:

<span id="v.iii.x-p4"></span>**16.** Since those *days* were, when *one*
came to an heap of twenty *measures*, there were *but* ten: when *one*
came to the pressfat for to draw out fifty *vessels* out of the press,
there were *but* twenty.

<span id="v.iii.x-p5"></span>**16.** Ante haec quum veniret quis ad
acervum viginti, fuit decem; quum veniret ad torcular ut hauriret
quinquaginta e torculari, fuit summa viginti.

<span id="v.iii.x-p6"></span>**17.** I smote you with blasting and with
mildew and with hail in all the labours of your hands; yet ye *turned*
not to me, saith the LORD.

<span id="v.iii.x-p7"></span>**17.** Percussi vos orientali vento
(*vel*, urente) et rubigene, et grandine in omni opere manuum vestrarum
(*alii vertunt*, et omne opus, *sed male*, *et potius hic debet resolvi
quemadmodum dictum est*, in omni *ergo* opere) et vos non ad me, dicit
lehova.

<span id="v.iii.x-p8"></span>**18.** Consider now from this day and
upward, from the four and twentieth day of the ninth *month*, *even*
from the day that the foundation of the LORD’S temple was laid, consider
*it*

<span id="v.iii.x-p9"></span>**18.** Ponite quaeso super cor vestrum a
die hac et supra, a die vicesimo quarto noni mensis, a die quo fundatum
fuit templum Iehovae, ponite super cor vestrum.

<span id="v.iii.x-p10"></span>**19.** Is the seed yet in the barn? yea,
as yet the vine, and the fig tree, and the pomegranate, and the olive
tree, hath not brought forth: from this day will I bless *you*

<span id="v.iii.x-p11"></span>**19.** An adhuc semen in horreo? et adhuc
vitis, et ficus, et malusgranata, et arbor olivae non protulit; a die
hac benedicam vobis.

<span id="v.iii.x-p12"></span><span id="v.iii.x-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p13"></span>I am under the necessity of joining all
these verses together, for the Prophet treats of the same thing: and the
import of the whole is this — that the Lord had then openly punished the
tardiness of the people, so that every one might have easily known that
they acted very inconsistently in attending only to their private
concerns, so as to neglect the Temple. The Prophet indeed speaks here in
a homely manner to earthly men, addicted to their own appetites: had
they really become wiser, or made greater progress in true religion, he
might have addressed them differently, and would have no doubt followed
the rule mentioned by Paul,

<span id="v.iii.x-p14"></span>‘We speak wisdom among those who are
perfect.’  
(<span id="v.iii.x-p14.2"></span>[1Co
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)<span id="v.iii.x-p14.2"></span>..md)

<span id="v.iii.x-p15"></span>But as they had their thoughts fixed on
meat and drink, and were intent on their private advantages, the Prophet
tells them what they could comprehend that God was angry with them, and
that the proofs of his curse were evident, as the earth did not produce
fruit, and they themselves were reduced to want. We hence perceive the
object of the Prophet: but I shall run over the words, that the subject
may become more evident.

<span id="v.iii.x-p16"></span>*Lay it*, he says, *on your heart*. Here
the Prophet indirectly condemns their insensibility, as they were blind
in things quite manifest; for he does not here direct their thoughts to
heaven, nor announce deep mysteries, but only speaks of food and daily
support. Since God, then, impressed clear marks of his wrath on their
common sustenance, it was an intolerable stupidity in them to disregard
these. And the Prophet often repeats the same thing, in order to shame
the Jews; for their tardiness being so often reproved, ought to have
made them ashamed. *Lay it on the heart*, he says; that is, Consider
what I am going to say; *from this day and heretofore*,  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152.md) he says, *before a stone was laid on a
stone*; that is, from that day when I began to exhort you to build the
Temple, consider what has happened to this very day.

<span id="v.iii.x-p25"></span>Then he adds, Before ye began, he says, to
build the Temple, was it not that every one who came to a heap of twenty
measures found only ten? that is, was it not, that when the husband men
expected that there would be twenty measures in the storehouse or on the
floor, they were disappointed? because God had dried up the ears, so
they yielded not what they used to do; for husband men, by long
experience, can easily conjecture what they may expect when they see the
gathered harvest; but this prospect had disappointed the husband men.
God, then, had in this case given proofs of his curse. Farther; when any
one came to the vat, and expected a large vintage, had he not also been
disappointed? for instead of fifty casks he found only twenty.

<span id="v.iii.x-p26"></span>He afterwards adds, *I have smitten you
with the east wind*: for <span id="v.iii.x-p26.1"></span>שדפון,
*shidafun*, is to be taken for a scorching wind; and the east wind
proved injurious to Judea by its dryness. So also <span
id="v.iii.x-p26.2"></span>ירקון, *irkun*, is mildew, or a moist wind,
from which mildew proceeds; for we know that corn, when it has much wet,
contracts mildew when the sun emits its heat. As to the meaning of the
Prophet there is no ambiguity, for he intended to teach them that they
were in various ways visited, that they might clearly perceive that God
was displeased with them. He then mentions the hail: for when famine
happens only from the cold or from the heat, it may be ascribed to
chance or to the stars: but when God employs various scourges, we are
then constrained to acknowledge his wrath, as though he were determined
to awaken us. This is the reason why the Prophet records here various
kinds of judgements. And he says, *In every work of your hands*. Some
read, And every work, etc., which is improper; for they were not smitten
in their own bodies, but in the produce of the earth. Then he adds, *And
you* returned *not to me*, that is, “During the whole of that time I
effected nothing, while I was so often and in such various ways
chastising you. And yet what good has the obduracy of your hearts done
you? ye have not returned to me.”

<span id="v.iii.x-p27"></span>*Lay it*, he says, *on your heart from
this day, and heretofore*, etc. He repeats what he had said, even from
the twenty-fourth day of the ninth month. We have seen before, that the
Prophet was sent on that day to reprove the people for their sins. *Lay
it* then *on your heart*, he says, *from this day*, etc. We see how
emphatical is this repetition, because in things evident the Jews were
so insensible that their want and famine could not touch them: and we
know that there is no sharper goad to stimulate men than famine. Since
then the Lord snatched away their food from their mouth, and they
remained inattentive to such a judgement, it was a sure evidence of
extreme stupidity. It is on this account that the Prophet often
declares, that the Jews were extremely insensible; for they did not
consider the judgements of God, which were so manifest. He now subjoins,
*Is there yet seed in the barn?* Jerome reads, in the bud; and the
probable reason why he thus rendered the word was, that he thought that
the clauses would not correspond without giving the meaning of bud to
<span id="v.iii.x-p27.1"></span>מגורה, *megure*; but, as I think, he was
mistaken. The Hebrews propose what I cannot approve, for some of them
read the sentence as an affirmation, For there is seed in the barn;
because they dared not to commit the seed to the ground in their state
of want. And others read it as a question, as though he had said, that
the time of harvest was far off, and that what they had remaining was so
small that it was not enough to support them. But, in my judgement, the
seed refers not to what had been gathered, but to what had been sown. I
therefore doubt not but that he speaks of God’s blessing on the harvest
which was to come after five months, to which I shall presently refer.
Some, indeed, render the words in the past tense, as though the Prophet
had said, that the Jews had already experienced how great the curse of
God was; but this is a forced view. The real meaning of the Prophet is
this, *Is there yet seed in the barn?* that is, Is the seed, as yet hid
in the ground, gathered?

<span id="v.iii.x-p28"></span>He then adds affirmatively, *neither the
vine, nor the fig tree, nor the pomegranate, nor the olive had yet
produced any thing*; for it was the ninth month of the year; and the
beginning of the year, we know, was in the month of March. Though then
they were nearly in the midst of winter, they remained uncertain as to
what the produce would be. In the month of November no opinion could be
formed, even by the most skillful, what produce they were to expect. As
then they were still in suspense, the Prophet says, that God’s blessing
was in readiness for them. What he had in view was, to show that he
brought a sure message from God; for he speaks not of a vintage the
prospect of which had already appeared, nor of a harvest when the ears
had already made their appearance. As then there was still danger from
the hail, from scorching winds, and also from rains and other things
injurious to fruit and produce of the land, he says, that the harvest
would be most abundant, the vintage large, that, in a word, the produce
of the olive and the fig tree would be most exuberant. The truth of the
prophecy might now be surely known, when God fulfilled what he had
spoken by the mouth of his servant. I now return to the subject itself

<span id="v.iii.x-p29"></span>As I have before observed, the Prophet
deals with the Jews here according to their gross disposition: for he
might in a more refined manner have taught the godly, who were not so
entangled with, or devoted to, earthly concerns. It was then necessary
for him to speak in a manner suitable to the comprehension of the
people, as a skillful teacher who instructs children and those of riper
age in a different manner. And he shows by evidences that the Jews were
unthankful to God, for they neglected the building of the Temple, and
every one was diligently and earnestly engaged in building his own
house. He shows by proofs their conduct, — How? Whence has it happened,
he says, that at one time your fruit has been destroyed by mildew, at
another by heat, and then by the hail, except that the Lord intended
thus to correct your neglect? It then follows, that you are convicted of
ingratitude by these judgements; for you have neglected God’s worship,
and only pursued your own private advantages. This is one thing.

<span id="v.iii.x-p30"></span>The latter clause contains a promise; and
by it the instruction given was more confirmed, when the people saw that
things suddenly and unexpectedly took a better turn. They had been for
many years distressed with want of sustenance; but, when fruitfulness of
a sudden followed, did not this change manifest something worthy of
their consideration? especially when it was foretold before it happened,
and before any such thing could have been foreseen by human conjectures?
We see then, that the Prophet dwells on two things, — he condemns the
Jews for their neglect, and proves that they were impious and ungrateful
towards God, for they disregarded the building of the Temple; and them,
in order to animate them and render them more active in the work they
had begun, he sets before them, as I have said, what had taken place.
God had, indeed, abundantly testified, by various kinds of punishment
that he was displeased with them: but when he now promises that he would
deal differently with them, there hence arises a new and a stronger
evidence.

<span id="v.iii.x-p31"></span>But some one may here raise an objection
and say, that these evidences are not sure or unvaried; since it often
happens, that when people devote themselves faithfully to the service of
God they are pressed down by adverse events; yea, that God very often
designedly tries their faith by withholding from them for a time his
blessing. But the answer to this may be readily given: I indeed allow
that it often happens that those who sincerely and from the heart serve
God, are deprived of earthly blessings, because God intends to elevate
their minds to the hope of eternal reward. God then designedly withdraws
his blessing often from the faithful, that they may hunger and thirst in
this world; as though they lost all their labor in serving him. But it
was not the Prophet’s design to propound here an evidence of an
unvarying character, as he counted it sufficient to convince the Jews by
experience, that nothing prevented them from acknowledging that their
avarice displeased God, except their extreme stupidity. The Prophet then
does here reprove their insensibility; for, while they greatly labored
in enriching themselves, they did not observe that their labor was in
vain, because God from heaven poured his curse on them. This then might
have been easily known by them had they not hardened themselves in their
vices. And what the Prophet testifies here respecting the fruitful
produce of wine, and corn, and oil, and of other things, was still, as I
have said, a stronger confirmation.

<span id="v.iii.x-p32"></span>Now, if any one objects again and says —
that this was of no value, because a servile and mercenary service does
not please God: to this I answer — that God does often by such means
stimulate men, when he sees them to be extremely tardy and slothful, and
that he afterwards leads them by other means to serve him truly and from
the heart. When therefore any one obeys God, only that he may satisfy
his appetite, it is as though one labored from day to day for the sake
of wages, and then disregards him by whom he has been hired. It is
certain that such a service is counted as nothing before God; but he
would have himself to be generously worshipped by us; and he loves, as
Paul says, a cheerful giver. (<span id="v.iii.x-p32.1"></span>[2Co
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#007)<span id="v.iii.x-p32.1"></span>..md)
But as men, for the most part, on account of their ignorance, cannot be
led at first to this generous state of mind, so as to devote themselves
willingly to God, it is necessary to begin by using other means, as the
Prophet does here, who promises earthly and daily sustenance to the
Jews, for he saw that they could not immediately, at the first step,
ascend upwards to heaven; but it was not his purpose to stop short,
until he elevated their minds higher. Let us then know, that this was
only the beginning, that they might learn to fear God and to expect
whatever they wanted from his blessing, and also that they might shake
off their stupor, under which they had previously labored. In short, God
deals in one way with the rude and ignorant, who are not yet imbued with
true religion; and he deals in another way with his own disciples, who
are instructed in sound doctrine. When I say that the Prophet acted thus
towards the Jews, I speak not of the whole nation; but I regard what we
have observed at the beginning of this book — that the Jews cared for
nothing then but to build their own houses, and that there was no zeal
for religion among them. As then the recollection of God was nigh buried
among them, the Temple being neglected, and every one’s anxiety being
concentrated in building his own house, we hence learn how grossly
earthly their affections were. It is therefore no wonder that the
Prophet treated them in the manner stated here. Let us proceed -

<span id="v.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
2:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p2"></span>**20.** And again the word of the LORD
came unto Haggai in the four and twentieth *day* of the month, saying,

<span id="v.iii.xi-p3"></span>**20.** Et fuit (postea fuit) sermo
Iehovae secundo ad Chaggai vicesimo quarto mensis, dicendo,

<span id="v.iii.xi-p4"></span>**21.** Speak to Zerubbabel, governor of
Judah, saying, I will shake the heavens and the earth;

<span id="v.iii.xi-p5"></span>**21.** Dic ad Zerubbabel, ducens Iehudah,
dicendo, Ego concutiam coelos et terram;

<span id="v.iii.xi-p6"></span>**22.** And I will overthrow the throne of
kingdoms, and I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the
heathen; and I will overthrow the chariots, and those that ride in them;
and the horses and their riders shall come down, every one by the sword
of his brother.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p7"></span>**22.** Et evertam solium regnorum, et
perdam robur regnorum gentium; et evertam quadrigam et sessores ejus
evertam quadrigam et sessores ejus; et descendent equi et sessores
eorum, quisque in gladio fratris sui.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p8"></span>**23.** In that day, saith the LORD of
hosts, will I take thee, O Zerubbabel, my servant, the son of Shealtiel,
saith the LORD, and will make thee as a signet: for I have chosen thee,
saith the LORD of hosts.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p9"></span>**23.** In die illa, dicit Iehova
exercituum, sumam te Zerubbabel, fili Sealtiel, serve mi, dicit Iehova;
et ponam to quasi annulum, quia elegi te, dicit Iehova exercituum.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p10"></span><span id="v.iii.xi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xi-p11"></span>The Prophet now proceeds still farther;
for there is here a really gratuitous and spiritual promise, by which
God affirms that he will have a care for his people to the end. He does
not now speak of wine and corn, in order to feed the hungry; but he
shows that he would be an eternal Father to that people; for he could
not and would not forget the covenant he made with their fathers. There
is no doubt but he points out Christ in the person of Zerubbabel, as we
shall presently see. So that it is right to distinguish this prophecy
from the last; for God has before shown, that the worship which the Jews
had for a time disregarded was pleasing to him, as a reward was in
readiness, and also that he was offended with the negligence previously
reproved, as he had inflicted manifest punishment, not once, nor for a
short time, but for many years, and in various ways. What then does
follow? In this second prophecy he addresses Zerubbabel, and promises to
be a Savior to the people under his authority.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p12"></span>With regard to these words, some think
that a continued act is signified when he says, I shake the heavens and
the earth; and they give this explanation — That though it belongs to me
to shake the heaven and the earth, and I am wont to subvert kingdoms,
yet I will render firm the sacred kingdom which I have raised among my
people. But this view is very frigid: and we see even from this chapter
what is meant by the shaking of the heaven and of the earth, of which
mention is made. The Apostle also rightly interprets this passage, when
he teaches us, that this prophecy properly belongs to the kingdom of
Christ. (<span id="v.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>[Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026.md)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p12.1"></span>.) There is therefore no doubt, but that the
Prophet means here something special, when he introduces God as saying,
Behold, I shake the heavens and the earth. God then does not speak of
his ordinary providence, nor simply claim to himself the government of
the heaven and of the earth, nor teach us that he raises on high the
humble and the low, and also brings down the high and the elevated; but
he intimates, that he has some memorable work in contemplation, which,
when done, would shake men with fear, and make heaven and earth to
tremble. Hence, the Prophet no doubt intended here to lead the Jews to
the hope of that redemption, some prelude of which God had then given
them; but its fullness could not as yet be seen — nay, it was hid from
the view of men: for who could have expected such a renovation of the
world as was effected by the coming of Christ? When the Jews found
themselves exposed to the wrongs of all men, when so small a number
returned, and there was no kingdom and no power, they thought themselves
to have been as it were deceived. Hence the Prophet affirms here, that
there would be a wonderful work of God, which would shake the heaven and
the earth. It is therefore necessary that this should be applied to
Christ; for it was, as it were, a new creation of the world, when Christ
gathered together the things scattered, as the Apostle says, in the
heaven and in the earth. (<span id="v.iii.xi-p12.2"></span>[Col
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#020.md)<span
id="v.iii.xi-p12.2"></span>.) When he reconciled men to God and to
angels, when he conquered the devil and restored life to the dead, when
he shone forth with his own righteousness, then indeed God shook the
heaven and the earth; and he still shakes them at this day, when the
gospel is preached; for he forms anew the children of Adam after his own
image. This spiritual regeneration then is such an evidence of God’s
power and grace, that he may justly be said to shake the heaven and the
earth. The import of the passage is, that it behaved the Jews to form a
conception in their minds of something greater than could be seen by
their eyes; for their redemption was not yet completed.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p13"></span>Hence he subjoins — *I will overthrow the
throne of kingdoms; I will destroy the strength of the kingdoms of the
nations; and I will overthrow the chariot and him who sits in it; come
down shall the horses and their riders; every one shall fall by the
sword of his brother*. He confirms here the former sentence — that
nothing would be an hindrance that God should not renew his Church. And
rightly he adds this by way of anticipation; for the Jews were
surrounded on all sides by inveterate enemies; they had as many enemies
as they had neighbors; and they were hated even by the whole world. How
then could they emerge into that dignity which was then promised to
them, except God overturned the rest of the world? But the Prophet here
meets this objection, and briefly shows that God would rather that all
the nations should perish, than that his Church should remain in that
dishonorable state. We then see that the Prophet here means no other
thing then that God would overcome all those impediments, which Satan
and the whole world may throw in the way, when it is his purpose to
restore his Church.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p14"></span>We now perceive the Prophet’s designs,
and we also perceive the application of his doctrine. For whenever
impediments and difficulties come in our way, calculated to drive us to
despair, when we think of the restoration of the Church, this prophecy
ought to come to our minds, which shows that it is in God’s power, and
that it is his purpose to overturn all the kingdoms of the earth, to
break chariots in pieces, to cast down and lay prostrate all riders,
rather then to allow them to prevent the restoration of his Church.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p15"></span>But in the last verse the Prophet shows
why God would do this — even that Zerubbabel might prosper together with
the whole people. Hence he says — *In that day saith Jehovah, I will
take thee, Zerubbabel, and will set thee as a signet, for I have chosen
thee*. As we have before said, God addresses Zerubbabel here, that in
his person he might testify that he would bless the people whom he
intended to gather under that sacred leader; for though Zerubbabel never
had a kingdom, nor ever wore a crown, he was yet of the tribe of Judah;
and God designed that some spark of that kingdom should exist, which he
had raised in the family of David. Since, then, Zerubbabel was at that
time a type of Christ, God declares here that he would be to him as a
signet — that is, that his dignity would be esteemed by him. This
comparison of a signet is found also in other places. It is said in
<span id="v.iii.xi-p15.1"></span>[Jer
22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#024.md)<span id="v.iii.xi-p15.1"></span>
— “Though this Coniah were a signet on my right hand I would pluck him
thence.” But here God says that Zerubbabel would be to him a signet —
that is, Thou shalt be with me in high esteem. For a sealing signet is
wont to be carefully preserved, as kings seek in this way to secure to
themselves the highest authority, so that more trust may be placed in
their seal than in the greatest princes. The meaning, then, of the
similitude is, that Zerubbabel, though despised by the world, was yet
highly esteemed by God. But it is evident that this was never fulfilled
in the person of Zerubbabel. It hence follows that it is to be applied
to Christ. God, in short, shows, that that people gathered under one
head would be accepted by him; for Christ was at length to rise, as it
is evident, from the seed of Zerubbabel.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p16"></span>But this reason is to be especially
noticed — *Because I have chosen thee*. For God does not here ascribe
excellencies or merits to Zerubbabel, when he says that he would hold
him in great esteem; but he attributes this to his own election. If,
then, the reason be asked why God had so much exalted Zerubbabel, and
bestowed on him favors so illustrious, it can be found in nothing else
but in the goodness of God alone. God had made a covenant with David,
and promised that his kingdom would be eternal; hence it was that he
chose Zerubbabel after the people had returned from exile; and this
election was the reason why God exalted Zerubbabel, though his power at
that time was but small. We indeed know that he was exposed to the
contempt of all nations; but God invites here the attention of the
faithful to their election, so that they might hope for more than what
the perception of the flesh could conceive or apprehend; for what he has
decreed cannot be made void; and in the person of Zerubbabel he had
determined to save a chosen people; for from him, as it has been said,
Christ was to come.

<span id="v.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="v.iii.xii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.iii.xii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we are still
restrained by our earthly cares, and cannot ascend upward to heaven with
so much readiness and alacrity as we ought — O grant, that since thou
extendest to us daily so liberal a supply for the present life, we may
at least learn that thou art our Father, and that we may not at the same
time fix our thoughts on these perishable things, but learn to elevate
our minds higher, and so make continual advances in thy spiritual
service, until at length we come to the full and complete fruition of
that blessed and celestial life which thou hast promised to us, and
procured for us by the blood of thy only begotten Son. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc29015.htm#fr_144.md) <span
id="v.iii.iii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iii-p6"></span> This is the most approved manner. There
is no instance in which it means "according.” It may be rendered — “This
*is* the word,” etc. There were two things which were intended to dispel
their fear — the covenant made with the fathers, and the Spirit of God —
the spirit of prophecy, “standing,” or existing among them. The Chaldee
Paraphrase is — “My Prophets are teaching among you.” The verse may be
thus translated —

<span id="v.iii.iii-p7"></span>This is the word which I covenanted with
you  
At your comming forth from Egypt,  
And my Spirit is continuing among you; fear not.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p8"></span>*Junius* and *Tremelius* render the
\[<span id="v.iii.iii-p8.1"></span>את\], “with,” and the verse thus —

<span id="v.iii.iii-p9"></span>With the word (i.e., having the word)
which I covenanted with you  
When ye came forth from Egypt,  
And with my Spirit standing among you, fear not.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p10"></span>*Henderson* considers “the word,” and
“my Spirit,” to be nominatives to the particle “standing,” or rather to
the auxiliary verb which is to be understood before it, and that
“standing” is in the singular number, on account of the nearer
nominative “my Spirit.” *Newcome* follows our version, and views \[<span
id="v.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>את\] as a preposition — “according to.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc29015.htm#fr_145.md) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p14"></span> Our common version is no doubt the best,
and is materially followed by *Newcome*, *Henderson*, and many others.
Retaining the tense of the passage, I would render the clause thus,

<span id="v.iii.iv-p15"></span>Yet once, shortly will it be,  
And I will shake, etc.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p16"></span>“Shortly *will* it *be*,” \[<span
id="v.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>מעט היא\] (shortly it) may be taken as a
parenthesis.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p17"></span>Yet once *more*, *in* a short time —
*Newcome.*

<span id="v.iii.iv-p18"></span>Yet once, within a little, — *Henderson.*

<span id="v.iii.iv-p19"></span>The shaking of the heavens, earth, sea,
and dry land is explained, according to the common manner of the
Prophets, in the next verse, by shaking of all nations: the material
world is named in the first instance, while its inhabitants are
intended. So *Henderson* very properly renders the \[<span
id="v.iii.iv-p19.1"></span>מ\] at the beginning of the seventh verse,
“Yea.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc29015.htm#fr_146.md) <span
id="v.iii.iv-p26.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.iv-p27"></span> Many have been the criticisms on this
clause, both as to its grammatical construction and as to the import of
the word rendered “desire.” The verb “come” is plural, and the word for
“desire” is singular. The easiest solution, and countenanced by the
Septuagint, where the word is rendered τὰ ἐκλεκτὰ — “choice things,” is
to consider \[<span id="v.iii.iv-p27.1"></span>חמדת\] as a plural, the
\[<span id="v.iii.iv-p27.2"></span>ו\] being omitted. This would remove
th egrammatical anomaly, and the sentiment, as *Calvin* says, woud be
more consonant with the context.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p28"></span>And come shall the choice things of all
nations.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p29"></span>There is no ground for the objection
which *Bishop Chandler* states, that to “come” is in this case an
improper expression; for there are other similar instances. See <span
id="v.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>[Jos
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos006.htm#012.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p29.1"></span>;
<span id="v.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>[Isa
60:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#005.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p29.2"></span>.
It is also applied to trees, <span id="v.iii.iv-p29.3"></span>[Isa
60:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#013.md)<span
id="v.iii.iv-p29.3"></span>; and to incense, <span
id="v.iii.iv-p29.4"></span>[Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p29.4"></span>.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p30"></span>*Newcome* takes the word as a plural, but
applies it as *deliciae* in Latin to a person, and refers to <span
id="v.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>[Da
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#023.md)<span id="v.iii.iv-p30.1"></span>;
where Daniel is called \[<span id="v.iii.iv-p30.2"></span>חמודות\],
rendered in our version “greatly beloved.”

<span id="v.iii.iv-p31"></span>The version of *Henderson* is the
following —

<span id="v.iii.iv-p32"></span>And the things desired by all nations
shall come.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p33"></span>He considers that they are the blessings
of the kingdom of Christ, and thinks that the Prophet refers to the
general expectation which pervaded the world of some better state of
things, and especially of some deliverer.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p34"></span>But the most tenable is the view of
*Calvin*, which has been held by *Kimchi*, *Drusius*, *Vitringa*, and
others. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc29015.htm#fr_147.md) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p17"></span> This clause is literally rendered by
*Newcome* — "Ask now the law from the priests;” or, according to the
order of the words, “Ask now from the priests the law.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_148"></span>[149](cc29015.htm#fr_148.md) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p26"></span> The words are \[<span
id="v.iii.vii-p26.1"></span>טמא-נפש\], polluted of soul, or polluted
soul. When pollution by a carcase or a dead body is meant, the
preposition \[<span id="v.iii.vii-p26.2"></span>ל\] is put before
\[<span id="v.iii.vii-p26.3"></span>נפש\]. See <span
id="v.iii.vii-p26.4"></span>[Num. 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002.md),
[Num. 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006.md),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007.md),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010.md)<span id="v.iii.vii-p26.4"></span>.
A polluted person seems to be intended here, without any reference to
the way in which he became so; and this is sufficient for the purpose of
the Prophet. *Theodoret* takes this sense — ἀκάθαρτόν τινα — “an unclean
person.” But most agree with our version; so do *Jerome*, *Dathius*,
*Newcome*, *Henderson*, and others — “the polluted by a dead body.” —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_149"></span>[150](cc29015.htm#fr_149.md) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p29"></span> <span
id="v.iii.vii-p29.1"></span>Compositum jus, fasque animi, sanctosque
recesssus Mentis, et incoctum generoso pectus honesto. — *Per. Sat.* 2.
74.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[151](cc29015.htm#fr_150.md) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p32"></span> <span id="v.iii.vii-p32.1"></span>Non
ben celestes impia dextra colit.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[152](cc29015.htm#fr_151.md) <span
id="v.iii.vii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.vii-p45"></span> The literal rendering of the verse
would be as follows, —

<span id="v.iii.vii-p46"></span>*Then answered Haggai and said,* —*  
Such is this people and such is this nation,  
Before me, saith Jehovah;  
Yea, such is every work of their hands,  
And what they offer there, polluted it is.*

<span id="v.iii.vii-p47"></span>The Prophet seems to have pointed to the
altar on which they offered their sacrifices, when he says, “What they
offer there.” Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* are evidently wrong in
rendering the passage in the past tense. The last verb is future, used,
as it is often, as a present. So we render it in Welsh, <span
id="v.iii.vii-p47.1"></span>*yr hyn a aberthant yna*; but we understand
it as a present act. We may notice here what is often the character of
the Prophetic style; the two last lines explain more particularly what
the two first contain. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc29015.htm#fr_152.md) <span
id="v.iii.x-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p17"></span> <span id="v.iii.x-p17.1"></span>*Supra*,
\[<span id="v.iii.x-p17.2"></span>מעלה\]; "upward,” *Newcome*;
“backward,” *Henderson*; “forward,” *Secker.* The last refers to <span
id="v.iii.x-p17.3"></span>[1Sa
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p17.3"></span>,
and 30:25, as the only places besides here and in verse 18, where it is
applied to time: and clearly in Samuel it means “forward,” or hereafter.
It means the same when applied to age, <span
id="v.iii.x-p17.4"></span>[Nu
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p17.4"></span>,
and when applied to place, <span id="v.iii.x-p17.5"></span>[De
28:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#043.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p17.5"></span>

<span id="v.iii.x-p18"></span>If we retain this meaning, we must
consider this verse, and its repetition in verse 18, as the commencement
of a sentence, which is completed at the end of verse 19, as intervening
clauses. Then the passage would be as follows —

<span id="v.iii.x-p19"></span>**15.** And now take, I pray, notice;  
From this day and forward,  
From the time of setting a stone on a stone  
In the Temple of Jehovah,

<span id="v.iii.x-p20"></span>**16.** From the time you came to a heap
of twenty,  
And it was ten,  
*And* came to the vat to draw fifty measures,  
And there were twenty;

<span id="v.iii.x-p21"></span>**17.** I smote you with blight, and with
mildew,  
And with hail, even all the work of your hands;  
But ye *turned* not to me, saith Jehovah; —

<span id="v.iii.x-p22"></span>**18.** Take, I pray, notice;  
From this day and forward,  
From the twenty-fourth day of the ninth *month*,  
From the day in which was founded  
The Temple of Jehovah; — take notice;

<span id="v.iii.x-p23"></span>**19.** Is yet the seed in the granary?
—  
And as yet the vine and the fig tree,  
And the pomegranate and the olive, it hath not borne; —  
From this day will I bless *you.*

<span id="v.iii.x-p24"></span>I prefer “Take notice,” or, “mark,” to
“consider,” as the meaning of \[<span id="v.iii.x-p24.1"></span>לבבכם
שימו\], “set or fix your heart.” In favor of “your” instead of “their”
in verse 16, there are three MSS.; and it is more consistent with the
context. The expression literally is, “From your being to come,” *i.e*
from the time in which you came, and found out the deficiency. “Fifty
measures;” \[<span id="v.iii.x-p24.2"></span>פורה\] is rendered by the
Septuagint μετρητὰς — “baths;” by *Jerome*, “<span
id="v.iii.x-p24.3"></span>Lagenas — flagons.” The word means here
evidently a vessel to measure the wine from the vat; what quantity it
contained is not known. It is here in the singular number, while the
numeral, “fifty,” is in the plural; <span
id="v.iii.x-p24.4"></span>*deugain*, which literally in English is, “ten
measure and forty.” In verse 17, “even all the work of your hands,” is
in apposition with “you,” and explanatory of it, according to what we
often find in the Prophets; for by “you” was meant their “work,” and not
themselves personally. “But ye *turned* not to me,” literally, “But ye
not to me;” perhaps the meaning is, “Ye ascribed it not to me,” that is,
the judgment previously mentioned, or, “Ye attended not to me:” but the
verb \[<span id="v.iii.x-p24.5"></span>שבתם\] is commonly thought to be
understood. See <span id="v.iii.x-p24.6"></span>[Am
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009.md)<span id="v.iii.x-p24.6"></span>.
The question in verse 19 is to be taken negatively, to correspond with
the negative declaration in what follows. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Scripture Translations](cc29016.md)
