[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29003)  [Next](cc29005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="iii.ii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Sixth.

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#001)<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p2"></span>**1.** The burden which Habakkuk the
prophet did see.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1.** Onus quod vidit Chabakuk Propheta.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p4"></span><span id="iii.ii.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p5"></span>The greater part of interpreters refer
this burden to the Chaldeans and the monarchy of Babylon; but of this
view I do not approve, and a good reason compels me to dissent from
their opinion: for as the Prophet addresses the Jews, and without any
addition calls his prophecy a burden, there is no doubt but that he
refers to them. Besides, their view seems wholly inconsistent, because
the Prophet dreads the future devastation of the land, and complains to
God for allowing His chosen and elect people to be so cruelly treated.
What others think is more correct — that this burden belonged to the
Jews.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>What the Prophet understood by the word
<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>משא, *mesha*, has been elsewhere
stated. Habakkuk then reproves here his own nation, and shows that they
had in vain disdainfully resisted all God’s prophets, for they would at
length find that their threatening would be accomplished. The burden,
then, which the Prophet Habakkuk saw, was this — That God, after having
exercised long forbearance towards the Jews, would at length be the
punisher of their many sins. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Hab.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#002),
[3](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#003)<span id="iii.ii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p2"></span>**2.** O LORD, how long shall I cry, and
thou wilt not hear! *even* cry out unto thee *of* violence, and thou
wilt not save!

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p3"></span>**2.** Quousque, Jehova, clamabo, et non
exaudies? Vociferabor ad te ob violentiam, et non servabis?

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p4"></span>**3.** Why dost thou shew me iniquity,
and cause *me* to behold grievance? for spoiling and violence *are*
before me: and there are *that* raise up strife and contention.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3.** Quare ostendis mihi iniquitatem,
et moestiam aspicere facis? Et direptio et violentia in conspectu meo?
et est qui litem et contentionem excitet.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p8"></span>As I have already reminded you,
interpreters think that the Prophet speaks here of future things, as
though he had in his view the calamity which he afterwards mentions; but
this is too strained a meaning; I therefore doubt not but that the
Prophet expostulates here with God for so patiently indulging a
reprobate people. For though the Prophets felt a real concern for the
safety of the people, there is yet no doubt but that they burned with
zeal for the glory of God; and when they saw that they had to contend
with refractory men, they were then inflamed with a holy displeasure,
and undertook the cause of God; and they implored His aid to bring a
remedy when the state of things had become desperate. I therefore
consider that the Prophet here solicits God to visit these many sins in
which the people had hardened themselves. And hence we conclude that he
had previously exercised his office of a teacher; for it would have been
otherwise improper for him to begin his work with such a complaint and
expostulation. He had then by experience found that the people were
extremely perverse. When he saw that there was no hope of amendment, and
that the state of things was becoming daily worse, burning with zeal for
God, he gave full vent to his feelings. Before, then, he threatens the
people with the future vengeance of God, he withdraws himself, as it
were, from intercourse with men, and in private addresses God himself.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p9"></span>We must bear this first in mind, that
the Prophet relates here the secret colloquy he had with God: but it
ought not to be ascribed to an unfeeling disposition, that in these
words he wished to hasten God’s vengeance against his own kindred; for
it behaved the Prophet not only to be solicitous for the salvation of
the people, but also to feel a concern for the glory of God, yea, to
burn with a holy zeal. As, then, he had in vain labored for a length of
time, I doubt not but that, being as it were far removed from the
presence of all witnesses, he here asks God, how long he purposed thus
to bear with the wickedness of the people. We now apprehend the design
of the Prophet and the import of his words.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p10"></span>But he says first, *How long, Jehovah,
shall I cry, and thou hearest not? How long shall I cry to thee for
violence, that is, on account of violence, and thou savest not?* We
hence learn, that the Prophet had often prayed God to correct the people
for their wickedness, or to contrive some means to prevent so much
licentiousness in sinning. It is indeed probable that the Prophet had
prayed as long as there was any hope; but when he saw that things were
past recovery, he then prayed more earnestly that God would undertake
the office of a judge, and chastise the people. For though the Prophet
really condoled with those who perished, and was touched, as I have
said, with a serious concern for their public safety, he yet preferred
the glory of God: when, therefore, he saw that boldness in sin increased
through impunity, and that the Jews in a manlier mocked God when they
found that they could sin without being punished, he could not endure
such unbridled wantonness. Besides, the Prophet may have spoken thus,
not only as expressing his own feeling, but what he felt in common with
all the godly; as though he had undertaken here a public duty, and
utters a complaint common to all the faithful: for it is probable that
all the godly, in so disordered a state of things, mourned alike. *How
long, then, shall I cry? How long, he says, shall I cry on account of
violence?* that is, When all things are in disorder, when there is now
no regard for equity and justice, but men abandon themselves, as it were
with loose reins, unto all kinds of wickedness, how long, Lord, wilt
thou take no notice? But in these words the Prophet not only egresses
his own feelings, but makes this kind of preface, that the Jews might
better understand that the time of vengeance was come; for they were
become not only altogether intolerable to God, but also to his servants.
God indeed had suspended his judgement, though he had been often
solicited to execute it by his Prophet. It hence appears, that their
wickedness had made such advances that it would be no wonder if they
were now severely chastised by the Lord; for they had by their sins not
only provoked him against them, but also all the godly and the faithful.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p11"></span><span id="iii.ii.iii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p12"></span>He afterwards adds, *How long wilt thou
show me iniquity, and make me to see trouble?* Here the Prophet briefly
relates the cause of his indignation, — that he could not, without great
grief, yea, without anguish of mind, behold such evils prevailing among
God’s chosen people; for they who apply this to the Chaldeans, do so
strainedly, and without any necessity, and they have not observed the
reason which I have stated — that the Prophet does not here teach the
Jews, but prepares them for a coming judgement, as they could not but
see that they were justly condemned, since they were proved guilty by
the cry and complaints made by all the godly.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p13"></span>Now this passage teaches us, that all
who really serve and love God, ought, according to the Prophet’s
example, to burn with holy indignation whenever they see wickedness
reigning without restraint among men, and especially in the Church of
God. There is indeed nothing which ought to cause us more grief than to
see men raging with profane contempt for God, and no regard had for his
law and for divine truth, and all order trodden under foot. When
therefore such a confusion appears to us, we must feel roused, if we
have in us any spark of religion. If it be objected, that the Prophet
exceeded moderation, the obvious answer is this, — that though he freely
pours forth his feelings, there was nothing wrong in this before God, at
least nothing wrong is imputed to him: for wherefore do we pray, but
that each of us may unburden his cares, his griefs, and anxieties, by
pouring them into the bosom of God? Since, then, God allows us to deal
so familiarly with him, nothing wrong ought to be ascribed to our
prayers when we thus freely pour forth our feelings, provided the bridle
of obedience keeps us always within due limits, as was the case with the
Prophet; for it is certain that he was retained under the influence of
real kindness. Jeremiah did indeed pray with unrestrained fervor (<span
id="iii.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>[Jer
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)<span
id="iii.ii.iii-p13.1"></span>): but his case was different from that of
our Prophet; for he proceeds not here to an excess, as Jeremiah did when
he cursed the day of his birth, and when he expostulated with God for
being made a man of contention. But our Prophet undertakes here the
defense of justice; for he could not endure the law of God to be made a
sport, and men to allow themselves every liberty in sinning.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p14"></span>We now, then, see that the Prophet can
be justly excused, though he expostulates here with God, for God does
not condemn this freedom in our prayers; but, on the contrary, the end
of praying is, that every one of us pour forth, as it is said in the
Psalms, his heart before God. As, then, we communicate our cares and
sorrows to God, it is no wonder that the Prophet, according to the
manner of men, says, Why dost thou show me iniquity, and make me to see
trouble? Trouble is to be taken here in an active sense, and the verb
<span id="iii.ii.iii-p14.1"></span>תבימ, *tabith*, has a transitive
meaning.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) Some render it, Why dost
thou look on trouble? as though the Prophet indignantly bore the
connivance of God. But the context necessarily requires that this verb
should be taken in a transitive sense. “Why dost thou show me iniquity?”
and then, “and makest me to look on violence?” He says afterwards, in
the third place, in my sight is violence. But I have said, that the word
trouble is to be taken actively; for the prophet means not that he was
worn out with weariness, but that wicked men were troublesome to the
good and the innocent, as it is usually the case when a freedom in
sinning prevails.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p20"></span>And *why*, he says, *are violence and
plunder in my sight? and there is he who excites, etc.?* The verb <span
id="iii.ii.iii-p20.1"></span>נשא, *nusha* means not here to undertake,
as some render it; but, on the contrary, to raise. Others render it,
“Who supports,” but this is frigid. Therefore the translation which I
have stated is the most suitable — *And why is there one who excites
strife and contention?*

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p21"></span>But the Prophet here accuses them only
of sins against the second table of the law: he speaks not of the
superstitions of people, and of the corrupted worship of God; but he
briefly says, that they had no regard for what was just and right: for
the stronger any one was, the more he distressed the helpless and the
innocent. It was then for this reason that he mentioned iniquity,
trouble, plunder, violence, contention, strife. In short, the Prophet
here deplores, that there was now no equity and no brotherly kindness
among the people, but that robberies, rapines, and tyrannical violence
prevailed everywhere. It follows —

<span id="iii.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#004)<span id="iii.ii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p2"></span>**4.** Therefore the law is slacked, and
judgement doth never go forth: for the wicked doth compass about the
righteous; therefore wrong judgement proceedeth.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p3"></span>**4.** Propterea dissolvitur (*vel*,
debilitatur) lex, et non egredietur perpetuo judicium (*vel*, non
egreditur:) quia impius circumdat justum, propterea impius circumdat
justum, propterea egredietur judicium perversum.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms here what I have
already said, and brings an excuse for his zeal; he proves that he was
not without reason led to so great a warmth; for he saw that the law of
God was trodden as it were under foot; he saw men so hardened in every
kind of sin, that all religion and the fear of God had nearly been
extinguished. Hence I have already said, that the Prophet was not here
impelled by a carnal passion, as it often happens to us, when we defend
ourselves from wrongs done to us; for when any one of us is injured, he
immediately becomes incensed, while, at the same time, we suffer God’s
law to be a sport, His whole truth to be despised, and everything that
is just to be violated. We are only tender on what concerns us
individually, and in the meantime we easily forgive when God is wronged,
and His truth despised. But the Prophet shows here that he was not made
indignant through a private feeling, but because he could not bear the
profanation of God’s worship and the violation of His holy law.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p7"></span>He therefore says, that the law was
dissolved or weakened, as though he said that God’s law had no longer
any authority or regard. Let us hence learn to rouse up ourselves, for
we are very frigid, when the ungodly openly despise and even mock God.
As, then, we are too unconcerned in this respect, let us learn, by the
Prophet’s example, to stimulate ourselves. For even Paul also shows, in
an indirect way, that there is just reason for indignation — ‘Be ye
angry,’ he says, ‘and sin not,’ (<span id="iii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>[Eph
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#026)<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p7.1"></span>); that is, every one ought to regard his own
sins, so as to become an enemy to himself; and he ought also to feel
indignant whenever he sees God offended.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p8"></span>This rule the Prophet now follows,
*Weakened*, he says, *is the law*  <span id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) We
know that when a sinful custom prevails, there is but little authority
in what is taught: nor are human laws only despised when men’s audacity
breaks through all restraints, but even the very law of God is esteemed
as nothing; for they think that everything erroneously done, by the
consent of all, is lawful. We now then see that the Prophet felt great
anguish of mind, like holy Lot (<span id="iii.ii.iv-p11.5"></span>[Ge
19:1-38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.5"></span>.), when he saw every regard for God almost
extinct in the land, and especially among the chosen people, whom God
had above all others consecrated to himself.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p12"></span>He then adds, *judgement goes not forth
perpetually*. Absurdly do many regard this as having been said in the
person of foolish men, who think that there is no such thing as divine
providence, when things in the world are in a disordered state: but the
Prophet simply says, that all justice was suppressed. We have nearly the
very same complaint in <span id="iii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>[Isa
59:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#004)<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p12.1"></span>. He then says, that judgement did not go
forth perpetually, because the ungodly thought that no account was to be
given by them. When, therefore, any one dared to say a word against
them, they immediately boiled with rage, and like wild beasts fiercely
attacked him. All then were silent, and nearly made dumb, when the
ungodly thus prevailed and gathered boldness from the daily practice of
licentiousness. Hence, ‘Go forth perpetually does not judgement;’ that
is, “O Lord, things are now past hope, and there appears to be no end to
our evils, except thou comest soon and applies a remedy beyond what our
flesh can conceive.” *For the wicked*, he says, *surround the
righteous*; that is, when there was any one who continued to retain some
regard for religion and justice, immediately the wicked rose up against
him on every side and surrounded him before and behind; so it happened,
that no one dared to oppose the torrent, though frauds, rapines,
outrages, cruelty, and even murders everywhere prevailed; if any
righteous men still remained, they dared not come forth into the public,
for the wicked beset them on all sides.

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p13"></span>He afterwards adds, *Therefore perverted
judgement goes forth*. The Prophet now rises higher, that even the
rulers themselves increased the rage for evils, and as it were supplied
fuel to their wickedness, as they confounded all distinction between
right and wrong: for the Prophet speaks not here of private wrongs which
any one might have done, but he speaks of the very rulers, as though he
said, “There might have been one remedy, the judges might have checked
so great an audacity; but they themselves stretch out their hands to the
wicked and help them.” Hence the tribunals, which ought to have been
sacred, were become as it were dens of thieves. The word <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p13.1"></span>משפט, *meshiphith* is taken properly in a
good sense: Is not judgement then a desirable thing? Yes, but the
Prophet says, that it was perverted. It was then by way of concession
that judgement is mentioned; for he afterwards adds a word to it, by
which he shows that the administration of the laws was evil and
injurious: for when any one oppressed had recourse to the assistance of
the laws, he was plundered. In short, the Prophet means, that all things
in private and in public were corrupt among the people. It now follows —

<span id="iii.ii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p2"></span>**5.** Behold ye among the heathen, and
regard, and wonder marvellously: for *I* will work a work in your days,
*which* ye will not believe, though it be told *you*

<span id="iii.ii.v-p3"></span>**5.** Videte in gentibus, et aspicite, et
admiramini, admiramini; quia opus operans in diebus vestris, non
credetis, quum narratum fuerit.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.v-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p6"></span>The Prophet turns his discourse to the
Jews, after having related the private colloquy, in which he
expostulated with God for having so patiently borne with the obstinate
wickedness of the nation. Being now as it were furnished with God’s
command, (as the case really was,) he performs the office of a herald,
and proclaims an approaching destruction. He indeed adopts a preface,
which ought to have awakened drowsy and careless minds. He says — *look,
see, be astonished, be astonished*; these repetitions do not a little
increase the alarm; he twice bids them to see, and he twice exhorts them
to be astonished, or to wonder. He then briefly proclaims the judgement
of God, which he afterwards more fully describes. We now, then, perceive
the object of the Prophet, and the manner in which he proceeds with his
subject.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p7"></span>And he bids those among the nations to
behold, as though he had said, that they were unworthy to be taught in
the school of God; he therefore appointed other masters for them, even
the Chaldeans, as we shall presently see. He might have said — look to
God; but as the Prophet had so long spent his labor in vail and without
profit while teaching them, he sets over them the Chaldeans as teachers.
Behold, he says, ye teachers among the Gentiles. There is here indeed an
implied contrast, as thought he said — “God has hitherto often recalled
you to himself, and has offered himself to you, but ye have refused to
look to him; now then, as he is wearied with exercising patience so
long, he appoints for you other teachers; learn now from the Gentiles
what ye leave hitherto refused to learn from the holy mouth of Cod
himself”.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p8"></span>The Greek translators no doubt read <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.1"></span>בגורים, for their version is — “Behold, ye
despisers.”  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) But in Hebrew there is
no ambiguity as to the word.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p10"></span>He afterwards adds — *And wonder ye,
wonder*  <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) By these words the
prophets express how dreadful God’s judgement would be, which would
astonish the Jews themselves. Had they not been extremely refractory
they might have quietly received instruction, for God would have
addressed them by his prophets, as though they had been his own
children. They might thus, with composed minds, have listened to God
speaking to them; but the time was now come when they were to be filled
with astonishment. We hence see that the Prophet meant this in a few
words — that there would be a new mode of teaching, which would
overwhelm the unwilling with astonishment, because they would not endure
to be ruled in a gentle manner, when the Lord required nothing from them
but to render themselves teachable.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p12"></span>After having said that God’s judgement
would be dreadful, he adds that it was nigh at hand — *a work*, he says,
*will he work in your days*, etc. They had already been often warned of
that vengeance, but as they had for a long time disregarded it, they did
ever remain sunk in their own self-delusions, like men who are wont to
protract time and hunt on every side for some excuse for indulging
themselves. So then when the people became hardened against all
threatening, they thought that God would ever bear with them; hence the
Prophet expressly declares, that the execution of that which they
regarded as a fable was near at hand — *He will work*, he says, *this
work in your days*

<span id="iii.ii.v-p13"></span>He then subjoins — *ye will not believe
when it shall be told you*; that is, God will execute such a punishment
as will be incredible and exceed all belief. The Prophet no doubt
alludes to the want of faith in the people, and indirectly reproves
them, as though he said — “Ye have hitherto denied faith to God’s word,
but ye shall at length find that he has told the truth; and this ye
shall find to your astonishment; for as his word has been counted by you
incredible, so also incredible shall be his judgement.” In short, the
Prophet intimates this — that though the Prophets had been derided by
the Jews, and despised as inventors of fables, yet nothing had been said
by them which would not be fully accomplished. This reward then was to
be paid to all the unbelieving; for God would in the most dreadful
manner avenge their impiety, so that they should themselves be
astonished and become an astonishment to others. We now perceive what
the Prophet meant by saying that the Jews would not believe the work of
God when told them, that is, the vengeance which he will presently
describe.

<span id="iii.ii.v-p14"></span>This passage is quoted by Paul, and is
applied to the punishment then awaiting the Jews; for Paul, after having
offered Christ to them, and seeing that many of them regarded the
preaching of Gospel with scorn, added these words — “see,” he said, “and
be astonished, for God will work a work in your days which ye shall not
believe.” Paul at the same time made a suitable application of the
Prophet’s words; for as God had once threatened his people by his
Prophet Habakkuk, so he was still like himself; and since had so
severely vindicated the contempt of his law as to his ancient people, he
could not surely bear with the impiety of that people whom he found to
have acted so malignantly and so ungratefully, yea so wantonly and
perversely, as to reject his grace; for this was the last remedy for the
Jews. No wonder then that Paul set before them this vengeance, when the
Jews of his time persisted through their unbelief to reject Christ. Now
follows the explanation -

<span id="iii.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#006)<span id="iii.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** For, lo, I raise up the Chaldeans,
*that* bitter and hasty nation, which shall march through the breadth of
the land, to possess the dwellingplaces *that are* not theirs.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Quia ecce ego excito Chaldaeos,
gentem asperam, et praecipitem, quae incedet per latitudines terrae, ad
possidendum tabernacula non sua.

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vi-p6"></span>This verse is added by the Prophet as an
explanation; for it was not enough to speak generally of God’s work,
without reminding them that their destruction by the Chaldeans was nigh
at hand. He does not indeed in this verse explain what would be the
character of that judgement which he had mentioned in the last verse
<span id="iii.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>[Hab
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005)<span id="iii.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>;
but he will do this in what follows. Now the Prophets differ from Moses
in this respect, for they show, as it were by the finger, what he
threatened generally, and they declare the special judgements of God; as
it is indeed evident from the demonstrative adverb, “Behold.” How
necessary this was, we may gather from the perverseness of that people;
for how distinctly soever the Prophets showed to them God’s judgements,
so that they saw them with their eyes, yet so great was their
insensibility, that they despised denunciations so apparent. What, then,
would have been done, if the Prophets had only said in general, ‘God
will not spare you!’ This, then, is the reason why the Prophet, having
spoken of God’s terrible vengeance, now declares in express terms, that
the Chaldeans were already armed by Him to execute His judgement. The
rest we leave for tomorrow.

<span id="iii.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ii.vii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as our sins
cry continually to heaven, each of us may turn to repentance, and by
condemning ourselves of our own accord may anticipate thy judgement, and
thus stir up ourselves to repentance, that being received into favor, we
may find thee, whom we have provoked to take vengeance, to be indeed our
Father: and may we be so preserved by thee in this world, that having at
length put off all our vices, we may attain to that perfection of
purity, to which thou invites us; and thus lead us more and more to
thyself by thy Spirit, and separate us from the corruptions of this
world, that we may glorify thee before men, and be at last made
partakers of that celestial glory which has been purchased for us by the
blood of thy only begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Seventh

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p2"></span>In the lecture of yesterday the Prophet
began to show from whom the Jews were to expect the vengeance of God,
even from the Chaldeans, who would come, not by their own instinct, but
by the hidden impulse of God. God indeed testifies that he should be the
author of this war, and that the Chaldeans would fight, as it were,
under his auspices. *I am he*, *he says*, *who excites*, etc. Then by
calling the Chaldeans *a bitter and hasty nation*, he intended seriously
to terrify the Jews, who had heedlessly despised all threatenings.
 <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) It was not indeed a subject of
praise to the Chaldeans, that they were bitter and impetuous: but the
Lord could turn these vices to a good purpose, inasmuch as he elicits
light from darkness. When, therefore, we read that the Chaldeans were
bitter, and also hasty, God thus intimates that he can employ the vices
of men in executing his judgements, and yet contract hence no spot nor
blemish; for we cannot possibly pollute him with our filth, as he
scatters it far away by the brightness of his justice and equity.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p4"></span>He afterwards adds, *They shall march
through the latitudes*  <span id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) *of the
earth, to possess habitations not their own*. He means that there would
be no obstacles in the way of the Chaldeans, but that they would spread
themselves over the whole earth, and occupy regions far remote. For they
who fear, dare not thus disperse themselves, but, on the contrary, they
advance cautiously with a collected army; but those, who have already
obtained victory, march on to lay waste the land. This is what the
Prophet says the Chaldeans would do.

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p6"></span>The meaning is — that they would not
come to carry on an uncertain warfare, but that they would enjoy a
victory; for they would by an impetuous course fill the land, so as to
occupy tents or habitations not their own. It was indeed a matter of
blame in the Chaldeans, that they thus made inroads on their own
neighbors: but, as I have said, God intended only to fill the Jews with
terror, because he found that all threatenings were despised. He
therefore meant to show how terrible the Chaldeans would be, and he
confirms the same in the next verse.

<span id="iii.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#007)<span id="iii.ii.ix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p2"></span>**7.** They *are* terrible and dreadful:
their judgement and their dignity shall proceed of themselves.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p3"></span>**7.** Terribilis et metuenda ipsa, ab
ipsa judicium ejus (pro jure ponitur hoc nomen,) et exultatio (vel,
dignitas) ejus egredietur.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p6"></span>By saying that the Chaldeans would be
terrible and dreadful, he praises not their virtues; but, as I have
already reminded you, he shows that they would be prepared to do his
service by executing his vengeance: and he so regulated his judgement,
that he used their cruelty for a good purpose. Thus we see that the
worst of men are in God’s hand, as Satan is, who is their head; and yet
that God is not implicated in their wickedness, as some insane men
maintain; for they say — That if God governs the world by his
providence, he becomes thus the author of sin, and men’s sins are to be
ascribed to him. But Scripture teaches us far otherwise, — that the
wicked are led here and there by the hidden power of God, and that yet
the fault is in them, when they do anything in a deceitful and cruel
manner, and that God ever remains just, whatever use he may make of
instruments, yea, the very worst.

<span id="iii.ii.ix-p7"></span>But when the Prophet adds, that *its
judgement would be from the nation itself*, he means that the Chaldeans
would act according to their own will. When any one indeed obeys laws,
and willingly submits to them, he will freely allow either judges or
umpires in case of a dispute; but he who will have all things done
according to his own purpose repudiates all judges. The Prophet
therefore means, that the Chaldeans would be their own judges, so that
the Jews or others would complain in vain for any wrongs done to them.
“They shall be,” he says, “their own judges, and shall execute
judgement, for they will not accept any arbitrators.” The word
*judgement*, taken in a good sense, is put here for law (*jus*); as
though he said, “Whatever the Chaldeans will claim for themselves,
theirs shall it be; for no one will dare to interfere, and they will not
submit to the will of others; but their power shall be for law, and
their sword for a tribunal.” We now understand the Prophet’s meaning;
and we must ever bear in mind what I have already said, — That God had
no participation in these vices; but it was necessary that the
stubbornness of an irreclaimable people should be thus corrected, or at
least broken down. The Lord in the meantime could use such instruments
in such a way as to preserve some moderation in his judgements. It
follows —

<span id="iii.ii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#008)<span id="iii.ii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p2"></span>**8.** Their horses also are swifter than
the leopards, and are more fierce than the evening wolves: and their
horsemen shall spread themselves, and their horsemen shall come from
far; they shall fly as the eagle *that* hasteth to eat.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p3"></span>**8.** Et velociores pardis equi ejus, et
acutiores lupis vespertinis: et multiplicati sunt equites ejus, et
equites ejus e longinquo venient; volabunt quasi aquila festinans ad
comedendum (*vel*, ad cibum.)

<span id="iii.ii.x-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.x-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p6"></span>The design of these figurative expressions
is the same. The Prophet had spoken of the cruelty of those enemies whom
the Jews despised: he now adds, that they would be so active as to
surpass in velocity both leopards and eagles, or to be at least equal to
them. He then says first, that their horses would be swifter then
leopards. The Jews might have eluded his threatenings, or at least have
cherished their insensibility by a vain confidence, as we see how this
vice prevails in the world; for they might have thought thus within
themselves, “The Chaldeans are far away, and the danger of which the
Prophet speaks cannot be so near at hand.” Hence he declares that their
horses would be swifter than leopards.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p7"></span>He then adds, that *they would be fiercer
than the evening wolves*. The wolf is a rapacious animal; and when he
ranges about all the day in vain seeking what he may devour, then in the
evening hunger kindles his rage. There is, therefore, nothing more
dreadful than hungry wolves. But, as I have said, except they find some
prey about the evening, they become the more furious. We shall meet with
the same simile in <span id="iii.ii.x-p7.1"></span>[Zep
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#001)<span id="iii.ii.x-p7.1"></span>.
We now see the drift of the Prophet’s words.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p8"></span>He adds that *their horsemen would be
numerous*  <span id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) He now sets forth their
power, lest the Jews should have recourse to vain hopes, because they
might obtain some help either from the Egyptians or other neighbors. The
Prophet shows that all such hopes would be wholly vain; for had they
gathered auxiliaries from all quarters, still the Chaldeans would exceed
them in power and number.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p12"></span>He afterwards says, that *their horsemen
would come from a distance*. Though they should have a long journey, yet
weariness would not hinder and delay them in coming from a remote part.
The toil of travelling would not weaken them, until they reached Judea.
How so? Because it will fly, he says, (he speaks throughout of the
nation itself,) *as an eagle hastening to devour*. This metaphor is also
most suitable to the present purpose; for it signifies, that wherever
the Chaldeans saw a prey, they would instantly come, as an eagle to any
carcass it may observe. Let the distance be what it may, as soon as it
sees a prey, it takes a precipitate flight, and is soon present to
devour; for the rapidity of eagles, as it is well known, is astonishing.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p13"></span>We now see that what we learn from the
Prophet’s words is substantially this, — that God’s judgement ought to
have been feared, because he purposed to employ the Chaldeans as his
servants, whose cruel disposition and inhumanity would be dreadful: he
also shows that the Chaldeans would be far superior in power and number;
and in third place he makes it known, that they would possess an
astonishing rapidity, and that though length of journey might be deemed
a hindrance, they would yet be like eagles, which come like an arrow
from heaven to earth, whenever a prey is observed by them. And eagles
are not only rapid in their flight, but they possess also sharpness of
sight; for we know that the eyes of eagles are remarkably keen and
strong: and it is said that they cast away their young, if they find
that they cannot look steadily at the sun; for they regard them as
spurious. The Prophet then intimates that the Chaldeans would from a
distance observe their prey: as the eagles, who are endued with
incredible quickness of sight, see from mid air every carcass lying on
the ground; so also would the Chaldeans quickly discover a prey, and
come upon it in an instant. Let us proceed.

<span id="iii.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#009)<span id="iii.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p2"></span>**9.** They shall come all for violence:
their faces shall sup up *as* the east wind, and they shall gather the
captivity as the sand.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p3"></span>**9.** Tota (semper de ipsa gente
loquitur, hoc est. totus ipse populus) ad praedam venict; occursus
vultus ipsorum (jam in plurali numera loquitar) ventus orientalis, et
colliget quasi arenam captivitatem.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p6"></span>By saying that they would come to the
prey, he means that they would have no trouble or labor, for they would
be victorious before they had any contest, or had any war with their
enemies. The meaning then is, that the Chaldeans would not come to spend
much time in warfare, as when there is a strong power to resist; but
that they would only come for the booty, for the Jews would be
frightened, and instantly submit themselves. And by these words the
Prophet intimates, that there would be neither strength nor courage in a
people so refractory: for God thus debilitates the hearts of those who
fiercely resist his word. Whenever, then, men become strong against God,
he so melts their hearts, that they cannot resist their fellow-mortals;
and thus he mocks their confidence, or rather their madness. Lest then
the Jews should still harbor any hope from the chance of war, the
Prophet says that the Chaldeans would only come for the prey, for all
would become subject to them.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p7"></span>He afterwards adds, that *the meeting of
their faces would be like the oriental wind*. The word <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>גמה, *gime*, means what is opposite; and its
derivative signifies meeting or opposition (*occursus*.) We indeed know
that the east wind was very injurious to the land of Judea, that it
dried up vegetation, yea, that it consumed as it were the whole produce
of the earth. The violence of that wind was also very great. Hence
whenever the Prophets wished to express a violent impetuosity, they
added this comparison of the east wind. It was therefore the same as
though the Prophet had said that the Jews would now in vain flatter
themselves; for as soon as they perceived the blowing of the east wind,
they would flee away, knowing that they would be wholly unable to stand
against it.  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14)

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p14"></span>Hence follows what is added by the
Prophets, *He shall gather the captivity like the sand*; that is, the
king of Babylon shall without any trouble subdue all the people, and
collect captives innumerable as the sand; for by the sand of the sea is
meant an immense number of men. In short, the Prophet shows that the
Jews were already conquered; because their striving and their contest
had been with God, whom they had so often and so obstinately provoked;
and also, because God had chosen for himself such servants as excelled
in quickness, and power, and cruelty. This is the sum of the whole. He
afterwards adds —

<span id="iii.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#010)<span id="iii.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p2"></span>**10.** And they shall scoff at the
kings, and the princes shall be a scorn unto them: they shall deride
every strong hold; for they shall heap dust, and take it.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p3"></span>**10.** Et ipse reges ridebit, et
principes subsannatio ei; ipse omnem munitionem subsannabit; congregabit
pulverem et capiet eam.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet concludes the subject which
he has been hitherto pursuing. He says that the Chaldeans would not come
to engage in a doubtful war, but only to triumph over conquered nations.
We indeed know that the Jews, though not excelling either in number or
in riches, were yet so proud, that they looked down, as it were, with
contempt on other nations, and we also know, that they vainly trusted in
vain helps; for as they were in confederacy with the Egyptians, they
thought themselves to be beyond the reach of danger. Hence the Prophet
says, that kings and princes would be only a sport to the Chaldeans, and
their fortresses would be only a derision to them. How so? For *they
will gather dust*, he says; that is, will make a mound of the dust of
the earth, and will thus penetrate into all fortified cities.

<span id="iii.ii.xii-p7"></span>In short the Prophet intended to cut off
every hope from the Jews, that they might humble themselves before God;
or he intended to take away every excuse if they repented not, as it
indeed happened; for we know that they did not repent notwithstanding
these warnings, until vengeance at length fully overtook them. He then
adds —

<span id="iii.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#011)<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**11.** Then shall *his* mind change,
and he shall pass over, and offend, *imputing* this his power unto his
god.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**11.** Tunc mutabit spiritum, et
transgredietur, et impie aget: haec virtus ejus deo ipsius.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet now begins to give some
comfort to the faithful, lest they should succumb under so grievous
evils. He has hitherto directed his discourse to that irreclaimable
people, but he now turns to the remnant; for there were always among
them some of the faithful, though few, whom God never neglected; yea,
for their sake often he sent his prophets; for though the multitude
derived no benefit, yet the faithful understood that God did not
threaten in vain, and were thus retained in his fear. This was the
reason why the prophets were wont, after having spoken generally, to
come down to the faithful, and as it were to comfort them apart and
privately. And this difference ought to be noticed, as we have said
elsewhere; for when the prophets denounce God’s wrath, the discourse
then is directed indiscriminately to the whole body of the people; but
when they add promises, it is then as though they called the faithful to
a private conference, and spake in their ear what had been committed to
them by the Lord. The truth might have been useful to all, had they
returned to a right mind; but as almost the whole people had hardened
themselves in their vices, and as Satan had rendered stupid the minds
and hearts of nearly all, it behaved the Prophet to have a special
regard to the chosen of God. We now then apprehend his design.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p7"></span>And he says — *now he will change his
spirit*. He bids the faithful to entertain hope, because the Chaldeans,
after having poured forth all their fury, will be punished by the Lord
for their arrogance, for it will be intolerable. This may indeed seem
frigid to ungodly men; for what wonder is it that the Chaldeans, after
having obtained so many victories, should grow haughty and exult in
their success, as is commonly the case? But as this is a fixed principle
with us, that men’s pride becomes intolerable to God when they extremely
exult and preserve no moderation — this is a very powerful argument —
that is, that whosoever thus raises his horns shall suddenly be laid
prostrate by the Lord. And Scripture also ever sets this before us, that
God beats down supercilious pride, and does this that we may know that
destruction is nigh all the ungodly, when they thus grow violently mad,
and know not that they are mortals. It was then for this reason that the
Prophet mentions what he says here; it was that the faithful might hope
for some end to the violence of their enemies, for God would check their
pride when they should transgress. But he says — *then He will change
his spirit*; not that there was before any humility in the Chaldeans,
but that success inebriated them, yea, and deprived them of all reason.
And it is a common thing that a person who has fortune as it were in his
hand, forgets himself, and thinks himself no longer a mortal. Great
kings do indeed confess that they are men; but we see how madness lays
hold on them; for, as I have said, being deluded by prosperity, they
deem themselves to be nothing less than gods.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p8"></span>The Prophet refers here to the king of
Babylon and all his people. He will change, he says, his spirit; that
is, success will take away from him whatever reason and moderation he
had. Now since the proud betray themselves and their disposition when
fortune smiles on them, let us learn to form our judgement of men
according to this experiment. If we would judge rightly of any man we
must see how he bears good and bad fortune; for it may be that he who
has borne adversity with a patient, calm and resigned mind, will
disappoint us in prosperity, and will so elate himself as to be wholly
another man. The Prophet then does not without reason speak of a change
of spirit; for though the Chaldeans were before proud, they were not so
extremely haughty as when their pride passed all bounds, after their
many victories. He will change then his spirit; not that the Chaldeans
were another kind of people, but that the Lord thus discovered their
madness which was before hid.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p9"></span>He then adds — *he will pass over*. The
Prophet intended to express that when the Lord suffered the Chaldeans to
rule far and wide, a way was thus opened for his judgements, which is
far different from the judgement of the flesh. For the more power men
acquire the more boldness they assume; and it seemed to tend to the
establishing of their power that they knew how to use their success. But
the Lord, as I have said, was secretly preparing a way to destroy them,
when they thus became proud and passed all bounds; hence the Prophet
does not simply condemn the haughtiness and pride of the Chaldeans, but
shows that a way is already open, as it were, for God’s judgement, that
he might destroy them, inasmuch as they would render themselves
intolerable.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p10"></span>He afterwards adds — *and shall act
impiously*. The verb <span id="iii.ii.xiii-p10.1"></span>אשם, *ashem* I
refer to the end of the verse — where he ascribes his power to his own
god. And the Prophet adds this explanation, in order that the Jews might
know what kind of sin would be the sin of the king of Babylon. He then
charges him with sacrilege, because he would think that he had become
the conqueror of Judea through the kindness of his idol, so that he
would make nothing of the power and glory of the true God. Since then
the Babylonian would transfer God’s glory to his own idol, his own ruin
would be thus made ripe; for the Lord would undertake his own cause, and
execute vengeance on such a sacrilege; for he speaks here no doubt of
the Babylonian, and according to his view, when he says —

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p11"></span>*This his strength is that of his
god*; but were any inclined to explain this of the true God, as some do,
he would make a harsh and a forced construction; for the Babylonians did
not worship the true God, but were devoted, as it is well known, to
their own superstitions. The Prophet then no doubt makes known here to
the faithful the pride with which the Babylonians would become elated,
and thus provoke God’s wrath against themselves; and also the
sacrilegious boasting in which they would indulge, ascribing the
victories given them to their own idols, which could not be done without
daring reproach to the true God.  <span id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15)
It now follows —

<span id="iii.ii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#012)<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p2"></span>**12.** *Art* thou not from everlasting,
O LORD my God, mine Holy One? we shall not die. O LORD, thou hast
ordained them for judgement; and, O mighty God, thou hast established
them for correction.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p3"></span>**12.** Annon tu ab initio, (*vel*,
jampridem,) Jehova, Deus meus? sanctus meus, non moriemur; Jehova, ad
judicium posiusti eum; et fortis, ad castigationem fundasti eum.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet now exulting, according to
what all the faithful feel, shows the effect of what he has just
mentioned; for as ungodly men wantonly rise up against God, and, while
Satan renders them insane, throw out swelling words of vanity, as though
they could by speaking confound earth and heaven; so also the faithful
derive a holy confidence from God’s word, and set themselves against
them, and overcome their ferocity by the magnanimity and firmness of
their own minds, so that they can intrepidly boast that they are happy
and blessed even in the greatest miseries.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p7"></span>This then is what the prophet means when
he adds — *Art not thou our God?* The question is much more emphatical
than if he had simply declared that the true God was worshipped in
Judea, and would therefore be the protector of that nation; for when the
Prophet puts a question, he means, according to what is commonly
understood in Hebrew, that the thing admits of no doubt. “What! art not
thou our God?” We hence see that there is a contrast between the wicked
and impious boastings in which the profane indulge, and the holy
confidence which the faithful have, who exult in their God. But that the
discourse is addressed to God rather than to the ungodly is not done
without reason, for it would have been useless to contend with the
wicked. This is indeed sometimes necessary, for when the reprobate
openly reproach God we cannot restrain ourselves; nor is it right that
we refrain from testifying that we regard all their slanders as of no
account; but we cannot so courageously oppose their audacity as when we
have the matter first settled between us and God, and be able to say
with the Prophets — “Thou art our God.” Whosoever then would boldly
contend with the ungodly must first have to do with God, and confirm and
ratify as it were that compact which God has proposed to us, even that
we are his people, and that he in his turn will be always our God. As
then God thus covenants with us, our faith must be really made firm, and
then let us go forth and contend against all the ungodly. This is the
order which the Prophet observes here, and what is to be observed by us
— Art not thou our God?

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p8"></span>He also adds — *long since*, <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p8.1"></span>מקדם, *mekodam*, by which word the Prophet
invites the attention of the faithful to the covenant which God had
made, not yesterday nor the day before that, with his people, but many
ages before, even 400 years before he redeemed their fathers from Egypt.
Since then the favor of God to the Jews had been confirmed for so long a
time, it is not without reason that the Prophet says here — *Thou art
our God from the beginning*; that is, “the religion which we embrace has
been delivered to us by thy hands, and we know that thou art its author;
for our faith recumbs not on the opinion of men, but is sustained by thy
word. Since, then, we have found so often and in so many ways, and for
so many years, that thou art our God, there is now no room for doubt.”
 <span id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16)

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p12"></span>He then subjoins — *we shall not die*.
What the Jews say of this place, that it had been corrected by the
scribes, seems not to me probable; for the reason they give is very
frivolous. They suppose that it was written lo tamut, Thou diest not,
and that the letter nun had been introduced, “we shall not die,” because
the expression offended those scribes, as though the Prophet compared
God to men, and ascribed to him a precarious immortality; but they would
have been very foolish critics. I therefore think that the word was
written by the Prophet as we now read it, Thou art our God, we shall not
die. Some explain this as a prayer — “let us not die;” and the future is
often taken in this sense in Hebrew; but this exposition is not suitable
to the present passage; for the Prophet, as I have already said, rises
up here as a conqueror, and disperses as mists all those foolish
boastings of which he had been speaking, as though he said — “we shall
not die, for we are under the protection of God.”

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p13"></span>I have already explained why he turns
his discourse to God: but this is yet the conclusion of the argument, —
that as God had adopted that people, and received them into favor, and
testified that he would be their defender, the Prophet confidently draws
this inference, — that this people cannot perish, for they are preserved
by God. No power of the world, nor any of its defences, can indeed
afford us this security; for whatever forces may all mortals bring
either to protect or help us, they shall all perish together with us.
Hence, the protection of God alone is that which can deliver us from the
danger of death. We now perceive why the Prophet joins together these
two things, “Thou art our God,” and “We shall not die;” nor can indeed
the one be separated from the other; for when we are under the
protection of God, we must necessarily continue safe and safe for ever;
not that we shall be free from evils, but that the Lord will deliver us
from thousand deaths, and ever preserve our life in safety. When only he
affords us a taste of eternal salvation, some spark of life will ever
continue in our hearts, until he shows to us, when at length redeemed,
as I have already said, from thousand deaths, the perfection of that
blessed life, which is now promised to us, but as yet is looked for, and
therefore hid under the custody of hope.

<span id="iii.ii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ii.xv-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou
settest around us so many terrors, we may know that we ought to be
roused, and to resist the sloth and tardiness of our flesh, so that thou
mayest fortify us by a different confidence: and may we so recumb on
thine aid, that we may boldly triumph over our enemies, and never doubt,
but that thou wilt at length give us the victory over all the assaults
of Satan and of the wicked; and may we also so look to thee, that our
faith may wholly rest on that eternal and immutable covenant, which has
been confirmed for us by the blood of thy only Son, until we shall at
length be united to him who is our head, after having passed through all
the miseries of the present life, and having been gathered into that
eternal inheritance, which thy Son has purchased for us by his own
blood. Amen.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p1"></span>Lecture One hundred and Eighth

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p2"></span>We began yesterday to explain the words
of the Prophet, by which he encouraged himself and the faithful, and
obtained support under circumstances bordering on despair; for he turned
to God, when he saw the wicked, not only elated with prosperity, but
also pouring forth blasphemies against the living God. The Prophet then
says, that those who are under God’s protection shall not perish. Of
this he felt assured within himself. The declaration, as I have said, is
much more striking, as the Prophet turns all his thoughts towards God,
than if he had publicly and loudly declared what he testified, as it
were, in a private conference.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p3"></span>But it was not without reason that he
said, "Thou, my God, my holy one;” as though he had said, “I trust in
thee, inasmuch as I am one of thy chosen people.” He does not indeed
speak here in his own private name, but includes with himself the whole
Church; for this privilege belonged to all the children of Abraham, as
they had been set apart by the gratuitous adoption of God, and were a
royal priesthood. This is the reason why the Prophet says, *Thou, my
God, my holy one*. For the Jews were wont thus to call God, because they
had been chosen from the rest of the world. And their holiness was, that
God had deigned to take them as his people, having rejected others,
while yet there was by nature no difference between them.  <span
id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17)

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p5"></span>There is, moreover, much weight in the
words which follow, *Jehovah! for judgement has thou set him*. This
temptation ever occurs to us, whenever we strive to put our trust in God
— What does this mean? for God now forsakes us, and exposes us to the
caprice of the wicked they are allowed to do what they please, and God
interferes not. How, then, can we cherish hope under these
perplexities?” The Prophet now sets up a shield against this temptations
— “Thou,” he says, “hast appointed him for judgement.” For he ascribes
it to God’s providence, that the Assyrians had with so much wantonness
wasted the land, or would waste it when they came; for he speaks of
things yet future — “Thou,” he says, “hast appointed him for judgement.”

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p6"></span>This is a truth much needed: for Satan
darkens, as with clouds, the favor of God, when any adversity happens to
us, and when God himself thus proves our faith. But adversities are as
it were clouds, excluding us from seeing God’s fervor, as the light of
the sun appears not to us when the sky is darkened. If, indeed, the mass
of evils be so great and so thick, that our minds are overwhelmed, they
are not clouds, but the thick darkness of night. In that case our faith
cannot stand firm, except the providence of God comes to our view, so
that we may know, in the midst of such confusion, why he permits so much
liberty to the wicked, and also how their attempts may turn out, and
what may be the issue. Except then we be fully persuaded, that God by
his secret providence regulates all these confusions, Satan will a
hundred times a day, yea every moment, shake that confidence which ought
to repose in God. We now see how opportunely the Prophet adds this
clause. He had said, “Art not thou our God? we shall not die.” He now
subjoins this by way of anticipation, “The Assyrians indeed do lay waste
thy land as with an unbridled wantonness, they plunder thy people, and
with impunity slay the innocent; but, O Lord, this is not done but by
thy permission: Thou overrules all these confused proceedings, nor is
all this done by thee without a cause. Thou, Jehovah, *hast for
judgement appointed him*. — Judgement is to be taken for chastisement.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7"></span>But the Prophet repeats the same thing,
*and, being strong, thou hast for correction established him*. Some
render <span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7.1"></span>צור, *tsur* strong, in the
accusative case, and give a twofold explanation. One party apply the
term to the Jews, who were to be subdued by hard means, since they were
so refractory; and hence they think that the Jews are called strong,
because they were like stones. Others give this meaning, *Thou hast made
him strong to correct*; that is, Thou hast given him strength, by which
he will chastise us. But as this is one of God’s titles, I doubt not but
that the two clauses correspond. He now, then, gives this name to God.
Having given him his name as an eternal God, *Thou, Jehovah*, etc.; he
now calls him *strong*. He puts <span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7.2"></span>צור,
*tsur* to correspond with Jehovah; and then to *correct*, to correspond
with *judgement*. We hence see how well the whole context agrees, and
how the words answer, the one to the other. Then it is, *Thou, strong
one, hast established him to correct*. But why does the Prophet call him
*strong*? though this title, as I have said, is commonly ascribed to
God, yet the Prophet, I have no doubt, had regard to the circumstances
at the time. It is indeed difficult to retain this truth, — that the
world is ruled by the secret counsel of God, when things are turned
upside down: for the profane then glamour against God, and charge him
with listlessness; and others cry out, that all things are thus changed
fortuitously and at random; and hence they call fortune blind. It is
then difficult, as I have said, to retain a fast hold on this truth. The
Prophet, therefore, in order to support his own weakness, sets before
himself this title of God, *Thou, the strong God*, or the *rock*, etc.;
for <span id="iii.ii.xvi-p7.3"></span>צור, *tsur* means properly a rock,
but it is to be taken here for God of strength. Why? “Behold, we indeed
see revolutions, which not only make our faith to totter, but also
dissipate as it were all our thoughts: but how much soever the world
revolve in confusion, yet God is a rock; His purpose fails not, nor
wavers; but remains ever firm.” We now then see why the Prophet calls
God strong.  <span id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18)

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p11"></span>Thou the strong one, he says, hast
established him. He expresses more by the word *established*, than in
the first clause: for he prepared himself with firmness against
continued evils, in case God (as it might be easily conjectured) would
not give immediate relief to his people, but add calamities to
calamities. Should God then join evils to evils, the Prophet prepares
himself for perseverance; “Thou,” he says, “the strong one hast
established him;” that is, “Though the Assyrian should not only like a
whirlwind or a violent tempest rush upon us, but also continue to
oppress us, as though he were a pestilence attached to the land, or some
fixed mountain, yet thou, Lord, hast established him.” For what purpose?
*to correct*. But the Prophet could not have said this, had he not known
that God justly chastised his people. Not only for his own sake did he
say this; but he intended also, by his own example, to lead the faithful
to make the same holy and pious confession.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p12"></span>The two clauses of this sentence then
are these, that though the Assyrian would rage with unbridled
wantonness, like a cruel wild beast, he would yet be restrained by the
hidden power of God, to whom it peculiarly belongs to overrule by his
secret providence the confusions of this world. This is one thing. The
Prophet also ascribes justice to God’s power, and thus confesses his own
guilt and that of the people; for the Lord would justly use so severe a
scourge, because the people needed such a correction. Let us now go on —

<span id="iii.ii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#013)<span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p2"></span>**13.** *Thou art* of purer eyes than
to behold evil, and canst not look on iniquity: wherefore lookest thou
upon them that deal treacherously, *and* holdest thy tongue when the
wicked devoureth *the man that is* more righteous than he?

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p3"></span>**13.** Mundus es oculis, ne videas
malum, et aspicere ad molestiam non potes (non poteris, adverbum;) quare
aspicis transgressores? dissimulas quum impius devorat justiorem se?

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p6"></span>The Prophet here expostulates with God,
not as at the beginning of the chapter; for he does not here, with a
holy and calm mind, undertake the defense of God’s glory, but complains
of injuries, as men do when oppressed, who go to the judge and implore
his protection. This complaint, then, is to be distinguished from the
former one; for at the beginning of the chapter the Prophet did not
plead his own cause or that of the people; but zeal for God’s glory
roused him, so that he in a manner asked God to take vengeance on so
great an obstinacy in wickedness; but he now comes down and expresses
the feelings of men; for he speaks of the thoughts and sorrows of those
who had suffered injuries under the tyranny of their enemies.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p7"></span>And he says, O God, *thou art pure in
eyes, thou lookest not on evil*. Some render the verb <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p7.1"></span>טהור, *theur* in the imperative mood,
*clear the eyes*; but they are mistaken; for the verse contains two
parts, the one contrary to the other. The Prophet reasons from the
nature of God, and then he states what is of an opposite character.
Thou, God, he says, *art pure in eyes*; hence thou canst not look on
evil; it is not consistent with thy nature to pass by the vices of men,
for every iniquity is hateful to thee. Thus the Prophet sets before
himself the nature of God. Then he adds, that experience is opposed to
this; for the wicked, he says, exult; and while they miserably oppress
the innocent, no one affords any help. How is this, except that God
sleeps in heaven, and neglects the affairs of men? We now then
understand the Prophet’s meaning in this verse.  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19)

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p12"></span>By saying that God is *pure in eyes*,
he assumes what ought to be deemed certain and indubitable by all men of
piety. But as God’s justice does not always appear, the Prophet has a
struggle; and he shows that he in a manner vacillated, for he did not
see in the state of things before him what yet his piety dictated to
him, that is, that God was just and upright. It is indeed true, that the
second part of the verse borders on blasphemy: for though the Prophet
ever thought honourably and reverently of God, yet he murmurs here, and
indirectly charges God with too much tardiness, as he connived at
things, while he saw the just shamefully oppressed by the wicked. But we
must notice the order which the Prophet keeps. For by saying that God is
pure in eyes, he no doubt restrains himself. As there was danger lest
this temptation should carry him too far, he meets it in time, and
includes himself, in a manner, within this boundary — that we ought to
retain a full conviction of God’s justice. The same order is observed by
Jeremiah when he says, ‘I know, Lord, that thou art just, but how is it
that the ungodly do thus pervert all equity? and thou either takest no
notice, or dost not apply any remedy. I would therefore freely contend
with thee.’ The Prophet does not immediately break out into such an
expression as this, “O Lord, I will contend with thee in judgement:” but
before he mentions his complaint, knowing that his feelings were
strongly excited, he makes a kind of preface, and in a manner restrains
himself, that he might check that extreme ardor which might have
otherwise carried him beyond due bounds; “Thou art just, O Lord,” he
says. In a similar manner does our prophet speak here, *Thou art pure in
eyes, so as not to behold evil; and thou canst not look on trouble*

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p13"></span>Since, he says, *thou canst not look
on trouble*, we find that he confirms himself in that truth — that the
justice of God cannot be separated from his very nature: and by saying,
<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p13.1"></span>לא תוכל, *la* *tucal*, “thou canst
not,” it is the same as though he had said, “Thou, O Lord, art just,
because thou art God; and God, because thou art just.” For these two
things cannot be separated, as both the eternity, and the very being of
God, cannot stand without his justice. We hence see how strenuously the
Prophet struggled against his own impetuosity, so that he might not too
much indulge himself in the complaint, which immediately follows.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p14"></span>For he then asks, according to the
common judgement of the flesh, *Why dost thou look on, when the ungodly
devours one more just than himself?* The Prophet here does not divest
God of his power, but speaks in doubt, and contends not so much with God
as with himself. A profane man would have said, “There is no God, there
is no providence,” or, “He cares not for the world, he takes his
pleasure in heaven.” But the Prophet says, “Thou seest, Lord.” Hence he
ascribes to God what peculiarly belongs to him — that he does not
neglect the world which he has created. At the same time he here
inclines two ways, and alternates; *Why does thou look on, when the
ungodly devours one more just than himself?* He says not that the world
revolves by chance, nor that God takes his delight and ease in heaven,
as the Epicureans hold; but he confesses that the world is seen by God,
and that he exercises care over the affairs of men: notwithstanding, as
he could not see his way clear in a state of things so confused, he
argues the point rather with himself than with God. We now see the
import of this sentence. The Prophet, however, proceeds —

<span id="iii.ii.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>[Hab.
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#015)<span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p2"></span>**14.** And makest men as the fishes
of the sea, as the creeping things, *that have* no ruler over them?

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p3"></span>**14.** Facis hominem quasi pisces
maris, quasi reptile, quod caret duce (*ad verbum*, non est dux in
illo.)

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p4"></span>**15.** They take up all of them with
the angle, they catch them in their net, and gather them in their drag:
therefore they rejoice and are glad.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p5"></span>**15.** Totum hamo suo attrahet,
colliget in sagenam suam, et congregabit in rete suum; propterea
gaudebit et exultabit (*hoc est*, gaudet et exultat.)

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii.xviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p8"></span>He goes on, as it has been said, in
his complaint; and by a comparison he shows that the judgement would be
such as though God turned away from men, so as not to check the violence
of the wicked, nor oppose his hand to their wantonness, in order to
restrain them. Since, then, every one would oppress another as he
exceeded him in power, and would with increased insolence rise up
against the miserable and the poor, the Prophet compares man to the fish
of the sea, — “What can this mean?” he says. “For men have been created
after God’s image: why then does not some justice appear among them?
When one devours another, and even one man oppresses almost the whole
world, what can be the meaning of this? God seems to sport with human
affairs. For if he regards men as his children, why does he not defend
them by his power? But we see one man (for he speaks of the Assyrian
king) so enraged and so cruel, as though the rest of the world were like
fish or reptiles.” *Thou makes men*, he says, *like reptiles or fishes*;
and then he adds, *He draws up the whole by his hook, he collects them
into his drag, he gathers then into his net, he exults*  <span
id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20)

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p13"></span>We now see what the Prophet means —
that God would, as it were, close his eyes, while the Assyrians wantonly
laid waste the whole world: and when this tyranny should reach the holy
land, what else could the faithful think but that they were forsaken by
God? And there is nothing, as I have already said, more monstrous, than
that iniquitous tyranny should thus prevail among men; for they have
all, from the least to the greatest, been created after God’s image. God
then ought to exercise peculiar care in preserving mankind; his paternal
love and solicitude ought in this respect to appear evident: but when
men are thus destroyed with impunity, and one oppresses almost all the
rest, there seems indeed to be no divine providence. For how will it be
that he will care for either birds, or oxen, or asses, or trees, or
plants, when he will thus forsake men, and bring no aid in so confused a
state? We now understand the drift of what the Prophet says.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p14"></span>But yet he does not, as I have
already said, take away from God his power, nor does he here rail
against fortune, as many cavillers do. Thou makest men, he says: he
ascribes to God what cannot be taken from him, — that he governs the
world. But as to God’s justice, he hesitates, and appeals to God. Though
the Prophet seems here to rush headlong like insane men; yet if we
consider all things, we shall see that he strenuously contended with his
temptations, and even in these words some sparks at least of faith will
shine forth, which are sufficient to show to us the great firmness of
the Prophet. For this especially is worthy of being noticed, — that the
Prophet turns himself to God. The Epicureans, when they glamour against
God, for the most part, seek the ear of the multitude; and so they speak
evil of God and withdraw themselves at a distance from him; for they do
not think that he exercises any care over the world. But the Prophet
continually addresses God. He knew then that God was the governor of all
things. He also desires to be extricated from thoughts so thorny and
perplexing; and from whom does he seek relief? From God himself. When
the profane wantonly deride God, they indulge themselves, and seek
nothing else but to become hardened in their own impious conjectures:
but the Prophet comes to God himself, “How does this happen, O Lord?” As
though he had said,

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p15"></span>“Thou sees how I am distracted, and
also held fast bound — distracted by many absurd thoughts, so that I am
almost confounded, and held fast bound by great perplexities, from which
I cannot extricate myself. Do thou, O Lord, unfold to me these knots,
and concentrate my scattered thoughts, that I may understand what is
true, and what I am to believe; and especially remove from me this
doubt, lest it should shake my faith; O Lord, grant that I may at length
know and fully understand how thou art just, and overrules, consistently
with perfect equity, those things which seem to be so confused.”

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p16"></span>It also happens sometimes that the
ungodly, as it were, openly revile God, a satanic rage having taken
possession on them. But the case was far different with the Prophet; for
finding himself overwhelmed and his mind not able to sustain him under
so heavy trials, he sought relief, and as we have said, applied to God
himself.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p17"></span>By saying, *He therefore rejoices and
exults*, he increases the indignity; for though the Lord may for a time
permit the wicked to oppress the innocent, yet when he finds them
glorying in their vices and triumphing, so great a wantonness ought the
more to kindle his vengeance. That the Lord then should still withhold
himself, seems indeed very strange. But the Prophet proceeds —

<span id="iii.ii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#016)<span id="iii.ii.xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p2"></span>**16.** Therefore they sacrifice unto
their net, and burn incense unto their drag; because by them their
portion *is* fat, and their meat plenteous.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p3"></span>**16.** Propterea sacrificabit sagenae
suae, et suffitum offeret reti suo, quia in illis pinguis portio ejus,
et cibus ejus lautus.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii.xix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms the closing
sentence of the last verse; for he explains what that joy was of which
he had spoken, even the joy by which the wicked, as it were, designedly
provoke God against themselves. It is indeed an abominable thing when
the ungodly take delight in their vices; but it is still more atrocious
when they deride God himself. Such, then, is the account now added by
the Prophet, as though he had said, “Not only do the ungodly felicitate
themselves while thou sparest them, or for a time bearest with them; but
they now rise up against thee and deride all thy majesty, and openly
blaspheme against heaven itself; for they sacrifice to their own net,
and offer incense to their drag.” By this metaphor the Prophet
intimates, that the wicked do not only become hardened when they succeed
in their vices, but that they also ascribe to themselves the praise of
justice; for they consider that to be rightly done which has been
attended with success. They thus dethrone God, and put themselves in his
place. We now then see the Prophet’s meaning.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p7"></span>But this passage discovers to us the
secret impiety of all those who do not serve God sincerely and with an
honest mind. There is indeed imprinted on the hearts of men a certain
conviction respecting the existence of a God; for none are so barbarous
as not to have some sense of religion: and thus all are rendered
inexcusable, as they carry in their hearts a law which is sufficient to
make them a thousand times guilty. But at the same time the ungodly, and
those who are not illuminated by faith, bury this knowledge, for they
are enveloped in themselves: and when some recollection of God creeps
in, they are at first impressed, and ascribe some honor to him; but this
is evanescent, for they soon suppress it as much as they can; yea they
even strive to extinguish (though they cannot) this knowledge and
whatever light they have from heaven. This is what the Prophet now
graphically sets forth in the person of the Assyrian king. He had before
said, “This power is that of his God.” He had complained that the
Assyrians would give to their idols what was peculiar to God alone, and
thus deprive him of his right: but he says now, that they would
*sacrifice to their own drag, and offer incense to their net*. This is a
very different thing: for how could they sacrifice to their idols, if
they ascribed to their drag whatever victories they had gained? Now, by
the words drag and net, the Prophet means their efforts, strength,
forces, power, counsels, and policies as they call them, and whatever
else there be which profane men arrogate to themselves. But what is it
to sacrifice to their own net? The Assyrian did this, because he thought
that he surpassed all others in craftiness, because he thought himself
so courageous as not to hesitate to make war with all nations, regarding
himself well prepared with forces and justified in his proceedings; and
because he became successful and omitted nothing calculated to ensure
victory. Thus the Assyrian, as I have said, regarded as nothing his
idols; for he put himself in the place of all the gods. But if it be
asked whence came his success, we must answer, that the Assyrian ought
to have ascribed it all to the one true God: but he thought that he
prospered through his own velour. If we refer to counsel, it is certain
that God is he who governs the counsels and minds of men; but the
Assyrian thought that he gained everything by his own skill. If, again,
we speak of strength, whence was it? and of courage, whence was it, but
from God? but the Assyrian appropriated all these things to himself.
What regard, then, had he for God? We see how he now takes away all
honor even from his own idols, and attributes everything to himself.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p8"></span>But this sin, as I have already said,
belongs to all the ungodly; for where God’s Spirit does not reign, there
is no humility, and men ever swell with inward pride, until God
thoroughly cleanse them. It is then necessary that God should empty us
by his special grace, that we may not be filled with this satanic pride,
which is innate, and which cannot by any means be shaken off by us,
until the Lord regenerates us by his Spirit. And this may be seen es
specially in all the kings of this world. They indeed confess that kings
rule through God’s grace; and then when they gain any victory,
supplications are made, vows are paid. But were any one to say to those
conquerors, “God had mercy on you,” the answer would be, “What! was then
my preparation nothing? did I not provide many things beforehand? did I
not attain the friendship of many? did I not form confederacies? did I
not foresee such and such disadvantages? did I not opportunely provide a
remedy?” In a word, they sacrifice apparently to God, but afterwards
they have a regard mainly to their drag and their net, and make nothing
of God. Well would it be were these things not so evident. But since the
Spirit of God sets before us a lively image of the fact, let us learn
what true humility is, and that we then only have this, when we think
that we are nothing, and can do nothing, and that it is God alone who
not only supports and continues us in life, but also governs us by his
Spirit, and that it is he who sustains our hearts, gives courage, and
then blesses us, so as to render prosperous what we may undertake. Let
us hence learn that God cannot be really glorified, except when men
wholly empty themselves.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p9"></span>He then adds, *because in* (*or by*)
*them is his fat portion and his rich meat*. Though some render <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p9.1"></span>בראה, *berae*, *choice* meat, and others,
*fat* meat, I yet prefer the meaning of rich.  <span
id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) His meat then will be rich. The Prophet
intimates here that men are so blinded by prosperity that they sacrifice
to themselves, and hence the more deserving of reproof is their
ingratitude; for the more liberally God deals with us the more reason,
no doubt, there is why we ought to glorify him. But when men, well
supplied and fully satisfied, thus swell with pride and sacrifice to
themselves, is not their impiety in this manner more completely
discovered? But the Prophet not only proves that the Assyrians abused
God’s bounty, but he shows in their person what is the disposition of
the whole world. For when men accumulate great wealth, and pile up a
great heap from the property of others, they become more and more
blinded. We hence see that we ought justly to fear the evil of
prosperity, lest our fatness should so increase that we can see nothing;
for the eyes are dimmed by excessive fatness. Let this then be ever
remembered by us. The Prophet then concludes his discourse: but as one
verse of the first chapter only remains, I shall briefly notice it.

<span id="iii.ii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p1"></span><span
id="iii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>[Habakkuk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#017)<span id="iii.ii.xx-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p2"></span>**17.** Shall they therefore empty their
net, and not spare continually to slay the nations?

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p3"></span>**17.** An propterea extendet  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) sagenam suam, et assiduus erit ad
occidendas gentes, ut non parcat (*alii vertuat*, annon *negative*;
*atqui debuisset* esse \[וכ-לע אלה\])?

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p6"></span><span id="iii.ii.xx-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p7"></span>This is an affirmative question, “Shall
they therefore;” which, however, requires a negative answer. Then all
interpreters are mistaken; for they think that the Prophet here
complains, that he presently extends his net after having made a
capture, but he rather means, “Is he ever to extend his net?” that is,
“How long, O Lord, wilt thou permit the Assyrians to proceed to new
plunders, so as to be like the hunter, who after having taken a boar or
a stag, is more eager, and immediately renews his hunting; or like the
fisherman, who having filled his little ship, with more avidity pursues
his vocation? Wilt thou, Lord, he says, suffer the Assyrians to become
more assiduous in their work of destruction?” And he shows how unworthy
they were of God’s forbearance, for they slew the nations. “I speak not
here,” he says, “either of fish or of any other animal, nor do I speak
of this or that man, but I speak of many nations. As these slaughters
are thus carried on through the whole world, how long, Lord, shall they
be unpunished? for they will never cease.” We now see the purport of the
Prophet’s complaint; but we shall find in the next lecture how he
recovers himself.

<span id="iii.ii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iii.ii.xxi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as it cannot
be but that, owing to the infirmity of our flesh, we must be shaken and
tossed here and there by the many turbulent commotions of this world, —
O grant, that our faith may be sustained by this support — that thou art
the governor of the world, and that men were not only once created by
thee, but are also preserved by thy hand, and that thou art also a just
judge, so that we may duly restrain ourselves; and though we must often
have to bear many insults, let us yet never fail, until our faith shall
become victorious over all trials, and until we, having passed through
continued succession of contests, shall at length reach that celestial
rest, which Christ thy Son has obtained for us. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc29004.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.ii.iii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p15"></span> Rather, a causative meaning; for so
does *Calvin* take it; and *Junius* and *Tremelius, Piscator, Grotius,*
and *Newcome,* agree with him: but *Drusius, Marckius, Henderson,* and
others, consider it simply in the sense of seeing or beholding, and say
with truth, that there is no other instance in which it has, though it
be often found, as here, in Hiphil, a causative sense. The context, as
*Calvin* says, seems certainly to favor this meaning; and we might
suppose that Habakkuk used it in a sense different from others, were it
not that he uses it at least twice in this very chapter, verses 5 and
13, simply in the sense of seeing or beholding.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p16"></span>In these two verses there is no need of
continuing the interrogatory form throughout, nor is this justified by
the original. A strictly literal rendering, such as the following, would
be the most appropriate:

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p17"></span>**2.** How long, Jehovah, have I cried,
and thou hearest not? I cry aloud to thee, "oppression,” and thou savest
not:

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p18"></span>**3.** Why showest thou to me iniquity?
Yea, wickedness is what thou seest; Even wasting and oppression are
before me; Then there is strife, and contention arises.

<span id="iii.ii.iii-p19"></span>Some think that there is to be
understood a preposition before \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii-p19.1"></span>חמם\], which I render “oppression,” in the
second line; but there is no need of it. The word means outrage, wrong
forcibly done, violent injustice. \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii-p19.2"></span>עמל\], wickedness, in the second line of
the third verse, in its primary sense, is labor, toil; it means also
what produces toil, mischief, wickedness. *Henderson* renders it misery;
but it is not so suitable; for it must be something that corresponds
with iniquity in the previous line. Wickedness is the word adopted by
*Newcome*. \[<span id="iii.ii.iii-p19.3"></span>ריב\], strife, is a
verbal contention or quarrel; and \[<span
id="iii.ii.iii-p19.4"></span>מדוז\] contention, is a judicial contest,
or a trial by law. Then in the next verse we see how unjustly this trial
was conducted. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc29004.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9"></span> *Calvin* omits to notice “therefore,”
\[<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.1"></span>על-כז\], at the beginning of the
verse. *Henderson* says, that the connection is with the second verse:
but this can hardly be the case; and certainly what this verse contains
is no reason for what is stated in the previous verse. \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p9.2"></span>לכז\], a similar proposition with this, when
followed by \[<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.3"></span>כי\], as the case is
here, refers sometimes to what follows and not to what precedes. See
<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.4"></span>[Ps.
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#011), [Ps.
78:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#021),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#022)<span id="iii.ii.iv-p9.4"></span>.
The meaning of the verse will be elicited, as I can conceive, by the
following version: —

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p10"></span>*On this account the law fails,  
And judgment goeth not forth to victory,* —*  
Because wickedness surrounds the righteous;  
*Yea, *on this account perverted judgment goeth forth.*

<span id="iii.ii.iv-p11"></span>The expression, \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.1"></span>לא לנצח\], is rendered “never” in our
version, and by *Newcome;* but it never means this: “not for ever, or
not always,” it is rendered in other places. See <span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>[Ps. 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019),
[Ps. 74:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#019)<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.2"></span>. But \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.3"></span>נצח\] means as a noun, superiority,
excellency, strength, victory; and this, according to *Parkhurst*, is
what it means here. It seems better to render \[<span
id="iii.ii.iv-p11.4"></span>רשע\], wickedness, than wicked. It means
injustice, the perversion of right, and by this the just man was
surrounded or completely beset, so that he had no chance of having
justice done to him. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc29004.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.ii.v-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p9"></span> This may perhaps be considered one of the
*very few* instances in which the *Septuagint* seems to have retained
the true reading without the countenance of a single MS.; for the word
“despisers” is more suitable to the context. The very same word is found
in the 13th verse of this chapter. The omission is very trifling, only
of the letter \[<span id="iii.ii.v-p9.1"></span>ד\], and Paul in quoting
this passage, in <span id="iii.ii.v-p9.2"></span>[Ac
13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041)<span id="iii.ii.v-p9.2"></span>,
retains this word, while in the other clauses he departs from the
*Septuagint*, and comes nearer to the Hebrew text. *Pocock* thought that
\[<span id="iii.ii.v-p9.3"></span>בגוים\] is a noun from the Arabic
\[<span id="iii.ii.v-p9.4"></span>בגא\], which means to be unjust or
injurious; and thus the Hebrew is made the same with the *Septuagint*,
and St. Paul, καταφρονηται, despisers — the insolent; but the former
supposition seems the more probable — that the letter \[<span
id="iii.ii.v-p9.5"></span>ד\] has been omitted. *Dathius* renders the
word “<span id="iii.ii.v-p9.6"></span>*perfidi* — perfidious,” and
*Newcome* “transgressors.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc29004.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.v-p11"></span> This is the proper rendering, and not as
in our version. It is not the usual mode in Hebrew to enhance the
meaning by connecting two verbs together; but the two other verbs here
are in the imperative mood, only the first is in Niphal and the other in
Kal. *Parkhurst* very properly renders them, *and be ye astonished,
wonder*, etc. The repetition, says *Drusius,* is for the sake of
emphasis. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc29004.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p3"></span> "Bitter” rendered “cruel” by
*Drusius.* To be “bitter” in mind means passively, to be grieved, or
distressed, or discontented, <span id="iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>[1Sa
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#002)<span
id="iii.ii.viii-p3.1"></span>; and actively, to be revengeful, cruel, or
inhuman, <span id="iii.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>[Jude
18](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#018)<span
id="iii.ii.viii-p3.2"></span>:25 — “Hasty” signifies to be rash,
inconsiderate, or soon excited and made angry. It is obvious that the
order is reversed; what follows is mentioned first, and then what
precedes it; for to be hasty in entertaining anger is first, and then
follows cruelty in executing it. A similar order is found in the next
verse; the worst feature is mentioned first, that the nation would be
“terrible;” and then what is less, that it would be “fearful.” This is
what is often doen by the writers of both of the Old and New Testament.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc29004.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.ii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.viii-p5"></span> The word, \[<span
id="iii.ii.viii-p5.1"></span>מרהבים\], means “breadths” or broad places,
or wide regions, as *Henderson* renders it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc29004.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.ii.x-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.x-p9"></span> *Multiples*, various: but this is not the
meaning of the verb \[<span id="iii.ii.x-p9.1"></span>פשה\]; it
signifies to range at large, or to spread far and wide. The whole verse
may be thus rendered, —

<span id="iii.ii.x-p10"></span>And swifter than leopards shall be its
horses,  
And more eager than the wolves of the evening;  
Spread far and wide shall its horsemen;  
Yea, its horsemen from far shall come,  
And fly as an eagle hastening to devour.

<span id="iii.ii.x-p11"></span>The horsemen are represented as sweeping
the whole country, spreading themselves in all directions; and when
espying a prey at a distance, they are said to fly to it like an eagle.
The idea of being “numerous” or “abundant,” as *Junius* and *Tremelius*
render the verb, is derived from the Rabbins, and is not sanctioned by
examples in Scripture. The rendering of the Septuagint is ἐξιππασονται,
shall ride forth, and of *Jerome*, <span
id="iii.ii.x-p11.1"></span>*diffundentur*, shall spread themselves.
There is no occasion to borrow a meaning from Arabic, as *Henderson*
does, and to render it “spread proudly along.” *Newcome* follows our
common version. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc29004.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.ii.xi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p8"></span> This clause has been variously
interpreted. The *Targum*, *Vulgate*, and *Symmachus*, countenance the
view given here. There is no help from the Septuagint, as no sense is
given. The word \[<span id="iii.ii.xi-p8.1"></span>מגמח\], only found
here, is rendered by *Symmachus*, προσοψις, sight, aspect. Targum
explains it by a word which signifies “front.” *Henderson* and *Lee*
regard this as its meaning. Others, as *Newcome* and *Drusius* render
it, supping up, or absorption, and derive it from \[<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p8.2"></span>גמא\], to drink up, to absorb; and they
regard the idea to be, that the very presence of the Chaldeans would
absorb every thing like a scorching wind. But “the supping up of their
faces *shall* *be as* the east wind,” which is *Newcome’s* version, is
an odd phrase. The last word has \[<span id="iii.ii.xi-p8.3"></span>ה\]
affixed to it, which is never the case when it means the east wind. It
is by all admitted, that “towards the east” is its proper construction.
Hence the most probable rendering of this passage is, “The aspect of
their faces shall be towards the east;” and with this corresponds what
follows, that they should “gather captives as the sand;” that is, that
they might carry them away to the place where they turned their faces.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p9"></span>The version of *Henderson*, which is
essentially that of *Symmachus*, is the following, —

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p10"></span>The aspect of their faces is like the
east wind.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p11"></span>He owns the difficulty as to the last
word, and views it here as in an irregular form. *Dathius* gives this
paraphrase, —

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p12"></span>It will have its face direct towards the
east.

<span id="iii.ii.xi-p13"></span>He says that the word \[<span
id="iii.ii.xi-p13.1"></span>קדום\], by itself never means the
pestilential wind from the east; but that when it means this, it has
another word attached to it. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc29004.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p12"></span> The foregoing verse is one on which
no satisfactory explanation has been given. The one adopted here has
been materially followed by *Vatablus, Druius,* and *Dathius*, except as
to the last clause. As to the first part of the verse *Henderson* gives
the best sense, for it corresponds with “changing” to \[<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p12.1"></span>חלף\] and “courage” to \[<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p12.2"></span>רוח\], (see <span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p12.3"></span>[Josh.
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#011), [Josh.
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#001)<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p12.3"></span>;) and of “passing onward” to \[<span
id="iii.ii.xiii-p12.4"></span>עבר\], and not of “passing over,” *i.e.*
bounds or moderation, which it seems not to have, when used, as here,
intransitively. The passing here is evidently what is referred to in
verse 6, as the renewing of courage would arise, from the success
mentioned in verse 10.

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p13"></span>The best exposition of the last clause
is what *Grotius* has suggested, and has been followed by *Marckius* and
*Dathius* — that the Chaldeans made their own strength their God; (see
verse 16;) the rendering then would be this, —

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p14"></span>*Then will it renew courage, And pass
through,  
and become guilty;* — *This is strength being its god,  
*or literally, *This is strength for its god.*

<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p15"></span>There is an inconsistency in our
version, and also in *Calvin*, as to this passage, from verse 6 to the
end of this verse. The number is changed. The “bitter nation,” mentioned
in verse 6, is meant throughout; and we ought to adopt the plural number
throughout, as *Newcome* does, or, according to *Henderson*, the
singular. There is no change of person, as some suppose, at the
beginning of verse 10; for \[<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p15.1"></span>הוא\],
there, and \[<span id="iii.ii.xiii-p15.2"></span>הוא\] in verse 6 is the
same — the “bitter nation.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc29004.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.ii.xiv-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p9"></span> Most commentators agree with our
version in connecting “from the beginning,” or “from eternity,” with
Jehovah, and not as *Calvin* seems to do, with “God.” His view is
evidently the most consonant with the design of the passage, and
countenanced by the Septuagint, for Jehovah is rendered κυριε, in the
vocative case. To assert the eternity of God seems not to be necessary
here; but to say that he had been from old times the God of Israel is
what is suitable to the context. The Prophet in saying “my God,”
identifies himself with the people; for he says afterwards, “we shall
not die.” Viewed in this light the former part of the verse may be thus
rendered, —

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p10"></span>Art not thou from of old, O Jehovah,  
my God! My holy one, we shall not die.

<span id="iii.ii.xiv-p11"></span>The reason for which he calls him
“holy” will appear from what the next verse contains. The Prophet seems
to sustain himself by two considerations — that Jehovah was the God of
Israel, and that he was a holy God. When he says “we shall not die,” he
means, no doubt, as *Marckius* observes, that the people as a nation
would not be destroyed, for he had prophesied of their subjugation and
captivity by the Chaldeans. What he had in view was the Church of God,
respecting which promises had been made. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc29004.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p4"></span> It seems that *Calvin* regarded “my
holy one,” as equivalent to “my sanctifier;” he who had separated the
people from others to be his own. The primary meaning of \[<span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p4.1"></span>קדש\] is no doubt to separate a thing from a
common use to a sacred one; but whether in this connection it has this
meaning is not quite certain. “The holy one of Israel” is a phrase
several times used by Isaiah, see <span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>[Isa.
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#011), [Isa.
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#003)<span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p4.2"></span>, etc. The sentence here may be rendered,
“God of my holiness,” or “My God, my holiness.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc29004.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p8"></span> Many agree in this view, *Drusius,
Piscator, Marckius, Henderson,* etc. The Septuagint affords no help. The
rendering of *Symmachus* is κραταιον, strong, and of *Aquila*, στερεον,
firm; then it would be, “and strong (or firm) for correction hast thou
established him.” *Grotius*, and also *Newcome*, adopt this meaning.

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p9"></span>*And thous hast founded them on a rock
to chasten* us

<span id="iii.ii.xvi-p10"></span>This is, no doubt, the easiest and most
natural construction. See <span id="iii.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>[Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)<span
id="iii.ii.xvi-p10.1"></span>. God rendered the Chaldean nation firm,
and strong, and resolute, to punish the Jews. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc29004.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.ii.xvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p8"></span> Adjectives and participles in Hebrew
commonly take a plural form, but not always, as evidently in the present
case; for the word for “pure,” though singular, will admit of a better
construction with “eyes” than in any other way; and so *Grotius* renders
the clause, “Purer are thine eyes,” etc.; which is better than our
version, followed by *Newcome* and *Henderson*. The whole passage will
thus read better: —

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p9"></span>*Purer* are thine *eyes than to behold
evil,  
And to look on wickedness thou art not able:  
Why* then *lookest thou on the perfidious,  
*And *art still when the wicked swallows up  
One more righteous than himself?  
And makest man to be like the fish of the sea,  
Like the reptile which has no ruler?*

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p10"></span>“Evil” means here wrong, injustice;
the corresponding clause is “the wicked” swallowing up or oppressing his
better. The Jews were bad, but better than the Chaldeans. “Wickedness,”
\[<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p10.1"></span>עמל\], is such a mischief as is
done through treachery: hence in the next line, which, according to the
style of the Prophets, corresponds with this, “the perfidious” are
mentioned, improperly rendered “plunderers” by *Henderson*, and
“transgressors” by *Newcome*. The Chaldeans had been the allies of the
Jews.

<span id="iii.ii.xvii-p11"></span>With respect to the reptile or the
crawling fish, such as keep to the bottom of the waters, why is it said
to be without a ruler? Is it more insulated and less gregarious, so to
speak, than other fish? If so, “without a ruler” has an obvious meaning.
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc29004.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p9"></span> The construction of this verse can
only be understood by a reference to the preceeding verse; where two
things are mentioned, the fish of the sea and the reptile: as it is
customary with the Prophets, the first clause was rasied up by a hook,
and the fish were enclosed in a net, or collected by a drag. The
reptile, \[<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p9.1"></span>רמש\], is in the singular
number, and used in a collective sense, and \[<span
id="iii.ii.xviii-p9.2"></span>כלה\], every one, at the beginning of this
verse, is in the same number. This entirely removes the difficulty which
critics have felt, and made them to propose emendations. The verse then
would read thus: —

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p10"></span>Every one (i.e. every reptile) by a
hook he raises up  
He draws them out (i.e. the fish) by his net,  
And collects them by his drag;  
He therefore rejoices, and exults.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p11"></span>To “gather then *into* the net” can
hardly be sense; nor is “*in* the net” much better. The drawing out and
the collecting were evidently *by* the net and the drag; the
preposition, \[<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p11.1"></span>ב\], has very
commonly this meaning, as ἐν in Greek.

<span id="iii.ii.xviii-p12"></span>The representation here is, that
every means would be employed: men being compared to fishes, some are
set forth as creeping along the bottom, and others as swimming at large
at all depths; and then the fisherman, the Chaldean comes, and draws out
the first by a fishing-hook, and the rest by a net and a ddrag; so that
he takes them all. — *Ed*.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc29004.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p10"></span> “His fat portion and rich meat” were
the people whom he conquered. The words verbatim are these, —

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p11"></span>For through them abundant his
portion,  
And his meat well-fed.

<span id="iii.ii.xix-p12"></span>The comparison of the drag and net is
continued; by which is signified military strength and power. See <span
id="iii.ii.xix-p12.1"></span>[Isa
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#013)<span
id="iii.ii.xix-p12.1"></span>. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc29004.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.xx-p4"></span> The verb is \[<span
id="iii.ii.xx-p4.1"></span>יריק\], a hiphil form, and means, to
evacuate, to empty, to empty out, and this is the sense in which it is
taken here by *Drusius*, *Marckius*, *Newcome*, and *Henderson*. But the
verb means also to draw out, *i.e.,* a sword, <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p4.2"></span>[Ex
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#009)<span id="iii.ii.xx-p4.2"></span>,
<span id="iii.ii.xx-p4.3"></span>[Le
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#033)<span
id="iii.ii.xx-p4.3"></span>, and to draw forth, *i.e.,* an army, <span
id="iii.ii.xx-p4.4"></span>[Ge
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014)<span
id="iii.ii.xx-p4.4"></span>, and this is the meaning given to it by
*Grotius, Junius,* and the Septuagint. To draw forth, to extend, or to
expand, seems most in accordance with the drift of the passage. To empty
his net, and that for the sake of filling it again, which must be what
is implied, is rather a farfetched notion. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc29005)
