[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29012)  [Next](cc29014) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i"></span>

<span id="v.i-p1"></span>Calvin’s Preface to Haggai

<span id="v.i-p2"></span>After the return of the people, they were
favored, we know, especially with three Prophets, who roused their
fainting hearts, and finished all predictions, until at length the
Redeemer came in his appointed time. During the time of The Babylonian
Exile the office of teaching was discharged among the captives by
Ezekiel, and also by Daniel; and there were others less celebrated; for
we find that some of the Psalms were then composed, either by the
Levites, or by some other teachers. But these two, Ezekiel and Daniel,
were above all others eminent. Then Ezra and Nehemiah followed them, the
authority of whom was great among the people; but we do not read that
they were endued with the Prophetic gift.

<span id="v.i-p3"></span>It then appears certain that three only were
divinely inspired to proclaim the future condition of the people.

<span id="v.i-p4"></span>Daniel had before them foretold whatever was to
happen till the coming of Christ, and his Book is a remarkable mirror of
God’s Providence; for he paints, as on a tablet, three things which were
to be fulfilled after his death, and of which no man could have formed
any conjecture. He has given even the number of years from the return of
the people to the building of the Temple, and also to the death of
Christ. But we must come to the other witnesses, who confirmed the
predictions of Daniel. The Lord raised up three witnesses — Haggai,
Zechariah, and Malachi.  <span id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124)

<span id="v.i-p6"></span>The first  <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) condemned the sloth of the people;
for, being intent on their own advantages, they all neglected the
building of the Temple; and he shows that they were deservedly suffering
punishment for their ingratitude; for they despised God their Deliverer,
or at least honored him less than they ought to have done, and deprived
him of the worship due to him. He then encouraged them to hope for a
complete restoration, and showed that there was no reason for them to be
disheartened by difficulties, and that though they were surrounded by
enemies, and had to bear many evils, and were terrified by threatening
edicts, they ought yet to have entertained hope; for the Lord would
perform the work which he had begun — to restore their ancient dignity
to his people, and Christ also would at length come to secure the
perfect happiness and glory of the Church.

<span id="v.i-p8"></span>This is the sum of the whole. I now come to the
words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc29013.htm#fr_124) <span
id="v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p5"></span> "Prophecy ceased with these Prophets until the
time of Christ. For it was God’s purpose, by this *famine of the word*,
(according to the prophetic language,) to render the Jews more desirous
(<span id="v.i-p5.1"></span>*appetentiores*) of the Messiah, who was to
surpass all the Prophets in the power of doing miracles.” — *Grotius.*

<span id="fn_125"></span>[126](cc29013.htm#fr_125) <span
id="v.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.i-p7"></span> “We know nothing of the parentage of Haggai.
He was probably born in Babylon during the captivity. He was sent
particularly to encourage the Jews to proceed with the building of the
temple, which had been interrupted for about *fourteen* years.” — *Adam
Clarke.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 1](cc29014)
