[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29018)  [Next](cc29020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION of

<span id="vi.iii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION of

<span id="vi.iii-p3"></span>THE BOOK OF HAGGAI

<span id="vi.iii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p2"></span><span id="vi.iii.i-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vi.iii.i-p3"></span>**1** In the second year of Darius the
king, in the sixth month, on the first day of the month, came the word
of Jehovah by Haggai the Prophet, to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel,
the governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high
priest, saying —

<span id="vi.iii.i-p4"></span>**2** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, saying
— This people say, “The time is not come To build the house of Jehovah.”

<span id="vi.iii.i-p5"></span>**3** Then came the word of Jehovah, By
Haggai, the Prophet, saying —

<span id="vi.iii.i-p6"></span>**4** “Is it time for you To dwell
yourselves in your boarded houses, And this house a waste!”

<span id="vi.iii.i-p7"></span>**5** And now thus saith Jehovah of hosts,
— Apply your heart to your ways:

<span id="vi.iii.i-p8"></span>**6** Ye have sown much, and brought in
little; Ye have eaten, and were not satisfied; Ye have drank, and were
not replenished; Ye have clothed yourselves, and were not warmed; And he
who gains wages, Gains wages for a perforated bag. (**330**)

<span id="vi.iii.i-p9"></span>**7** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, — Apply
your heart to your ways;

<span id="vi.iii.i-p10"></span>**8** Ascend unto the mountain and bring
wood, And build the house; And I will be *to you* propitious in it, And
glorified shall I be, saith Jehovah. (**333**)

<span id="vi.iii.i-p11"></span>**9** Ye have looked for much, but behold
little! And ye brought it home, and I blew on it: Why is this? saith
Jehovah; On account of my house, because it is waste, And ye run, each
of you to his own house.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p12"></span>**10** Therefore restrained over you Are
the heavens from dew; And the earth from producing is restrained:

<span id="vi.iii.i-p13"></span>**11** Yea, I have called for drought On
the land and on the mountains, And on the corn and the wine and the oil,
And on everything which the earth produces, On man and on beast, And on
every labour of the hands. (**338**)

<span id="vi.iii.i-p14"></span>**12** And Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Josedech,
the high priest, and all the residue of the people, attended to the
voice of Jehovah, their God, and to the words of Haggai, the Prophet, as
Jehovah their God had sent him; and the people feared Jehovah.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p15"></span>**13** Then said Haggai, the messenger of
Jehovah, according to Jehovah’s message, saying to the people, “With you
am I,” saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p16"></span>**14** And Jehovah stirred up the spirit
of Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, the governor of Judah, and to
Joshua, the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
people; and the came and carried on the work in the Temple of Jehovah of
hosts, their God,

<span id="vi.iii.i-p17"></span>**15** on the twenty-fourth day of the
sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154)

<span id="vi.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p2"></span>CHAPTER 2.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p3"></span>**1** In the seventh month, and on the
twenty-first day, came the word of Jehovah to Haggai, the Prophet,
saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p4"></span>**2** Speak now to Zerubbabel, the son of
Shealtiel, the governor of Judah, and to Joshua, the son of Josedech,
the high priest, and to all the residue of the people, saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Who among you is alive, Who saw
this house in its former glory, And how do ye see it now? Is it not to
that as nothing in your eyes?

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p6"></span>**4** Yet now strong be thou Zerubbabel,
saith Jehovah; And strong be all the people of the land; And work, for
with you am I, Saith Jehovah of hosts,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p7"></span>**5** According to the word I covenanted
with you, When ye came forth from Egypt, And my Spirit shall be in the
midst of you, fear ye not. (**354**)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p8"></span>**6** For thus saith Jehovah of hosts, —
Yet for a little while shall be this,

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p9"></span>**7** And I will shake the heavens and
the earth, Also the sea and the dry land: Yea, I will shake all nations,
And come shall the choice things of all nations; And I will fill this
house with glory, Saith Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p10"></span>**8** Mine the silver and mine the gold,
Saith Jehovah of hosts:

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p11"></span>**9** Greater shall be the glory Of this
latter house than that of the former, Saith Jehovah of hosts; And in
this place will I give peace, Saith Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p12"></span>**10** On the twenty-fourth of the ninth
*month*, in the second year of Darius, came the word of Jehovah to
Haggai, the Prophet, saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p13"></span>**11** Thus saith Jehovah of hosts, Ask
the priests respecting the law, saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p14"></span>**12** If a man carry holy flesh in the
skirt of his garment, and with his skirt touch bread, or pottage, or
wine, or oil, or any eatable, shall it be made holy? And the priests
answered and said, No.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p15"></span>**13** Then said Haggai, If any one
polluted in his person touch any of these things, shall it be polluted?
The priests answered and said, It shall be polluted.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p16"></span>14 Then answered Haggai, and said, — So
is this people, and so is this nation, In my sight, saith Jehovah; And
so is every work of their hands, And what they offer, — it is polluted.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p17"></span>15 And now I pray, lay it to heart, —
From this day and beyond it, Before a stone was laid on a stone In the
temple of Jehovah, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p18"></span>**16** Before this time, when one came
To a heap of twenty, there were but ten *measures*, When he came to the
vat to draw fifty, There were from the vat but twenty *vessels*:

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p19"></span>**17** I smote you with blasting and
mildew and hail, As to every work of you hands; And ye turned not to me,
saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p20"></span>**18** Lay it, I pray, to your heart, —
From this day and beyond it, From the twenty-fourth day of the ninth
month, From the day the temple of Jehovah was founded; — Lay it to your
heart, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p21"></span>**19** Is there now seed in the barn?
And as yet the vine and the fig tree, And the pomegranate and the olive,
Have produced nothing; — From this day will I bless you. (**378**)

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p22"></span>**20** And the word of Jehovah came
again to Haggai, on the twenty-fourth of the month, saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p23"></span>**21** Speak to Zerubbabel, the governor
of Judah, saying, —

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p24"></span>**22** I will shake the heavens and the
earth, And will overthrow the throne of kingdoms, And destroy the
strength of the kingdoms of the nations; Yea, I will overthrow chariots
and their riders, And down shall come the horses and their riders, Every
one by the sword of his brother:

<span id="vi.iii.ii-p25"></span>**23** In that day, saith Jehovah of
hosts, I will take the Zerubbabel, The son of Shealtiel, my servant,
saith Jehovah, And I will make thee as a signet, For I have chosen thee,
saith Jehovah of hosts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc29019.htm#fr_154) <span
id="vi.iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="vi.iii.i-p18"></span> What is said in a Note in p. 347 does
not apply to what *Calvin* says. He refers not, as I inadvertently
apprehended, to the present division of the chapter, but to that adopted
in the Septuagint; for this verse in that version forms the beginning of
the next chapter. — *Ed*.

<span id="vi.iii.i-p19"></span> 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Indexes](cc29020)
