[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29009)  [Next](cc29011) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iv.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii-p1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="iv.iii.i"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#001),
[2](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#002)<span id="iv.iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Gather yourselves together, yea,
gather together, O nation not desired;

<span id="iv.iii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Colligite vos, et colligite gens
non amabilis;

<span id="iv.iii.i-p4"></span>**2.** Before the decree bring forth,
*before* the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord
come upon you, before the day of the Lord’s anger come upon you.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p5"></span>**2.** Antequam pariat decretum, sicut
stipula transibit die, antequam veniat super eos furor irae Iehovae,
antequam veniat super eos dies irae Iehovae.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.i-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p8"></span>The Prophet, after having spoken of God’s
wrath, and shown how terrible it would be, and also how near, now
exhorts the Jews to repentance, and thus mitigates the severity of his
former doctrine, provided their minds were teachable. We hence learn
that God fulminates in his word against men, that he may withhold his
hand from them. The more severe, then, God is, when he chastises us and
makes known our sins, and sets before us his wrath, the more clearly he
testifies how precious and dear to him is our salvation; for when he
sees us rushing headlong, as it were, into ruin, he calls us back by
threatening and chastisements. Whenever, then, God condemns us by his
word, let us know that he will be propitious to us, if, touched with
true repentance, we flee to his mercy; for to effect this is the design
of all his reproofs and threatening.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p9"></span>There follows then a seasonable
exhortation, after the Prophet had spoken of the dreadfulness of God’s
vengeance. *Gather yourselves*, he says, *gather, ye nation not worthy
of being loved*. Others read — Search among yourselves, search; and
interpreters differ as to the root of the verb; some derive it from
<span id="iv.iii.i-p9.1"></span>קשש, *koshesh*, and others from <span
id="iv.iii.i-p9.2"></span>קוש, *kush*; while some deduce the verb from
the noun <span id="iv.iii.i-p9.3"></span>קש *kosh*, which signifies
chaff or stubble. But however this may be, I consider the real meaning
of the Prophet to be — Gather yourselves, gather; for this is what
grammatical construction requires. I do not see why they who read search
yourselves, depart from the commonly received meaning, except they think
that the verb gather does not suit the context; but it suits it
exceedingly well. Others with more refinement read thus — Gather the
chaff, gather the chaff, as though the Prophet ridiculed the empty
confidence of the people. But as I have already said, he no doubt shows
here the remedy, by which they might have anticipated God’s judgment,
with which he had threatened them. He indeed compares them to stubble,
as we find in the next verse, but he shows that still time is given them
to repent, so that they might gather themselves, and not be dissipated;
as though he said — The day of your scattering is at hand; ye shall then
vanish away like chaff, for ye shall not be able to stand at the breath
of the Lord’s wrath. But now while God withholds himself, and does not
put forth his hand to destroy you, gather yourselves, that ye may not be
like the chaff. There are then two parts in this passage; the first is,
that if the Jews abused, as usual, the forbearance of God, they would
become like the chaff, for God’s wrath would in a moment scatter them;
but the Prophet in the meantime reminds them that a seasonable time for
repentance was still given them; for if they willingly gathered
themselves, God would spare them. *Before then the day of Jehovah’s
wrath shall come; gather, he says, yourselves*  <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p11"></span>But the way of gathering is, when men do
not vanish away in their foolish confidences, or when they do not
indulge their own lusts; for whenever men give loose reins to wicked
licentiousness, and thus go astray in gratifying their corrupt lusts, or
when they seek here and there vain confidences, they expose themselves
to a scattering. Hence the Prophet exhorts them to examine themselves,
to gather themselves, and as it were to draw themselves together, that
they might not be like the chaff. Hence he says, — gather yourselves,
yea, gather, *ye nation not loved*

<span id="iv.iii.i-p12"></span>Some take the participle <span
id="iv.iii.i-p12.1"></span>נכסף, *necasaph*, in an active sense, as
though the Prophet had said that the Jews were void of every feeling,
and had become wholly hardened in their stupidity. But I know not
whether this can be grammatically allowed. I therefore follow what has
been more approved. The nation is called not worthy of love, because it
did not deserve mercy; and God thus amplifies and renders illustrious
his own grace, because he was still solicitous about the salvation of
those who had willfully destroyed themselves, and rejected his favor.
Though then the Jews had by their depravity so alienated themselves from
God, that there was no reason why he should save them, he yet still
continued to call them back to himself. It is therefore a remarkable
proof of the unfailing grace of God, when he shows love to a nation
wholly worthy of being hated, and is concerned for its safety.  <span
id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p15"></span>He then adds, *Before the decree brings
forth*. Here the Prophet asserts his own authority, and that of God’s
other servants: for the Jews thought that all threatening would come to
nothing, as it is the case with most men at this day who deride every
true doctrine, as though it were nothing but an empty sound. Hence the
Prophet ascribes birth to his doctrine. It is indeed true, that the word
decree has a wider meaning; but the Prophet does not speak here of the
hidden counsel of God. He therefore calls that a decree, which God had
already declared by his servants: and the meaning is, that it is not
beating the air when God denounces his vengeance on sinners by his
Prophets, but that it is a fixed and unchangeable decree, which shall at
length be effected. But the similitude of birth is most apposite; for as
the embryo lies hid in the womb, and then emerges in due time into
light; so God’s vengeance, though hid for a time, will yet in due season
be accomplished, when God sees that men’s wickedness is past a remedy.
We now understand why the Prophet says, that the time was near when the
decree should bring forth.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p16"></span>Then he says, *Pass away shall the chaff
in a day*. Some read, Before the day comes, when the stubble (or chaff)
shall pass away. But I take <span id="iv.iii.i-p16.1"></span>יום, *ium*,
in another sense, as meaning that the Jews shall quickly pass away as
the chaff; the like expression we have also met in Hosea. He says then
that the Jews would perish in a day, in a short time, and as it were in
a moment; though they thought that they would not be for a long time
conquered. *Pass away*, he says, *shall they like chaff*  <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91)

<span id="iv.iii.i-p27"></span>Then he adds, *Before it comes, the fury
of Jehovah’s wrath; the day of Jehovah’s wrath*, gather ye yourselves.
He says first, before it comes upon you, the fury of wrath, and then,
the day of wrath. He repeats the same thing; but some of the words are
changed, for instead of the fury of wrath, he puts in the second clause,
the day of wrath; as though he had said, that they were greatly deceived
if they thought that they could escape, because the Lord deferred his
vengeance. How so? For the day, which was nigh, though not yet arrived,
would at length come. As when one trusting in the darkness of the night,
and thinking himself safe from the danger of being taken, is mistaken,
for suddenly the sun rises and discovers his hiding-place; so the
Prophet intimates, that though God was now still, it would yet be no
advantage to the Jews: for he knew the suitable time. Though then he
restrained for a time his wrath, he yet poured it forth suddenly, when
the day came and the iniquity of men had become ripe.

<span id="iv.iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iii.ii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we continue
in various ways to provoke thy wrath, we may at length be awakened by
the blasting of that trumpet which sounds in our ears, when thou
proclaimest that thou wilt be the judge of the world, and testifies also
the same so plainly in the gospel, so that we may, with our minds raised
up to thee, learn to renounce all the depraved lusts of the world, and
that having shaken off our torpidity, we may so hasten to repent, that
we may anticipate thy judgment, and so find that we are reconciled to
thee, as to enjoy thy goodness, and ever to retain the taste of it, in
order that we may be enabled to renounce all the allurements and
pleasures of this world, until we shall at length come to that blessed
rest, where we shall be filled with that unspeakable joy, which thou
hast promised to us, and which we hope for in Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="iv.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iii-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-second

<span id="iv.iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p2"></span>**3.** Seek ye the Lord, all ye meek of
the earth, which have wrought his judgment; seek righteousness, seek
meekness: it may be ye shall be hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p3"></span>**3.** Quaerite Jehovam omnes mansueti
terrae, qui judicium ejus fecerunt (*pro* fecistis;) quaerite justitiam,
quaerite mansuetudinem, si forte abscondamini in die irae Jehovae.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6"></span>Here the Prophet turns his discourse to a
small number, for he saw that he could produce no effect on the
promiscuous multitude. For had his doctrine been addressed in common to
the whole people, there were very few who would have attended. We would
therefore have been discouraged had he not believed that some seed
remained among the people, and that the office of teaching and exhorting
had not been in vain committed to him by God. But he shows at the same
time that the greater part were wholly given up to destruction. We now
see why the Prophet especially addresses the *meek of the land*; for few
undertook the yoke, though they had been already broken down by many
calamities. And it hence appears that the fruit of correction was not
found equal in all, for God had chastised the good and the bad, the
whole people, from the least to the greatest; they had all been laid
prostrate by many evils, yet the same ferocity remained, as God
complains in Isaiah, that he labored in vain in punishing that
refractory nation. <span id="iv.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>[Isa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p7"></span>But we are here taught that though
ministers of the word may think that they spend their labor to no
purpose, while they sing to the deaf, as the proverb is, they ought not
yet to depart from the course of their vocation; for there will ever be
some who will really show, after a long time, that they had been
divinely and wonderfully saved, so as not to perish with others. But
what the Prophet had especially in view was to show, that the faithful
ought not to regard what the multitude may do, or how they live; but
that when God invites them to repentance, and gives them a hope of
pardon, they ought without delay to come to him, that they might not
perish with the rest. And it deserves to be noticed, that when God
raises his voice, some harden others, and thus men lead one another into
ruin. Thus it happens that all teaching becomes unsuccessful. Hence the
Prophet applies a remedy, by showing how preposterous it is when some
follow others; for in this way they increase the ranks of the
rebellious; but that if there be any who are meek, they ought to be
teachable, when God stretches forth his hand and shows that he will be
propitious, provided they return to the right way.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p8"></span>He calls them meek who had profited under
the scourges of God; for the Hebrews consider <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p8.1"></span>ענוים, *onuim*, to be the afflicted, deriving
the word from <span id="iv.iii.iv-p8.2"></span>ענה, *one*, to afflict,
or to be humble. But as men for the most part are not subdued except by
scourges, they call, by a metaphor, <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p8.3"></span>ענוים, *onuim*, the meek, such as have been
subdued: for men grow wanton in their pleasures, and abundance commonly
produces insolence; but by adversity they learn to become meek. Hence
our Prophet calls those the meek of the land who were submissive to God,
after having been chastised by him. For we know, that though God may
smite the wicked, they yet continue to have a stiff and iron neck and a
brazen front: but the faithful are tamed, as Jeremiah confesses as to
himself; for he says that he was like an untamed heifer before he was
chastised by God’s scourges. So the Prophet directs his discourse to the
few who had felt the afflicting hand of God, and had been thus humbled.
 <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92)

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p10"></span>He bids them to *seek Jehovah*, and yet
he says that they had *wrought his judgment*. These two clauses seem
inconsistent with each other; for if they had been previously alienated
from God, justly might the Prophet bid them to return to the right way;
but as they had devoted themselves to religion, and formed their life
according to the rule of uprightness, the Prophet seems to have exhorted
them without reason to seek God. But the passage is worthy of special
notice; for we hence learn that even the best are roused by God’s
scourges to seek true religion with greater ardor than they had before
done. Though then it be our object to serve God and to follow his word,
yet when calamities arise and God appears as a judge, we ought to be
stimulated to greater care and diligence; for it never is the case that
any one of us fully performs his duty. Let us then remember, that we are
roused by God whenever adversity impends over us, and when God himself
shows by manifest signs that he is displeased. This is the reason why
the Prophet bids the pious doers of righteousness to seek God, however
much they were before devoted to what was just and upright.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p11"></span>There was also another reason: we know
how grievously faith is tried, when the good and wicked are
indiscriminately and without any difference chastised by God’s hand; for
the godly are then tempted to think that it avails them nothing that
they have labored sincerely to serve God; they think that this has all
been in vain and to no purpose, for they are brought into the same
miseries with others. As then this temptation is enough to shake even
the strongest, the Prophet here exhorts the faithful to persevere, as
though he had said, that in the first confusion no difference would be
found between the good and the wicked as to their circumstances, for God
would afflict both alike, but that the end would be different; and that
there was therefore no reason for them to despond or to think it of no
advantage to seek God: for he would at length really show that he
approved of their integrity; as though he had said, God will not
remunerate you at the first moment; but your patience will at length
find that he is a just judge, who has regard for his people, and
delivers them in their extremity.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12"></span>To do the judgment of God in this place
is to form the life according to the righteousness of the law. The word
<span id="iv.iii.iv-p12.1"></span>משפט, *meshepheth*, has various
meanings in Scripture. Sometimes, and indeed often, it designates the
punishment which God allots to the wicked: but it frequently means
equity or the rule of right living. Hence to do judgment is to observe
what is righteous and just, to abstain from what is wrong and injurious.
But the Prophet calls it the judgment of God, because it is what he
prescribes in his word and what he approves. For we know that men blend
various things, by which they would prove themselves to be just and
righteous: but they deceive themselves, except they form their life
especially according to what God requires. We now perceive what the
Prophet means; and he afterwards defines what it is to seek God; for the
latter part of the verse is added as an explanation, that the faithful
might understand how God is to be sought.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p13"></span>For hypocrites, as soon as God invites
them, accumulate many rites, and weary themselves much in things of no
value. In short, they think that they have sufficiently sought God when
they have performed a number of ceremonies. But by over-acting they
trifle as it were with God, and thus deceive themselves. Thus we see
repentance profaned. They under the Papacy prattle enough about
repentance, but when they are asked to define it, they begin with
contrition; and yet no displeasure at sin is mentioned by them, nor any
real love of righteousness, but they talk about attrition and
contrition, and then immediately they leap to confession; and this is
the principal part of repentance: they afterwards come to satisfactions.
Thus repentance among the Papists is nothing else but a some kind of
mistaken solicitude, by which they labor to pacify God, as though they
came nigh him: nay, the satisfactions of the Papacy are nothing else but
obstructions between God and men.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14"></span>This evil has been common in all ages.
The Prophet, therefore, does not without reason define what the true and
rightful way of seeking God is, and that is, when *righteousness* is
sought, when *humility* is sought. By righteousness he understands the
same thing as by judgment; as though he had said, Advance in a righteous
and holy course of life, for God will not forget your obedience,
provided your hearts grow not faint, and ye persevere to the end. We
hence see that God complains, not only when we obtrude external pomps
and devices I know not what, as though he might like a child be amused
by us; but also when we do not sincerely devote our life to his service.
And he adds humility to righteousness; for it is difficult even for the
very best of men not to murmur against God when he severely chastises
them. We indeed find how much their own delicacy embitters the minds of
men when God appears somewhat severe with them. Hence the Prophet, in
order to check all clamors, exhorts the faithful here to cultivate
humility, so that they might patiently bear the rigor by which God would
try them, and might suffer themselves to be ruled by his hand. Peter had
the same thing in view when he said, Humble yourselves under the mighty
hand of God. (<span id="iv.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>[1Pe
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#006)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p14.1"></span>.) We now then see why the Prophet requires
from the faithful not only righteousness but also humility; it was, that
they might with composed minds wait for the deliverance which God had
promised. They were not in the interval to murmur, nor to give vent to
their own perverse feelings, however severely God might treat them.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p15"></span>We may hence gather a profitable
instruction: The Prophet does not address here men who were depraved and
had wholly neglected what was just and right, but he directs his
discourse to the best, the most upright, the most holy: and yet he shows
that they had no other remedy, but humbly and patiently to bear the
chastisement of God. It then follows that no perfection can be found
among men, such as can meet the judgment of God. For were any to object
and say, that they devoted themselves to righteousness, there is yet a
just reason why they should humble themselves; for we are all guilty
before God, and no one can clear himself, inasmuch as when any one
examines his own conscience, he finds that he is not free from sin.
However conscious then we may be of acting uprightly, and God himself
may be a judge to us, and the Holy Spirit the witness of our true and
real integrity; yet when the Lord summons us before his tribunal, let us
all, from the least to the greatest, learn to confess ourselves guilty
and exposed to judgment.

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, *If it may be* (or,
*it may be*) *ye shall be concealed*  <span
id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93) *in the day of Jehovah’s anger*. The
Prophet speaks not doubtingly, as though the faithful were uncertain as
to God’s favor: but he had another thing in view, — that though no hope
remained as to the perceptions of men, yet the faithful would not lose
their labor, if they sought God; for in their worst circumstances they
would find him propitious to them and their safety secured by his
kindness. Hence we see, that the Prophet in these words points out the
disastrous character of the event, but no deficiency in the love of God.
Though the Lord is ready to pardon, nay, of his own self anticipates his
people, and kindly invites them to himself; it is yet necessary for them
to consider how wonderful is his power in preserving his elect, when all
things seem desperate. *It may* then *be*, he says, when the Jews
understood that all things were in a state of extreme despair: and the
Prophet said this, partly that the reprobate and the perverse might know
that they were to perish, and partly that the faithful might appreciate
the more the favor of God, when they saw themselves delivered from death
by a miracle, and found that it would be a kind of resurrection, when
God became their deliverer. Hence the Prophet, in order to commend to
God’s children his salvation, which he offers them, and to render more
illustrious God’s favor, makes use of the particle <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p17.1"></span>אולי, *auli*, it may be. In the meantime he
fulminates, as I have already said, against the reprobate, that they
might understand that it was all over with them. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.v"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#004),
[5](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#005)<span id="iv.iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p2"></span>**4.** For Gaza shall be forsaken, and
Ashkelon a desolation: they shall drive out Ashdod at the noon day, and
Ekron shall be rooted up.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p3"></span>**4.** Quia Aza derelicta erit, et Aksalon
in vastiationem; Asdod in meridie expellent, et Ekron dissipabitur.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p4"></span>**5.** Woe unto the inhabitants of the sea
coast, the nation of the Cherethites! the word of the LORD *is* against
you; O Canaan, the land of the Philistines, I will even destroy thee,
that there shall be no inhabitant.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p5"></span>**5.** Heus habitatores funiculi maris
(vel, regionis) gens Cretim; sermo Iehovae contra vos Canaan, terra
Philistim; et exterminabo te, ne sit habitator.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.v-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p8"></span>The Prophet begins here to console the
elect; for when God’s vengeance had passed away, which would only be for
a time against them, the heathens and foreigners would find God in their
turn to be their judge to punish them for the wrongs done to his people;
though some think that God’s judgment on the Jews is here described,
while yet the Prophet expressly mentions their neighbors: but the former
view seems to me more suitable, — that the Prophet reminds the faithful
of & future change of things, for God would not perpetually afflict his
chosen people, but would transfer his vengeance to other nations. The
meaning then is — that God, who has hitherto threatened the Jews, would
nevertheless be propitious to them, not indeed to all the people, for a
great part was doomed to destruction, but to the remnant, whom the Lord
had chosen as a seed to himself, that there might be some church
remaining. For we know, that God had always so moderated the punishment
he inflicted on his people, as not to render void his covenant, nor
abolish the memory of Abraham’s race: for this reason he was to come
forth as their Redeemer.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p9"></span>Since then the Prophet speaks here against
Gaza, and Ashkelon, and Ashdod, and Akron, and the Philistine, and the
Cretians and others, he intended no doubt to add courage to the
faithful, that they might not despair of God’s mercy, though they might
find themselves very grievously oppressed; for he could at length put an
end to his wrath, after having purged his Church of its dregs. And this
admonition the faithful also need, that they may not envy the wicked and
the despisers of God, as though their condition were better or more
desirable. For when the Lord spares the wicked and chastens us, we are
tempted to think that nothing is better than to shake off every yoke.
Lest then this temptation should have assailed the faithful, the Prophet
reminded them in time, that there was no reason why the heathens should
flatter or congratulate themselves, when God did not immediately punish
them; for their portion was prepared for them.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p10"></span>He mentions Gaza first, a name which
often occurs in scripture. The Hebrews called it Aza; but as <span
id="iv.iii.v-p10.1"></span>ע, *oin*, is the first letter, the Greeks
have rendered it Gaza, and heathen authors have thought it to be a
Persia word, and it means in that language a treasure. But this is a
vain notion, for it is no doubt a Hebrew word. He then adds Ashkelon, a
city nigh to Gaza. In the third place he mentions Ashdod, which the
Greeks have translated Azotus, and the Latins have followed the Greeks.
He names Ekron in the last place. All these cities were near to the
Jews, and were not far from one another towards the Moabites and the
Idumeans.  <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94)

<span id="iv.iii.v-p18"></span>He then adds, *Ho!* (or, *woe to*, <span
id="iv.iii.v-p18.1"></span>הו) *the inhabitants of the line of the sea*.
The region of the sea he calls Galilee; and he joins the Kerethites and
the Philistine. Some think that he alludes to the troops, who carried on
war under David; for he had chosen his garrison soldiers from that
nation, that is, from the people of Galilee, and had called them
Kerethites and Philistine. But I know not whether the Prophet spoke so
refinedly. I rather think, that he refers here to those heathen nations,
which had been hostile to the Jews, though vicinity ought to have been a
bond of kindness. Hence he includes them all in the name of Canaan: for
I do not take it here, as some do, as signifying merchants; for the
Prophet evidently means, that however called, they were all Canaanites,
who had been long ago doomed to destruction. Since then those regions
had been enemies to the Jews, the Prophet intimates that God would
become the defender of his chosen people.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p19"></span>*The word of Jehovah is against you*.
God, who has hitherto threatened his own people, summons you to
judgment. Think not that you will escape unpunished for having vexed his
Church. For though God designed to prove the patience of his people, yet
neither the Moabites, nor the rest, were excusable when they cruelly
oppressed the Jews; yea, when they purposed through them to fight with
God himself, the creator of heaven and earth. He afterwards adds, *There
shall be no inhabitant*, for God would destroy them all. We now see that
the Prophet had no other design but to alleviate the bitter grief of the
faithful by this consolation, — that their miseries would be only for a
time, and that God would ere long punish their enemies. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p2"></span>**6.** And the sea coast shall be
dwellings *and* cottages for shepherds, and folds for flocks.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p3"></span>**6.** Et erit funiculus maris (id est,
regio; sed metaphorice Hebraei vocant regionem, funiculum, propter
distributionem) habitaculum caulis pastorum et septa ovium.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p4"></span>**7.** And the coast shall be for the
remnant of the house of Judah; they shall feed thereupon: in the houses
of Ashkelon shall they lie down in the evening: for the LORD their God
shall visit them, and turn away their captivity.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p5"></span>**7.** Et erit regio reliquiis domus
Jehudah, apud eos pascentur, in domibus Ascalon vesperi accubabunt; quia
visitabit Jehova Deus ipsorum ipsos, et reducet captivitatem eorum.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p8"></span>The Prophet confirms what he has before
said respecting the future vengeance of God, which was now nigh at hand
to the Moabites and other neighboring nations, who had been continually
harassing the miserable Jews. Hence, he says, that that whole region
would become the habitation of sheep. It is a well known event, that
when any country is without inhabitants shepherds occupy it; for there
is no sowing nor reaping there, but grass alone grows. Where, therefore,
there is no cultivation, where no number of men are found, there
shepherds find a place for their flocks, there they build sheep cots. It
is, therefore, the same as though the Prophet had said, that the country
would be desolate, as we find it expressed in the next verse.  <span
id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95)

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p12"></span>He immediately adds, but for a different
reason, that *the coast of the sea would be a habitation to the house of
Judah*. And there is here a striking divergence from the flocks of
shepherds to the tribe of Judah, which was as it were, the chosen flock
of God. The Prophet then, after having said that the region would be
waste and desolate, immediately adds, that it would be for the benefit
of the chosen people; for the Lord would grant there to the Jews a safe
and secure rest. But the Prophet confines this to the remnant; for the
greater part, as we have already seen, were become so irreclaimable,
that the gate of mercy was completely closed against them. The Prophet,
at the same time, by mentioning a remnant, shows that there would always
be some seed from which God would raise up a new Church; and he also
encourages the faithful to entertain hope, so that their own small
number might not terrify them; for when they considered themselves and
found themselves surpassed by a vast multitude, they might have thought
that they were of no account. Lest then they should be disheartened the
Prophet says that this remnant would be the object of God’s care; for
when he would visit the whole coast of the sea and other regions, he
would provide there for the Jews a safe habitation and refuge.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p13"></span>*That line* then, he says, *shall be for
the residue of the house of Judah; feed shall they in Ashkelon, and
there shall they lie down in the evening*; that is, they shall find in
their exile some resting-place; for we know that the Jews were not all
removed to distant lands; and they who may have been hid in neighboring
places were afterwards more easily gathered, when a liberty to return
was permitted them. This is what the Prophet means now, when he says,
that there would be a refuge in the night to the Jews among the Moabites
and other neighboring nations.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p14"></span>A reason follows, which confirms what I
have stated, *for Jehovah their God*, he says, will visit them. We hence
see that the Prophet mitigates here the sorrow of exile and of that most
grievous calamity which was nigh the Jews, by promising to them a new
visitation of God; as though he had said, Though the Lord seems now to
rage against you, and seems to forget his own covenant, yet he will
again remember his mercy, when the suitable time shall come. And he
adds, *he will restore their captivity*; and he added this, that he
might show that his favor would prove victorious against all hindrances.
The Jews might indeed have raised this objection, Why does not the Lord
help us immediately; but he, on the contrary, allows our enemies to
remove us into exile? The Prophet here calls upon them to exercise
patience; and yet be promises, that after having been driven into exile,
they should again return to their country; for the Lord would not suffer
that exile to be perpetual. It now follows —

<span id="iv.iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#008)<span id="iv.iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p2"></span>**8.** I have heard the reproach of
Moab, and the revilings of the children of Ammon, whereby they have
reproached my people, and magnified *themselves* against their border.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p3"></span>**8.** Audivi opprobrium Moab, et
contumelias filiorum Ammon, quibus exprobrarunt populo meo, et se
extulerunt contra terminum ipsorum.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p6"></span>The Prophet confirms what I have just
said of God’s vengeance against foreign enemies. Though all the
neighboring nations had been eager in their hostility to the Jews, yet
we know that more hatred, yea and more fury, had been exhibited by these
two nations than by any other, that is, by the Moabites and the
Ammonites, notwithstanding their connection with them by blood, for they
derived their origin from Lot, who was Abraham’s nephew. Though, then,
that connection ought to have turned the Moabites and the Ammonites to
mercy, we yet know they always infested the Jews with greater fury than
others, and as it were with savage cruelty. This is the reason why the
Prophet speaks now especially of them. Some indeed take this sentence as
spoken by the faithful; but the context requires it to be ascribed to
God, and no doubt he reminds them that he looked down from on high on
the proud vauntings of Moab which he scattered in the air, as though he
had declared that it was not hidden or unknown to him how cruelly the
Moabites and Ammonites raged against the Jews, how proud and inhuman
they had been. And this was a very seasonable consolation. For the Jews
might have been swallowed up with despair, had not this promise been
made to them. They saw the Moabites and the Ammonites burning with fury,
when yet they had not been injured or provoked. They also saw that they
made gain and derived advantage from the calamities of a miserable
people. What could the faithful think? These wicked men not only
harassed them with impunity, but their cruelty and perfidy towards them
was gainful. Where was God now? If he regarded his own Church, would he
not have interposed? Lest then a temptation of this kind should upset
the faithful, the Prophet introduces God here as the speaker, —

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p7"></span>*I have heard*, he says, *the reproach
of Moab; I have heard the revilings of Amman*: “Nothing escapes me;
though I do not immediately show that these things are regarded by me,
yet I know and observe how shamefully the Moabites and the Ammonites
have persecuted you: they at length shall find that I am the guardian of
your safety, and that you are under my protection.” We now apprehend the
Prophet’s design. Nearly the same words are used by Isaiah, <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>[Isa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.1"></span>, and also by Jeremiah <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.2"></span>[Jer
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.2"></span>, they both pursue the subject much farther,
while our Prophet only touches on it briefly, for we see that what he
says is comprised in very few words. But by saying that the reproach of
Moab and the revilings of the children of Amman had come into
remembrance before God, what he had in view was — that the Jews might be
assured and fully persuaded that they were not rejected and forsaken,
though for a time they were reproachfully treated by the wicked. The
Prophet indeed takes the words reproach and revilings, in an active
sense.  <span id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96)

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p9"></span>He then adds, *By which they have
upbraided any people*. God intimates here that he does not depart from
his elect when the wicked spit, as it were, in their faces. There is
indeed nothing which so much wounds the feelings of ingenuous minds as
reproach; there is not so much bitterness in hundred deaths as in one
reproach, especially when the wicked licentiously triumph, and do this
with the applauding consent of the whole world; for then all difference
between good and evil is confounded, and good conscience is as it were
buried. But the Prophet shows here, that the people of God suffer no
loss when they are thus unworthily harassed by the wicked and exposed to
their reproach.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p10"></span>He at last subjoins that they had
*enlarged over their border*. Some consider mouth to be understood —
they have enlarged the mouth against their border; and the word, it is
true, without any addition, is often taken in this sense; but in this
place the construction is fuller, for the words <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.1"></span>על-גבולם, *ol-gebulam*, over their border,
follow the verb. The Prophet means that God’s wrath had been provoked by
the petulance of both nations, for they wished to break. up, as it were,
the borders, which had been fixed by God. The land of Canaan, we know,
had been given to the Jews by an hereditary right; — When the Most High,
says Moses, divided the nations, he set a line for Jacob. <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>[De
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.2"></span>. It is indeed true that the possessions of
the nations were allotted to them by the hidden counsel of God; but
there was a special reason as to his chosen people; for the Lord had
made Abraham the true possessor of that land, even for ever. <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.3"></span>[Ge
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.3"></span>. Now the Moabites were confined, as it
were, to a certain place; the Lord had assigned to them their own
inheritance. When, therefore, they sought to go beyond and to invade the
land of the Jews, God’s wrath must have been kindled against them; for
they thus fought, not against mortals, but against God himself; for by
removing the borders fixed by him, they attempted to subvert his eternal
decree. We now then understand why the Prophet says that the children of
Moab and of Ammon had enlarged over the border of those who had been
placed in the land of Canaan by God’s hand; for they not only sought to
eject their neighbors, but wished and tried to take away from God’s hand
that inheritance which the Lord had given to Abraham, and given, as I
have said, in perpetuity.  <span id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97)

<span id="iv.iii.viii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iii.viii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou hast
been pleased to consecrate us a peculiar people to thyself, we may be
mindful of such an invaluable favor, and devote ourselves woody to thee,
and so labor to cultivate true sincerity as to bear the marks of thy
people and of thy holy Church: and as we are so polluted by so many of
the defilements of our own flesh and of this world, grant that thy Holy
Spirit may cleanse us more and more every day, until thou bringest us at
length to that perfection to which thou invites us by the voice of thy
gospel, that we may also enjoy that blessed glory which has been
provided for us by the blood of thy only begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="iv.iii.ix"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.ix-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-third.

<span id="iv.iii.x"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p1"></span><span id="iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>[Zeph.
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#009),
[10](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#010)<span id="iv.iii.x-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p2"></span>**9.** Therefore *as* I live, saith the
LORD of hosts, the God of Israel, Surely Moab shall be as Sodom, and the
children of Ammon as Gomorrah, *even* the breeding of nettles, and
saltpits, and a perpetual desolation: the residue of my people shall
spoil them, and the remnant of my people shall possess them.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p3"></span>**9.** Propterea vivo ego, dicit Jehova
exercituum, Deus Israel, quod Moab sicuti Sodoma erit, et filii Ammon
sicuti Gomorrha, productio urticae et fodina salis, et vastitas in
perpetuum: reliquiae populi mei diripient eos, et residuum gentis meae
possidebit eos.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p4"></span>**10.** This shall they have for their
pride, because they have reproached and magnified *themselves* against
the people of the Lord of hosts.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p5"></span>**10.** Hoc illis pro superbis sua, quia
exprobrarunt et insultarunt super populum Jehovae exercituum.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p6"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.x-p7"></span><span id="iv.iii.x-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p8"></span>In order to cheer the miserable Jews by
some consolation, God said, in what we considered yesterday, that the
wantonness of Moab was known to him; he now adds, that he would visit
with punishment the reproaches which had been mentioned. For it would
have availed them but little that their wrongs had been observed by God,
if no punishment had been prepared. Hence the Prophet reminds them that
God is no idle spectator, who only observes what takes place in the
world; but that there is a reward laid up for al the ungodly. And these
verses are to be taken in connection, that the faithful may know that
their wrongs are not unknown to God, and also that he will be their
defender. But that the Jews might have a more sure confidence that God
would be their deliverer, he interposes an oath. God at the same time
shows that he is really touched with when he sees his people so cruelly
and immoderately harassed, when the ungodly seem to think that an
unbridled license is permitted them. God therefore shows here, that not
only the salvation of his people is an object of his care, but that he
undertakes their cause as though his anger was kindled; not that
passions belong to him but such a form of speaking is adopted in order
to express what the faithful could never otherwise conceive an idea of,
that is, to express the unspeakable love of God towards them, and his
care for them.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p9"></span>He then says that he lives, as though he
had sworn by his own life. As we have elsewhere seen that he swears by
his life, so he speaks now. *Live do I*, that is, As I am God, so will I
avenge these wrongs by which my people are now oppressed. And for the
same reason he calls himself *Jehovah of hosts*, and the *God of
Israel*. In the first clause he exalts his own power, that the Jews
might know that he was endued with power; and then he mentions his
goodness, because he had adopted them as his people. The meaning then is
that God swears by his own life; and that the Jews might not think that
this was done in vain, his power is brought before them, and then his
favor is added.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p10"></span>*Moab*, he says, *shall be like Sodom,
and the sons of Ammon like Gomorrah, even for the production of the
nettle and for a mire of salt*;  <span id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98)
that is, their lands should be reduced to a waste, or should become
wholly barren, so that nothing was to grow there but nettles, as the
case is with desert places. As to the expression, the mine (*fodina*) or
quarry of salt, it often occurs in scripture: a salt-pit denotes
sterility in Hebrew. And the Prophet adds, that this would not be for a
short time only; *It shall be* (he says) *a perpetual desolation*. He
also adds, that this would be for the advantage of the Church; *for the
residue of my people shall plunder them, and the remainder of my nation
shall possess them*. He ever speaks of the residue; for as it was said
yesterday, it was necessary for that people to be cleansed from their
dregs, so that a small portion only would remain; and we know that not
many of them returned from exile.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p15"></span>The import of the whole is, that though
God determined to diminish his Church, so that a few only survived, yet
these few would be the heirs of the whole land, and possess the kingdom,
when God had taken vengeance on all their enemies.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p16"></span>It hence follows, according to the
Prophet, that *this* shall be *to them for their pride*. We see that the
Prophet’s object is, to take away whatever bitterness the Jews might
feel when insolently slandered by their enemies. As then there was
danger of desponding, since nothing, as it was said yesterday, is more
grievous to be borne than reproach, God does here expressly declare,
that the proud triumph of their neighbors over the Jews would be their
own ruin; for, as Solomon says, ‘Pride goes before destruction.’ <span
id="iv.iii.x-p16.1"></span>[Pr
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p16.1"></span>. And he again confirms what he had already
referred to — that the Jews would not be wronged with impunity, for God
had taken them under his guardianship, and was their protector: *Because
they have reproached*, he says, *and triumphed over the people of
Jehovah of hosts*. He might have said, over my people, as in the last
verse; but there is something implied in these words, as though the
Prophet had said, that they carried on war not with mortals but with God
himself, whose majesty was insulted, when the Jews were so unjustly
oppressed. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.xi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#011)<span id="iv.iii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p2"></span>**11.** The Lord *will be* terrible unto
them: for he will famish all the gods of the earth; and *men* shall
worship him, every one from his place, *even* all the isles of the
heathen.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p3"></span>**11.** Terribilis Iehova super eos, quia
consumpsit omnes deos terrae: et adorabit eum quisque ex loco suo, omnes
insulae gentium.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p6"></span>He proceeds with the same subject, — that
God would show his power in aiding his people. But he calls him a
*terrible* God, who had for a time patiently endured the wantonness of
his enemies, and thus became despised by them: for the ungodly, we know,
never submit to God unless they are constrained by his hand; and then
they are not bent so as willingly to submit to his authority; but when
forced they are silent.  <span id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99) This is
what the Prophet means in these words; as though he had said, that the
wicked now mock God, as they disregard his power, but that they shall
find how terrible an avenger of his people he is, so that they would
have to dread him. And then he compares the superstitions of the nations
with true religion; as though he had said, that this would be to the
Jews as a reward for their piety, inasmuch as they worshipped the only
true God, and that all idols would be of no avail against the help of
God. And this was a necessary admonition; for the ungodly seemed to
triumph for a time, not only over a conquered people, but over God
himself, and thus gloried in their superstitious and vain inventions.
The Prophet, therefore, confirms their desponding minds; for God, he
says, will at length *consume all the gods of the nations*

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p8"></span>The verb <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p8.1"></span>רזה, *reze*, means strictly to make lean or
to famish, but is to be taken here metaphorically, as signifying to
consume. God then will famish all the inventions of the nations: and he
alludes to that famine which idols had occasioned through the whole
world; as though he had said, that God’s glory would shortly appear,
which would exterminate whatever glory the false gods had obtained among
them, so that it would melt away like fatness.

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p9"></span>He at last adds, that the remotest
nations would become suppliants to God; for by saying, *adore him shall
each from his place*,  <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100) he
doubtless means, that however far off the countries might be, the
distance would be no hindrance to God’s name being celebrated, when his
power became known to remote lands. And, for the same reason, he
mentions *the islands of the nations*, that is, countries beyond the
sea: for the Hebrews, as it has been elsewhere observed, call those
countries islands which are far distant, and divided by the sea.  <span
id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101) In short, the Prophet shows, that the
redemption of the people would be so wonderful, that the fame of it
would reach the farthest bounds of the earth, and constrain foreign
nations to give glory to the true God, and that it would dissipate all
the mists of superstition, so that idols would be exposed to scorn and
contempt. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.xii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p2"></span>**12.** Ye Ethiopians also, ye *shall
be* slain by my sword.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p3"></span>**12.** Etiam vos Ethiopes, interfecti
gladio meo ipsi (*alii vertunt*, cum ipsis.)

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p6"></span>The Prophet extends farther the
threatened vengeance, and says, that God would also render to the
Ethiopians the reward which they deserved; for they had also harassed
the chosen people. But if God punished that nation, how could Ammon and
Moab hope to escape? For how could God spare so great a cruelty, since
he would visit with punishment the remotest nations? For the hatred of
the Moabites and of the Ammonites, as we have said, was less excusable,
because they were related to the children of Abraham. They ought, on
this account, to have mitigated their fierceness: besides, vicinity
ought to have rendered them more humane. But as they exceeded other
nations in cruelty, a heavier punishment awaited them. Now this
comparison was intended for this end — that the Jews might know that God
would be inexorable towards the Moabites, by whom they had been so
unjustly harassed, since even the Ethiopians would be punished, who yet
were more excusable on account of their distance.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p7"></span>As to the words, some regard the
demonstrative pronoun <span id="iv.iii.xii-p7.1"></span>המה, *eme*,
they, as referring to the Babylonians, and others, to the Moabites. I
prefer to understand it of the Moabites, if we read, like them, or with
them, as these interpreters consider it: for they regard the particle
<span id="iv.iii.xii-p7.2"></span>את, *at*, with, or <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p7.3"></span>כ, *caph*, like, to be understood, Ye
Ethiopians shall be slain by my sword like them, or with them. It would
in this case doubtless apply to the Moabites. But it seems to me that
the sentence is irregular, *even ye Ethiopians*, and then, *they shall
be slain by any sword*. The Prophet begins the verse in the second
person, summoning the Ethiopians to appear before God’s tribunal; he
afterwards adds in the third person, they shall be slain by my sword.
 <span id="fr_102"></span>[103](#fn_102)

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p11"></span>God calls whatever evils were impending
over the Ethiopians his sword; for though they were destroyed by the
Chaldeans yet it was done under the guidance of God himself. The
Chaldeans made war under his authority, as the Assyrians did, who had
been previously employed by him to execute his vengeance. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p2"></span>**13.** And he will stretch out his
hand against the north, and destroy Assyria; and will make Nineveh a
desolation, *and* dry like a wilderness.

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p3"></span>**13.** Et extendet manum suam ad
Aquilomen, et perdet Assyriam, et ponet Ninevem in vastitatiem,
desolationem instar deserti.

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p6"></span>The Prophet proceeds here to the
Assyrians, whom we know to have been special enemies to the Church of
God. For the Moabites and the Ammonites were fans only, as we have
elsewhere seen, as they could not do much harm by their own strength.
Hence they stirred up the Assyrians, they stirred up the Ethiopians and
remote nations. The meaning, then, is, that no one of all the enemies of
the Church would be left unpunished by God, as every one would receive a
reward for his cruelty. He speaks now of God in the third person; but in
the last verse God himself said, that the Ethiopians would be slain by
his sword. The Prophet adds here, *He will extend his hand to the
north*; that is, God will not complete his judgments on the Ethiopians;
but he will go farther, even to Nineveh and to all the Assyrians.

<span id="iv.iii.xiii-p7"></span>Nineveh, we know, was the metropolis of
the empire, before the Assyrians were conquered by the Babylonians. Thus
Babylon then recovered the sovereignty which it had lost; and Nineveh,
though not wholly demolished, was yet deprived of its ruling power, and
gradually lost its name and its wealth, until it was reduced into a
waste; for the building of Ctesiphon, as we have elsewhere seen, proved
its ruin. But the Prophet, no doubt, proceeds here to administer comfort
to the Jews, lest they should despair, while the Lord did not interfere.
And the extension of the hand means as though he said, that his own time
is known to the Lord, and that he would put forth his power when
needful. Assyria was north as to Judea: hence he says, to the north will
the Lord extend his hand, and will destroy Assyria; he will make Nineveh
a desolation, that it may be like the desert. It follows —

<span id="iv.iii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p2"></span>**14.** And flocks shall lie down in the
midst of her, all the beasts of the nations: both the cormorant and the
bittern shall lodge in the upper lintels of it; *their* voice shall sing
in the windows; desolation *shall be* in the thresholds: for he shall
uncover the cedar work.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p3"></span>**14.** Et cubabunt in medio ejus
greges, omnes bestiae gentium: etiam onocrotalus, etiam noctua (*alii
vertunt*, *pro* onocrotalo, ibin, *alii*, cuculum; *alii*, *pro* noctua,
ericium) in postibus ejus pernoctabunt; vox cantabit in fenestra, in
poste vastitatis (*alii* *vertunt*, corvum; *sed nomen* vastitatis,
*quod* *postulat ratio grammaticae*, *retinendum nobis est*,) quia
nudavit cedrum (*vel*, contignationem.)

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xiv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p6"></span>The Prophet describes here the state of
the city and the desolation of the country. He says, that the
habitations of flocks would be in the midst of the city Nineveh. The
city, we know, was populous; but while men were so many, there was no
place for flocks, especially in the middle of a city so celebrated.
Hence no common change is here described by the Prophet, when he says,
that *flocks would lie down in the middle of Nineveh*; and he adds, *all
wild beasts*. For beasts, which seek seclusion and shun the sight of
men, are wont to come forth, when they find a country desolate and
deserted; and they range then at large, as it is the case after a
slaughter in war; and when any region is emptied of its inhabitants, the
wolves, the lions, and other wild beasts, roam here and there at full
liberty. So the Prophet says, that wild beasts would come from other
parts and remote places, and find a place where Nineveh once stood.
 <span id="fr_103"></span>[104](#fn_103) He adds that the bitterns, or
the storks or the cuckoos, and similar wild birds would be there.  <span
id="fr_104"></span>[105](#fn_104) As to their various kinds, I make no
laborious research; for it is enough to know the Prophet’s design:
besides, the Jews themselves, who boldly affirm that either the bittern
or the stork is meant, yet adduce nothing that is certain. What, in
short, this description means, is — that the place, which before a vast
multitude of men inhabited, would become so forsaken, that wild beasts
and nocturnal birds would be its only inhabitants.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p10"></span>But we must bear in mind what I have
stated, that all these things were set before the Jews, that they might
patiently bear their miseries, understanding that God would become their
defender. For this is the only support that remains for us under very
grievous evils, as Paul reminds us in the first chapter of the Second
Epistle to the Thessalonians; for he says, that the time will come when
the Lord shall give to us relief and refreshment, and that he will visit
our adversaries with punishment <span id="iv.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>[2Th
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p11"></span>The Prophet mentions especially
Nineveh, that the Jews might know that there is nothing so great and
splendid in the world which God does not esteem of less consequence than
the salvation of his Church, as it is said in Isaiah, I will give Egypt
as thy ransom. So God threatens the wealthiest city, that he might show
how much he loved his chosen people. And the Jews could not have
attributed this to their own worthiness; but the cause of so great a
love depended on their gratuitous adoption. It afterwards follows —

<span id="iv.iii.xv"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p1"></span><span
id="iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>[Zephaniah
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/zep002.htm#015)<span id="iv.iii.xv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p2"></span>**15.** This *is* the rejoicing city that
dwelt carelessly, that said in her heart, I *am*, and *there is* none
beside me: how is she become a desolation, a place for beasts to lie
down in! every one that passeth by her shall hiss, *and* wag his hand.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p3"></span>**15.** Haec urbs exultabunda, quae
sedebat confidenter, quae dicebat in corde suo, Ego et non praeter me
amplius: quomodo facta est in vastationem, cubile animalibus? Quisquis
transierit (*vel*, omnis viator) super eam subilabit, agitabit manum
suam.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p5"></span><span id="iv.iii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p6"></span>He seems to have added this by way of
anticipation, lest the magnificent splendor of the city Nineveh should
frighten the Jews, as though it were exempt from all danger. The Prophet
therefore reminds them here, that though Nineveh was thus proud of its
wealth, it could not yet escape the hand of God; nay, he shows that the
greatness, on account of which Nineveh extolled itself, would be the
cause of its ruin; for it would cast itself down by its own pride: as a
wall, when it swells, will not long stand; so also men, when they
inwardly swell, and vent their own boastings, burst; and though no one
pushes them down, they fall of themselves. Such a destruction the
Prophet denounces on the Ninevites and the Assyrians.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p7"></span>*This*, he says, *is the exulting city,
which sat in confidence*. Isaiah reprobates in nearly the same words the
pride of Babylon: but what Isaiah said of Babylon our Prophet justly
transfers here to Nineveh. But he no doubt had respect to the Jews, and
exhibits Nineveh in its state of ruin, lest the power of that city
should dazzle their eyes; for we are seized with wonder, when anything
grand and splendid presents itself to us. Here then Zephaniah makes a
representation of Nineveh and sets it before the Jews: Behold, he says,
ye see this city full of exultation; ye also see that it rests as in a
state of safety; for it is conscious of no fear; it regards itself
exempt from the common lot of men, as though it was built in the clouds.
This city, he says, is above all others celebrated; but let not frail
and evanescent splendor terrify you; for God will doubtless in his own
time overthrow it and reduce it to nothing.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p8"></span>Let us also in the meantime observe what
I have lately referred to, — that the cause of the ruin of Nineveh is
described, which was, that it had promised to itself a perpetuity in the
world. But let us remember, that in this city is presented to us an
example, which belongs in common to all nations, — that God cannot
endure the presumption of men, when inflated by their own greatness and
power, they do not think themselves to be men, nor humble themselves in
a way suitable to the condition of men, but forget themselves, as though
they could exalt themselves above the heavens.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p9"></span>But it is necessary to examine the words:
Nineveh *said in her heart, I, and besides me no other*. By these words
the Prophet means, that Nineveh was so blinded by its splendor that it
now defied every change of fortune. Had Babylon spoken thus, it would
have been no wonder, for it had taken from Nineveh its sovereignty. But
we see that the same pride infatuates people as well as superior kings;
for each thinks himself to be great alone, and when he compares himself
with others, he looks on them as far below him, as though they were
placed beneath his feet. Thus then the Prophet shows in few words what
was the cause of the ruin of Nineveh: it thought that its condition on
the earth was fixed and perpetual. If then we desire to be protected by
God’s hand, let us bear in mind what our condition is, and daily, yea,
hourly prepare ourselves for a change, except God be pleased to sustain
us. Our stability is to depend only on the aid of God, and from
consciousness of our infirmity, to tremble in ourselves, lest a
forgetfulness of our state should creep in.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *How has it become a
desolation?* The Prophet accommodates his words to the capacities of
men: for the ruin of Nineveh might have appeared incredible. Hence the
Prophet by a question rouses the minds of the faithful, that they might
not doubt the truth of what God declared, for he would work in an
extraordinary manner. This how then intimates, that the Jews ought not
to be incredulous, while thinking that Nineveh was on all sides
fortified, so as to prevent the occurrence of anything disastrous: for
God would, in a wonderful manner and beyond what is usual, overthrow it.
*How*, then, *has it become a desolation, a resting-place for beasts?*

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p11"></span>He then subjoins, *Every one who passes
by will hiss and shake his hand*. The Prophet seems to point out the
future reproach of Nineveh, and to confirm also by a different mode of
speaking what he had before said, that its ruin would be wonderful; for
the shaking of the hand and hissing are marks of reproach: Behold
Nineveh, which so much flattered itself! we now see only its sad ruins.
The Prophet, I have no doubt, means here by hissing and the shaking of
the hind, that Nineveh would become an ignominious spectacle to all
people: and the same mode of speaking often occurs in the Prophets. All
shall hiss at thee; that is, I will make thee a reproach and a disgrace.
Then the Prophet, as I have already said, still declares the same truths
that the ruin of Nineveh would be like a miracle; for all those who pass
by would be amazed; as though he had said, Behold, they will hiss — What
is this? and then they will shake the hand — What can be firm in this
world? We see the principal seat of empire demolished, and differing
nothing from a desert. We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet.

<span id="iv.iii.xv-p12"></span>As this doctrine is also necessary for
us at this day, we must notice the circumstances to which we have
referred. If, then, our enemies triumph now, and their haughtiness is
intolerable, let us know, that the sooner the vengeance of God will
overtake them; if they are become insensible in their prosperity, and
secure, and despise all dangers, they thus provoke God’s wrath, and
especially if to their pride and hardness they add cruelty, so as basely
to persecute the Church of God, to spoil, to plunder, and to slay his
people, as we see them doing. Since then our enemies are so wanton, we
may see as in a mirror their near destruction, such as is foretold by
the Prophet: for he spoke not only of his own age, but designed to teach
us, by the prophetic spirit, how dear to God is the safety of his
Church; and the future lot of the ungodly till the end of the world will
no doubt be such as Nineveh is described here to have been that though
they swell with pride for a time, and promise themselves every success
against the innocent, God will yet put a stop to their insolence and
check their cruelty, when the proper time shall come. I shall not today
begin the third chapter, for it contains a new subject.

<span id="iv.iii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="iv.iii.xvi-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as thou triest
us in the warfare of the cross, and arouses most powerful enemies, whose
barbarity might justly terrify and dishearten us, were we not depending
on thine aid, — O grant, that we may call to mind how wonderfully thou
didst in former times deliver thy chosen people, and how seasonably thou
didst bring them help, when they were oppressed and entirely
overwhelmed, so that we may learn at this day to flee to thy protection,
and not doubt, but that when thou becomest propitious to us, there is in
thee sufficient power to preserve us, and to lay prostrate our enemies,
how much soever they may now exult and think to triumph above the
heavens, so that they may at length know by experience that they are
earthly and frail creatures, whose life and condition is like the mist
which soon vanishes: and may we learn to aspire after that blessed
eternity, which is laid up for us in heaven by Christ our Lord. Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_89"></span>[90](cc29010.htm#fr_89) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p9.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p10"></span> The verb, found only in five other
places — <span id="iv.iii.i-p10.1"></span>[Exod.
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#007),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.2"></span>[Num.
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#033)<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.2"></span>;
and <span id="iv.iii.i-p10.3"></span>[1 Kings
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#010),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#012)<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.3"></span>,
means to collect, to gather, and not “to search,” as said by *Kimchi*,
and adopted by *Marckius*; nor “to bind,” as rendered by *Henderson.*
The import of the passage is considered by all to be an invitation to
repentance, though the words are differently rendered. It is difficult
to see the meaning when it is said — “Gather yourselves, yea, gather,”
etc, except such an assembly is meant as is recommended by <span
id="iv.iii.i-p10.4"></span>[Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014)<span id="iv.iii.i-p10.4"></span>;
the kind of gathering being well understood, it is not mentioned.
“Gather yourselves,” that is, to offer prayers, says *Grotius*. “Be ye
assembled — συνάχθητε,” is the rendering of the Septuagint. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_90"></span>[91](cc29010.htm#fr_90) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p12.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p13"></span> \[<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.1"></span>כסף\]
is found as a verb in four other places, <span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>[Ge
31:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#030)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.2"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.i-p13.3"></span>[Job
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#015)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.i-p13.4"></span>[Ps
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#012)<span
id="iv.iii.i-p13.4"></span>; and <span id="iv.iii.i-p13.5"></span>[Ps
84:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.5"></span>.
It means to be or to grow pale, either through love, as in Genesis and
Job, or through hunger, as in the first Psalm referred to, or through
longing for God’s house, as in the last, or through shame, as some —
such as *Grotius*, *Dathius*, and *Gesenius*, suppose to be the case
here; and they therefore give this rendering — “O nation without shame;”
or, “not ashamed.” This idea is favored by the Septuagint — “unteachable
— ἀπαίδευτον.” In no instance is it found in a passive sense as to the
feeling through which the paleness is occasioned, and therefore “worthy
of love,” or “desired,” cannot be its proper rendering. *Buxtorf* give
its meaning in Niphal — “<span id="iv.iii.i-p13.6"></span>desiderio
affici — to be touched with or to feel a desire.” Hence the person
spoken of is the subject, not the object, of the desire. According,
then, to the use of the verb, the rendering here is to be — “Ye nation
that feels no desire,” that is, for God and his law, or, “that feels no
shame,” that is, for its sins. The paraphrase of the *Targum* is — “not
willing to be converted to the law,” which corresponds with the idea
which has been stated.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p14"></span>*Marckius* considers that the nation is
here described as having “no desire,” that is for that which was good,
and that its torpidity and indifference as to religion is what is set
forth. And such is the view of *Cocceius*; it had no thirst for
righteousness, no desire for the kingdom of God — the mark of an
unregenerated mind. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_91"></span>[92](cc29010.htm#fr_91) <span
id="iv.iii.i-p16.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.i-p17"></span> It is difficult to make the words bear
this sense. Hardly a sentence has been more variously rendered. The most
satisfactory solution perhaps is to regard it parenthetic, and to
consider “the day” as that allowed for repentance: it was to pass away
quickly, like the chaff carried away by the wind —

<span id="iv.iii.i-p18"></span>*As the chaff passing away* will be *the
day:*

<span id="iv.iii.i-p19"></span>Both *Marckius* and *Henderson* regard
this as the meaning. Then the whole verse might be thus translated —

<span id="iv.iii.i-p20"></span>2. *Before the bringing forth of the
decree,  
(As the chaff passing away will be the day,)  
Before it shall come upon you,  
The burning of Jehovah’s anger;  
Before it shall come upon you,  
The day of the anger of Jehovah.*

<span id="iv.iii.i-p21"></span>Literally it is, “Before it shall not
come,” etc., or, “During the time when it shall not come,” etc. \[<span
id="iv.iii.i-p21.1"></span>בטרם\] may be rendered “while;” then the
version would be —

<span id="iv.iii.i-p22"></span>While it shall not come upon you,  
The burning of Jehovah’s anger;  
While it shall not come upon you,  
The day of the anger of Jehovah.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p23"></span>There are several MSS. which omit the two
first lines; but evidently without reason. They are retained in the
Septuagint.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p24"></span>Possibly the second line may refer to the
speedy execution of “the decree,” that its day would pass quickly. Its
birth, or its bringing forth was its commencement; and the second line
may express its speedy execution: it would be carried into effect with
the quickness by which the chaff is carried away by the wind —

<span id="iv.iii.i-p25"></span>As the chaff passing away will be *its*
day.

<span id="iv.iii.i-p26"></span>The word \[<span
id="iv.iii.i-p26.1"></span>עבר\] is, in either case, a participle, and
the auxiliary verb is understood, as often is the case in Hebrew, and
must partake of the tense of the context. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_92"></span>[93](cc29010.htm#fr_92) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p8.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p9"></span> *Newcome* renders the adjective "lowly,”
and the noun “lowliness;” but *Marckius* and *Henderson* render the
first “humble,” as the Septuagint do — ταπεινοι, and the second
“humility.” They were those who had been made humble by affliction. The
design of affliction is to make us humble, submissive to God’s will; and
this is the effect of sanctified affliction. It is somewhat singular
that the verb means to afflict and to be humble, as though affliction
were needful to render us humble. The word \[<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p9.1"></span>ענות\], occurs in <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>[2Sa
22:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#036)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p9.2"></span>, and <span id="iv.iii.iv-p9.3"></span>[Ps
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#035)<span
id="iv.iii.iv-p9.3"></span>, and is rendered “gentleness” in our common
version, but more correctly in our Prayer-book version “loving
correction.” Perhaps the best rendering would be “humbling affliction;”
and the idea of humbling affliction making great is very striking. The
word used by the Septuagint is παιδεια — discipline; and the Vulgate is
the same. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_93"></span>[94](cc29010.htm#fr_93) <span
id="iv.iii.iv-p16.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.iv-p17"></span> The idea is not “protected,” as given
by *Newcome*, but “secreted” or concealed as in a hiding-place. “Hid” is
the version of *Henderson*, and also of *Marckius*. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_94"></span>[95](cc29010.htm#fr_94) <span
id="iv.iii.v-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.v-p11"></span> This verse, literally rendered, retains
more of its poetic character, —

<span id="iv.iii.v-p12"></span>4. *For Gaza, forsaken shall she be,  
And Ashkelon shall be a desolation;  
Ashdod, at mid-day shall they drive it out,  
And Ekron shall be rooted up.*

<span id="iv.iii.v-p13"></span>In the first and the last line there is a
correspondence in the sound of the words.

<span id="iv.iii.v-p14"></span>The following presents another instance
of the nominative case absolute, —

<span id="iv.iii.v-p15"></span>5. *Woe to the dwellers of the line of
the sea,  
The nation of the Kerethites!  
The word of Jehovah is against you:  
Canaan, the land of the Philistines,  
I will even destroy thee, that there shall be no inhabitant.*

<span id="iv.iii.v-p16"></span>The *line* of the sea, meaning the coast
along the shore, is so called, says *Henderson*, “from the custom of
using a cord or line in measuring off or dividing a territory.”

<span id="iv.iii.v-p17"></span>Some derive “Kerethites” from \[<span
id="iv.iii.v-p17.1"></span>כרת\], to cut off, to destroy; and so they
were cutters off or destroyers. They were celebrated men of war in the
time of David, <span id="iv.iii.v-p17.2"></span>[2Sa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#018)<span id="iv.iii.v-p17.2"></span>.
“Philistines” mean emigrants, says *Henderson*; the word being derived
from a verb, which signifies, in the Ethiopic language, to rove, to
migrate. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_95"></span>[96](cc29010.htm#fr_95) <span
id="iv.iii.vi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9"></span> The words, \[<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p9.1"></span>נות כרת רעים\], are rendered by *Calvin*,
“<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9.2"></span>habitaculum caulis pastorum — an
habitation (or a dwelling) for the sheepcots of shepherds.” The *Targum*
takes the two first words in the singular number; the second is
evidently so, and the first may be so also: and \[<span
id="iv.iii.vi-p9.3"></span>כרת\] certainly does not mean sheepcots, but
digging, from \[<span id="iv.iii.vi-p9.4"></span>כרה\], to dig. The
reference is either to the pits dug for watering the flock, as
*Piscator* thinks, o rto the subterraneous huts, or caves, dug for the
purpose of shelter, as *Drusius* and *Bochart* suppose. *Junius* and
*Tremelius* render the words, “sheepcots, the delvings of shepherds;”
and *Drusius*, “dwellings of the digging out of shepherds,” *i.e.*,
dwellings dug out by shepherds. The most literal and the easiest
construction is, “dwellings, the digging of shepherds.” Then the verse
might be thus rendered, —

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p10"></span>And the line of the sea shall be
dwellings,  
Dug out by shepherds, and folds for sheep.

<span id="iv.iii.vi-p11"></span>*Parkhurst* quotes *Harmer*, who says,
“the Eastern shepherds make use of *caves* very frequently, sleeping in
them and driving their flocks into them at night. The mountains
bordering on the *Syrian* coast are remarkable for the number of caves,
and are found particularly in the neighborhood of *Ashkelon*.” How fully
then was this prophecy fulfilled. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_96"></span>[97](cc29010.htm#fr_96) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p7.3"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p8"></span> That is, the reproach cast by Moab, and
the revilings uttered by Ammon. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_97"></span>[98](cc29010.htm#fr_97) <span
id="iv.iii.vii-p10.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p11"></span> There is a difference as to the
meaning of the last line. *Newcome* adopts our common version, —

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p12"></span>*And magnified* themselves *against
their border*

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p13"></span>*Henderson’s* rendering is essentially
the same —

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p14"></span>And carried themselves haughtily
against their border.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p15"></span>The verb \[<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.1"></span>נדל\] is transitive and intransitive in Kal
— to make great and to be great; it seems to partake of a similar
character in Hiphil, as it is found here, to magnify, and to grow great
or proud, and hence to exult or to triumph; and when followed by \[<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.2"></span>על\], as here, to exult over a person or a
country, — see <span id="iv.iii.vii-p15.3"></span>[Job
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#005)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.3"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.vii-p15.4"></span>[Ps.
35:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#026), [Ps.
38:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#017)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.4"></span>; <span id="iv.iii.vii-p15.5"></span>[Eze
35:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#013)<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p15.5"></span>. In these verses “to exult over” would be
the best rendering; as also in 10th verse of this chapter. The idea of
enlarging or extending over, as adopted by *Jerome* and *Dathius*, as
well as by *Calvin*, is not countenanced by any other passage. The best
rendering here is —

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p16"></span>And exulted over their border.

<span id="iv.iii.vii-p17"></span>This line corresponds with the
revilings of Ammon, as the preceding does with the reproach of Moab.
That it was the triumphant and exulting language of Ammon is evident,
because it was what was *heard* — “I have heard,” etc. The particle
\[<span id="iv.iii.vii-p17.1"></span>אשר\], rendered here “<span
id="iv.iii.vii-p17.2"></span>quibus — by which,” and “wherewith” by
*Newcome*, is rendered “who” by *Marckius* and *Henderson* — “who have
reproached on my people;” and this is the most natural construction.
Some have rendered it “because.” — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_98"></span>[99](cc29010.htm#fr_98) <span
id="iv.iii.x-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.x-p11"></span> This clause is rendered differently by
some. The word \[<span id="iv.iii.x-p11.1"></span>ממשק\] occurs only
here. It is rendered by the *Targum* by a word which means a "deserted
place,” and so *Newcome* renders it, “A deserted place for the thorn:”
so also do *Drusius*, *Grotius*, *Piscator*, and *Marckius*. The
Septuagint have mistaken the word for “Damascus,” and give a version of
the whole clause wholly foreign to the context. *Henderson* thinks that
the word has the same meaning with \[<span
id="iv.iii.x-p11.2"></span>משך\], to draw out, to extend, and gives this
version, “A region of overrunning brambles.” This is far-fetched. The
word, \[<span id="iv.iii.x-p11.3"></span>חרול\], rendered “nettle” by
*Calvin*, *Grotius*, and others, cannot be so taken, according to
*Drusius* and *Bochart*, for in <span id="iv.iii.x-p11.4"></span>[Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007)<span id="iv.iii.x-p11.4"></span>,
men are said to gather under it. It is found besides only in <span
id="iv.iii.x-p11.5"></span>[Pr
24:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#031)<span
id="iv.iii.x-p11.5"></span>. It may be rendered either a thorn or a
bramble. The other part of the sentence is literally “a digging place
for salt.”

<span id="iv.iii.x-p12"></span>Moab was to be like Sodom, and Ammon like
Gommorah, not as to the *manner* of their ruin, but as to the *extent*
of it. It was to be an *entire* overthrow. Their habitation was not to
become a pool of water like Sodom and Gommorah, but a place where the
bramble was to grow, and salt might be dug. And it was to be “a
desolation,” \[<span id="iv.iii.x-p12.1"></span>עד-עולם\], “for ages;”
for the word means an indefinite time. So *Drusius* regards it here as
meaning a long time. But some consider the “desolation,” as having
reference to the people and not to the place. If so, the rendering were
wholly obliterated. Moab and Ammon, as a separate people, are altogether
extinct. The whole verse is as follows —

<span id="iv.iii.x-p13"></span>**9.** <span
id="iv.iii.x-p13.1"></span>Therefore, as I live,  
Saith Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel,  
Surely Moab like Sodom shall be,  
And the children of Ammon like Gomorrah,  
The desert of the thorn and the excavation of salt,  
Yea, a desolation for ages;  
The remnant of my people shall plunder them,  
And the residue of my nation shall possess them.

<span id="iv.iii.x-p14"></span>The two last lines refer to the children
of Ammon, as the two preceding especially to Moab. The country of Moab
was on the eastern side of the Dead Sea, and that of Ammon was
north-east, of Moab. Both were subdued and led captive by Nebuchadnezzar
about four or six years after the captivity of Judah. They were
afterwards partially restored, especially the children of Ammon, as
Tobiah was their chief in the time of Nehemiah. <span
id="iv.iii.x-p14.1"></span>[Ne
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003)<span id="iv.iii.x-p14.1"></span>.
They were “plundered,” as recorded in <span
id="iv.iii.x-p14.2"></span>[1 Macc.
5:35](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#035),
[51](../../../bib/apo/ma1005.htm#051)<span id="iv.iii.x-p14.2"></span>,
by Judas Maccabeus. Of Moab we read nothing at that time: but it
appears, that for ages it has been desolate. “Not one,” says
*Burckhart*, the traveler, “of the ancient cities of Moab exists as
tenanted by man,” and he speaks of “their entire desolation.” Another
modern traveler, *Seetzen*, a Russian, speaking of Ammon, says, “All
this country, formerly so populous, is now changed into a vast desert.”
— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_99"></span>[100](cc29010.htm#fr_99) <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p7"></span> The word, \[<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p7.1"></span>נורא\], is rendered “to be feared,” by
*Cocceius* and *Henderson*, and \[<span
id="iv.iii.xi-p7.2"></span>עליהם\], “above them,” that is, “the gods of
the earth,” mentioned in the next line; it being considered an instance
of a pronoun preceding its noun. But this is forced; and it is not
necessary. Moab and Ammon are evidently referred to; and what is said
is, that God would be terrible to them, as well as to others, for he
would famish or destroy all the gods of the earth. And then in the next
verse he mentions other nations. Some extend what is here said to
gospel-times; but there seems no reason for this, inasmuch as God’s
judgment is the subject of the Prophet. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_100"></span>[101](cc29010.htm#fr_100) <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p10"></span> Literally —

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p11"></span>And bow down to him, every one from his
place,  
Shall all the islands of the nations.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[102](cc29010.htm#fr_101) <span
id="iv.iii.xi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xi-p12"></span> By the earth the Jews understood the
great continent of all Asia and Africa, to which they had acces by land;
and by the isles of the sea they understood the places to which they
sailed by sea, particularly all Europe. Sir I. Newton on Daniel, p.
276.” — *Newcome.*

<span id="fn_102"></span>[103](cc29010.htm#fr_102) <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p8"></span> *Newcome* cuts the knot, here by an
emendation, by \[<span id="iv.iii.xii-p8.1"></span>אתם\], ye, for
\[<span id="iv.iii.xii-p8.2"></span>המה\], they; and *Houbigant*, by
\[<span id="iv.iii.xii-p8.3"></span>תהיו\], ye shall be, — “the wounded
of my sword shall ye be.” This is according to the Septuagint; but the
former is more in accordance with the Hebrew idiom; for the pronoun is
often used without the auxiliary verb. Some take \[<span
id="iv.iii.xii-p8.4"></span>המה\] as <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p8.5"></span>*ipsi* in Latin, connected with <span
id="iv.iii.xii-p8.6"></span>*vos*, ye yourselves. Then the rendering
would be —

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p9"></span>Also ye Cushites,  
The slain of my sword shall ye yourselves be.

<span id="iv.iii.xii-p10"></span>But what *Calvin* says is not uncommon
in the Prophet, the abrupt change of persons. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_103"></span>[104](cc29010.htm#fr_103) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p7"></span> It is literally, “every wild beast of
the nation,” — \[<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p7.1"></span>נוי\], — “of the
land,” in the Septuagint. What is meant is, every wild beast that
beloned to that country. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_104"></span>[105](cc29010.htm#fr_104) <span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p8"></span> Both *Newcome* and *Henderson* render
the two words, “the pelican and the porcupine.” The former says that
\[<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p8.1"></span>קאת\], “pelican,” comes from \[<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p8.2"></span>קאה\], to vomit, because it casts up fish or
water from its membranaceous bag; and \[<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p8.3"></span>קפד\], “porcupine,” according to *Bochart*,
is from the verb, which means to cut off as by a bite, or rather, he
says, from its Syriac meaning, to dread, for it is a solitary animal.
See *Newcome*. But *Parkhurst* contends that it is the hedgehog, and
both the Septuagint and Vulgate render it so.

<span id="iv.iii.xiv-p9"></span>What *Calvin* translates “<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p9.1"></span>in postibus ejus,” \[<span
id="iv.iii.xiv-p9.2"></span>בכפתויה\], is rendered by *Newcome*, “in the
carved lintels thereof,” by *Henderson*, “in her capitals,” and by
*Parkhurst*, “in her door-porches,” i.e. when thrown down. — *Ed.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 3](cc29011)
