[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29013)  [Next](cc29015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii-p1"></span>Chapter 1

<span id="v.ii.i"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p2"></span>**1.** In the second year of Darius the
king, in the sixth month, in the first day of the month, came the word
of the LORD by Haggai the prophet unto Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel,
governor of Judah, and to Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest,
saying,

<span id="v.ii.i-p3"></span>**1.** Anno secundo Darii regis, mense
sexto, die primo mensis, datus fuit sermo Jehovae in manum Chaggai
Prophetae ad Zerubbabel, filium Sealtiel, ducem Jehudah, et ad Jehosuah,
filium Jehosadak, sacerdotem magnum, dicendo—

<span id="v.ii.i-p4"></span><span id="v.ii.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p5"></span>The Prophet mentions here the year, the
month, and the day in which he began to rouse up the people from their
sloth and idleness, by the command of God; for every one studied his own
domestic interest, and had no concern for building the Temple.

<span id="v.ii.i-p6"></span>This happened, he says, *in the second year
of Darius the king*. Interpreters differ as to this time; for they do
not agree as to the day or year in which the Babylonian captivity began.
Some date the beginning of the seventy years at the ruin which happened
under Jeconiah, before the erasing of the city, and the destruction of
the Temple. It is, however, probable, that a considerable time had
passed before Haggai began his office as a Prophet; for Babylon was
taken twenty years, or little more, before the death of king Cyrus; his
son Cambyses, who reigned eight years, succeeded him. The third king was
Darius, the son of Hystaspes, whom the Jews will have to be the son of
Ahasuerus by Esther; but no credit is due to their fancies; for they
hazard any bold notion in matters unknown, and assert anything that may
come to their brains or to their mouths; and thus they deal in fables,
and for the most part without any semblance of truth. It may be
sufficient for us to understand, that this Darius was the son of
Hystaspes, who succeeded Cambyses, (for I omit the seven months of the
Magi; for as they crept in by deceit, so shortly after they were
destroyed;) and it is probable that Cambyses, who was the first-born son
of Cyrus, had no male heir. Hence it was that his brother being slain by
the consent of the nobles, the kingdom came to Darius. He, then, as we
may learn from histories, was the third king of the Persians. Daniel
says, in the fifth chapter <span id="v.ii.i-p6.1"></span>[Da
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.i-p6.1"></span>,
that the city of Babylon had been taken by Cyrus, but that Darius the
Mede reigned there.

<span id="v.ii.i-p7"></span>But between writers there is some
disagreement on this point; though all say that Cyrus was king, yet
Xenophon says, that Cyaxares was ever the first, so that Cyrus sustained
only the character, as it were, of a regent. But Xenophon, as all who
have any judgement, and are versed in history, well know, did not write
a history, but fabled most boldly according to his own fancy; for he
invents the tale that Cyrus was brought up by his maternal grandfather,
Astyages. But it is evident enough that Astyages had been conquered in
war by Cyrus.  <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) He says also that
Cyrus married a wife a considerable time after the taking of Babylon,
and that she was presented to him by his uncle Cyaxares, but that he
dared not to marry her until he returned to Persia, and his father
Cambyses approved of the marriage. Here Xenophon fables, and gives range
to his own invention, for it was not his purpose to write a history. He
is a very fine writer, it is true; but the unlearned are much mistaken
who think that he has collected all the histories of the world. Xenophon
is a highly approved philosopher, but not an approved historian; for it
was his designed object fictitiously to relate as real facts what seemed
to him most suitable. He fables that Cyrus died in his bed, and dictated
a long will, and spoke as a philosopher in his retirement; but Cyrus, we
know, died in the Scythian war, and was slain by the queen, Tomyris, who
revenged the death of her son; and this is well known even by children.
Xenophon, however, as he wished to paint the image of a perfect prince,
says that Cyrus died in his bed. We cannot then collect from the
*Cyropaeda*, which Xenophon has written, anything that is true. But if
we compare the historians together, we shall find the following things
asserted almost unanimously: — That Cambyses was the son of Cyrus; that
when he suspected his younger brother he gave orders to put him to
death; that both died without any male issue; and that on discovering
the fraud of the Magi,  <span id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) the son
of Hystaspes became the third king of the Persian. Daniel calls Darius,
who reigned in Babylon, the Mede; but he is Cyaxares. This I readily
admit; for he reigned by sufferance, as Cyrus willingly declined the
honor. And Cyrus, though a grandson of Astyages, by his daughter
Mandane, was yet born of a father not ennobled; for Astyages, having
dreamt that all Asia would be covered by what proceeded from his
daughter, was easily induced to marry her to a stranger. When,
therefore, he gave her to Cambyses, his design was to drive her to a far
country, so that no one born of her should come to so great an empire:
this was the advice of the Magi. Cyrus then acquired a name and
reputation, no doubt, only by his own efforts; nor did he venture at
first to take the name of a king, but suffered his uncle, and at the
same time his father-in-law, to reign with him; and yet he was his
colleague only for two years; for Cyasares lived no longer than the
taking of Babylon.

<span id="v.ii.i-p10"></span>I come then now to our Prophet: he says,
*In the second year of Darius* it was commanded to me by the Lord to
reprove the sloth of the people. We may readily conclude that more than
twenty years had elapsed since the people began to return to their own
country.  <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) Some say thirty or
forty years, and others go beyond that number; but this is not probable.
Some say that the Jews returned to their country in the fifty-eighth
year of their captivity; but this is not true, and may be easily
disproved by the words of Daniel as well as by the history of Ezra.
Daniel says in the ninth chapter <span id="v.ii.i-p11.1"></span>[Da
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.i-p11.1"></span>
that he was reminded by God of the return of the people when the time
prescribed by Jeremiah was drawing nigh. And as this happened not in the
first year of Darius, the son of Hystaspes, but about the end of the
reign of Belshasar before Babylon was taken, it follows that the time of
the exile was then fulfilled. We have also this at the beginning of the
history, ‘When seventy years were accomplished, God roused the spirit of
Cyrus the king.’ We hence see that Cyrus had not allowed the free return
of the people but at the time predicted by Jeremiah, and according to
what Isaiah had previously taught, that Cyrus, before he was born, had
been chosen for this work: and then God began openly to show how truly
he had spoken before the people were driven into exile. But if we grant
that the people returned in the fifty-eighth year, the truth of prophecy
will not appear. They therefore speak very thoughtlessly who say that
the Jews returned to their country before the seventieth year; for thus
they subvert, as I hare said, every notion of God’s favor.

<span id="v.ii.i-p12"></span>Since then seventy years had elapsed when
Babylon was taken, and Cyrus by a public edict permitted the Jews to
return to their country, God at that time stretched forth his hand in
behalf of the miserable exiles; but troubles did afterwards arise to
them from their neighbors. Some under the guise of friendship wished to
join them, in order to obliterate the name of Israel; and that they
might make a sort of amalgamation of many nations. Then others openly
carried on war with them; and when Cyrus was with his army in Scythia,
his prefects became hostile to the Jews, and thus a delay was effected.
Then followed Cambyses, a most cruel enemy to the Church of God. Hence
the building of the Temple could not be proceeded with until the time of
this Darius, the son of Hystaspes. But as Darius, the son of Hystaspes,
favored the Jews, or at least was pacified towards them, he restrained
the neighboring nations from causing any more delay as to the building
of the Temple. He ordered his prefects to protect the people of Israel,
so that they might live quietly in their country and finish the Temple,
which had only been begun. And we may hence conclude that the Temple was
built in forty-six years, according to what is said in the second
chapter of John  <span id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) (<span
id="v.ii.i-p13.3"></span>[Joh 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#001)<span
id="v.ii.i-p13.3"></span>); for the foundations were laid immediately on
the return of the people, but the work was either neglected or hindered
by enemies.

<span id="v.ii.i-p14"></span>But as liberty to build the Temple was
given to the Jews, we may gather from what our Prophet says, that they
were guilty of ingratitude towards God; for private benefit was by every
one almost exclusively regarded, and there was hardly any concern for
the worship of God. Hence the Prophet now reproves this indifference,
allied as it was with ungodliness: for what could be more base than to
enjoy the country and the inheritance which God had formerly promised to
Abraham, and yet to make no account of God, nor of that special favor
which he wished to confer — that of dwelling among them? An habitation
on mount Sion had been chosen, we know, by God, that thence might come
forth the Redeemer of the world. As then this business was neglected,
and each one built his own house, justly does the Prophet here reprove
them with vehemence in the name and by the command of God. Thus much as
to the time. And he says in the *second* year of Darius, for a year had
now elapsed since liberty to build the Temple had been allowed them; but
the Jews were negligent, because they were too much devoted to their own
private advantages.

<span id="v.ii.i-p15"></span>And he says, that *the word was given by
his hand to Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, and to Joshua, the son of
Josedech*. We shall hereafter see that this communication had a regard
without distinction to the whole community; and, if a probable
conjecture be entertained, neither Zerubbabel nor Joshua were at fault,
because the Temple ass neglected; nay, we may with certainty conclude
from what Zechariah says, that Zerubbabel was a wise prince, and that
Joshua faithfully discharged his office as a priest. Since then both
spent their labor for God, how was it that the Prophet addressed them?
and since the whole blame belonged to the people, why did he not speak
to them? why did he not assemble the whole multitude? The Lord, no
doubt, intended to connect Zerubbabel and Joshua with his servant as
associates, that they three might go forth to the people, and deliver
with one mouth what God had committed to his servant Haggai. This then
is the reason why the Prophet says, that he was sent to Zerubbabel and
Joshua.

<span id="v.ii.i-p16"></span>Let us at the same time learn, that princes
and those to whom God has committed the care of governing his Church,
never so faithfully perform their office, nor discharge their duties so
courageously and strenuously, but that they stand in need of being
roused, and, as it were, stimulated by many goads. I have already said,
that in other places Zerubbabel and Joshua are commended; yet the Lord
reproved them and severely expostulated with them, because they
neglected the building of the Temple. This was done, that they might
confirm by their authority what the Prophet was about to say: but he
also intimates, that they were not wholly free from blame, while the
people were thus negligent in pursuing the work of building the Temple.

<span id="v.ii.i-p17"></span>Zerubbabel is called the son of Shealtiel:
some think that son is put here for grandson, and that his father’s name
was passed over. But this seems not probable. They quote from the
Chronicles a passage in which his father’s name is said to be Pedaiah:
but we know that it was often the case among that people, that a person
had two names. I therefore regard Zerubbabel to have been the son of
Shealtiel. He is said to have been the governor  <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) of Judah; for it was necessary that
some governing power should continue in that tribe, though the royal
authority was taken away, and all sovereignty and supreme power
extinguished. It was yet God’s purpose that some vestiges of power
should remain, according to what had been predicted by the patriarch
Jacob,

<span id="v.ii.i-p19"></span>‘Taken away shall not be the scepter from
Judah, nor a leader from his thigh, until he shall come;’ etc. (<span
id="v.ii.i-p19.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span id="v.ii.i-p19.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.i-p20"></span>The royal scepter was indeed taken away,
and the crown was removed, according to what Ezekiel had said, ‘Take
away the crown, subvert, subvert, subvert it,’ (<span
id="v.ii.i-p20.1"></span>[Ezek. 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#026),
[27](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#027)<span id="v.ii.i-p20.1"></span>;)
for the interruption of the government had been sufficiently long. Yet
the Lord in the meantime preserved some remnants, that the Jews might
know that that promise was not wholly forgotten. This then is the reason
why the son of Shealtiel is said to be the governor of Judah. It now
follows —

<span id="v.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
1:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#002)<span id="v.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p2"></span>**2.** Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts,
saying, This people say, The time is not come, the time that the Lord’s
house should be built.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p3"></span>**2.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum,
dicendo, Populus isti dicunt (hoc est, dicit,) Non venit tempus domui
Iehovae ad aedificandum.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p4"></span>**3.** Then came the word of the Lord by
Haggai the prophet, saying,

<span id="v.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3.** Et datus fui sermo Iehovae in manu
Chaggai Prophetae, dicendo,

<span id="v.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4.** *Is it* time for you, O ye, to dwell
in your ceiled houses, and this house *lie* waste?

<span id="v.ii.ii-p7"></span>**4.** An tempus vobis, ut habitatis vos in
domibus vestris tabulatis, et domus haec deserta?

<span id="v.ii.ii-p8"></span><span id="v.ii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p9"></span>They who think that seventy years had not
passed until the reign of Darius, may from this passage be easily
disproved: for if the seventy years were not accomplished, an excuse
would have been ready at hand, — that they had deferred the work of
building the Temple; but it was certain, that the time had then elapsed,
and that it was owing to their indifference that the Temple was not
erected, for all the materials were appropriated to private uses. While
then they were thus taking care of themselves and consulting their own
interest, the building of the Temple was neglected. That the Temple was
not built till the reign of Darius, this happened, as we have said, from
another cause, because the prefects of king Cyrus gave much annoyance to
the Jews, and Cambyses was most hostile to them. But when liberty was
restored to them, and Darius had so kindly permitted them to build the
Temple, they had no excuse for delay.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p10"></span>It is however probable that they had then
many disputes as to the time; for it may have been, that they seizing on
any pretext to cover their sloth, made this objection, — that many
difficulties had occurred, because they had been too precipitate, and
that they had thus been punished for their haste, because they had
rashly undertaken the building of the Temple: and we may also suppose
that they took another view of the time as having not yet come, for
easily might this objection occur to them, — “It is indeed true that the
worship of God is deservedly to be preferred to all other things; but
the Lord grants us this indulgence, so that we are allowed to build our
own houses; and in the meantime we attend to the sacrifices. Have not
our fathers lived many ages without a Temple? God was then satisfied
with a sanctuary: there is now an altar erected, and there sacrifices
are offered. The Lord then will forgive us if we defer the building of
the Temple to a suitable time. But in the meantime every one may build
his own house, so that afterwards the Temple may at leisure be built
more sumptuously.” However this may have been, we find that true which I
have often stated, — that the Jews were so taken up with their own
domestic concerns, with their own ease, and with their own pleasures,
that they made very little account of God’s worship. This is the reason
why the Prophet was so greatly displeased with them.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p11"></span>He declares what they said, *This people
say, The time is not yet come to build the house of Jehovah*  <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) He repeats here what the Jews were
wont to allege in order to disguise their sloth, after having delayed a
long time, and when they could not, except through consummate
effrontery, adduce anything in their own defense. We however see, that
they hesitated not to promise pardon to themselves. Thus also do men
indulge themselves in their sins, as though they could make an agreement
with God and pacify him with some frivolous things. We see that this was
the case then. But we may also see here, as in a mirror, how great is
the ingratitude of men. The kindness of God had been especially worthy
of being remembered, the glory of which ought to have been borne in mind
to the end of time: they had been restored from exile in a manner beyond
what they had ever expected. What ought they to have done, but to have
devoted themselves entirely to the service of their deliverer? But they
built, no, not even a tent for God, and sacrificed in the open air; and
thus they wilfully trifled with God. But at the same time they dwelt at
ease in houses elegantly fitted up.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p15"></span>And how is the case at this day? We see
that through a remarkable miracle of God the gospel has shone forth in
our time, and we have emerged, as it were, from the abodes below. Who
does now rear up, of his own free-will, an altar to God? On the
contrary, all regard what is advantageous only to themselves; and while
they are occupied with their own concerns, the worship of God is cast
aside; there is no care, no zeal, no concern for it; nay, what is worse,
many make gain of the gospel, as though it were a lucrative business. No
wonder then, if the people have so basely disregarded their deliverance,
and have almost obliterated the memory of it. No less shameful is the
example witnessed at this day among us.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p16"></span>But we may hence also see how kindly God
has provided for his Church; for his purpose was that this reproof
should continue extant, that he might at this day stimulate us, and
excite our fear as well as our shame. For we also thus grow frigid in
promoting the worship of God, whenever we are led to seek only our own
advantages. We may also add, that as God’s temple is spiritual, our
fault is the more atrocious when we become thus slothful; since God does
not bid us to collect either wood, or stones, or cement, but to build a
celestial temple, in which he may be truly worshipped. When therefore we
become thus indifferent, as that people were thus severely reproved,
doubtless our sloth is much more detestable. We now see that the Prophet
not only spoke to men of his age, but was also destined, through God’s
wonderful purpose, to be a preacher to us, so that his doctrine sounds
at this day in our ears, and reproves our torpor and ungrateful
indifference: for the building of the spiritual temple is deferred,
whenever we become devoted to ourselves, and regard only what is
advantageous to us individually. We shall go on with what follows
tomorrow.

<span id="v.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iii-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.ii.iii-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that as we must carry
on a warfare in this world, and as it is thy will to try us with many
contests, — O grant, that we may never faint, however extreme may be the
trials which we shall have to endure: and as thou hast favored us with
so great an honor as to make us the framers and builders of thy
spiritual temple, may every one of us present and consecrate himself
wholly to thee: and, inasmuch as each of us has received some peculiar
gift, may we strive to employ it in building this temple, so that thou
mayest be worshipped among us perpetually; and especially, may each of
us offer himself wholly as a spiritual sacrifice to thee, until we shall
at length be renewed in thine image, and be received into a full
participation of that glory, which has been attained for us by the blood
of thy only-begotten Son. Amen.

<span id="v.ii.iv"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p1"></span>Lecture One Hundred and Twenty-ninth

<span id="v.ii.iv-p2"></span>When the Prophet asks, whether the time had
come for the Jews to dwell in splendid and well furnished houses, and
whether the time had not come to build the Temple, he intimates, that
they were trifling in a very gross manner with God; for there was
exactly the same reason for building the Temple as for building the
city. How came they to be restored to their country, but that God
performed what he had testified by the mouth of Jeremiah? Hence their
return depended on the redemption promised to them: it was therefore
easy for them to conclude, that the time for building the Temple had
already come; for the one could not, and ought not to have been
separated from the other, as it has been stated. He therefore upbraids
them with ingratitude, for they sought to enjoy the kindness of God, and
at the same time disregarded the memorial of it.

<span id="v.ii.iv-p3"></span>And very emphatical are the words, when he
says, *Is it time for you to dwell in houses?*  <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) For there is implied a comparison
between God, whose Temple they set no value on, and themselves, who
sought not only commodious, but sumptuous dwellings. Hence the Prophet
inquires, whether it was consistent that mortal men, who differ not from
worms, should possess magnificent houses, and that God should be without
his Temple. And to the same purpose is what he adds, when he says, that
their *houses* were *boarded*; for <span
id="v.ii.iv-p4.3"></span>ספונים, *saphunim*, means in Hebrew what we
express by *Cambrisees*  <span id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) Since
then they were not satisfied with what was commodious, without splendor
and luxury being added, it was extremely shameful for them to rob God at
the same time of his Temple, where he was to be worshipped. It now
follows —

<span id="v.ii.v"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>[Hag.
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#005),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006)<span id="v.ii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p2"></span>**5.** Now therefore thus saith the LORD of
hosts; Consider your ways.

<span id="v.ii.v-p3"></span>**5.** Et nunc sic dicit Iehova exercituum,
Adjicite cor vestrum ad vias vestras;

<span id="v.ii.v-p4"></span>**6.** Ye have sown much, and bring in
little; ye eat, but ye have not enough; ye drink, but ye are not filled
with drink; ye clothe you, but there is none warm; and he that earneth
wages earneth wages *to put it* into a bag with holes.

<span id="v.ii.v-p5"></span>**6.** Seminastis multum, et intulistis
parum; comedere, et non ad satietatem; bibere, et non ad ebrietatem;
vestire, et non ad calorem cuique; et qui colligit mercedem, colligit
mercedem in sacculum perforatum.

<span id="v.ii.v-p6"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p7"></span>Here the Prophet deals with the refractory
people according to what their character required; for as to those who
are teachable and obedient, a word is enough for them; but they who are
perversely addicted to their sins must be more sharply urged, as the
Prophet does here; for he brings before the Jews the punishments by
which they had been already visited. It is commonly said, that
experience is the teacher of fools; and the Prophet has this in view in
these words, *apply your hearts to your ways*;  <span
id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) that is, “If the authority of God or a
regard for him is of no importance among you, at least consider how God
deals with you. How comes it that ye are famished, that both heaven and
earth deny food to you? Besides, though ye consume much food, it yet
does not satisfy you. In a word, how is it that all things fade away and
vanish in your hands? How is this? Ye cannot otherwise account for it,
but that God is displeased with you. If then ye will not of your own
accord obey God’s word, let these judgements at least induce you to
repent.” It was to apply the heart to their ways, when they acknowledged
that they were thus famished, not by chance, but that the curse of God
urged them, or was suspended over their heads. He therefore bids them to
receive instruction from the events themselves, or from what they were
experiencing; and by these words the Prophet more sharply teaches them;
as though he had said, that they profited nothing by instruction and
warning, and that it remained as the last thing, that they were to be
drawn by force while the Lord was chastising them.

<span id="v.ii.v-p9"></span><span id="v.ii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p10"></span>He says that they had *sown much*, and that
*small was the produce*. They who render the clause in the future tense,
wrest the meaning of the Prophet: for why did he say, apply your heart
to your ways, if he only denounced a future punishment? But, as I have
already stated, he intimates, that they very thoughtlessly champed the
bridle, for they perceived not that all their evils were inflicted by
God’s hand, nor did they regard his judgement as righteous. Hence he
says, that they had sowed much, and that the harvest had been small; and
then, that they *ate* and *were not satisfied*; that they *drank* and
had not their *thirst quenched*; that they *clothed themselves* and were
*not warmed*. How much soever they applied those things which seemed
necessary for the support of life, they yet availed them nothing. And
God, we know, does punish men in these two ways either by withdrawing
his blessings, by rendering the earth and and the heavens dry; or by
making the abundant produce unsatisfying and even useless. It often
happens that men gather what is sufficient for support, and yet they are
always hungry. It is a kind of curse, which appears very evident when
God takes away their nourishing power from bread and wine, so that they
supply no support to man. When therefore fruit, and whatever the earth
produces for the necessities of man, give no support, God proves, as it
were by an outstretched arm, that he is an avenger. But the other curse
is more frequent; that is, when God smites the earth with drought, so
that it produces nothing. But our Prophet refers to both these kinds of
evils. Behold, he says, *Ye have sown much and ye gather little*; and
then he says, Though ye are supplied with the produce of wine and corn,
yet with eating and drinking ye cannot satisfy yourselves; nay, your
very clothes do not make you warm. They might have had a sure hope of
the greatest abundance, had they not broken off the stream of God’s
favor by their sins. Were they not then extremely blind this experience
must have awakened them, according to what is said in the first chapter
of <span id="v.ii.v-p10.1"></span>[Joe
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p11"></span>He says at the end of the verse, *He who
gains wages, gains then for a perforated bag*. By these words he reminds
them, that the vengeance of God could not only be seen in the sterility
of the earth, and in the very hunger of men, who by eating were not
satisfied; but also in their work, for they wearied themselves much
without any profit, as even the money cast into the bag disappeared.
Hence he says, even your work is in vain. It was indeed a most manifest
proof of God’s wrath, when their money, though laid up, yet vanished
away.  <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135)

<span id="v.ii.v-p15"></span>We now see what the Prophet means: As his
doctrine appeared frigid to the Jews and his warnings were despised, he
treats them according to the perverseness of their disposition. Hence he
shows, that though they disregarded God and his Prophets, they were yet
sufficiently taught by his judgements, and that still they remained
indifferent. He therefore goads them, as though they were asses, that
they might at length acknowledge that God was justly displeased with
them, and that his wrath was conspicuous in the sterility of the land,
as well as in everything connected with their life; for whether they did
eat or abstained from food, they were hungry; and when they diligently
labored and gathered wages, their wages vanished, as though they had
cast them into a perforated bag. It follows —

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Hag.
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#008)<span id="v.ii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p2"></span>**7.** Thus saith the Lord of hosts;
Consider your ways.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p3"></span>**7.** Sic dicit Iehova exercituum, Ponite
cor vestrum super vias vestras;

<span id="v.ii.vi-p4"></span>**8.** Go up to the mountain, and bring
wood, and build the house; and I will take pleasure in it, and I will be
glorified, saith the Lord.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p5"></span>**8.** Ascendite in montem et afferte
lignum, et aedificate domum (*vel*, hance domum;) et propitius ero in ea
(*vel*, mihi placebit in ea;) et glorificabor, dicit Iehova.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p6"></span><span id="v.ii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p7"></span>The Prophet now adds, that since the Jews
were thus taught by their evils, nothing else remained for them but to
prepare themselves without delay for the work of building the Temple;
for they were not to defer the time, inasmuch as they were made to know,
that God had come forth with an armed hand to vindicate his own right:
for the sterility of which he had spoken, and also the famine and other
signs of a curse, were like a drawn sword in the hand of God; by which
it was evident, that he intended to punish the negligence of the people.
As God then had been robbed of his right, he not only exhorted the
people by his Prophets, but also executed his vengeance on this
contempt.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p8"></span>This is the reason why the Prophet now
says, *Apply your heart*, and then adds, *Go up to the mountain, bring
wood*, *etc*. And this passage strikingly sets forth why God punished
their sins, in order that they might not only perceive that they had
sinned, but that they might also seek to amend that which displeased
God. We may also, in the second place, learn from what is said, how we
are to proceed rightly in the course of true repentance. The beginning
is, that our sins should become displeasing to us; but if any of us
proceed no farther, it will be only an evanescent feeling: it is
therefore necessary to advance to the second step; an amendment for the
better ought to follow. The Prophet expresses both here: He says first,
*Lay your heart on your ways*; that is, “Consider whence comes this
famine to you, and then how it is that by laboring much ye gain nothing,
except that God is angry with you.” Now this was what wisdom required.
But he again repeats the same thing, Lay your heart on your ways, that
is, “Not only that sin may be hated by you, but also that this sloth,
which has hitherto offended God and provoked his wrath, may be changed
into strenuous activity.” Hence he says, *Go up to the mountain, and
bring wood, and let the house be built*

<span id="v.ii.vi-p9"></span>If any one is at a loss to know why the
Prophet insists so much on building the Temple, the ready answer is this
that it was God’s design to exercise in this way his ancient people in
the duties of religion. Though then the Temple itself was of no great
importance before God, yet the end was to be regarded; for the people
were preserved by the visible Temple in the hope of the future Christ;
and then it behaved them always to bear in mind the heavenly pattern,
that they might worship God spiritually under the external symbols. It
was not then without reason that God was offended with their neglect of
the temple; for it hence clearly appeared, that there was no care nor
zeal for religion among the Jews. It often was the case that they were
more sedulous than necessary in external worship, and God scorned their
assiduity, when not connected with a right inward feeling; but the gross
contempt of God in disregarding even the external building, is what is
reprehended here by the Prophet.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p10"></span>He afterwards adds, *And I will be
propitious in it*, or, I will take pleasure in it. Some read, It will
please me; and they depart not from the real meaning of the verb: for
<span id="v.ii.vi-p10.1"></span>רצה, *retse* — is to be acceptable. But
more correct, in my view, is the opinion of those who think that the
Prophet alludes to the promise of God; for he had said, that he would on
this condition dwell among the Jews, that he might hear their prayers,
and be propitious to them. As, then, the Jews came to the Temple to
expiate their sins, that they might return to God’s favor, it is not
without reason that God here declares that he would be propitious in
that house.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p11"></span>‘If any one sin,’ said Solomon, ‘and
entering this house, shall humbly pray, do thou also hear from thy
heavenly habitation.’  
(<span id="v.ii.vi-p11.2"></span>[1Ki
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030)<span id="v.ii.vi-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.vi-p12"></span>We further know that the covering of the
ark was called the propitiatory, because God there received the
suppliant into favor. This meaning, then, seems the most suitable — that
the Prophet says, that if the Temple was built, God would be there
propitious. But it was a proof of extreme impiety to think that they
could prosper while God was adverse to them: for whence could they hope
for happiness, except from the only fountain of all blessings, that is,
when God favored them and was propitious to them? And how could his
favor be sought, except they came to his sanctuary, and thence raise up
their minds by faith to heaven? When, therefore, there was no care for
the Temple, it was easy to conclude that God himself was neglected, and
regarded almost with scorn. We then see how emphatically this was added,
*I will be propitious there*, that is, in the Temple; as though he had
said, “Your infirmity ought to have reminded you that you have need of
this help, even of worshipping me in the sanctuary. But as I gave you,
as it were, a visible mirror of my presence among you, when I ordered a
Temple to be built for me on mount Sion, when ye despise the Temple, is
it not the same as though I was rejected by you?”

<span id="v.ii.vi-p13"></span>He then adds, *And I shall be glorified,
saith Jehovah*. He seems to express the reason why he should be
propitious; for he would then see that his glory was regarded by the
Jews. At the same time, this reason may be taken by itself, and this is
what I prefer.  <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136) The Prophet then
employs two goads to awaken the Jews: When the Temple was built, God
would bless them; for they would have him pacified, and whenever they
found him displeased, they might come as suppliants to seek pardon; this
was one reason why it behaved them strenuously to undertake the building
of the Temple. The second reason was, that God would be glorified. Now,
what could have been more inconsistent than to disregard God their
deliverer, and so late a deliverer too? But how God was glorified by the
Temple I have already briefly explained; not that it added anything to
God; but such ordinances of religion were then necessary, as the Jews
were as yet like children. It now follows —

<span id="v.ii.vii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009)<span id="v.ii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p2"></span>**9.** Ye looked for much, and, lo, *it
came* to little; and when ye brought *it* home, I did blow upon it. Why?
saith the Lord of hosts. Because of mine house that *is* waste, and ye
run every man unto his own house.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p3"></span>**9.** Respexistis ad multum, et ecce
parum; et intulistis ad domum, et sufflavi in illud: cur hoc? dicit
Iehova exercituum: Propter domum meam quae est deserta, et vos curritis
(vel, addicti estis quisque domi suae) quisque in domum suam.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p4"></span><span id="v.ii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p5"></span>Here the Prophet relates again, that the
Jews were deprived of support, and that they in a manner pined away in
their distress, because they robbed God of the worship due to him. He
first repeats the fact, *Ye have looked for much, but behold little*
 <span id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) It may happen that one is
contented with a very slender portion, because much is not expected.
They who are satisfied with their own penury are not anxious though
their portion of food is but scanty, though they are constrained to feed
on acorns. Those who are become hardened in enduring evils, do not seek
much; but they who desire much, are more touched and vexed by their
penury. This is the reason why the Prophet says, Ye have looked for
much, and, behold, there was but little; that is, “Ye are not like the
peasants, who satisfy themselves with any sort of food, and are not
troubled on account of their straitened circumstances; but your desire
has led you to seek abundance. Hence ye seek and greedily lay hold on
things on every side; but, behold, it comes to little.”

<span id="v.ii.vii-p13"></span>In the second place he adds, *Ye have
brought it home*. He farther mentions another kind of evil — that when
they gathered wine, and corn, and money, all these things immediately
vanished. *Ye have brought it home, and I have blown upon it*. By saying
that they brought it home, he intimates that what they had acquired was
laid up, that it might be preserved safely; for they who had filled
their storehouses, and wine-cellars, and bags, thought that they had no
more to do with God. Hence it was that profane men securely indulged
themselves; they thought that they were beyond the reach of danger, when
their houses were well filled. God, on the contrary, shows that their
houses became empty, when filled with treasures and provisions. But he
speaks still more distinctly — that he had blown upon them, that is,
that he had dissipated them by his breath: for the Prophet did not deem
it enough historically to narrate what the Jews had experienced; but his
purpose also was to point out the cause, as it were, by the finger. He
therefore teaches us, that what they laid in store in their houses did
not without a cause vanish away; but that this happened through the
blowing of God, even because he cursed their blessing, according to what
we shall hereafter see in the Prophet Malachi.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p14"></span>He then adds, *Why is this? saith Jehovah
of hosts*. God here asks, not because he had any doubts on the subject,
but that he might by this sort of goading rouse the Jews from their
lethargy, — “Think of the cause, and know that my hand is not guided by
a blind impulse when it strikes you. You ought, then, to consider the
reason why all things thus decay and perish.” Here again is sharply
reproved the stupidity of the people, because they attended not to the
cause of their evils; for they ought to have known this of themselves.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p15"></span>But God gives the answer, because he saw
that they remained stupefied — *On account of my house*, he says,
*because it is waste*  <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) God here
assigns the cause; he shows that though no one of them considered why
they were so famished, the judgement of his curse was yet sufficiently
manifest, on account of the Temple remaining a waste. And you, he says,
run, every one to his own house. Some read, You take delight, every one
in his own house; for it is the verb <span
id="v.ii.vii-p16.4"></span>רצה, *retse*, which we have lately noticed;
and it means either to take pleasure in a thing, or to run. Every one,
then, runs to his house, or, Every one delights in his house. But it is
more suitable to the context to give this rendering, Every one runs to
his house. For the Prophet here reminds the Jews that they were slow and
slothful in the work of building the Temple, because they hastened to
their private houses. He then reproves here their ardor in being intent
on building their own houses, so that they had no leisure to build the
Temple. This is the hastening which the Prophet blames and condemns in
the Jews.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p17"></span>We may hence learn again, that they had
long delayed to build the sanctuary after the time had arrived: for, as
we have mentioned yesterday, they who think the Jews returned in the
fifty-eighth year, and that they had not then undergone the punishment
denounced by Jeremiah, are very deluded; for they thus obscure the favor
of God; nay, they wholly subvert the truth of the promises, as though
they had returned contrary to God’s will, through the permission of
Cyrus, when yet Isaiah says, that Cyrus would be the instrument of their
promised redemption. (<span id="v.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>[Isa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#005)<span
id="v.ii.vii-p17.1"></span>.) Surely, then, Cyrus must have been dead
before the time was fulfilled! and in that case God could not have been
the redeemer of his people. Therefore Eusebius, and those who agree with
him, did thus most absurdly confound the order of time. It now follows —

<span id="v.ii.viii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>[Hag.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#011)<span id="v.ii.viii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p2"></span>**10.** Therefore the heaven over you is
stayed from dew, and the earth is stayed *from* her fruit.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p3"></span>**10.** Propterea prohibiti super vos
sunt coeli a rore, et terra a proventu suo prohibita est.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p4"></span>**11.** And I called for a drought upon
the land, and upon the mountains, and upon the corn, and upon the new
wine, and upon the oil, and upon *that* which the ground bringeth forth,
and upon men, and upon cattle, and upon all the labour of the hands.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p5"></span>**11.** Et vocavi siccitatem super
terram, et super montes, et super triticum, et super mustum (aut,
vinium,) et super omne quod profert terra, et super hominem, et super
animal, et super omnem laborem manuum.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p6"></span><span id="v.ii.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p7"></span>He confirms what the last verse contains
— that God had made it evident that he was displeased with the people
because their zeal for religion had become cold, and, especially,
because they were all strangely devoted to their own interest and
manifested no concern for building the Temple. Hence, he says,
*therefore the heavens* are shut up and *withhold the dew*; that is,
they distil no dew on the earth; and he adds, that the earth was closed
that it produced no fruit; it yielded no increase, and disappointed its
cultivators. As to the particle <span id="v.ii.viii-p7.1"></span>על-כן,
*ol-can*, we must bear in mind what I have stated, that God did not
regard the external and visible Temple, but rather the end for which it
was designed; for it was his will then that he should be worshipped
under the ceremonies of the law. When, therefore, the Jews offered
mutilated, lame, or diseased sacrifices, they manifested impiety and
contempt of God. It is yet true, that it was the same thing as to God;
but he had not commanded sacrifices to be offered to him for his own
sake, but that by such services they might foster true religion. When,
therefore, he says now, that he punished their neglect of the Temple, we
ought ever to regard that as a pattern of heavenly things, so that we
may understand that the coldness and indifference of the Jews were
reproved; because it hence evidently appeared that they had no care for
the worship of God.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p8"></span>With respect to the withholding of dew
and of produce, we know that the Prophets took from the law what served
to teach the people, and accommodated it to their own purposes. The
curses of the law are general. (<span id="v.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>[De
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#017)<span
id="v.ii.viii-p8.1"></span>.) It is therefore the same thing as though
the Prophet had said, that what God had threatened by Moses was really
fulfilled. It ought not to have been to them a new thing, that whenever
heaven denied its dew and rain it was a sign of God’s wrath. But as, at
this day, during, wars, or famine, or pestilence, men do not regard this
general truth, it is necessary to make the application: and godly
teachers ought wisely to attend to this point, that is, to remind men,
according to what the state of things and circumstances may require,
that God proves by facts what he has testified in his word. This is what
is done by our Prophet now, *withheld have the heavens the dew and the
earth its produce*  <span id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139)

<span id="v.ii.viii-p15"></span>In a word, God intimates, that the
heavens leave no care to provide for us, and to distil dew so that the
earth may bring forth fruit, and that the earth also, though called the
mother of men, does not of itself open its bowels, but that the heavens
as well as the earth bear a sure testimony to his paternal love, and
also to the care which he exercises over us. God then shows, both by the
heavens and the earth, that he provides for us; for when the heavens and
the earth administer and supply us with the blessings of God, they thus
declare his love towards us. So also, when the heaven is, as it were,
iron, and when the earth with closed bowels refuses us food, we ought to
know that they are commissioned to execute on us the vengeance of God.
For they are not only the instruments of his bounty, but, when it is
necessary, God employs them for the purpose of punishing us. This is
briefly the meaning.

<span id="v.ii.ix"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ix-p1"></span>Prayer

<span id="v.ii.ix-p2"></span>Grant, Almighty God, that since thou kindly
and graciously invites us to thyself, we may not wait until thou
stimulates us with goads, but cast aside our sloth and run quickly to
thee. And when our torpor so possesses us as to render punishment
necessary, permit us not to harden ourselves; but being at length
effectually warned, and we return to the right way, and strive so to
render all we do approved by thee, that we may find a door opened to thy
grace and favor: and being made partakers of those blessed, by which
thou affordest a taste of that goodness which we shall enjoy in heaven,
may we ever aspire thither, and be satisfied with the abundant blessings
which we daily and even continually receive from thine hand, in such a
manner as not to be detained by this world; but may we, with minds
raised up to heaven, ever tend upwards, and labor for that perfect
happiness which is there laid up fur us by Christ our Lord. Amen.

<span id="v.ii.x"></span>

<span id="v.ii.x-p1"></span>Lecture One hundred and Thirtieth

<span id="v.ii.xi"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#012)<span id="v.ii.xi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p2"></span>**12.** Then Zerubbabel the son of
Shealtiel, and Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, with all the
remnant of the people, obeyed the voice of the Lord their God, and the
words of Haggai the prophet, as the Lord their God had sent him, and the
people did fear before the Lord.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p3"></span>**12.** Et audivit Zerubbabel, filius
Sealtiel, et Jehoasua, filius Jehosadak, sacerdos magnus, et omnes
reliquiae populi vocem Iehovae Dei sui, et ad verba Chaggai Prophetae;
quemadmodum miserat ipsum Iehova Deus eorum; et timuerunt populus a
conspectu Iehovae.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p4"></span><span id="v.ii.xi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p5"></span>The Prophet here declares that his message
had not been without fruit, for shortly after the whole people prepared
themselves for the work. And he names both Zerubbabel and Joshua; for it
behaved them to lead the way, and, as it were, to extend a hand to
others. For, had there been no leaders, no one of the common people
would have pointed out the way to the rest. We know what usually happens
when a word is addressed indiscriminately to all the people: they wait
for one another. But when Joshua and Zerubbabel attended to the commands
of the Prophet, the others followed them: for they were dominant, not
only in power, but also in authority, so that they induced the people
willingly to do their duty. One was the governor of the people, the
other was the high priest; but the honesty and faithfulness of both were
well known, so that the people spontaneously followed their example.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p6"></span>And this passage teaches us that though God
invites all to his service, yet as any one excels in honor or in other
respects, so the more promptly he ought to undertake what is proposed by
the authority of God. Our Prophet, no doubt, meant to point out this due
order of things, by saying, that he was heard first by Zerubbabel and
Joshua, and then by the whole people.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p7"></span>But as all had not returned from exile, but
a small portion, compared with that great number, which, we know, had
not availed themselves of the kindness allowed them — this is the reason
why the Prophet does not simply name the people, but *the remnant of the
people*, <span id="v.ii.xi-p7.1"></span>שארית העם, *sharit eom*. As also
the gift of prophecy had been for a long time more rare, and few
appeared among the people who had any decided evidence of their call,
such as Samuel, Isaiah, David, and others possessed, the Prophet, for
this reason, does here more carefully commend and honor his own office:
he says that the people attended to *the voice of Jehovah* — How? By
attending, he says, *to the words of Haggai the Prophet, inasmuch as
Jehovah their God had sent him*. He might have said more shortly that
his labor had not been without fruit; but he used this circuitous mode
of speaking, that he might confirm his own call; and he did this
designedly, because the people had for a long time been without the
opportunity of hearing God’s Prophets, for there were none among them.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p8"></span>But Haggai says nothing here but what
belongs in common to all teachers in the Church: for we know that men
are not sent by divine authority to speak that God himself may be
silent. As then the ministers of the word derogate nothing from the
authority of God, it follows that none except the only true God ought to
be heard. It is not then a peculiar expression, which is to be
restricted to one man, when God is said to have spoken by the mouth of
Haggai; for he thus declared that he was God’s true and authorised
Prophet. We may therefore gather from these words, that the Church is
not to be ruled by the outward preaching of the word, as though God had
substituted men in his own place, and thus divested himself of his own
office, but that he only speaks by their mouth. And this is the import
of these words, *The people attended to the voice of Jehovah their God,
and to the words of Haggai the Prophet*. For the word of God is not
distinguished from the words of the Prophet, as though the Prophet had
added anything of his own. Haggai then ascribed these words to himself,
not that he devised anything himself, so as to corrupt the pure doctrine
which had been delivered to him by God, but that he only distinguished
between God, the author of the doctrine, and his minister, as when it is
said,

<span id="v.ii.xi-p9"></span>"The sword of God and of Gideon,” (<span
id="v.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>[Jud
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020)<span id="v.ii.xi-p9.1"></span>,)

<span id="v.ii.xi-p10"></span>and also,

<span id="v.ii.xi-p11"></span>“The people believed God and Moses his
servant.”  
(<span id="v.ii.xi-p11.2"></span>[Ex
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)<span
id="v.ii.xi-p11.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.xi-p12"></span>nothing is ascribed to Moses or to Gideon
apart from God; but God himself is placed in the highest honor, and then
Moses and Gideon are joined to him. In the same sense do the Apostles
write, when they say, that “it had pleased the Holy spirit” and
themselves. (<span id="v.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>[Ac
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)<span
id="v.ii.xi-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.xi-p13"></span>And hence it is evident how foolish and
ridiculous are the Papists, who hence conclude that it is lawful for men
to add their own inventions to the word of God. For the Apostles, they
say, not only alleged the authority of the Holy Spirit, but also say,
that it seemed good to themselves. God then does not so claim, they say,
all things for himself, as not to leave some things to the decision of
his Church, as though indeed the Apostles meant something different from
what our Prophet means here; that is, that they truly and faithfully
delivered what their had received from the spirit of God.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p14"></span>It is therefore a mode of speaking which
ought to be carefully marked, when we hear, that the voice of God and
the words of Haggai were reverently attended to by the people. — Why?
*Inasmuch*, he says, *as God had sent him*; as though he had said, that
God was heard when he spoke by the mouth of man. And this is also worthy
of being noticed, because many fanatics boast, that they allow regard to
the word of the Lord, but are unwilling to give credit to men, as that
would be even preposterous; and they pretend, that in this way what
belongs to the only true God is transferred to creatures. But the Holy
Spirit most easily reconciles these two things — that the voice of God
is heard when the people embrace what they hear from the mouth of a
Prophet. Why so? because it pleases God thus to try the obedience of our
faith, while he commits to man this office. For if the Lord was pleased
to speak himself, then justly might men be neglected: but as he has
chosen this mode, whosoever reject God’s Prophets, clearly show that
they despise God himself. There is no need of inquiring here, why it is
that we ought to obey the word preached or the external voice of men,
rather than revelations; it is enough for us to know that this is the
will of God. When therefore he sends Prophets to us, we ought
unquestionably to receive what they bring.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p15"></span>And Haggai says also expressly, that he
was sent by the God of Israel; as though he had said, that the people
had testified their true piety when they acknowledged God’s Prophet in
his legitimate vocation. For he who clamorously objects, and says that
he knows not whether it pleases God or not to send forth men to announce
his word, shows himself to be wholly alienated from God: for it ought to
be sufficiently evident to us that this is one of our first principles.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p16"></span>He afterwards adds, that *the people
feared before Jehovah*  <span id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) Haggai
confirms here the same truth — that the people received not what they
heard from the mouth of mortal man, otherwise than if the majesty of God
had openly appeared. For there was no ocular view of God given; but the
message of the Prophet obtained as much power as though God had
descended from heaven, and had given manifest tokens of his presence. We
may then conclude from these words, that the glory of God so shines in
his word, that we ought to be so much affected by it, whenever he speaks
by his servants, as though he were nigh to us, face to face, as the
Scripture says in another place. It now follows —

<span id="v.ii.xii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>[Hag.
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#013),
[14](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#014)<span id="v.ii.xii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p2"></span>**13.** Then spake Haggai the Lord’s
messenger in the LORD’S message unto the people, saying, I *am* with
you, saith the Lord

<span id="v.ii.xii-p3"></span>**13.** Et dicit Chaggai, legatus Iehovae
in legatione Iehovae, dicendo (vel, dicens) populo, Ego vobiscum sum,
dicit Iehova.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p4"></span>**14.** And the Lord stirred up the spirit
of Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, governor of Judah, and the spirit of
Joshua the son of Josedech, the high priest, and the spirit of all the
remnant of the people; and they came and did work in the house of the
Lord of hosts, their God,

<span id="v.ii.xii-p5"></span>**14.** Et excitavit Iehova spiritum
Zerubbabel, filli Sealtiel, ducis Jehudah, et spiritum Jehosuae, filii
Jehozadak, sacerdotis magni, et spiritum omnium reliquiarum (hoc est,
totius residuae multitudinis) populi; et venerunt et fecerunt opus in
templo (in domo, ad verbum) Iehovae exercituum Dei sui.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p6"></span><span id="v.ii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p7"></span>The Prophet tells us here, that he had
again roused the leaders as well as the common people; for except God
frequently repeats his exhortations, our alacrity relaxes. Though then
they had all attended to God’s command, it was yet necessary that they
should be strengthened by a new promise: for men can be encouraged, and
their indifference can be corrected, by no other means, to such a
degree, as when God offers and promises his help. This, then, was the
way in which they were now encouraged, *I am with you*. And experience
sufficiently shows, that we never really and from the heart obey, except
when we rely on his promises and hope for a happy success. For were God
only to call us to our work, and were our hope doubtful, all our zeal
would doubtless die away. We cannot then devote our services to God,
except he supports and encourages us by promises. We also see, that it
is not enough that God should speak once, and that we should once
receive his word, but there is need that he should rouse us again and
again; for the greatest ardor grows cold when no goads are applied.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p8"></span>And the Prophet makes known again his
vocation, for he says, that *he spake in the message of Jehovah*, for he
was his messenger. The word <span id="v.ii.xii-p8.1"></span>מלאך,
*malak*, means a messenger; and as angels are called <span
id="v.ii.xii-p8.2"></span>מלאכים, *melakim*, some foolish men have
thought that Haggai was one of the celestial angels, clothed with the
form of man: but this is a most frivolous conjecture; for priests, we
know, are honored with this title in the second chapter of Malachi,
<span id="v.ii.xii-p8.3"></span>[Mal
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#001)<span id="v.ii.xii-p8.3"></span>,
and God in many other places calls his Prophets messengers or
ambassadors. There is, therefore, no doubt but that Haggai meant simply
to testify, that he brought forward nothing presumptuously, but was a
faithful dispenser of the word; for he knew that he was sent by God; and
that he might attain attention, he was able justly to testify that his
message came from heaven.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p9"></span>Hence he says, that he spake as a
*messenger of Jehovah in the message of Jehovah*; that is, he spoke
according to his calling, and not as a private individual, but as one
who derived his authority from heaven, and could call to order the whole
people; for he was to give way neither to the chief priest nor to
Zerubbabel the ruler of the people, inasmuch as he was superior to them
on this account, because he had a message which had been committed to
him by God.  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) We now then
understand the design of the Prophet.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p13"></span>And we hence learn that there is no
dignity which exempts us from obedience common to all, when God’s word
is addressed to us. Doubtless Joshua the high priest was superior to all
the rest in matters of religion, and he was the chief angel or messenger
of the God of hosts; and yet he refused not to submit himself to God’s
Prophet, for he understood that he was in a special manner appointed by
God to this office. Zerubbabel, the governor of the people, followed
also his example. Let us, then, know that God’s word is proclaimed under
this condition, that no eminence, either in honor or in dignity, exempts
us, as it were, by a sort of privilege, from the obligation of receiving
it.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p14"></span>The Prophet at length adds, that the
people hastened quickly to the work, because God had given encouragement
to them all. He had lately spoken of the fruit of his doctrine; but he
now declares that his voice had not so penetrated into the hearts of
all, as though it had been of itself efficacious, but that it had been
connected with the hidden influence of the Spirit.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p15"></span>And this passage is remarkable; for the
Prophet includes both these things — that God allows not his word to be
useless or unfruitful — and yet that this proceeds not from the
diligence of men, but from the hidden power of the Spirit. The Prophet,
then, did not fail in his efforts; for his labor was not in vain, but
brought forth fruit. At the same time, that that saying might remain
true,

<span id="v.ii.xii-p16"></span>‘He who plants and he who waters is
nothing,’  
(<span id="v.ii.xii-p16.2"></span>[1Co
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.xii-p16.2"></span>,)

<span id="v.ii.xii-p17"></span>he says, that the Israelites were ready
for the work, because the Lord roused them; *Jehovah*, he says, *stirred
up the spirit of Zerubbabel, the spirit of Joshua, and of the whole
people*. It is not right to restrict the influence of the Spirit to one
thing only, as some do, who imagine that the Israelites were confirmed
in their good resolution, as they say, having before spontaneously
obeyed the word of God. These separate, without reason, what ought to be
read in the Prophet as connected together. For God roused the spirit of
Zerubbabel and of the whole people; and hence it was that they received
the message of the Prophet, and were attentive to his words. Foolishly,
then, do they imagine that the Israelites were led by their own
free-will to obey the word of God, and then that some aid of the Holy
Spirit followed, to make them firmly to persevere in their course. But
the Prophet declared, in the first place, that his message was
respectfully received by the people; and now he explains how it was,
even because God had touched the hearts of the whole people.  <span
id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142)

<span id="v.ii.xii-p19"></span>And we ought to notice the expression,
when it is said that the *spirit* of Zerubbabel and of all the people
was *stirred up*. For much sloth, we know, prevailed, especially among
the multitude. But as to Zerubbabel and Joshua, they were, as we have
said, already willing, but delayed until the coldness under which they
labored was reproved. But the Prophet here simply means, that they
became thus obedient through the hidden impulse of God, and also that
they were made firm in their purpose. God does not form new souls in us,
when he draws us to his service; but changes what is wrong in us: for we
should never be attentive to his word, were he not to open our ears; and
there would be no inclination to obey, were he not to turn our hearts;
in a word, both will and effort would immediately fail in us, were he
not to add his gift of perseverance. Let us, then, know that Haggai’s
labors produced fruits, because the Lord effectually touched the hearts
of the people; for we indeed know that it is his special gift, that the
elect are made disciples, according to that declaration,

<span id="v.ii.xii-p20"></span>‘No one comes to me, except my Father
draw him.’  
(<span id="v.ii.xii-p20.2"></span>[Joh
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#024)<span
id="v.ii.xii-p20.2"></span>.)

<span id="v.ii.xii-p21"></span>It is therefore said that they *came and
did the work in the house of Jehovah*

<span id="v.ii.xii-p22"></span>We may also hence learn, that no one is
fit to offer sacrifices to God, or to do any other service, but he who
has been moulded by the hidden operation of the Spirit. Willingly,
indeed, we offer ourselves and our all to God, and build his temple; but
whence is this voluntary action, except that the Lord subdues us, and
thus renders us teachable and obedient? It is afterwards added —

<span id="v.ii.xiii"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p1"></span><span id="v.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>[Haggai
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#015)<span id="v.ii.xiii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p2"></span>**15.** In the four and twentieth day of
the sixth month, in the second year of Darius the king.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p3"></span>**15.** In die vicesimo quarto mensis
sexti, anno secundo Darii regis.

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p4"></span><span id="v.ii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p5"></span>The Prophet mentions even the time when
they commenced the building of the temple. Three-and-twenty days
interposed between the first message and the beginning of the work. It
hence appears how ignorant he was who divided the chapters, having begun
the second chapter at this verse, where the Prophet shows, as it were by
his finger, how much was the distance between the day in which he began
to exhort the people, and the success of which he speaks. He then simply
tells us here when the Temple began to be built — that is, in the second
year of Darius the king, and in the twenty-fourth day of the sixth
month. He had previously said that a message was given to him in the
second year of Darius the king, and in the sixth month, and on the first
day. Then from that day to the twenty-fourth the people delayed; not
that they disregarded the command of the Prophet, but because it was not
so easy a thing to persuade them all, that they might unanimously
undertake the work. Though then the promptitude of the people is
commended, we must yet observe that there was some mixture of weakness;
for the effect of the doctrine did not appear till the twenty-fourth
day.  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) It afterwards follows —

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_126"></span>[127](cc29014.htm#fr_126) <span
id="v.ii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p8"></span> According to the opinions of Plato and
Cicero, the Cyropaedia of Xenophon was a moral romance; and these
venerable philosophers suppose, that the historian did not so much write
what Cyrus had been, as what every true, good, and virtuous monarch
ought to be.” — *Lempriere’s* Class. Dict.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[128](cc29014.htm#fr_127) <span
id="v.ii.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p9"></span> The account of the Magi is briefly this: —
Cyrus had two sons, Cambyses and Smerdis. When Cambyses ascended the
throne, suspecting the fidelity of his brother, he caused him to be
secretly put to death. This was known to some of the Magi. On the death
of Cambyses, one of them, named Smerdis, who resembled the deceased
prince, was by the Magi declared king, under the pretense of being the
brother of Cambyses. The imposition was detected, and seven of the
nobles of Persia dethroned him after six months’ reign, and on
themselves, Darius Hystaspes, was made king, in the year before Christ
521. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_128"></span>[129](cc29014.htm#fr_128) <span
id="v.ii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p11"></span> *Adam Clark* says, that is was in the
*sixteenth* year after their return from Babylon. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_129"></span>[130](cc29014.htm#fr_129) <span
id="v.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p13"></span> The reference in <span
id="v.ii.i-p13.1"></span>[John 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019),
[20](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#020)<span id="v.ii.i-p13.1"></span>,
seems to have been made not to the time in which it was built then, but
to the time in which it was built or rebuilt by Herod the Great. For
this temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius (see <span
id="v.ii.i-p13.2"></span>[Ezr
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015)<span id="v.ii.i-p13.2"></span>,)
and about twenty-one years after the temple was finished in 515. It was
about four years in building under Darius. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_130"></span>[131](cc29014.htm#fr_130) <span
id="v.ii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.i-p18"></span> \[<span id="v.ii.i-p18.1"></span>פחה\]; it
is a word currect in several languages, Chaldee, Persic, etc.
*Parkhurst* derives it from \[<span id="v.ii.i-p18.2"></span>פה\], to
extend. *Theod.* Aq. and *Syn.* render it ἡγούμενον, governor. He is
called Sheshbazzar in <span id="v.ii.i-p18.3"></span>[Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014)<span id="v.ii.i-p18.3"></span>;
and Cyrus is said to have made him \[<span
id="v.ii.i-p18.4"></span>פחה\], governor or deputy. It is the name of a
person endued with authority by a sovereign. Zerubbabel, \[<span
id="v.ii.i-p18.5"></span>זרבבל\], has been derived from \[<span
id="v.ii.i-p18.6"></span>זר\], a stranger, and \[<span
id="v.ii.i-p18.7"></span>בבנ\], Babylon, a stranger or sojourner at
Babylon. It deserves to be noticed, that the civil governor is put here
before the chief priest; and we find from Ezra that it was to the civil
governor that Cyrus delivered the holy vessels of the temple. See <span
id="v.ii.i-p18.8"></span>[Ezr
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#014)<span id="v.ii.i-p18.8"></span>. —
*Ed.*

<span id="fn_131"></span>[132](cc29014.htm#fr_131) <span
id="v.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.ii-p12"></span> The words literally are, —

<span id="v.ii.ii-p13"></span>This people say, Not come is the time,  
The time for the house of Jehovah to be built.

<span id="v.ii.ii-p14"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_132"></span>[133](cc29014.htm#fr_132) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p4"></span> There is a double pronoun, \[<span
id="v.ii.iv-p4.1"></span>העת לכם אתם\], "Is it time for you, *even*
you,” or, “you yourselves?” The Welsh often use two pronouns in this
way, for the sake of emphasis. The rendering is very flat, as in our
version, and adopted by *Henderson*, “Is it time for you, O ye?” etc.
*Houbigant,* who always amends, proposes \[<span
id="v.ii.iv-p4.2"></span>אתה\], to come, “Is the time come for you?”
etc. This is suitable, but without authority. *Dathius* suggests the
place, but it is no more than a conjecture. There is no doubt an
emphasis is intended by the repetition. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_133"></span>[134](cc29014.htm#fr_133) <span
id="v.ii.iv-p4.4"></span>

<span id="v.ii.iv-p5"></span> It is rendered “wainscoted” by
*Henderson*; “κοιλοσταθμοις — ceiled,” by the *Sept.*; “ωροφωμενοις —
roofed,” by *Aquila.* It was the custom in the east, says *Parkhurst*,
to cover or line the roof with boards or wainscot. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_134"></span>[135](cc29014.htm#fr_134) <span
id="v.ii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p8"></span> Literally it is, “Set your heart on your
ways.” An idiomatic phrase, but very expressive. They were to fix their
attention on their conduct, not merely to take a glance, but seriously
and steadily to reflect on their ways.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[136](cc29014.htm#fr_135) <span
id="v.ii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.v-p12"></span> There seems to be an irregularity in the
construction of the whole verse. Literally it is as follows —

<span id="v.ii.v-p13"></span>Ye have sown much, but the coming in is
little;  
There is eating, but not to satisfaction;  
They drink, but not to fullness;  
There is clothing, but there is no warmth in it;  
And earn does the earner for a perforated bag.

<span id="v.ii.v-p14"></span>This change in the mode of construction
takes away the monotony which would have otherwise appeared. The word
\[<span id="v.ii.v-p14.1"></span>הבא\], \[<span
id="v.ii.v-p14.2"></span>אכול\], and \[<span
id="v.ii.v-p14.3"></span>לבוש\], are not infinitives, as some suppose,
but participles used as nouns; which is often the case in Hebrew, as
well as in Welsh, and often to in English, such as teaching, drinking,
clothing, etc. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_136"></span>[137](cc29014.htm#fr_136) <span
id="v.ii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vi-p14"></span> The whole verse may be thus rendered —

<span id="v.ii.vi-p15"></span>Ascend the mountains, for ye have brought
wood;  
And build the house, that I may delight in it,  
That I may be glorified, saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p16"></span>The \[<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.1"></span>ו\],
*vau*, here in two instance may have the meaning of <span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.2"></span>*ut,* that; but before \[<span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.3"></span>הבאתם\], a verb in the perfect tense, it must
be rendered “for,” or, “as;” and the clause seems to be a parenthesis.
The \[<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.4"></span>ו\], *vau*, is not conversive when
preceded by a verb in the imperative mood, as it appears from the end of
the verse. The mount was not Libanus, as many have supposed, but Sion,
where wood had been previously brought, but was not used. See <span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.5"></span>[Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.5"></span>.
As to the verb \[<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.6"></span>רצה\], followed by
\[<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.7"></span>ב\], it means to approve, to be
pleased with, or to take pleasure or delight in, a thing. See <span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.8"></span>[2Ch
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#003)<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.8"></span>;
<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.9"></span>[Ps
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010)<span
id="v.ii.vi-p16.9"></span>; <span id="v.ii.vi-p16.10"></span>[Mic
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#007)<span id="v.ii.vi-p16.10"></span>.
Probably the best rendering of the two last lines is the following —

<span id="v.ii.vi-p17"></span>And build the house, and I shall delight
in it  
And render it glorious, saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p18"></span>To take the last verb in a causative sense
is more consistent with the tenor of the passage. This is the meaning
given by the Targum, and is adopted by *Dathius.* — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_137"></span>[138](cc29014.htm#fr_137) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p6"></span> The first word in this verse, \[<span
id="v.ii.vii-p6.1"></span>פנה\], is evidently a participle noun; similar
instances we find in verse 6. The verse, literally rendered, is as
follows —

<span id="v.ii.vii-p7"></span>Looking for much, and behold little!  
And you brought it home, and I blew upon it;  
On what account this, saith Jehovah of hosts?  
On account of my house, because it is waste,  
And ye are running, each to his own house.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p8"></span>The first line is put in an absolute form,
as is sometimes the case in Hebrew; “There has been,” or some such words
being understood. Both the Targum and the Septuagint read \[<span
id="v.ii.vii-p8.1"></span>היה\] instead of \[<span
id="v.ii.vii-p8.2"></span>הנה\], which would be more suitable to the
word which follows, which has \[<span id="v.ii.vii-p8.3"></span>ל\]
before it. The line would then be —

<span id="v.ii.vii-p9"></span>*There has been* looking for much, but it
came to little.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p10"></span>The “blowing” seems to be a metaphor
taken from scorching wind, blowing on vegetation, and causing it to
wither. The last line may be thus rendered —

<span id="v.ii.vii-p11"></span>And ye *are* delighted, each with his own
house.

<span id="v.ii.vii-p12"></span> — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_138"></span>[139](cc29014.htm#fr_138) <span
id="v.ii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.vii-p16"></span> This is the literal rendering — “On
account of my house, because it is waste.” \[<span
id="v.ii.vii-p16.1"></span>אשר\] is not “which” here, for it is followed
by \[<span id="v.ii.vii-p16.2"></span>הוא\], “it;” but a conjunction,
“because.” The word <span id="v.ii.vii-p16.3"></span>*quod*, in Latin,
admits of two similar meanings. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_139"></span>[140](cc29014.htm#fr_139) <span
id="v.ii.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="v.ii.viii-p9"></span> *Calvin* seems to have overlooked
\[<span id="v.ii.viii-p9.1"></span>עליכם\], “on your account.” The verse
is —

<span id="v.ii.viii-p10"></span>Therefore, on your account, withheld
have the heavens from dew,  
And the earth has withheld its produce.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p11"></span>The verb \[<span
id="v.ii.viii-p11.1"></span>כלא\], to restrain, to keep back, to
withhold, is used here twice, and in the first line in an intransitive
sense, and in the second in a transitive sense, as it is often the case
in other languages, when the same verb is both neuter and active.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p12"></span>The 11th verse is passed by without any
particular remarks. The word \[<span id="v.ii.viii-p12.1"></span>חרב\]
is rendered “<span id="v.ii.viii-p12.2"></span>Siccitas — drought,” as
*Jerome* does, and also our version, as well as *Newcome* and
*Henderson*; but *Grotius* and also *Marckius* very justly observe, that
it means here “waste,” or “desolation,” it being the same word as is
applied to God’s house in verse 9. They left his house a waste; by a
just retribution he had brought or called for a waste on the land, etc.
The contrast is so evident that it cannot be denied. The ideal meanings
of the word is to be waste or desolate: it is then applied to various
things which produce desolation, the sword, drought, pestilence, etc.;
but it is used here in its primary sense, and the contrast is very
striking: “My house has been left waste; I have caused a waste to come
upon every thing else.” The verse may be thus rendered —

<span id="v.ii.viii-p13"></span>And I have called for a waste  
On the land and on the mountains,  
And on the corn and on the wine and on the oil,  
And on whatever the ground produces,  
And on man and on the cattle,  
And on all the labor of the hands.

<span id="v.ii.viii-p14"></span>— *Ed.*

<span id="fn_140"></span>[141](cc29014.htm#fr_140) <span
id="v.ii.xi-p16.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xi-p17"></span> This clause may be thus rendered, —

<span id="v.ii.xi-p18"></span>And fear him did the people on account of
Jehovah.

<span id="v.ii.xi-p19"></span>This comports better with the previous
clause, that Jehovah had sent him. The \[<span
id="v.ii.xi-p19.1"></span>ו\] affixed to “fear” is a pronoun, otherwise
the verb is plural; and “people” seldom, if ever, has a verb in the
plural number. To fear sometimes means to respect, to reverence: the
people honored him as God’s servant, by obeying his message. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc29014.htm#fr_141) <span
id="v.ii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p10"></span> The verse literally is —

<span id="v.ii.xii-p11"></span>Then said Haggai, the messenger of
Jehovah in the message of  
Jehovah to the people, saying,  
I am with you, saith Jehovah.

<span id="v.ii.xii-p12"></span>The word for “messages” is in the plural
number, preceded by the preposition \[<span
id="v.ii.xii-p12.1"></span>ב\]. Why commentators have generally rendered
it in the singular number, does not appear. Haggai is expressly said to
be God’s messenger in, or with regard to, the messages or communications
he made to the people. To connect the word, as some do, with “said,”
hardly gives a meaning, except the clause be rendered, as it is done by
*Newcome*, “by the message of Jehovah,” that is, by his command; but
then a plural word is made singular. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc29014.htm#fr_142) <span
id="v.ii.xii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xii-p18"></span> It is sometimes the case, that a
doctrine is illegitimately drawn from a passage, and then that it is
unfairly opposed. The building of the Temple had nothing to do with the
first movement of the spiritual life: and therefore to draw an argument
from the willingness of the people to undertake that work in favor of
free-will in the great business of salvation, is by no means legitimate.
It would have been, then, better to deny the application, than to turn
the passage from its regular course. But we shall not do violence to the
passage, if we render the \[<span id="v.ii.xii-p18.1"></span>ו\] at the
beginning of this verse, “Thus,” and refer “the stiring up” to the
threatening and the promise previously announced. The object seems not
to have been to set forth the direct influence of the Spirit on the
minds of the people, but to show the effect produced on them by the
message conveyed to them from the Lord by the Prophet. God stirs up the
minds of men both by his word and by his Spirit, both outwardly and
inwardly. The former may more properly be meant here. — *Ed.*

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc29014.htm#fr_143) <span
id="v.ii.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="v.ii.xiii-p6"></span> The reasons assigned here for a
different division is by no means satisfactory. The fact is that this
verse necessarily belongs to the last of the previous chapter, as it
specifies the time when the people began the work as there mentioned;
and what follows this verse is another message, and at another time. The
usual division is no doubt the best.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter 2](cc29015)
