[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc29017)  [Next](cc29019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 29: Habakkuk, Zephaniah, and Haggai*, tr.
by John King, \[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="vi.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii-p1"></span>A TRANSLATION of

<span id="vi.ii-p2"></span>CALVIN’S VERSION of

<span id="vi.ii-p3"></span>THE BOOK OF ZEPHANIAH.

<span id="vi.ii.i"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.i-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.i-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER 1

<span id="vi.ii.i-p3"></span>**1** The word of Jehovah, which came to
Zephaniah, the son of Cushi, the son of Gedaliah, the son of Amariah,
the son of Hizkiah, in the days of Josiah, the son of Amon, king of
Judah.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p4"></span>**2** By removing I will remover all things
From the face of the land, saith Jehovah; I will remove man and beast;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p5"></span>**3** And I will remove the bird of heaven,
And the fishes of the sea: And stumblingblocks shall be to the ungodly!
And I will cut off man From the face of the land, saith Jehovah:
(**190**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p6"></span>**4** Yea, I will extend my hand upon
Judah, And upon all the inhabitants of Je; And will cut off from this
place the remnants of Baal, The name of *its* worshippers with the
priests;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p7"></span>**5** And those who worship, On *their*
roofs, the host of heaven; And those who worship and swear by Jehovah,
And swear by their own king;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p8"></span>**6** And who turn back from following
Jehovah, And who seek not Jehovah, And do not inquire of him.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p9"></span>**7** Be silent at the presence of the Lord
Jehovah! For nigh is the day of Jehovah; Yea, prepared hath Jehovah a
sacrifice, He hath prepared his guests:

<span id="vi.ii.i-p10"></span>**8** And it shall be in the day of
Jehovah’s sacrifice, That I will visit the princes and the king’s sons,
And all who wear foreign apparel;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p11"></span>**9** And I will visit all those who dance
on the threshold in that day, Who fill the house of their masters By
means of rapine and fraud. (**204**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p12"></span>**10** And there shall be in that day,
saith Jehovah, The voice of crying from the fish-gate, and howling from
the second *gate*, And great breach from the hills. (**212**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p13"></span>**11** Howl ye, inhabitants of the lower
part, For exterminated are the people of traffic, Cut off are all loaded
with money.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p14"></span>**12** And it shall be in that day, That I
will search Jerusalem with candles, And visit the men, congealed on
their lees, Who say in their hearts, — “Good will not Jehovah do, Nor
will he do evil:”

<span id="vi.ii.i-p15"></span>**13** And their substance shall be a
spoil, And their house a water; And houses shall they build and not
inhabit; And plant shall they vineyards, And shall not drink the wine of
them.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p16"></span>**14** Nigh is the great day of Jehovah,
Nigh and hastening quickly; The voice of Jehovah’s day Will cry out
bitterly, — then will he be strong; (**222**)

<span id="vi.ii.i-p17"></span>**15** A day of wrath *shall be* that day,
A day of distress and of affliction, A day of tumult and of desolation,
A day of darkness and of thick darkness, A day of clouds and of mist;

<span id="vi.ii.i-p18"></span>**16** A day of trumpet and of shouting
Over the fortified cities And over the lofty citadels.

<span id="vi.ii.i-p19"></span>**17** And I will straiten men, And they
shall walk as the blind, Because they have done wickedly against
Jehovah; And poured out shall be their blood as dust,

<span id="vi.ii.i-p20"></span>**18** Even their silver and their gold
shall not avail To deliver them, in the day of Jehovah’s wrath; And by
the fire of his indignation shall their land be consumed; For a
consummation, and a speedy one, Will be made of all the inhabitants of
the land.

<span id="vi.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER 2

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p3"></span>**1** Gather yourselves, gather, Ye
nation, not worthy of being loved;

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p4"></span>**2** Before the decree brings forth, —
(As chaff shall they pass away in a day) Before it comes upon you, The
fury of Jehovah’s anger, — Before it comes upon you, The day of the
anger of Jehovah. (**232**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p5"></span>**3** Seek Jehovah all ye meek of the
land, who his judgment have sought; Seek righteousness, seek humility,
It may be that ye shall be concealed In the day of Jehovah’s anger.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p6"></span>**4** For Gaza, it shall be forsaken, And
Ashkelon shall be a waste; Ashod shall they at mid-day drive out, And
Ekron shall be rooted up.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p7"></span>**5** Ho! the inhabitants of the line of
the sea, The nation of the Cherethites! The word of Jehovah is against
you; Cannaan! the land of the Philistines! I will also exterminate thee,
That there may be no inhabitant:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p8"></span>**6** And the coast of the sea shall be a
habitation For sheepcots of shepherds and folds for sheep; (**242**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p9"></span>**7** And that coast shall be For the
residence of the house of Judah; Among them shall they feed; In the
houses of Ashkelon Shall they in the evening lie down; For visit them
shall Jehovah their God, and he will restore their captivity.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p10"></span>**8** Heard have I the reproach of Moab,
And the revilings of the children of Ammon; By which they have upbraided
my people; And they have extended themselves over their border:
(**247**)

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p11"></span>**9** Therefore *as* I live, Saith
Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, — Surely Moab like Sodom shall be,
And the children of Ammon like Gomorrah, A soil for the nettle and a
mine for salt, And a waste for ever; The residue of my people shall
plunder them, And the remnant of my nation shall possess them.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p12"></span>**10** This shall be to them for their
pride; Because they have reproached, And exulted over the people of
Jehovah of hosts.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p13"></span>**11** Terrible will Jehovah be to them;
For he will consume all the gods of the earth, And worship him shall
each from his place, All the islands of the nations. —

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p14"></span>**12** Ye also Ethiopians! — Slain by my
sword shall they be.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p15"></span>**13** And extend will he his hand to the
north, And he will destroy Assyria, And set Nineveh a waste, A
desolation like the desert:

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p16"></span>**14** And lie down within it shall
flocks, All the beasts of the nations; Even the bittern and the owl
Shall on its pillars pass the night; A voice shall sing in the window,
In the door-way there shall be desolation, For he will make bare the
cedar.

<span id="vi.ii.ii-p17"></span>**15** This is the exulting city! Which
sat in confidence, Which said in her heart, — “I am, and there is
besides me no other.” How is she become a waste, A resting-place for
beasts! Every one who shall pass by Will hiss at her, he will shake his
hand.

<span id="vi.ii.iii"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p1"></span>

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p2"></span><span id="vi.ii.iii-p2.1"></span>CHAPTER
3

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p3"></span>**1** Wo to the polluted and the filthy —
The city which is an oppressor! (**261**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p4"></span>**2** She has not attended to the voice,
She has not received correction, In Jehovah has she not trusted, To her
God she has not drawn nigh!

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p5"></span>**3** Her princes within her are roaring
lions, Her judges, the wolves of the evening; They break not the bones
in the morning!

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p6"></span>**4** Her Prophets are vain, men of
deceits; (268) Her Priests have polluted what is holy, They have
subverted the law. (**269**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p7"></span>**5** Jehovah is just in the midst of
her, He will not do iniquity; Every morning his judgment He brings to
light, — he fails not: Yet the unjust knoweth no shame.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p8"></span>**6** I have cut off nations, Waste have
become their citadels, I have destroyed their streets, So that no one
passes through; Wasted have become their cities, That there is not a
man, not an inhabitant: (**275**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p9"></span>**7** I said, “surely, thou wilt fear me,
Thou wilt receive instruction;” Then cut off should not be her
habitation, However I might have visited her: — (**279**) Truly! they
have hastened, They have corrupted all their doings!

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p10"></span>**8** Therefore look for me, saith
Jehovah, Till the day when I shall rise up for the prey; For my purpose
is, To gather nations, to assemble kingdoms, That I may pour upon them
my wrath, The whole fury of mine anger; For with the fire of my
indignation Shall be devoured the whole earth. (**281**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p11"></span>**9** But I will then turn to the people
a pure lip, That they may all call on the name of Jehovah, That they may
serve him with one consent. (**283**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p12"></span>**10** Beyond the rivers of Ethiopia
shall be my suppliants; The daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine
offering.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p13"></span>**11** In that day thou shalt not be
ashamed On account of all thy doings, By which thou hast transgressed
against me; For then will I remove from the midst of thee Those who
rejoice in thy pride, And thou shalt not take pride any more In my holy
mountain. (**292**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p14"></span>**12** And I will cause to remain in the
midst of thee, A people afflicted and poor; And they shall trust in the
name of Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p15"></span>**13** The remnant of Israel shall not
do iniquity, And they shall not speak falsehood, And not found in their
mouth Shall be a deceitful tongue; And they shall feed and lie down, And
there shall be none to terrify *them*

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p16"></span>**14** Exult thou daughter of Sion,
Exult thou Israel; Rejoice, exult with thy whole heart, Thou daughter of
je: (**299**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p17"></span>**15** Removed has Jehovah thy
judgments, He has turned aside thine enemies; The King of Israel,
Jehovah, is in the midst of thee, Thou shalt see evil no more.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p18"></span>**16** In that day it shall be said to
je, Fear not; Sion! relaxed let not thine hands be.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p19"></span>**17** Jehovah thy God is in the midst
of thee, He is strong, he will save; He will exult over thee with joy,
He will rest in his love, (**304**) He will exult over thee with
triumph.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p20"></span>**18** The afflicted, at the appointed
time, Will I gather, — who shall be of thee; Who sustained for her
reproach. (**308**)

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p21"></span>**19** Behold, I will destroy all thine
oppressors at that time, And I will save the halting, And restore the
driven away, To make them a praise and a name In the land of their
reproach.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p22"></span>**20** At that time will I restore you,
At that time will I gather you; For I will make you a name and a praise
Among all the nations of the earth; When I shall restore your
captivities, Before your eyes saith Jehovah.

<span id="vi.ii.iii-p23"></span>end of new translation of zephaniah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Haggai](cc29019)
