[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Bible](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](biob04)  [Next](biob06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002ECE954/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Biography of the Bible*, by Ernest Sutherland Bates, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

### FOUR

### The Bible under Medievalism

THE MISSIONARIES went forth to Christianize the Northern barbarians with
the Bible in their hands. As later with the American Indians, its simple
touching stories of piety and suffering won the hearts of the rude
tribesmen as could no other appeal. Without the Bible, the medieval
Church would have been powerless to accomplish its enormous task of
bringing a thousand warring nations and subnations, of divergent stock
and traditions, into some kind of spiritual unity. That the whole of
Europe came at last to accept, not merely nominally but actually, the
same religion, with the same general code of moral obligations for all,
was a testimony primarily to the enduring efficacy of the Bible.

In the beginning, vernacular renderings of the Bible were encouraged,
and wherever this occurred its fecundating influence was soon apparent.
Especially was this the case in England where, aside from Beowulf and a
few fragments, Anglo-Saxon

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

literature began with paraphrases and translations of the Bible.

For the English-speaking peoples special interest attaches to these
early Anglo-Saxon undertakings. Like the prophetical books of the Bible,
they were born of men's need in time of turmoil and distress, when the
few Christians in the British Isles stood in danger of being wiped out
by the Danish invaders even as the Hebrews had been environed by the
hostile Assyrians and Babylonians. Being special objects of attack from
the looting Danes, the little centers of learning in the monasteries
founded by the missionaries, such as those at Ely, Wearmouth, and
Yarrow, on the isle of Lindisfarne, and at Lastingham in the North
Riding, were one and all decimated by the great plague of 664 which took
particularly heavy toll in the congested quarters of the monks. It was
in this period of terror and in the exposed Yorkshire town of
Streonshalh (later to be sacked by the Danes and renamed Whitby) that
the work of Biblical translation was begun, calmly and serenely, in the
Benedictine monastery founded by Saint Hilda.

The moving tale is told by the Venerable Bede in his Ecclesiastical
History of how an illiterate cowherd named Caedmon, attached to the
monastery,

<span id="img_07600"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Characteristic
page from the Gutenberg Bible (1450–55)](tn/07600.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07600.jpg)  
Characteristic page from the Gutenberg Bible (1450–55)  
</span>

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

<span id="img_07700"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Title page of the
Coverdale Bible (1535)](tn/07700.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/07700.jpg)  
Title page of the Coverdale Bible (1535)  
</span>

was discovered to possess such a native power of putting into verse the
Biblical stories which he heard that the Abbess Hilda took him into the
order and had him instructed until he was able to paraphrase in
Anglo-Saxon verse a large part of the Vulgate as it was translated for
him by the other monks. Of his work but a single manuscript remains,
containing parts of Genesis, Exodus, and Daniel, together with original
poems on the fall of the Angels and the temptation of Man. These
fragments show Saint Hilda's cowherd to have well deserved her
patronage.

The literary movement thus begun was continued in the religious poetry
of the Northumbrian Cynewulf in the eighth century, during which England
also produced one of the foremost scholars of the day in the person of
the great Alcuin (Ealhwine in Anglo-Saxon). Invited to France by
Charlemagne, Alcuin as abbot of Tours became the center of a new
religio-literary movement in that country.

Charlemagne was an impatient Christian. When the continental Saxons
scoffed at his religion, he gave them the choice of baptism or death,
justifying his intolerance, as Augustine had done, by Christ's words,
"Constrain them to come in" (Luke xiv. 23) in his parable of the
slighted invitation.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Once the Saxons
had accepted baptism, however, he sent them missionaries who taught so
successfully that within a few years Saxon literature produced the long
Christian epic of the *Heliand*.

In truth, Charlemagne was more enlightened than the official leaders of
the Church at Rome. The text of Jerome's Vulgate, through incessant
copying and recopying, had already become much corrupted, and
Charlemagne, at the beginning of the ninth century, undertook the task
of revision which the Church itself postponed until the sixteenth
century. He sent for scholars from all over Europe, who under the
leadership of Alcuin made one revision; then Theodulf, bishop of
Orleans, dissatisfied with this, made, singlehanded, another; it was in
one or the other of these revisions that the Vulgate was henceforth
known in northern Europe.

Charlemagne considered himself the head of both Church and State. Not
approving of the Papacy's attitude toward the worship of images and
pictures, he composed, with Alcuin's assistance, a treatise on the
subject. As he knew both Latin and Greek and had mastered the learning
of the period, he was no mean polemicist. His legal code was fashioned
on the Biblical model, with laws prohibiting

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the taking of interest on loans (Deuteronomy xxiii. 19) and enforcing
observance of the Sabbath and the payment of tithes. In the church
services he required the priests to translate the sermons and the
readings from the Bible into the vernacular for the benefit of the
common people.

Inspired by Charlemagne's cultural example, Alfred the Great of England
endeavored to go still further in the way of familiarizing his people
with the Scriptures and with later Christian literature. At the head of
his legal code he placed the Ten Commandments, translated by him from
the Book of Exodus, and he also found time amidst the cares of state to
translate the *Pastoral Care* of Pope Gregory the Great, the *History of
the World* by Orosius, and the *Consolation of Philosophy* by Boethius.
Finally, he gathered about him the ablest scholars of the realm to carry
on this work of translation, in the magnificent hope that "all the
freeborn youth of my people . . . may persevere in learning . . . until
they can perfectly read the English Scriptures."

Under the stimulus of Alfred's influence and example, the writers of his
and subsequent reigns produced an abundance of Christian literature.
Aelfric the Grammarian, in addition to numerous religious homilies, made
a paraphrase of the first

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

seven books of the Old Testament known as "Aelfric's Heptateuch."
Aldheim, Abbot of Malmesbury, and Guthrac, a hermit of Croyland,
produced versions of the Psalms. Completed in this period, though begun
earlier, were the Lindisfarne Gospels and the Rushworth Gospels, both of
them glosses—that is, literal word-by-word translations without regard
to sentence structure. By the time of the Norman Conquest there were
also in existence translations of the Books of Kings, Esther, Job,
Judith, and the Maccabees. In other words, the English people already
possessed, in one form or another, most of the Bible in their own
language, and only awaited some great Anglo-Saxon Jerome to make the
complete translation.

The Norman Conquest eliminated all possibility of his coming. The
Norman-French, at first imposed by the conquerors upon the language of
the conquered and later assimilated with it, produced a new composite
language so that the old Anglo-Saxon literature was no longer
intelligible. By the twelfth century it was evident that new versions of
the Bible were needed. But these did not appear, for the attitude of the
Church toward the use of the vernacular had gradually changed.

To understand the indifference and even hostility

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

of the medieval Church toward the popular reading of the Bible, a number
of points must be borne in mind. The leaders of the Church considered
the unification of Europe to be their all-important task, and they were
not eager to foster national literatures to develop the spirit of local
independence. Among a people too ignorant to understand the Scriptures
correctly, the reading of them, it was thought, would merely lead to
heresies and schisms. Far better to let the knowledge of them come
through the priests who could tell as much or as little as the
individual case required. Was it not better to give the people concrete
help through the confessional and indulgences, through the exhibition of
relics to heal their sicknesses, and through rich ceremonials appealing
to their senses? So the Church was easily able to justify a course that
gave it greater and greater power over the people.

The medieval period was torn as perhaps no other between the demands of
the spirit and the flesh. To the former, the monks were specially
consecrated, and after the great monastic revival of the sixth century
under Saint Benedict learning and education were left primarily in their
care. Well the Benedictines wrought in their early years;

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

theirs was the leading part in the Christianization of Europe; in a
world made up largely of robber barons and their serfs the monasteries
were little islands of fraternity and peace in whose libraries the monks
labored over their illuminated manuscripts and from which they went
forth to carry their messages of human brotherhood. But they could not
escape the fate that makes the spirit's triumph transient and breeds
failure from success. They mingled with the world too much, too much
with politics; their monasteries became too powerful to preserve their
simple rules of life. By 1354 it is estimated that the order had
acquired thirty-seven thousand monasteries and had numbered among its
members twenty emperors, ten empresses, forty-seven kings and fifty
queens, twenty-four popes, two hundred cardinals, more than one thousand
canonized saints, seven thousand archbishops, and fifteen thousand
bishops. No order could fail to be corrupted by such a superfluity of
worldly glory.

As the system of feudalism developed, all care for the cultural
development of the common people was abandoned. Popular reverence for
the Bible was excessive, popular knowledge of its contents was abysmally
small. More and more it was devoted

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

to magical purposes, a practice that went back to the Roman Empire. One
of the first uses to which parchment was put when it began to supplant
papyrus in the fifth century was to furnish little strips, inscribed
with verses from the Bible, to be fastened on chair backs or around the
necks of babies as charms to keep away the demons. The Lord's Prayer and
various Psalms were regarded as particularly efficacious spells. The
Roman custom of consulting the Virgilian lots, that is, of opening the
*Aeneid* and taking the first verse on which the eye lighted as a
prophecy of the outcome of some contemplated enterprise was succeeded by
a similar superstitious use of the Bible during the Middle Ages.

The worship of relics led to organized pilgrimages to famous shrines,
such as that described by Chaucer in *The Canterbury Tales;* of these,
the most highly regarded was the difficult pilgrimage to the traditional
Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem. Those who had accomplished it were known as
palmers and enjoyed on their return double honors as specially
sanctified beings and as explorers of strange lands who brought back
marvelous tales with no possible check upon their stories. Only if one
bears in mind the romantic place of the Holy Land in

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

medieval imagination can one understand the two hundred years’
fanaticism of the Crusades.

Mohammedanism had been more successful than Christianity in civilizing
the nations who accepted it. True, the religion of Islam had a somewhat
easier task. Its peoples were all more nearly of the same stock, its
lands were nearer to the sources of classical civilization, and its
sacred book, the Koran, taught a more familiar ethics. Through these and
perhaps other causes, the Moorish kingdom in Spain and the Saracen
cities of the East had attained a higher level of learning and culture
than existed at that time anywhere in Christendom. After the victory of
Poitiers in 7 32 when Charles Martel turned back the Mohammedan invasion
of the West, Christianity had felt secure. But in the eleventh century,
its old foe, immensely wealthier and more powerful, menaced it from the
East. Constantinople was endangered, and in 1095 Pope Urban II preached
what was to be the first of seven Crusades for the rescue of the Eastern
capital and the recovery of the Holy Sepulcher in Jerusalem.

All the contradictions of medieval Christianity came to the front in the
Crusades. A war in honor of the Prince of Peace, begun to tumultuous
cries of "God Wills It!" was conducted in a manner that

<span id="img_08400"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Title page of
Tyndale's New Testament (1535)](tn/08400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08400.jpg)  
Title page of Tyndale's New Testament (1535)  
</span>

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

<span id="img_08500"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![Title page of the
Matthew Bible (1537)](tn/08500.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/08500.jpg)  
Title page of the Matthew Bible (1537)  
</span>

would have shamed the heathen races in the Old Testament. The Crusaders,
wearing the Cross on their breasts, soon lost the memory of their
original purpose in an indiscriminate bloodlust. Every successive
Crusade was marked by horror and disaster.

Before the First Crusade could be properly organized, the common people,
roused to frenzy by the preaching of Peter the Hermit and others, set
out in undisciplined hordes, murdering and looting as they went, to be
destroyed by the Christian Magyars, Slays, and Greeks before they ever
reached the Turks. After the knightly armies that followed had captured
Jerusalem, all the Jews in the city were burned alive in the synagogue
and the rest of the population, estimated at seventy thousand, was
massacred. Then the Crusaders returned home burdened with loot but left
so small a force to defend Jerusalem that it was soon again endangered,
when a Second Crusade was preached to secure the gains of the first. It
failed utterly after two great armies had been defeated and the nobility
had fled by sea, leaving the common soldiers to be slaughtered.
Jerusalem was taken by the Saracens, and the Third Crusade was preached.
It too failed: the death of one hundred thousand soldiers in the victory
at

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Acre was made
useless by the subsequent quarrels between the leaders, Philip Augustus
and Richard Coeur-de-Lion. The Fourth Crusade was diverted through the
intrigues of Enrico Dandolo, the doge of Venice, to an attack on
Christian Constantinople, which was sacked and burned. Then came the two
pathetic Children's Crusades—"armies" of twenty and thirty thousand
children, led by shepherd boys: one group dissolved after terrible
losses in the frozen Alps, and the other, more luckless, persisted until
the children reached Egypt where they were sold into slavery. In the
Fifth Crusade, the wily politician, Frederick II, succeeded in
recovering Jerusalem by treaty instead of by force of arms, but his
achievement, widely condemned for its un-knightly character, was of no
permanent significance as the city was soon retaken by the Moslems. In
the Sixth Crusade, Saint Louis, king of France, was captured with his
entire army in Egypt, and it taxed the resources of the French realm to
pay the enormous ransom that was demanded. The Seventh and last Crusade,
led by the same Saint Louis, ended ignominiously in Tunis when the king
fell ill and died.

What had all this record of savagery and failure

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

to do with our immediate theme of the Bible? A great deal.

The Crusaders, always in want of money and provisions, early adopted the
practice of sacking the Jewish quarters of the towns through which they
passed. The anti-Semitism from which Europe has suffered, to a greater
or less extent, ever since, definitely began with the Crusades. Before
that time the Jews had been generally tolerated; it was recognized that
they at least held sacred the older half of the Bible, which was still
the source of their ritual and the object of their constant study; there
was hence a kind of distant relationship between them and the
Christians. But after the Crusades, the Christians were reluctant to
admit any kind of connection with the Jews. The unpleasant fact that all
the Christian Sacred Scriptures had actually been written by the Jews
could not be denied, but it could be ignored if men would but refrain
from investigating origins at all. Any historical study of the Bible was
therefore unwelcome and was delayed by this obscurantist attitude until
well into the nineteenth century.

There was, it is true, another side to the Jewish persecutions. The book
of Deuteronomy had brought

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

about a strange situation in the medieval world. In accordance with its
provisions, Christians were forbidden to take interest on loans. The
Jews, on the other hand, were permitted to exact interest from
foreigners. Enjoying a monopoly of money-lending, they often yielded to
the temptation to raise the rates of interest to usurious heights. It is
perhaps not surprising that the exasperated Christians often retaliated
by seizing the wealth of those whose special privileges in the money
market seemed to them so unfair.

But the spirit of persecution once aroused is rarely limited to its
initial victims. The Jews were not the only victims of the revival of
intolerance which accompanied the Crusades. Christians also suffered. At
the beginning of the thirteenth century, the Papacy declared a crusade
against the large Albigensian sect in southern France, accused of
Manichaean tendencies because of their pacifistic ethics, and in the
campaigns that ensued whole cities were exterminated. The stage was
already set for the persecutions of the Protestants three centuries
later.

A contemporary movement often confused with the Albigensian was that of
the Waldensians, the followers of Peter Waldo. This man, a prosperous

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

merchant of Lyons, suddenly decided in 1176 to take literally the
injunction of Jesus, "Sell all that thou hast and distribute unto the
poor" (Luke xviii. 22). He carried out his resolution and formed a sect,
known as "the Poor Men of Lyons," who, like the Albigensians, were
complete pacifists, refused to take oaths, and held aloof from civic
life. If this was what came from the reading of the Bible, Pope Innocent
III determined to cut off the evil at its source; he forbade laymen
henceforth even to touch the Bible, much less read it. But the
Waldensians managed to survive the Albigensian persecution, became
Protestants during the Reformation, and continue to exist in small
numbers even to this day.

Not unsimilar in aim was the movement initiated by Francis of Assisi
which, being conducted more judiciously, found shelter within the bosom
of the Church. His monastic order, with its triple vows of poverty,
chastity, and obedience, was founded, like the Waldensian heresy, on
strict observance of the Scriptures. To Francis the reading of the Bible
was a religious ecstasy. He meditated so intently on the history of the
Lord's passion that the signs of the stigmata appeared on his own body.
His most difficult act of almsgiving occurred when he parted with his
sole possession, the New Testament,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

to a poor widow. Dying, he had the thirteenth chapter of the Gospel of
John read to him, so that the last words he heard on earth were those in
which Jesus foretold his own death.

These various movements, alike in their care for the common people and
in their reliance on the Bible, testified to a new spirit abroad in the
land. Something was happening to the feudal system.

Emerson, in his poem "Uriel," introduces a young seraph who shocks the
angels with his heretical proclamation:

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*In vain produced, all rays return  
Evil will bless, and ice will burn*.

</div>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> An apparent
illustration of Uriel's philosophy may be seen in the further effects of
the Crusades. In the amount of needless suffering and horror produced,
few greater evils have befallen Europe than the Crusades. And yet
without the Crusades, the glorious thirteenth century which marked the
culmination of all that was best in medievalism could never have
occurred. Acquaintance with Arabic philosophy, and through it a closer
acquaintance with the Greek philosophy on which it was based, fitted in
with the broader outlook on the world induced by

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

foreign travel to stimulate a zeal for learning which found expression
in the establishment of universities throughout western Europe and in
the development of the incipient Scholastic movement in philosophy,
until this produced, in the persons of Albertus Magnus, Thomas Aquinas,
and Duns Scotus, with others only a little less eminent, thinkers almost
on a par with the greatest of antiquity. And this, the intellectual
aspect of the new age, was superficial in comparison with the
fundamental changes that were going on in the whole social order.

The Crusaders, in order to finance their expeditions, had been forced to
borrow heavily from the towns and cities so that there grew up a
creditor class of merchants and burghers with a whip hand over the
nobility. The latter were further weakened by the death of so many
turbulent barons in or on the way to Palestine. For the moment, the
decrease in the strength of the first estate, the nobility, benefited
the second estate, the Church, which effected an alliance with the
rising power of the cities, now well on the way to form a significant
third estate. The new regime meant a vast enlargement of human
opportunity. And as usually happens, enlargement

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of opportunity brought a rebirth of literature and art. By way of
literature and art, its ancient friends, the Bible began to come back
into its own.

A Biblical history, the *Historia Scholastica*, was written by Petrus
Comestor for the use of scholars. For the unlettered was circulated the
*Biblia Pauperum*, a kind of Biblical picture book showing famous scenes
from the Bible. The greatest familiarity with the Bible, however, was to
come through drama.

Modern drama, like the classical drama, developed out of religious
liturgy. As early as the tenth century, the Benedictine nun, Hrotswitha
of Gandersheim, had vaguely sensed the possibilities of religious drama,
and in order to wean the nuns from reading the profane works of Plautus
and Terence had written six Latin comedies with highly moral
implications. But she was on the wrong track. The future lay not in
imitation of the classics but in the use of elements much nearer at
hand. The elaborate ceremonies of the medieval Church already possessed
a wealth of dramatic material in the processionals, the changes of
persons and costumes during the service, the washing of feet on Maundy
Thursday, the representations of the manger at Christmas and of the tomb
at Easter.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gradually, the
Christmas and Easter celebrations took on more and more of an explicitly
dramatic character: additional personages were introduced, such as Roman
soldiers, the Magi and the shepherds, the women at the tomb, and angels,
with rhymed dialogues written for all of them; finally, laymen were
allowed to participate in the role of evil characters like Herod, Judas,
and the impenitent thief. Thus, during the twelfth century, well-rounded
Christmas and Easter plays were presented by the clergy in the churches
and churchyards all over western Europe. Essentially the same
everywhere, they were known by different names: miracle plays in
England, mysteries in France, *ludi* in Germany, *autos* in Spain.

The popularity of the plays brought great crowds to see them, rude and
boisterous crowds whose conduct was often indecorous, yet for whose
benefit the writers began to introduce numerous scenes, such as a
quarrel between Noah and his wife, which shocked the sensibilities of
stricter clerics. So in 1210, Pope Innocent III, the same who preached
the Albigensian Crusade and forced Frederick II to go unwillingly to
Jerusalem, forbade the clergy to take any further part in the
development of popular drama.

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

The plays, transferred to the market place and taken over by the guilds,
were greatly enlarged after they fell into the hands of the laity until
they came to represent the entire cycle of Biblical events from the
creation to the resurrection. There they were halted by the nature of
Christian dogma; unlike the Greek myths which could be handled freely by
the Athenian dramatists to the extent of completely changing both plots
and characters, the Christian stories could not be fundamentally altered
without impiety. The creative genius of dramatic writers sought relief
through the introduction of allegorical figures who gradually came to
swamp the stage. From this resulted the new type of morality play,
wholly allegorical in character, and this in turn, with the coming of
the Reformation, was easily transformed into the satirical interlude,
usually directed against the Catholic Church. Forced into the realm of
the abstract in order to gain freedom, the drama came back to the
concrete through satire, and in Protestant England there resulted the
great period of purely secular Elizabethan drama which culminated in
Shakespeare. The religious origin of the drama, however, still directly
influenced the great plays of Calderon in Spain and can be seen, indeed,
as late as the

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

seventeenth century in the *Esther* and *Athalie* of the Catholic
Racine.

If the Church early relinquished its part in the development of drama,
the same thing did not happen in the realm of architecture. The noblest
expression of the medieval spirit in its uttermost reach of aspiration
was found in the twelfth- and thirteenth-century Gothic architecture
which was fostered equally by church and town. Rising high above the
market place, the houses, and all other public buildings, the cathedrals
in their erection gave employment to thousands of the common people,
enlisted the support of the guilds, afforded sanctuary for the tombs of
the nobility, enshrined the legends of the Bible and the saints in their
multicolored windows of stained glass, and presented religion in a guise
of beauty which yet did not obscure its austerity. Rather, in them,
austerity itself became beautiful. Each cathedral was the pride of its
city. As far its lofty towers could be seen, men were comforted by its
presence.

Gothic architecture was an embodiment of a final combined effort of the
three estates of feudalism before they fell apart forever. Sculpture and
painting, beginning as an adjunct of architecture, were, on the other
hand, to reach their highest development

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

during the more individualistic period that followed when the merchant
princes of Italy erected their little separate courts and vied with one
another in patronizing the arts and also the new learning that was
brought from Greece after the fall of Constantinople in 1453.

Sculpture and painting reflected the general movement of culture in
their choice of themes. During the medieval period these were drawn
mainly from the lives of the saints, or from events in the Bible, both
alike interpreted according to the medieval standards of asceticism;
very gradually, the meager limbs and wrinkled faces of the anchoritic
ideal were supplanted by the more well-rounded bodies and ruddier faces
of the Renaissance. The painters, originally often monks, eventually
became a professional class dependent upon private patrons rather than
the Church; mythological themes tended to replace the Biblical; and the
artists at last became entirely cynical, taking their mistresses as
models for either a Venus or a Madonna, whichever happened to be called
for. The deeply religious Michelangelo, to be sure, infused a prophetic
spirit into his work, and in his statues of David and Moses, as well as
in the frescoes of the Sistine Chapel, he achieved a marvelous harmony
of the

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

Biblical, the medieval, and the pagan; but of his two most gifted
contemporaries, Raphael contentedly painted the courtesan La Fornarina
as the Virgin Mother, and Leonardo used the same model for both his
Bacchus and his John the Baptist. The later Venetian School still
affected Scriptural subjects, but the interest was no longer in any kind
of characterization, Christian or pagan, but in the sheer beauty of the
flesh, the texture of garments, the overwhelming joy of deep, rich
colors. Venice, whose commercial prosperity after the Crusades was the
first harbinger of the decay of medievalism, was also the first to
announce that medievalism was dead, through the paintings of Titian,
Tintoretto, Veronese, and Giorgione, who had lost even the memory of the
long medieval centuries that preceded them.

In all this art, interest in the Bible was ultimately swallowed up in
broader, if less lofty, interests, but till the end the Biblical aspects
of art continued to keep alive the Scriptural stories. Through the
miracle plays and the religious paintings, during the centuries when the
Bible itself could not be generally read, even when this was permitted,
since to the great majority Latin had become an unknown tongue, the
common people

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

came to know, at least vaguely, the old legends that still after fifteen
hundred years retained the power of religious inspiration. The popular
demand for translations in the vernacular which the Protestant reformers
were to meet and satisfy arose in no small part from the but
half-gratified curiosity of the later Middle Ages.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Five. The Great Translations](biob06)
