[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tha08)  [Next](tha10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564599779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Human Atmosphere*, by Walter J. Kilner, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

<span id="chap08"></span>

### CHAPTER VIII

#### THE INNER AURA IN DISEASE

IN the last chapter an account was given of the deviations of large
portions of the aura from normal, and it was seen that the outer aura
was affected, while the inner might or might not escape derangement. In
the present chapter local changes will be considered, which will be
noticed most frequently to affect the inner aura alone, though in a few
cases the outer, too, is altered. In no instance, however, is there a
local change of the outer without participation of the inner.

Circumscribed alterations in the shape of the aura are not so
conspicuous as those described in the last chapter, and consist of
either a local diminution, or occasionally of an obliteration of a part
or the whole breadth of the inner aura, while external and contiguous to
the deranged portion, the outer also may be to some degree affected. The
inner aura besides is liable to alterations of texture, resulting in
appearances completely at variance with any observed during health. The
chief local modifications in structure are: (a), coarse striation of the
inner aura; (b), loss of striation of the inner aura; (c), granulation
of the inner aura. The last change may also affect the outer aura.

The simplest form of a local diminution is met with when a fair size of
the inner aura remains in normal contact with the body, but becomes
narrower from the loss of its distal portion. Usually the whole width of
the impaired portion of the inner aura will be fainter, and the
lineation less marked, while at the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

same time the free edge will not be as sharply defined as that of the
adjacent healthy areas. These changes seem to be the result of a
quantitative decrease with little or perhaps no qualitative alteration
of the inner auric force. The following is a typical example, which is,
besides, interesting in other respects. <span id="img_fig47"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig47.jpg"><img src="tn/fig47.jpg" alt="Locally contracted inner aura.&lt;br&gt; Fig. 47." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Locally contracted inner aura.<br />
Fig. 47.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="case56">Case 56</span>. ([Fig. 47](#img_fig47).) X.A., a
childless married woman, thirty-seven years of age, had been ill several
years. Within the last four she had undergone operations for a floating
kidney, double hernia, and appendicitis. As the kidney remained very
moveable another operation had been suggested.

When inspected, the outer aura reached the healthy standard of
distinctness. The shape was good with the exception of a wide dorsal
bow, which commenced at the head and finished at the feet. The breadth
was nine and a half inches round the head and by the sides of  the
trunk. It was six by the thighs and four and a half by the ankles. Down
the front it was four and a half, while at the widest part of the bow at
the back it measured nine inches. The inner aura was not quite as plain
as the average, but exhibited striation all over the body. On the left
side, at the front and at the back it was three inches throughout. On
the right side above the level of the umbilicus, and

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

also from the upper third of the thigh downwards it had the same
breadth, but between these two points it was only two inches wide. Here
lineation was visible, inclined to be a little coarse, and the outer
edge not properly defined. There was no gap between the outer and inner
auras. As was expected, the c.c. band presented several discoloured
areas. On the back the usual sacral patch was present, a yellow one
three inches in length was perceptible above the crest of the right
ilium, and a third over the right lower ribs. In front the greater part
of both iliac regions was dark, but the lower part had a deeper hue than
the upper. The colour was also darker on the right than on the left.
There was, besides, a dark patch on the left hypochondrium. She
complained of pain at each of these discoloured areas, but strange to
say, both it and the tenderness were more intense in the left iliac
region, although the colour here was lighter than on the right. The
excessive darkening on the right side was [attributed](errata.htm#9)
rightly or wrongly to descent of the kidney. Periodically she had acute
suffering in her back, which accounted for the well marked discoloured
patch.

Other variants of the contracted inner aura are the funnel-shaped and
the cylindrical depressions, which often entail a complete breach of the
haze. The mode of formations is probably as follows:—In chapter v., it
was demonstrated that the auric forces proceed from the body in direct
lines at right angles to it. If from any cause a circumscribed area be
deranged in such a manner that no auric force emanates from it, while
all around the affected spot the healthy parts are emitting auric force
in the ordinary way, a cylindrical hollow space with its long axis at
right angles to the body will be the outcome. ([Case
59](tha09.htm#case59).) More frequently than not the deranged area,
instead of being separated from the healthy portions of the body by a
sharp line of demarcation, will be surrounded by zones of gradually

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

[increasing](errata.htm#10) auric forces. (Cases [57](tha09.htm#case57)
and [58](tha09.htm#case58).) The result of this condition will be the
formation of a conical defect, with its apex towards the body. It may be
difficult to detect unless large in area, as in [case
58](tha09.htm#case58). The effect of these void spaces in the aura upon
the c.c. band has already been described.

These breaks in the inner aura can only be perceived <span
id="img_fig48"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig48.jpg"><img src="tn/fig48.jpg" alt="Fig 48.&lt;br&gt; Funnel-shaped&lt;br&gt; depression of aura." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Fig 48.<br />
Funnel-shaped<br />
depression of aura.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

under favourable circumstances, and in sections. Up to the present time
only two or three of them (see cases [58](tha09.htm#case58) and
[60](tha09.htm#case60)), have been observed except at the side of the
body. The reason is obvious; the void intervals by the side of the body
when the patients stand facing the observer, have not to be viewed
through the same thickness of aura as when they occur either in front or
at the back, and must be looked for with subjects standing sideways. In
like manner any increase of density or opacity of the aura helps to
obscure these spaces. A suitable background is absolutely necessary for
their detection, and the one, par excellence, for this purpose is a dead
black; light colours are entirely useless. Taking all these
circumstances into consideration, for every one of these spaces
detected, it is not at all unlikely that several elude recognition.

The following case occurred before the two auras could be separated, and
is quoted as it was the first instance in which an aura affected by
local disease was observed. As, however, the difference in size between
the outer and inner auras in children is so slight, it is probable that
an observation through a red screen would not have seriously affected
the result.

<span id="case57">Case 57</span>. ([Fig. 48](#img_fig48).) H.H., a boy
ten years old,

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

had been suffering from herpes zoster for five or six days before an
opportunity of examining him presented itself. The part affected was the
right lumbar region in front of the abdomen, and there were also a few
spots upon the flank. The rash had reached the stage of desiccation. His
aura was plainly marked, being, as he stood facing the observer, six
inches by the head, and two and a half inches by the sides of the body.
It was quite normal but narrow for a boy of his age, with the exception
of a portion on the right side from the level of the sterno-xiphoid
plane to the crest of the ilium. From the upper level just mentioned the
aura curved inwards reaching the body by the twelfth rib. From this
point it bent outwards, regaining its full width at the crest of the
ilium. The apex of this blank space apparently touched the body, and the
adjacent part of the aura did not look in any way affected either in
texture or colour. Upon examination with the blue c.c. band employed
transversely, the right half of the body seemed to be darker than the
left, and as might be surmised, the left extension was lighter than the
right. When the c.c. band was used on the back the colour was normal
above the eleventh dorsal spine, but below darker, the transition
between the two being abrupt. All traces of the void space vanished if
the boy stood in any position except facing the observer. The aura
looked perfectly normal, both at the back and front of the body.

The aura in the next case displayed a funnel-shaped depression, and when
the two constituents were separated by the carmine screen the inner was
seen to be more deranged.

<span id="case58">Case 58</span>. ([Fig. 49](#img_fig49).) B., an old
lady, seventy-three years of age, the mother of ten children, had been
suffering for some time from pain in the epigastrium and abdomen, and
coincidently losing flesh. It had been suggested that an exploratory
operation would be probably required. As neither her aura nor

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

subsequent ordinary examination showed any definite signs of organic
mischief, she was advised to wait a short time before undergoing any
operation. Under treatment all pain vanished, and she regained her
proper weight. Three years later she was in good health.

At the commencement of 1914, her outer aura was found to be of good
shape, and <span id="img_fig49"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig49.jpg"><img src="tn/fig49.jpg" alt="Fig. 49.&lt;br&gt; Funnel-shaped depression of inner aura." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Fig. 49.<br />
Funnel-shaped depression of inner aura.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

normal in clearness, being nine inches by the head and trunk, four by
the legs, six at the back and four in front and down the legs. The inner
aura was not nearly as conspicuous as it would have been had the patient
been in good health. Striation could only be detected with difficulty,
and above the shoulders was almost invisible. It was three inches broad
by the head and trunk, and half an inch narrower lower down. In profile,
it was at the back three inches and two and a half by the thighs and
legs. In front, wherever normal, it was three inches. It had, however,
nearly vanished about the level of the umbilicus, but regained its
proper width about four inches above and below, making a funnel-shaped
indentation. It was coarsely granular by the sides of the trunk. The
c.c. band exhibited three yellow patches on the back, one on the left
side of the spine between the fourth and seventh dorsal vertebræ,
another on the left shoulder blade, and the last on the small of the
back. In front there was a yellow patch over the epigastrium, a second
over the lower p art of the abdomen, while the band was dark over the
right

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

hypochondrium. Had there been any growth it would have been beneath the
dark patch, and this probably would have contained a smaller and still
darker spot. Yellow patches usually indicate no serious organic
mischief. It was confidently expected that the funnel-shaped depression
of the inner aura would have definitely discoloured the c.c. band, but
on the contrary there appeared only a small ill-defined <span
id="img_fig50"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig50.jpg"><img src="tn/fig50.jpg" alt="Fig. 50.&lt;br&gt; Young girl.&lt;br&gt; Hip disease." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Fig. 50.<br />
Young girl.<br />
Hip disease.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

spot, lighter in colour than the remainder of the band, which might have
been easily overlooked. This patch would probably have had the same
depth of colour as the other yellow spots except for the absence of a
part of the inner aura.

<span id="case59">Case 59</span>. ([Fig. 50](#img_fig50).) This is an
extremely instructive case of a delicate looking girl, H.M., seven years
of age, who in May, 1908, complained of pain in her right hip, which was
diagnosed as a very early stage of tubercular hip disease. Calmette's
tuberculo-ophthalmic test gave a decided reaction. As soon as possible
she entered a children's hospital, where she remained an in-patient for
several months, and was afterwards transferred to a convalescent home.

During February, 1909, within a day or two of her arrival home, she came
to have her aura inspected. She was then looking exceedingly well, had
no pain, and complete movement of her hip joint. Her aura was fairly
developed, but narrow, of a greyish colour two inches wide. It was
normal for a girl of her age except, that as she faced the observer,
there was a complete gap two inches in length by the right trochanter
major. This void space was so plainly visible and well marked that her
mother noticed it immediately.

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Instead of the
edges curving outwards, as they did in the last case, they were quite
straight, presenting a punched out appearance. The area could not be
detected when she stood sideways. The c.c. band was even all over the
body except where a side view exhibited a light patch over the void
space.

She removed to Scotland, but in 1912, returned to London for a few
weeks, when a second examination was allowed. She had grown a tall,
strong, healthy girl. Her aura was a grey bluish colour, six inches wide
by the head, four at the small of the back and three everywhere else.
The inner aura was one and a half inches all over. Both auras looked
natural for a child of her age, except round the right hip. The aura
when investigated without the intervention of a screen was less distinct
near the trochanter, especially close to the body. When the carmine
screen was employed, the inner aura was almost completely absent at this
place, and no striation could be discovered, though it was perfect above
and below. The c.c. band appeared even over the whole body, back and
front, except that over the right hip, it had a deeper shade, which was
prolonged into the extension. Viewed sideways the band was lighter over
the trochanter. Both her mother and a lady nurse who were present during
the examination, were able to distinguish the abnormality without the
slightest trouble.

<span id="case60">Case 60</span>. A woman, D.S., thirty-four years of
age, had been suffering from ulcer of the stomach. She had left a
hospital two months before inspection. Her complaint, which dated back
five months, was her first severe illness. The outer aura, rather above
the average in breadth, was a good shape and measured by the head and
sides of the trunk ten and a half inches, and by the thighs six,
contracting gently as it approached the ankles. A profile view showed
the aura coming down straight at the back, and four inches

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

wide at the shoulders and nates. In front the aura ought to have been
six inches in breadth before the body and lower limbs. However, there
was a diminution in width from the level of the lower border of the
manubrium to about the umbilical plane. This depression could not be
termed funnel-shaped, but looked as if it might have been so once, and
was filling up on its return to a normal condition. Here the haze was
not so bright as elsewhere. The inner aura, too, was below par as
regards clearness, but showed striation. The indistinctness was due to
the patient not having recovered her strength. In front of the
epigastrium it was narrower and fainter than over the remainder of the
body, to which it was still contiguous.

The c.c. band exhibited on the back a light yellow patch by the left
side of the spine from the fourth to the eighth dorsal vertebræ, and
also a dark one over the two lower lumbar vertebræ and the upper part of
the sacrum. In front of the body there was a patch over the epigastrium,
nondescript in colour, which was more marked over the place where the
pain had been previously most intense. A long dark mark running down by
the rectus abdominis on the left side, and two others one in either
groin, the left being deeper than the right, also came into view. In all
these places the patient complained of tenderness and pain.

The different coloured screens showed no modifications, except that
through the blue screen the aura looked green and yellow unblended.

The main interest in this case lay in the condition of the aura in front
of the epigastrium, where a transitional stage between a void space and
a healthy state had been reached, showing how the restoration of the
aura takes place gradually from the body outwards.

The next change of the inner aura to be described is most difficult to
understand. It consists of a diminution

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

in breadth at the expense of the part nearest the body, leaving an
apparently vacant space between the two.

A former chapter has been devoted to the etheric double, which appears
as an empty space intervening between the body and the aura. It rarely
exceeds three-sixteenths of an inch in breadth, and usually passes
unobserved during the inspection of a patient. Sometimes, however, when
wider, it is recognized at the first glance, over the whole body, while
occasionally it seems to be more clearly defined on one side than the
other. The last condition is generally accompanied by some alteration of
the inner aura. At times the blank space will be seen to be broadened
locally, while the inner aura is proportionally narrowed with its outer
margin remaining in its normal place. At present it is impossible to
decide whether this vacant space is an enlarged etheric double or arises
from a complete disappearance of a portion of the aura. The appearance
recalls the clear space between the visible steam and the spout of the
kettle from which it has issued when the water inside is boiling freely.

In well marked cases this phenomenon can hardly be missed, but in slight
instances it is difficult to determine whether the gap between the body
and the aura is or is not normal, and what makes it still more
perplexing is, that an alteration in the texture may also be present. In
many cases these empty spaces may be invisible, being obscured by the
surrounding healthy aura, so probably they are really not uncommon.

No part of the body is exempt. The change has been noticed over the
trunk, front, back, and sides, and upon the upper and lower limbs. It
occurs most frequently in neurotic people, and also accompanies or
results from various conditions, *e.g.*, injury ([case
68](tha09.htm#case68)), growth (page [287](tha10.htm#page_287)),
muscular atrophy ([case 61](tha09.htm#case61)), herpes zoster ([case
62](tha09.htm#case62)), disseminated sclerosis
[(case37](tha08.htm#case37)),

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

etc. The duration of the change cannot usually be determined, but in a
case of injury to the ribs proved to be purely temporary. ([Case
68](tha09.htm#case68).)

In <span id="case61">case 61</span> (figs. [51](#img_fig51) and
[52](#img_fig52)), an account is given of some very curious changes in
the aura, including a local vacant space.

N., a woman lately married, twenty-seven years of

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_fig51"></span></p>
<p><a href="img/fig51.jpg"><img src="tn/fig51.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p><span id="img_fig52"></span></p>
<p><a href="img/fig52.jpg"><img src="tn/fig52.jpg" /><br />
Click to enlarge</a></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

Figs. 51 and 52.  
Old hip disease. Spatulate aura.

<span id="img_22600"></span> ![](img/22600.jpg)

age, had suffered with hip disease when two years old. She had been an
in-patient several times in a hospital, where she had undergone four
operations, the wound of the last one only healing when she was
nineteen. She was obliged to use a crutch, as her left leg was two

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

inches shorter, and the left thigh was four inches less in circumference
than that of the right. At the time of inspection she looked a perfect
picture of health.

Her aura, when examined in 1912, was blue in colour. On the right side
the outer aura had a normally defined edge, and was typically spatulate,
being nine inches round the head and by the trunk, curving inwards just
below the lowest level of the body, becoming four inches by the knee. On
the left side the aura gradually shaded off to its margin, and as far as
could be verified, was eight inches by the trunk, but on a superficial
examination looked less, and bent inwards at a sharp angle just below
the crest of the ilium, from whence it proceeded downwards at a width of
three inches. Viewed sideways, the aura was four inches in front of the
trunk, the right thigh and leg, but was one inch narrower by the left
thigh and leg. At the back there was the usual large lumbar bulge seen
with this type of aura, being eight inches wide at the broadest part;
lower down along the thighs and legs the haze had the same width as in
front. The inner aura was equal in breadth over the whole body, except
from the crest of the ilium to the middle of the thigh on the left side.
The aura looked quite natural above the affected part, over which there
appeared a dark void space three quarters of an inch deep, resembling a
wide etheric double. It was impossible to determine how far round the
thigh this blank space extended. External to this void the aura was
coarsely striated. The outer aura here was also correspondingly coarse,
and the alteration of texture was limited by the vertical median lines
of the body back and front. The c.c. band was dark between the crest of
the ilium and the middle of the thigh on the left side. It also
disclosed a dark patch on the epigastrium due to indigestion. Otherwise
the band was uniform over the whole body.

A unique phenomenon of great interest was associated

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

with multiple changes of the kind under consideration in a patient
suffering from herpes zoster. The rash was so extensive that some
derangement of the aura, short of complete absence over the entire
affected area, was expected. Although the patient's aura was not very
distinct, and was below the normal in clearness, the following
extraordinary aspect could be easily detected:

When the patient extended his arm, the aura adjacent to the rash
presented a most remarkable appearance; it seemed to be honeycombed with
vacuoles beneath the arm and beside the trunk. At first the phenomenon
was hard to explain, but the difficulty vanished directly it was
recollected that the lines of the auric forces are at right angles to
the body, and that in this instance some of them would proceed from the
trunk, others from the arm, and again others from the axilla, all at
different angles, causing them to be continually intersecting in the
almost empty space. As the auric forces over this part of the body were,
owing to the complaint, considerably below the usual strength and
irregularly distributed, the haze was correspondingly small, and a
cellular or spongy appearance was thus produced. This effect would also
be enhanced by a more or less healthy aura at the back and in front of
the pathological portion.

<span id="case62">Case 62</span>. F.F., a shoemaker, twenty-two years of
age. When a boy of seven he had hip disease, and for years suffered from
[abscesses](errata.htm#11) due to sequestra. He had undergone several
operations, but for the last five years had enjoyed good health until a
week previous to his inspection, when he noticed a rash upon the side of
his chest followed by an eruption in the axilla and inner side of the
arm, and another similar patch on the back accompanied by severe pain.
When examined there was a herpetic patch about one and a half inches
square just below the clavicle. The whole of the right axilla and three
quarters of the right

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

arm, as well as another small place on the back near the spine at the
level of the third dorsal vertebræ, were covered with the rash. The
blebs were very large, some being half an inch in length. There could be
no mistake about its being a severe case of herpes zoster. Inspection
showed the aura to be less distinct than normal, and of a grey blue
colour. On the left side it was quite natural, but very narrow, the
outer being three inches in breadth and the inner two and a half. At the
front and the back it was the same width, and showed no departure in
shape from what would be found in health. On the right side, however,
the aura was normal round the head, but as soon as the arms were raised,
the appearance under the right arm and a little way down the trunk was
very peculiar. It was granular but not as plainly so as usual. Against a
black background, it looked as if it consisted of a haze honeycombed
with dark holes. The effect produced is difficult in the extreme to
describe, and the diminution of the intensity of the granular part of
the aura resulted evidently from a loss of substance. Besides, the outer
and inner auras appeared to be completely amalgamated, since not a
vestige of differentiation could be detected. Below this disorganized
portion, the aura seemed to have regained its proper condition for a
short distance. Opposite the ilium, from the crest downwards, for about
five inches, the haze showed a condition similar to that described, only
less marked. This was contiguous to the formerly diseased joint.

The next example is one displaying an alteration of the configuration of
an aura due to local disturbance, and recovery from immediately the
patient began to improve in health. Fortunately the woman allowed an
examination from time to time, and thus diagrams illustrating the
gradual recovery could be made. For the sake of simplicity the outer
aura alone has been depicted in the diagram. Although at intervals other

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

cases have been seen in which auras impaired in shape have been noticed
to return gradually to their natural forms, not one has shown the same
amount of alteration, and none could be so closely followed.

<span id="case63">Case 63</span>. ([Fig. 53](#img_fig53).) D., a
spinster, forty-seven years of age, whose occupation was housework, was
<span id="img_fig53"></span>

<table data-align="LEFT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig53.jpg"><img src="tn/fig53.jpg" alt="Fig. 53.&lt;br&gt; Recuperation of aura." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Fig. 53.<br />
Recuperation of aura.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

inspected for the first time at the end of July, 1908. For several years
she had been subject to indigestion. For some months she had suffered
great discomfort and pain, accompanied by a good deal of flatulence
which commenced about an hour and a half after meals, and continued
another half hour or longer. She was constipated and her stomach was
dilated.

The aura on the left side proceeded downwards in the ordinary manner for
a woman, reaching the middle of the thigh before it commenced to
contract permanently. It was about seven inches at the widest part. On
the right it was very peculiar. Around the head it was similar to that
on

the left, but at the level of the nipples, being then about six and a
half inches wide, it suddenly curved inwards to a point a trifle above
the level of the umbilicus, where it was only one and a half inches in
breadth. From this place downwards it did not alter in width. Sideways,
there was no peculiarity either at the back or in front of the body.

When the c.c. band was employed, a dark quadrilateral patch was seen
over the right hypochondrium.

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> It started at the
median line and extended round the body, having its upper edge level
with the xiphoid cartilage, and its lower margin at the level of the
umbilicus. This space was several shades darker than the rest of the
band, and its lines of demarcation were sharply defined. Upon palpation
tenderness of the liver was found, and one spot two inches above the
navel and the same distance to the right of the median line, was
exceedingly painful to deep pressure. The patient improved greatly under
treatment.

In October, 1908, another inspection was made. The aura was unchanged
except on the right side. Its curve was not so deep as formerly, and it
began to widen before it finally contracted at the same level as on the
left side, viz., about the middle of the thigh.

Six months later the inward curve of the aura on the right side could
still be plainly seen, but had greatly diminished, otherwise there was
no alteration. As the aura seemed to be gradually regaining its natural
state, it was inspected once again in October, 1909. The patient had
been suffering from indigestion for about six weeks, but after treatment
for the last three had vastly improved. The aura had become quite
symmetrical on the two sides of the body, but the previously affected
area still continued to have a different aspect to any other part.

This modified portion of the aura commenced about the level of the
xiphoid cartilage, and terminated a short distance above the crest of
the ilium. It had a dull look and was coarse in texture, and its colour
was not quite as blue as the healthy part. To the right it was bounded
by streaks of a lighter shade proceeding straight from the body. These
differed from the ordinary rays in their opacity. Here the inner aura
was slightly narrowed, showed no striation and was coarsely granular.
Elsewhere it was even all over the body, being two inches wide and was
fairly lineated. The etheric double was well marked as a

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

dark space one eighth of an inch in breadth. This showed that while the
aura had regained its proper shape, it had not resumed its natural
condition. With the blue c.c. band the quadrilateral space in the
hypochondriac region still was darker than the rest of the band, but the
difference was not so pronounced. The extension band on the right side
also remained of a darker hue than on the left, but the difference was
less marked. [Fig. 53](#img_fig53) shows the gradual amendment in the
aura from time to time.

Some months later, as the patient was in fair health, her aura was again
inspected. The outer was natural in size all over the body, and
symmetrical. However, the inner aura had not wholly regained its proper
texture on the right side, as it remained coarse and opaque, but it
showed signs of striation although the lines were unlike healthy ones.
The upper and lower margins of the unhealthy aura were the
sterno-xiphoid plane and a level a little higher than the crest of the
ilium.

With the blue c.c. band the large dark patch was still in existence but
had become less distinct than on the previous occasion. It was continued
round to the back. The band also brought to view a well marked patch
having ill-defined edges, on the left side, partially in the lumbar and
partially over the iliac region. She had pain in this place on the
previous day, and the spot was tender to palpation.

After a long lapse of time her aura was finally examined in the early
part of 1917. There was nothing of special interest except that the aura
on the right side had completely recovered its proper texture, leaving
no trace of its former abnormal condition.

Local enlargements of the aura must now be considered. Such are always
present in pregnancy, but only temporarily, and must be regarded as
physiological. In fact, as will be seen in a later chapter, the increase
in front of the breasts and abdomen constitute

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

one of the signs of that state. The two following instances are
exceptions to the rule, because although in both the increase was
similar to that occurring in pregnancy, this condition was not present.

<span id="case64">Case 64</span>. E., was the mother of two children, of
whom the first was still born and the second two and a half years old.
For some time after the birth of the latter child she had flooding and a
polypus was removed in the succeeding year. Since the operation her
periods had occurred at intervals of fourteen days, and were copious.
She had missed three times. Her abdomen was very slightly enlarged. She
had been feeling well, but far from strong. Her aura was bluish grey
colour. It was nine inches by the head and the sides of the trunk, and
four by the ankles. In profile the aura was five inches in front of the
abdomen, but only three above and below, and by the thighs and legs
four. The inner aura was two and a half inches over the whole body with
the exception of the front of the abdomen, where it was wider. Pregnancy
was diagnosed, but, as it turned out, incorrectly.

<span id="case65">Case 65</span>. N., a married childless woman. She was
very nervous and depressed, as she had been growing thin for the last
twelve months, and complained of vague pains in different parts of her
body. Three years before inspection she had undergone an uterine
operation. Her aura was blue, spatulate, seven inches and a half by the
head, nine by the trunk, and not quite four by the ankles. Seen
sideways, the outer aura was nine inches at the small of the back, and
elsewhere four, and in front it was four all the way down, except the
portion in front of the lower part of the abdomen, which was three
quarters of an inch wider. The inner aura was two and a half inches all
over the body, with the exception of the part in front of the abdomen,
where it was three inches. Omitting this broader portion which was
granular, the inner

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

aura was striated throughout. This want of lineation was evidence
against pregnancy.

Nearly allied to this alteration in texture, which will be described
almost directly, is the indistinctness of the inner or both auras
simultaneously. A less defined striation of the inner aura than normal
may be looked upon as presumptive evidence that the patient is not
naturally robust, or is in a temporary or permanent state of ill-health.
The only common exception is among women during pregnancy, when the
inner, or more frequently both, auras, are decidedly more shadowy than
is to be expected in good health. So numerous are these instances in
which this condition of the auras occur, that diminution of visibility
may be numbered among the less important signs of being enceinte.

A very good example of this condition is the next case, that of a
strong, well-built, tall man who, having lumbago, took it into his head
to cure it by fasting. When seen, although he had taken no food for nine
days and only water to drink, declared that the felt quite fit, and that
on the previous day, after attending to his bees all the morning, had
been gardening the whole afternoon, doing, as he termed it, "navvy's
work." When in his usual state of health, his aura would be pronounced
wide, especially round his head, as his intellectual powers were
considerably above the average. He was a barrister and a wrangler.

<span id="case66">Case 66</span>. H. G., aged forty-eight, was inspected
in 1915. The outer aura was quite up to the normal in distinctness, and
of a good shape. The inner was almost invisible, however, striation
could be just detected. The c.c. band was uniform over the whole body,
except that there was a yellow patch in front of the stomach. The
patient owned to having discomfort at that place for the first time
since he had commenced fasting, and attributed it to want of food. There
was nothing worth mentioning about

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

the aura. It is interesting to note that his surface electricity was
almost nil, while a month or two previously it had been unusually great.

<span id="case67">Case 67</span>. A lady thirty-four years of age, who
had never been strong but never had any serious illness, was examined in
1913. A short time before she had complained or indigestion from which
she had completely recovered. She was thin but that was natural to her.
Several members of her family had died of consumption, but she had shown
no signs of that complaint. She was regarded as a healthy but delicate
woman. The colour of her aura was blue tinged with grey. The outer aura
barely reached the average standard of distinctness, while the inner was
far below, though striation could be detected with difficulty. The
dimensions of the outer aura were nine inches by the sides of the trunk
and round the head, four in front of the body, seven at the back, and by
the lower limbs three and a half. The inner aura was two and a half
inches by the head and trunk, and two by the legs. The c.c. band only
revealed slight marks, one in front and one at the back. The colours of
the aura when observed through the different screens were curious, but
hardly worth mentioning here.

This condition is constantly met with in girls and young women when
anæmic, but the aura returns to its normal brightness as they become
convalescent.

Directly the outer and inner auras could be differentiated, it became
reasonable to surmise that each of these at times would display
alterations in size and structure. It has been incidentally noted that
in a large number of instances, a variation in the size of the inner
aura has been accompanied by a modification of substance, so that the
two conditions may be conveniently studied together.

To understand the changes that take place in the texture of the inner
aura, it must be borne in mind

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

that when healthy it is composed of an exceedingly fine haze, apparently
made up of fine granules which by their arrangement impart a striated
appearance. This aura keeps so nearly the same breadth over every part
of the body, that it is probably the outcome of one and only one force
emanating from the body, viz., the inner auric force. (Page
[133](tha06.htm#page_133)).

Any departure from health is liable to derange this force, and to induce
some change in the substance of the aura. One that can be frequently
distinguished without the intervention of any screen, is the loss of
natural striation. This is the earliest morbid modification of the inner
aura.

As an adjunct to this want of striation, the incomparably fine granules
constituting the inner aura in health, will be replaced by others more
coarse and opaque. Apparently each of these large granules is formed by
the coalescence of two or more small ones. The sizes of these granules
vary greatly, but there is generally a predominance of one size which
imparts a distinctive feature to the affected part. The granular state
may be conveniently classified as fine, medium, and coarse, as the case
may be. With the appearance of these granules, lineation first becomes
coarse, and ultimately disappears. It would appear from the infrequency
of alterations in breadth of the inner aura, that the intensity of the
forces originating it is usually preserved, but what part, if any, it
plays in the production of the abnormal granules is not known. When once
the granular appearance is established, especially if coarse, a long
time generally elapses before the aura returns to its pristine state. An
example may be cited of a lady, who showed this peculiarity seven weeks
after suffering from a stiff neck. After an interval of another five
months her neck was again examined. When investigated in the ordinary
manner there was a small deranged patch emanating from the lowest

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

part of the neck. This patch was about two and a half inches wide at the
base, and two in height. The outer margin consisted of a number of
points, one taller than the other until the highest was reached, and on
the other side of the peak it fell away in the same manner. With a light
carmine screen the spot looked finely granular, having been on the
former occasion much coarser. When the c.c. bands were employed, the
blue and the green on the right side were darker, while the yellow was
even on the two sides. The change from the large to the small granules
was obviously the precursor of a return to the normal.

The next case is extremely interesting as the patient was inspected
during bad health—after an injury—and again when she was in perfect
health. It was thus possible to determine whether the alterations in the
aura were transient or permanent.

<span id="case68">Case 68</span>. U., a shop assistant, twenty-four
years of age, who throughout her life had been healthy and strong,
recently became the victim of indigestion, which under treatment soon
disappeared. At the time of her inspection she was far from strong. Her
outer aura was natural in shape, and of a greyish blue colour. By the
sides of the head and trunk it was nine inches in breadth, six by the
thighs and four by the ankles. In front it was four inches all the way
down, and at the back showed a slight bulge seven inches wide, and by
the thighs and legs it was three and a half inches broad.

The inner aura measured two and three-quarter inches by the body and a
little less by the limbs. Natural striation could be recognized all over
the body, except in the left hypochondriac region, where it had become
coarsely lineated. The c.c. band showed the very common change on the
sacrum, while over the epigastrium there was a large dark patch
extending round the left side as far as the spine.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

Two years later she became anæmic, always felt languid, and had a return
of indigestion accompanied by dilatation of the stomach. While in this
condition she was inspected a second time. the outer aura, with the
exception of being enlarged in front of the abdomen, had not changed.
The inner aura had lost considerably in clearness, and was decidedly
below the average in distinctness, yet lineation could, without much
difficulty, be perceived. It remained unchanged, except that it had
increased in front of the trunk, from the level of the nipple line to a
short distance above the umbilicus. Here striation was visible, but was
coarse and had a tendency to become granular. Examination with the c.c.
band disclosed a large yellow spot over the left hypochondrium.

As this enlargement of the aura was not present in front of the abdomen
during the first inspection, it is evident that it could have been in
existence only a comparatively short time, so it was thought that
another examination would prove whether the augmentation was temporary
or permanent, and thus be instructive. The woman kindly assented, but
unfortunately was unable to fulfil her promise for a considerable time,
as during the interval she married and her new home was in the north of
England.

Her third inspection took place in the autumn of 1916, when she was
still feeling the effects of a fall which resulted in two fractured ribs
on the right side. It is unnecessary to enter into the details of this
examination, as for the most part the auras remained the same, and there
was no alteration in the enlargement in front of the abdomen, while the
inner aura had regained its proper distinctness. However, near the site
of the recent injury from the level of the sterno-xiphoid plane to the
crest of the ilium, there was a void space about an inch and a half
between the body and the inner aura. As owing to the injury

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

she could not be regarded in perfect health she came when feeling
absolutely well.

In March, 1917, she was examined for the last time. Her outer aura
looked unusually distinct and appeared larger than at the former
inspections. After making all allowances for its indefinite margin, the
outcome of a slight ultra-outer aura, there was no doubt about a true
increase in size. The measurements were, by the head eleven inches,
twelve by the trunk, six and a half by the thighs, and four by the
ankles. Back and front of the trunk it was eight inches, and down the
thighs and legs it was the same as by the sides. The enlargement in
front of the abdomen of both auras remained constant. The inner was
coarsely striated near the seat of the injury, (where also the c.c. band
looked dark), otherwise it appeared healthy over the whole body, being
three inches and a half wide, and a trifle narrower by the limbs. The
former blank space between the body and the haze was occupied by the
inner aura in the ordinary manner. The extra width of the auras in front
of the abdomen in this case must now be considered a permanent feature.

As the inner auras of persons in good health are more extensive in the
robust than in the constitutionally delicate, it is extremely improbable
that the broader side will prove to be abnormal when asymmetry occurs.
Usually there is no difficulty in coming to a decision, as some other
modification on the affected side can always be detected either directly
or with the c.c. band. It will be found that whenever a contraction of
the inner aura exists, a corresponding change in the outer will have
taken place; but the reverse does not hold good. It is worth remembering
that in every instance in which a contracted inner aura has been
observed over a large surface, the patient has suffered from a grave
malady.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

The inspection of an epileptic shows the inner aura on the left side to
be narrowed, while on the right it retains its full size. The
modifications do not stop here, as invariably on the left side the
texture of the aura is coarse in appearance, or even granular, causing
striation when distinguishable to be detected only with difficulty. This
one-sided diminution of the inner aura is far more diagnostic of
epilepsy than the contracted outer aura, although the latter is
considerably more conspicuous and was first discovered.

The permanence of the granular state of the inner aura reaches its
zenith in one place, where it almost ceases to be pathological. This is
over some part of the lower lumbar and sacral regions of many women
between the ages of twenty and fifty years. In some it is the lowest
part of the sacrum, in others higher up, but although in every instance
the median line is affected, the patch usually extends more to one side
than the other. When this condition is present an unvarying tale is
told, of pain, or at least discomfort, at that place in the back during
the menstrual periods. The recurrence of these cycles at short intervals
does not permit sufficient time for the aura to return to its natural
state before a fresh onset commences, thus making the abnormal condition
perpetual. Another interesting fact is, that this patch is generally
more pronounced when the pain has been severe. The granular condition
may as a rule be recognized by the aid of a deep carmine screen, but
before this was used, dark patches had been discovered in the c.c.
bands, and their cause had been a great puzzle, until the influence of
local changes had been realized. It had also been noticed that this dark
patch was non-existent in men, and did not appear in girls before
puberty, nor in women who had passed their grand climacteric, and that
it generally vanished during pregnancy unless it was

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

produced by a known cause such as lumbago. An additional proof of its
intimate connection with menstruation was forthcoming, when on one
occasion a young lady who presented not the slightest sign of any
discoloured patch over the sacrum, upon being interrogated, stated,
"that she had never suffered the least pain or ache in that region
during her periods." At the same examination the c.c. band exhibited a
small light discoloured spot, about one and a half inches in diameter
over the first lumbar spine. When questioned whether there was pain or
tenderness in that place, she replied that there had been none for the
last fortnight, but previously she had a good deal of pain, on one
occasion so acute that she had to retire to bed. This is another
instance of the long time sometimes taken by the aura before a return to
normal after being granular.

Besides the very crude variations in texture which are easily perceived,
such as the granular conditions, there are others of a more refined
nature, imperceptible to the naked eye but distinguishable by the c.c.
bands. The use of these bands will form the subject of the next chapter.

Physiological enlargements of the inner aura are of two kinds. The first
only persists a short time, is very great and sometimes extends beyond
the limits of the outer aura; these are the rays which have already been
discussed. The second is also temporary, but of longer duration;
occasionally it may persist for weeks or even months. A good
illustration of this condition is seen over the front of the abdomen in
pregnancy.

Pathological enlargements of the inner aura do indubitably occur, as in
[case 68](tha09.htm#case68). Whenever the inner aura look broaders
(broadens?—JBH) locally and the texture has not been sufficiently
altered to abolish striation throughout the whole width, there can be no
doubt about a real increase if present. At the same time

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

the outer aura will probably also show some augmentation.

In many cases the extension of the inner aura is only specious and a
result of an alteration in the adjacent outer aura, consequently it is
necessary to take into consideration the structure of this aura when
estimating the size of the inner. During health the portion of the outer
aura lying just outside the inner has larger granules than the more
distant parts. The layers of the different sized granules imperceptibly
graduate into one another. When a local disturbance arises in the inner
aura causing it to become granular, the grains of the outer are liable
to be similarly affected to a less extent. As the derangement of the
inner aura progresses there occurs *pare passu* a change in the outer,
which frequently can be verified by the chromatic alterations in the
c.c. bands over the affected portions. Besides, the charging of the
patient with static electricity will sometimes be of assistance in
determining the true width of the inner aura, and consequently the
extent of the derangement of the outer, as this proceeding causes the
inner aura to vanish before the outer, leaving a void space. However, it
is not always easy to decide whether there has been an increase of one
of the auras at the expense of the other.

The following case affords a very good illustration of a similar change
affecting both auras, making the inner aura appear widened; and of the
separation of the two auras by the help of static electricity. There
are, besides, other peculiarities which make the case worth quoting.

<span id="case69">Case 69</span>. ([Fig. 54](#img_fig54)). I.W., a girl
twenty years old was lately examined. Twelve months previously she had
an attack of influenza complicated by pleurisy, on the left side, and
subsequently she had undergone an operation for empyema. A few months
later enlarged glands were removed from the right side

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

of her neck. When eleven years old she was a patient in the Hospital
suffering from paralysis of both legs, and was discharged as incurable;
but two days after reaching home she had suddenly regained the use of
her legs.

When inspected both auras were normal in distinctness. The outer was
spatulate <span id="img_fig54"></span>

<table data-align="RIGHT">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="CENTER"><a href="img/fig54.jpg"><img src="tn/fig54.jpg" alt="Fig. 54.&lt;br&gt; Granular outer and inner auras.&lt;br&gt; Void space by neck." /><br />
Click to enlarge</a><br />
Fig. 54.<br />
Granular outer and inner auras.<br />
Void space by neck.<br />
</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

in shape, rather wide, ten inches by the sides of the head, eleven by
the trunk, six by the thighs and five by the ankles. The inward curve
was sudden, and just below the level of the body. The inner aura over
the right side of the neck showed a void space quite an inch wide, and
the remainder was coarsely granular. This occurred over the situation of
the diseased glands. Over the rest of the right side of the body the
aura was natural, and striation clearly defined. On the left side from
the axilla to the middle of the thigh the aura was very coarsely
granular, while by the neck and leg it was normal. The inner aura on the
left side of the trunk appeared to be six inches wide, but over the rest
of the body, including the affected portion on the right, was not more
than three. It was taken for granted that the wide granular aura on the
left side included a portion of the outer aura. Later on, when the

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

patient standing on the insulated stool received a sufficiently large
positive charge to cause the inner aura to vanish, but not enough to
abolish the outer, the void space could be seen as nearly as possible of
the same width as the inner aura in other places, viz, three inches,
thus proving that the outer aura to a depth of three inches partook of
the same granular alteration. With a larger charge it was noticed that
the granular outer aura was the last to depart.

The c.c. band also presented some abnormalities. First of all the whole
of the left side from the level of the clavicle downwards looked darker
than on the right. This deepening of colour commenced in the middle of
the spine at the back, and extended round to the front to about an inch
to the left of the median line. As the girl stood facing, the right
extension of the c.c. band was normal, while the left extension appeared
darker, but it was difficult to obtain the true colour as the band was
projected on to the aura itself on a plane in front of the trunk, and
seemed to be mixed up with the granules. This was a unilateral instance
of a phenomenon already mentioned. (Page [158](tha07.htm#page_158)). A
dark spot was also discovered upon the nape of the neck.

To sum up, the inner aura does not vary in shape and size to the same
extent as does the outer, and the chief morbid changes manifest
themselves as alterations of substance. It is plain from the cases
quoted, that variations in shape and size of the outer aura occur
frequently and extensively, while in general structural modifications
are either so slight or so delicate as to be almost imperceptible.

Nothing much can be said about the hue of an aura seen without a screen.
The colours are for the most part limited to blue or grey, or to the
mixtures of the two in different proportions. Temperament and mental
powers seem to be of more importance in

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

this direction than are temporary changes in the health. In the
following table compiled from the first hundred examinations made, auras
have been classified according to their colours under the different
headings. I. Blue auras. II. Blue mixed with grey auras. III. Grey
auras. (N.B. The table originally published in the first edition of this
book has been retained unaltered, as the overwhelming majority of the
people examined since have been in ill-health).

|       |                                                                 |                                |
|-------|-----------------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------|
| I.    | Blue series. Forty cases.                                       |                                |
|       | No individuals below, some above the average in mental power.   |                                |
| II\.  | Blue with more or less grey. Thirty-six cases.                  |                                |
|       | Some individuals below, none above the average in mental power. |                                |
|       | One case of hemiplegia.                                         | included in this class.        |
|       |                                                                 | Two epileptics.                |
|       |                                                                 | One case of meningitis.        |
| III\. | Grey series. Seventeen cases.                                   |                                |
|       | All below the average in mental power.                          |                                |
|       | Two eccentric people.                                           |                                |
|       | Six epileptics.                                                 | included in this class.        |
|       |                                                                 | One case of general paralysis. |
|       |                                                                 | Three mentally dull.           |

In the remaining seven cases no note was taken of the colour of the
aura.

This table shows conclusively that the owners of blue auras are
generally best endowed mentally.

A congenital grey aura indicates a deficiency of the intellectual
faculties, but it has not been ascertained whether the loss of brain
power through disease would change the colour of the aura to grey, which
seems not unlikely.

N.B. It should be remembered that in all cases the colours of auras are
faint and delicate.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX. The Use of the Complementary Coloured Bands in
Disease](tha10)
