[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab002)  [Next](fab004) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CHAPTER I.

### THE POEMS CONTAINED IN THE FOUR ANCIENT BOOKS OF WALES.

THE dissolution of the religious houses in Wales in the reign of Henry
the Eighth, and the dispersion of their libraries, led to many Welsh
MSS., which had been preserved in them, passing into the hands of
private individuals; and collections of Welsh MSS. soon began to be
formed by persons who took an interest in the history and literature of
their country.

The principal collectors in North Wales were Mr. Jones of Gelly Lyvdy,
whose collection was formed between the years 1590 and 1630, and Mr.
Robert Vaughan of Hengwrt, author of a work termed *British Antiquities
Revived*, published in 1662, who died at Hengwrt four years after, in
1666; and in South Wales, William Herbert, Earl of Pembroke, who formed
a collection at Raglan Castle in 1590; and Sir Edward Mansel, whose
father had received a gift of the priory of Margam in Glamorgan, in
1591.

The collections of Mr. Jones and Mr. Vaughan became united at Hengwrt,
in arrangement having been made between them that the MSS. collected by
each should become the property of the survivor. Mr. Jones having
predeceased Mr. Vaughan, the united collection, consisting of upwards of
400 MSS., remained

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

at Hengwrt till within the last few years, when it was bequeathed by Sir
Robert Vaughan of Hengwrt to W. W. E. Wynne, Esq. of Peniarth, in whose
possession it now is.

In the following century various collections were made, and among others
some valuable MSS. became the property of Jesus College, Oxford. The
collection of the Earl of Pembroke at Raglan Castle was destroyed by
fire in the time of Oliver Cromwell; and a similar fate overtook two of
those later collections, which had become the property of Sir Watkin
Williams Wynne, and were preserved at Wynnstay, but which were likewise
destroyed by fire. Other collections passed into the British Museum, and
the principal collections of Welsh MSS. are now the Hengwrt collection
at Peniarth, those in the British Museum, the MSS. at Jesus College, and
those belonging to Lord Mostyn, Mr. Panton of Plas Gwyn, and others.

In the Hengwrt collection were preserved three ancient MSS., termed the
Black Book of Caermarthen, the Book of Aneurin, and the Book of
Taliessin, containing a considerable collection of Welsh poetry bearing
marks of antiquity; and in the, library of Jesus College is a MS. which
contains similar poems, termed the Red Book of Hergest. These poems are
some of a historic character, and others not so, and are attributed,
either by their rubric, by the title of the MS., or by tradition, to
four bards termed Myrddin, Aneurin, Taliessin, and Llywarch Hen, who are
supposed to have lived in the sixth century.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

Two of these MSS. are still in the Hengwrt collection, and of one of
them we know the history: the Black Book of Caermarthen belonged to the
Priory of Black Canons at Caermarthen, and was given by the Treasurer of
the Church of St. Davids to Sir John Price, a native of Breconshire, who
was one of the commissioners appointed by King Henry the Eighth; the
other is the Book of Taliessin, and it is not known how it was acquired.

The Book of Aneurin is now the property of Sir Thomas Phillipps of
Middlehill.

The Red Book of Hergest is said to have been so termed from its having
been compiled for the Vaughans of Hergest Court, Herefordshire, and
seems to have come to Oxford from the Margam Collection in South Wales.

It is these four MSS.--the Black Book of Caermarthen, written in the
reign of Henry the Second (1154-1189); the Book of Aneurin, a MS. of the
latter part of the thirteenth century; the Book of Taliessin, a MS. of
the beginning of the fourteenth century; and the Red Book of Hergest, a
MS. compiled at different times in the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries--that are here termed THE FOUR ANCIENT BOOKS OF WALES, and it
is with the ancient poems contained in these four MSS. that we have now
to do.

Numerous transcripts of these poems are to be found in other Welsh MSS.,
but undoubtedly it is in these four MSS. that the most ancient. texts of
the poems are to be found; and, in most cases, those in the other

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

\[paragraph continues\] MSS. are not independent texts, but have
obviously, with more or less variation, been transcribed from these. The
contents of these MSS. remained little known till the publication of the
*Archæologia Britannica* in 1707, by Edward Lhuyd, who had examined all
the collections which were accessible, and the account which he included
in his work of the Welsh MSS. attracted some attention towards them, but
none of the poems were printed till the middle of the century, when the
publication of the poems of Ossian by James Macpherson, and the sudden
popularity they acquired, gave a temporary value to Celtic poetry, and
led to a desire on the part of the Welsh to show that they were likewise
in possession of a body of native poems not less interesting than the
Highland, and with better claims to authenticity. In 1764, the Rev. Evan
Evans published his *Specimens of the Poetry of the Ancient Welsh
Bards*; and though they mainly embraced poems written in the twelfth and
subsequent centuries, translated in the style of Macpherson's Ossian, he
annexed a Latin dissertation, *De Bardis*, in which he printed ten of
the stanzas of the great poem of the Gododin, and a stanza from the
Avallenau, as specimens of the older poems, with Latin translations. He
was followed by Edward Jones, who, in his *Musical and Poetical Relies
of the Welsh Bards*, published in 1784, printed a part of the Gododin,
three of the poems of Taliessin--viz. the Battle of Argoed Llwyfain, the
Battle of Gwenystrad, and the Mead song, one of the poems of Llywarch
Hen, with metrical translations,

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

and part of the Avallenau, with a more literal prose translation by Mr.
Edward Williams. He was likewise assisted in his work by Dr. W. Owen,
afterwards Dr. Owen Pughe, who, a few years afterwards, published five
of the poems of Taliessin in the Gentleman's Magazine for the years 1789
and 1790, being the Ode to Gwallawg, the Death-Song of Owen, the Battle
of Dyffryn Garant, the Battle of Gwenystrad, and the Gorchan Cynvelyn,
with English translations. These translations, however, were too diffuse
and too much tainted by a desire to give the passages a mystic meaning,
to convey a fair idea of the real nature of the poems.

In 1792, Dr. Owen Pughe published *The Heroic Elegies, and other pieces
of Llywarch Hen*, with a much more literal English version. The work
contains a pretty complete collection of the poems attributed to
Llywarch Hen, but it is not said from what MS. the text was printed,
while the notes contain collations with the Black Book of Caermarthen
and the Red Book of Hergest. <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

At length, in the year 1801, the text of the whole of these poems was
given to the world, through the munificence of Owen Jones, a furrier, in
Thames Street,

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

\[paragraph continues\] London, who, in that and subsequent years,
published the *Myvyrian Archæology of Wales*, containing the chief
productions of Welsh literature. He was assisted by Mr. Edward Williams
of Glamorgan and Dr. Owen Pughe; but though the text of almost all of
these poems is given, it is not said from what particular MSS. they were
printed, and no materials are afforded for discriminating between what
are probably old and what are spurious. The text is unaccompanied by
translations.

If the publication of the poems of Ossian thus drew attention to these
ancient Welsh poems, the controversy which followed on the poems drew
forth an able vindication of the genuine character of the latter. Sharon
Turner, in his *History of the Anglo-Saxons*, the first edition of which
appeared in 1799, founded upon some of these poems as historical
documents. He quoted the Death-Song of Geraint as containing the account
of a real battle at Longporth, or Portsmouth, between Cerdic, the
founder of the kingdom of Wesser, and the Britons. He referred to the
poems of Taliessin on the battles of Argoed Llwyfain and Gwenystrad as
real history, and he considered the great poem of the Gododin by Aneurin
as describing a real war between the Britons and the Angles of Ida's
kingdom. This drew upon him the criticism of the two chief opponents of
the claims of Ossian--viz. John Pinkerton and Malcolm Laing--who
declared that these Welsh poems, were equally unworthy of credit. In
consequence of this attack,

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Turner published, in 1803, his *Vindication of
the genuineness of the ancient British poems of Aneurin, Taliessin,
Llywarch Hen, and Myrddin*. In this elaborate essay he endeavoured to
demonstrate two propositions:--First, That these four bards were real
men, and actually lived in the sixth century; and, secondly, that, with
some exceptions, the poems attributed to them are their genuine works.
He dealt, however, with the historical poems alone as sufficient for his
purpose, and did not enter into any critical analysis of the poems as a,
whole. This vindication, was, in the main, considered to be conclusive
as to the poems being the genuine works of the bards whose name they
bore; and it appeared to be now generally accepted as a fact, that a
body of genuine poetry, of the sixth century, existed in the Welsh
language which threw light upon the history of that century.

A new view was, however, soon taken of their real meaning; and some
years after, the Rev. Edward Davies brought out, in his work called the
*Mythology of the British Druids*, published in 1809, his theory that
there was handed down in these poems a system of mythology which had
been the religion of the Druids in the pagan period, and was still
professed in secret by the bards, their genuine successors. The Gododin,
he endeavoured to show by an elaborate translation, related to the
traditionary history of the massacre of the Britons by the Saxons at
Stonehenge, called the Plot of the Long Knives; and he appended to his
work a number of the poems of Taliessin, with

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

translations to show the mystic meaning which pervaded them. This theory
was still further elaborated by the Honourable Algernon Herbert, in two
works published anonymously: *Britannia after the Romans*, in 1836; and
*The Neo-Druidic Heresy*, in 1838. He took the same view with regard to
the meaning of the Gododin; and he combined with much ingenious and wild
speculation regarding the post-Roman history of Britain, the theory that
a lurking adherence to the old paganism of the Druids had caused a
schism in the British church, and that the bards, under the name of
Christians and the guise of Christian nomenclature, professed in secret
a paganism as an esoteric cult, which he denominated the Neo-Druidic
heresy, and which he maintained was obscurely hinted at in the poems of
Taliessin. It would probably be difficult to find a stranger specimen of
perverted ingenuity and misplaced learning than is contained in the
works of Davies and Herbert; but the urgency with which they maintained
their views, and the disguise under which the poems appeared in their
so-called translations, certainly produced an impression that the poems
of Taliessin did contain a mystic philosophy, while, at the same time,
the Gododin of Aneurin and the poems of Llywarch Hen were generally
recognised as genuine historical documents commemorating real historical
events.

The Rev. John Williams, afterwards Archdeacon of Cardigan, an eminent
Welsh scholar, and a man of much talent, announced, in 1841, a
translation of the poems of Aneurin, Taliessin, and other primitive
bards,

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

with a critical revision and re-establishment of the text; but, although
these poems had occupied a large share of his attention, I believe he
never seriously prepared the materials for his edition, and he died in
1858, without having done anything towards carrying it out. I have
frequently heard him give as a reason the great difficulty involved, and
time and labour required, "in restoring the genuine text." What he meant
by this we can see in the last work he published, termed *Gomer*, where
(part ii. p. 33 *et seq*.), we have several specimens of how he meant to
deal with the text. His plan obviously was to restore the orthography of
the words from the existing text in the Myvyrian Archæology to what he
conceived must have been their form when the respective poems were
composed. His mind, too, appears to have been influenced in no slight
degree by the school of Davies, and he was too ready to attach a mystic
meaning to the text. In 1850, some time before the Archdeacon's death, a
learned Breton, the Vicomte do la Villemarqué, published his *Poemes des
Bardes Bretons du VI<sup>e</sup>. Siecle, traduits pour la premiere
fois, avec le texte en regard revu sur les plus anciens manuscrits*; and
he, too, proceeded upon the same idea of restoring the original text. In
his preface, after noticing the oldest copies of the poems, which he
says formed the basis of his edition, he adds, "Apres le travail de
collation, il restait a reproduire les textes avec l'orthographe
convenable, mais la quelle suivre;" and he fixes upon the Breton
orthography as the most ancient, and in this, which he

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

terms "l'orthographe historique," presents us with the text of the poems
which he translates. These poems are mainly the historical pieces, and
he considers with Turner that they contain fragments of real history.

A more unfortunate idea than that of thus arbitrarily restoring the text
never formed the basis of an important work; and while it has destroyed
the value of Villemarqué's edition, it lessens the regret we should
otherwise feel that the Archdeacon never carried his announced intention
into effect. To present the poems in a different shape from what they
appear in the oldest transcripts, and to clothe them with a supposed
older orthography, is to confound entirely the province of the editor
with that of the historic critic, and to exercise, in the character of
the former, functions which properly belong to the latter, while it
deprives him of the proper materials on which to exercise his critical
judgment. Such restoration necessarily proceeds on the assumption by the
editor that the poems are the genuine works of those to whom they are
attributed, and existed in the same form and substance at the era at
which their reputed authors lived; while the application of historical
criticism to the poems as they now exist may lead to very different
conclusions. It supersedes entirely the important work of the critic, by
assuming the very questions which he has to solve. The true function of
the editor is to select the oldest and best MSS., and to produce the
text of the poems in the precise shape and orthography in which he there
finds them: neither to tamper with, nor to restore

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

them, but to furnish the critic with the materials on which he can
exercise his skill in determining their true age and value. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1)

These remarks have likewise some bearing upon two very remarkable works
which have inaugurated a new school of criticism of these poems, and
subjected their claims to tests which they had not hitherto undergone.
These two works are--*first*, *The Literature of the Kymry*, by Thomas
Stephens, published in 1849; and, *secondly*, *Taliessin, or the Bards
and Druids of Britain*, by D. W. Nash, published in 1858.

The main object of Mr. Stephens' work is to treat of the language and
literature of the twelfth and two succeeding centuries; but it embraces
likewise the poems attributed to the bards of the sixth century, in so
far as he maintains that they are falsely so attributed, and are really
the works of later bards. Mr. Stephens' work is written with much
ability, and is, in fact, the first real attempt to subject these poems
to anything like a critical analysis. He opens one of his chapters, to
which he has put the title, "Poems, fictitiously attributed to Myrddin,
Taliessin, Aneurin, Llywarch, Meugant, and Golyddan," with the following
sentence:--"Reader! be attentive to what I am about to write, and keep a
watchful eye upon the sentences as they rise before you, for the daring
spirit of modern

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

criticism is about to lay violent hands upon the old household furniture
of venerable tradition;" and he certainly fulfils this promise, for he
maintains that, with some exceptions, these poems contain allusions, and
breathe forth a spirit and sentiment, which demonstrate that they were
composed subsequent to the twelfth century; and he endeavours to
indicate their real authors. Of the poems attributed to Aneurin he
appears to admit the Gododin to be genuine. He considers the whole of
the poems attributed to Myrddin, including even the Avallenau--which
Turner maintained to be genuine--to be spurious, and the work of later
bards, and endeavours to point out their real authors, hesitatingly in
the text, but more decidedly in the title to one of his chapters, where
he has "The Avallenau and Hoianau, composed by Prydydd y Moch. The
Gorddodau, composed by Gruffydd ab Yr Ynad Coch;" and of seventy-seven
poems attributed to Taliessin, he admits only twelve to be "historical
and as old as the sixth century."

His admission that some of these poems are as old as the sixth century
of course neutralises any argument drawn from their orthography and
grammatical or poetical structure, unless he can show that the poems he
maintains to be spurious differ materially in that respect from those he
admits to be genuine; and his attempt to indicate their real authors
breaks down in so far as the Avallenau and Hoianau, and other poems
contained in the Black Book of Caermarthen, are concerned; for the poems
in that MS. must have

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

been already transcribed in the twelfth century, and Prydydd y Moch
belongs to the succeeding century. So far as he shows that several of
these poems contain direct allusions to events which occurred after the
period when they are said to be composed, his criticism is successful,
and may be received as well founded; but in his attempt to show that
allusions, hitherto supposed to apply to events contemporaneous with the
alleged date of the poem, were really intended to describe later
events--which is, in fact, the main feature of his criticism--he is not
equally successful. His reasoning appears to me to be quite
inconclusive, the resemblances faint and uncertain, and the argument
carries no conviction to the mind. For instance, in the poem attributed
to Taliessin, termed Kerdd y Veib Llyr, where the lines occur--

"A battle against the lord of fame in the dales of Hafren,  
Against Brochwel Powys; *he loved my song*"--

it is a fair and legitimate inference that it could not have been
composed prior to the time of Brochmail, who is mentioned by Bede as
having been at the battle of Caerlegion, the true date of which is 613;
but when the following lines occur in a subsequent part of the same
poem--

"Three races, wrathful, of right qualities,  
Gwyddyl, and Brython, and Romani,  
Create war and tumult,"

it is not satisfactory to be told that "they refer to the ecclesiastic
dispute between Giraldus and King John respecting the see of St.
David's." It is therefore not

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

without reason that the reader is exhorted to keep a watchful eye upon
the sentences condemning the poems upon such grounds.

Mr. Nash, in his work, deals with the poems attributed to Taliessin
only, and in the main he follows up the criticisms of Stephens. He goes,
however, a step beyond him, as, without directly asserting it, he
implies that none of the poems are older than the twelfth century, if he
does not really assort that no earlier date can be assigned to them than
the date of the oldest MS. in which they are found. Of the historical
poems he sums up his criticism thus:--"Without, therefore, venturing to
decide that these 'Songs to Urien' were not re-written in the twelfth
century, from materials originally of the date of the sixth, and that
there are no poetical remains in the Welsh language older than the
twelfth century, we may nevertheless assert that the common assumption
of such remains of the date of the sixth century has been made upon very
unsatisfactory grounds, and without a sufficiently careful examination
of the evidence on which such assumption should be founded. Writers who
claim for productions actually existing only in MSS. of the twelfth all
origin in the sixth century, are called upon to demonstrate the links of
evidence, either internal or external, which bridge over this great
intervening period of at least five hundred years. This external
evidence is altogether wanting, and the internal evidence, even of the
so-called 'Historical Poems' themselves, is, in some

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

instances at least, opposed to their claims to an origin in the sixth
century." What he calls the mythological poems he entirely rejects, and
appears to place them even in a much later age than Stephens has done.

While Mr. Nash's work must be admitted to be written with much ability,
certainly the merit of candour cannot equally be attributed to it. It is
less an attempt to subject the poems to a fair and just criticism than
simply a very clever piece of special pleading, in which, like all
special pleading, he proceeds to demonstrate a foregone conclusion by
the usual partial and one-sided view of the facts--assuming whatever
appears to make for his argument, and ignoring what seems to oppose it;
while he makes conjectural alterations of the text when it suits his
purpose, and the real sense of the poems which form the subject of his
criticism is disguised under a version which he terms a translation, but
which affords anything but a faithful or candid representation of their
contents.

I consider that the true value of these poems is a problem which has
still to be solved. Are we to attach any real historical value to them,
or are we to set them aside at once as worthless for all historical
purposes, and as merely curious specimens of the nonsensical rhapsodies
and perverted taste of a later age?

Whether these poems are the genuine works of the bards whose names they
bear, or whether they are the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

production of a later age, I do not believe that they contain any such
system of Druidism, or Neo-Druidism, as Davies, Herbert, and others,
attempt to find in them; nor do I think that their authors wrote, and
the compilers of these ancient MSS. took the pains to transcribe,
century after century, what was a mere farrago of nonsense, and of no
historical or literary value. I think that these poems have a meaning,
and that, both in connection with the history and the literature of
Wales, that meaning is worth finding out; and I think, further, that if
they were subjected to a just and candid criticism, we ought to be able
to ascertain their true place and value in the literature of Wales. The
criticism to which they have hitherto been subjected is equally
unsatisfactory, whether they are maintained to be genuine or to be
spurious, mainly because the basis of the criticism is an uncertain and
untrustworthy text, and any criticism on the existing texts, in the
shape in which they are presented in the Myvyrian Archæology, is,
comparatively speaking, valueless; and because the translations by which
their meaning is attempted to be expressed, are either loose and
inaccurate, or coloured by the views of the translators. Those who deal
with the poems as the genuine works of the bards whose names they bear,
and view them as containing a recondite system of Druidism, or
semi-pagan philosophy, present us with a translation which is, to say
the least of it, mysterious enough in all conscience. Those, again, who
consider them to be the work of a later age, and to contain nothing but
a mere farrago

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

of nonsense, have no difficulty in producing a translation which amply
bears out that character.

The work of the editor must, however, precede that of the critic. An
essential preliminary is to give the text of these poems in the oldest
form in which it is to be found, and in the precise orthography of the
oldest MSS., and to present a translation which shall give as accurate
and faithful a representation of the meaning of the poems as is now
possible as the basis of the work of the critic. The object of the
present work. is to accomplish this. The contents of the four MSS., here
called the *Four Ancient Books of Wales*, are printed as accurately as
possible,--those of the first three completely, and as much of the last
as contains any of these poems. It is in these four MSS. that the oldest
known texts are to be found; and in order to secure a faithful and
impartial translation, I resolved, in order to avoid any risk of its
being coloured by my own views, to refrain from attempting the
translation myself, and to obtain it, if possible, from the most eminent
living Welsh scholars. With this view, I applied to the Reverend D.
Silvan Evans of Llanymawddwy, the author of the *English and Welsh
Dictionary* and other works, and the Reverend Robert Williams of
Rhydycroesau, author of the *Biography of Eminent Welshmen* and the
*Cornish Dictionary*, both distinguished Welsh scholars, who most kindly
acceded to my request. Mr. Evans, has translated for me the poems in the
Black Book of Caermarthen, the Book of Aneurin, and the Red Book

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

of Hergest, and accompanied them with valuable notes. Mr. Williams has
translated for me the poems in the Book of Taliessin; and I beg to
record my sense of the deep obligation under which they have laid me by
the valuable assistance thus afforded. But while these eminent scholars
an so far answerable for the translations, it is due to them to add that
they are not responsible for any opinions expressed in this work except
those contained in their own notes; and that, by permitting their names
to be connected with this work, they must not be held as sanctioning the
views entertained by myself, and to which I have given expression in the
following chapters, or in the notes I have added. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](fab003.htm#fr_0) It is remarkable that
there is no reference to readings in the *Llyfr du* in the poems which
are actually to be found there, while in six poems which are not in the
*Black Book*, the foot of the page is full of references to the *Llyfr
du* for various readings. These various readings, so far as I have been
able to judge, correspond with the Red Book of Hergest, while those
attributed to the *Llyfr coch* are not to be found there.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[11:1](fab003.htm#fr_1) In 1852, an edition of
the Gododin was published, with a translation, by J. Williams, at Ithel.
He adopts the historical view of this poem, and has given the text, such
as he had it, with much fidelity; while the translation, though somewhat
too free, is the first to give anything like a fair idea of the
original.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[18:1](fab003.htm#fr_2) The Welsh text has been
printed for some years. It was put in type as soon as the collation of
the manuscript copy of the poems with the original MSS. was completed,
and again collated in proof, and then thrown off, in order to facilitate
the work of translation. The only request made to the translators was to
make their version as literal and accurate as possible, even though the
meaning might be obscured thereby; and the care and time requisite to
prepare such a translation deliberately has delayed the appearance of
the work since then. While engaged in the preliminary investigations, I
from time to time communicated fragments of what was intended to appear
in the Introduction and Notes in occasional papers to the *Archæologia
Cambrensis*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II. The Literature of Wales Subsequent to the Twelfth
Century](fab004)
