[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab003)  [Next](fab005) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

# CHAPTER II.

### THE LITERATURE OF WALES SUBSEQUENT TO THE TWELFTH CENTURY.

PRIOR to the twelfth century there are not many poems which claim to
belong to the literature of that period, besides those attributed to
Taliessin, Aneurin, Llywarch Hen, and Myrddin. The Black Book of
Caermarthen contains a few attributed to Cuhelyn, Elaeth, and Meigant;
and the Red Book of Hergest, one to Tyssilio, son of Brochwael
Yscythrog; but the number of such poems is so small, that, if the poems
attributed to the bards of the sixth century really belong to that
period, there is an interval of several centuries, during which such a
literature either never existed or has perished, till the twelfth
century, from which period a mass of poetic literature existed in Wales,
and has been preserved to us. Of the genuine character of that poetry
there seems to be no doubt.

In order, then, to estimate rightly the place which the poems attributed
to the bards of the sixth century ought truly to occupy in the
literature of Wales, it will be necessary to form a just conception of
the character of her later literature subsequent to the twelfth century,
as well as to grasp the leading facts of her

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

history during the previous centuries in their true aspect.

In the eleventh century two events happened which seem to have had a
material influence on the literature of Wales. The one was the return of
Rhys ap Tewdwr, the true heir to the throne of South Wales, in 1077, and
the other was the landing of Gruffyd ap Cynan, the true heir to the
throne of North Wales, in 1080.

On the death of Edwal, the last of the direct line of the Welsh kings,
in 994, leaving an only son in minority; and of Meredith, Prince of
South Wales, in 994, leaving an only daughter, the government of both
provinces of Wales fell into the hands of usurpers. Cynan, who
represented the North Wales line, fled to Ireland in 1041, where he
married a daughter of the Danish king of Dublin, and after two fruitless
attempts to recover his inheritance by the assistance of the Irish, died
in Ireland, leaving a son Gruffyd. Rhys ap Tewdwr, the representative of
the South Wales line, took refuge in Armorica, whence he returned in
1077; and, laying claim to the throne of South Wales, was unanimously
elected by the people. Gruffyd ap Cynan invaded Anglesea with a body of
troops obtained in Ireland, and having been joined by Rhys ap Tewdwr,
their combined forces defeated the army of Trahaearn, then King of
Wales, their opponent, at the battle of Carno in 1080, where that prince
was slain, and Rhys ap Tewdwr and Gruffyd ap Cynan were confirmed on the
thrones of their ancestors.

The return of these two princes to Wales--the one

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

from Ireland, where he had been born and must have been familiar with
the Irish school of poetry, and the other from Armorica, where he
probably became acquainted with Armoric traditions, created a new era in
Welsh literature, and a great outburst of literary energy took place,
which in North Wales manifested itself in a very remarkable revival of
poetry, while in South Wales it took more the shape of prose literature
between 1080 and 1400, Stephens enumerates no fewer than seventy-nine
bards, many of whose works are preserved, and the Red Book of Hergest,
concludes with a body of poetry transcribed apparently by Lewis Glyn
Cothi, and attributed to bards, forty-five in number, who lived in a
period ranging from 1100 to 1450. One of the earliest of these bards was
Cynddelw, commonly called Prydydd Mawr, or the great bard. He was bard
to Madog ap Meredyth, Prince of Powis, who died in 1159, and two elegies
on his death, by Cynddelw, are contained in the Black Book of
Caermarthen. There is every reason to believe that the latter part at
least of this MS. was transcribed by him.

The influence produced upon Welsh literature by the return of Rhys ap
Tewdwr to South Wales was of a different description; and it is probably
from this period that the introduction into Wales of Armoric traditions
may be dated. The appearance of the *History of the Britons*, by
Geoffrey of Monmouth, was the first open manifestation of it. This work,
which is written in Latin, at once attained great popularity,

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

and made the fabulous history which it contained, with the romantic
tales of Uthyr Pendragon, and Arthur with his Round Table, familiar to
the whole world. There is prefixed to this history an epistle-dedicatory
to Robert, Earl of Gloucester, son of Henry I. It must therefore have
been compiled prior to his death in 1147. In this epistle he states that
Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, a man of great eloquence and learned in
foreign histories, gave him a very ancient book in the British tongue
(*quondam Britannici sermonis librum vetustissimum*), giving an account
of the Kings of Britain from Brutus to Cadwaladyr, and that he had, it
the Archdeacon's request, translated it into Latin; and he concludes his
history by committing to his contemporary, Caradoc of Llancarvan, the
history of the subsequent Kings in Wales, as he does that of the Kings
of the Saxons to William of Malmesbury and Henry of Huntingdon, whom he
advises to be silent concerning the Kings of the Britons, since they
have not the book written in the British tongue (*librum Britannici
sermonis*), which Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, brought out of Britanny
(*Britannia*), and which being a true history, he has thus taken care to
translate. William of Malmesbury's history is likewise dedicated to
Robert, Earl of Gloucester, and is brought down to the 28th year of
Henry I., or 1125, in which year it appears to have been written. Henry
of Huntingdon's history of the English is dedicated to Alexander, Bishop
of Lincoln, and the first part terminates with the death of Henry I. in
1135, in which year it

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

appears to have been written. Geoffrey must therefore have finished his
translation, if his account be true, or compiled his work, if it is
original, before these dates; but as in his epistle-dedicatory he
invites his patron to correct his work, so as to make it more polished,
it is possible that there may have been editions prior to the one
finally given forth as the completed work, which this epistle and
postscript accompanied.

That there was such a person as Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, seems now
admitted; but whether the talc of the Welsh book, brought from Britanny
and translated into Latin, is a reality or one of those fictions
occasionally prefixed to original works, is a question of very great
difficulty; and it will be necessary to inquire whether any light is
thrown upon it by the, Welsh versions termed *Brut y Brenhinoedd*, or
the History of the Kings. Two of these versions are printed in the
*Myvyrian Archæology*. The second is obviously a translation from the
Latin edition, as we now have it, to which it closely adheres, and is
there termed *Brut Geoffrey ap Arthur*. The first is said to be taken
from the Red Book of Hergest; the narrative is shorter and simpler; the
epistle-dedicatory is not prefixed to it, and it contains at the end of
it this postscript, "I, Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, did turn this book
out of Welsh (*Cymraeg*) into Latin; and in my old age I turned it a
second time out of Latin into Welsh." The editor considers this version
to be the original Welsh book brought by Walter the Archdeacon from
Britanny; and conjecturing that it belongs to in

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

earlier period, and may have been written by Tyssilio, son of Brochwael,
who is said to have written a history and to have lived in the seventh
century, he has without any authority termed it *Brut Tyssilio*. It is
the text from which the Rev. Peter Roberts translated his English
version termed *The Chronicle of the Kings of Britain, translated from
the Welsh copy attributed to Tyssilio*, and published in 1811.

Now, though the text of the so-called *Brut Tyssilio* is distinctly
stated both by the editor of the *Myvyrian Archæology* and by Roberts to
be taken from the Red Book of Hergest, no such text is to be found
there. The text of the *Brut y Brenhinoedd* in the Red Book is the same
as the second version termed *Brut G. ap Arthur*. There are two later
MSS. in the library of Jesus College, containing a text similar to that
of the *Brut Tyssilio*, and from which it was probably taken. They are
exactly alike, but the one bears to have belonged to David Powell of
Aberystwith in 1610, and is a MS. of that period, and the other to have
been written by Hugh Jones, keeper of the Ashmolean Museum, in 1695, and
seems to be a copy of it. Another copy is said to be preserved in the
library at Downing in North Wales, having this note attached to
it:--"Walter, Archdeacon of Oxford, translated this part of the
Chronicle from Latin into Welsh, and Edward Kyffin copied it for John
Trevor of Trevalin, A.D. 1577;" and a copy is likewise contained in the
*Book of Basingwerk*, the property of Thomas T. Griffith, Esq., Wrexham,
which appears to be in the

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

handwriting of Guttyn Owain and to have been written in 1461. This is
the oldest known transcript of this version of the *Brut*.

In the British Museum (MS. Cott., Cleop. B. v.) there is a copy of the
*Brut* which differs from this, but approaches more nearly to it than to
the *Brut G. ap Arthur*. It has been written about the end of the
thirteenth century, and it has the epistle-dedicatory, in which the book
given by Walter is termed *Llyvyr Cymraec*, but in the postscript it is
stated that the *Cymraec* book which Walter gave him had been translated
by him from Latin into *Cymraec*, and again by Geoffrey from *Cymraec*
into Latin. The text in the Red Book is, as I mentioned, closely allied
to Geoffrey's Latin version, but there is no epistle-dedicatory, and the
postscript here again varies from the others. It states that the book
Walter had was a Breton book (*llyfr Brvtvn*) which he translated from
Breton into Cymraeg (*o Brytanec yg Kymraec*), and which Geoffrey
translated into Latin. The only other MSS. which have been accessible to
me are those at Hengwrt. There are several copies, some complete and
some imperfect, but only one that has the postscript. It is the same
text, or nearly so, as that in the Red Book, but varies in the
postscript. It states Walter's book to have been a *Cymraec* book, which
he translated from *Cymraec* to Latin, and which Geoffrey likewise
translated from *Cymraec* to Latin, and again from Latin to *Cymraec*.

There are thus three different Welsh texts--one

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

represented by the first text in the Myvyrian Archæology, by the two
late copies in Jesus College, the Downing MS., and the Book of
Basingwerk; a second by the Cottonian MS. in the British Museum; and a
third by the second text in the Myvyrian Archæology, by the text in the
Red Book of Hergest and the Hengwrt MS.; but all differ in the account
given of the original MS. By one it is said to have been Latin, by
another Cymraec, and by a third Breton. So far we may extricate some
facts:--All the MSS. of the first text agree that it was a translation
by Walter the Archdeacon from Latin to Welsh; on the authority of the
Hengwrt MS., we may pronounce the third to be a translation into Welsh,
by Geoffrey of Monmouth, of his Latin edition; the second text probably
represents an intermediate stage of the work; all seem to imply that
Walter's book was at all events in Latin before it reached Geoffrey; but
whether the original was in, Breton, in Cymraec, or in Latin, or whether
there ever was an original, there is certainly no text, either in Welsh
or in Latin, which now represents it; and all of these texts must be
placed in the first part of the twelfth century.

The MSS. containing the Welsh versions usually have a translation into
Welsh of the history of Troy, by Dares Phrygius, prefixed to it. Those
which represent the first and second texts have a chronicle termed *Brut
y Saeson*, annexed to it, which is expressly said by the Cotton MS. to
be the work of Caradauc of Llancarvan, and gives a chronicle of events
in

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

the history of Wales, interspersed with notices of the Saxon history;
but the text in the Red Book is followed by a chronicle containing the
Welsh events only, and to which, in a later hand, the title *Brut y
Tywysogion* has been attached.

The Red Book of Hergest likewise contains the text of several prose
tales and romances connected with the early history of Wales. They are
eleven in number, and have been published, with an English translation,
by Lady Charlotte Guest, in 1849, under the title of *The Mabinogion,
from the, Llyfr Coch o Hergest, and other ancient Welsh manuscripts,
with an English translation and notes*. It is justly remarked in the
preface of this collection that "some have the character of chivalric
romances, and others bear the impress of a far higher antiquity, both as
regards the manners they depict and the style of language in which they
are composed." So greatly do these Mabinogion differ in character, that
they may be considered as forming two distinct classes; one of which
generally celebrates heroes of the Arthurian cycle, while the other
refers to persons and events of an earlier period, and it is not
difficult to assign each tale to one or other of these two classes:--

To the older class belong--

The Tale of Pwyll, Prince of Dyfed.

The Tale of Branwen, daughter of Llyr.

The Tale of Manawyddan, the son of Llyr.

The Tale of Math, son of Mathonwy.

The Contention of Llud and Llevelys. <span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

The Story of Kilhwch and Olwen.

The Dream of Rhonabwy.

To the second class belong--

The Tale of the Lady of the Fountain.

The Story of Peredur, son of Evrawc.

The Story of Geraint, son of Erbin.

The Dream of Macsen Guledig.

Though the whole of these tales have been published under the title of
Mabinogion, that name is applied in the Red Book solely to the first
four, which form, in fact, one romance. The name of Arthur only occurs
in the last two of this class, and it is in his earliest aspect. They
are probably older than the *Bruts* as the substance of the tale called
the Contention of Llud and Llevelys occurs in the earliest form of the
*Brut*, and is omitted in the later.

The tales included in the second class certainly belong to the
full-blown Arthurian Romance.

As early as the date of the Black Book of Caermarthen, some of the Welsh
traditions appear under the form of short triads, and that MS. contains
a fragment of what were probably the earliest--the Triads of the Horses.
A MS. in the Hengwrt collection, which has apparently been written as
far back as the year 1300, contains two sets of triads, one termed
*Trioedd arbenic*--Chief or excellent Triads which are religious; and.
another, called *Trioedd Arthur ac gwyr*--Triads of Arthur and his
warriors. And in the Red Book of Hergest are two sets of triads, one
called *Trioedd ynys Brydain*, or Triads of the

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Island of Britain, which contain these Triads of
Arthur, with many others; and the other an enlarged edition of the
Triads of the Horses. They are both published in the Myvyrian Archæology
(vol. ii. p. 1); and to these may be added the *Bonhed y Seint*, or
Genealogies of the Saints, which are usually found along with them.

Such is a sketch of the literature of Wales subsequent to the twelfth
century, of which we know something of the history; but a branch of its
literature still remains to be noticed which has exercised a powerful
influence upon the history of the country, the true source and history
of which, however, is wrapped in obscurity and encompassed with doubt.

One, of the editors of the Myvyrian Archæology, and a chief contributor
of its contents, was Edward Williams, of Flimstone in Glamorgan. He
maintained that there had existed at an early period, when bardism
flourished as an institution of the country, four chairs or schools of
bards, and that one of these chairs still remained--the chair of
Glamorgan--of which he was himself the bardic president, and he adopted
the bardic title of *Iolo Morganwg*. He declared that the succession of
bards and bardic presidents could be traced back to 1300; that the
traditions of bardism had been handed down by them in the chair of
Glamorgan; that Llywelyn Sion, who was bardic president in 1580, and
died in 1616, had reduced this system to writing under the title of the
"Book of bardism, or the Druidism of the Bards of the Isle of

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Britain," which he professed to have compiled
from old books in the collection of MSS. at Raglan Castle. Iolo Morganwg
published, in 1794, his *Poems, Lyric and Pastoral*, in which he gave to
the world some account of this system, and a work which he had prepared
for the press, termed *Cyfrinach Beirdd ynys Prydain*, in the Welsh
language and from the MS. of Llywelyn Sion, was published after his
death by his son in 1829. A further instalment, termed *Barddas*, was
printed, with a translation, for the Welsh, MS. Society in 1862.

Among the contributions made by him to the documents printed in the
Myvyrian Archæology, were the so-called Historical Triads (vol. ii. p. 5
7) which have been so much founded upon in writing Welsh history, and
the Triads called the Wisdom of Catoc, (vol. iii. p. 1), and the Triads
of the Bards of Britain and Institutes of the Bards of Dyfnwal Moelmud
(vol. iii. pp. 199 and 283). A volume of documents prepared by him as an
additional volume of the Myvyrian Archæology, was printed after his
death, with a translation, for the Welsh MS. Society, in 1848, termed
*The Iolo Manuscripts*.

But the most important document which issued from him, and which has
exercised the greatest influence on the popular views of Welsh
literature, was the prose tale or Mabinogi, termed *Hanes Taliessin*,
and containing the so-called personal history of that bard. A fragment
of the Welsh text was given in the first volume of the Myvyrian
Archæology; but the whole tale, with a translation, was published by Dr.
Owen Pughe,

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

in 18 33, in the *Cambrian Quarterly Magazine* (vol. v. p. 198). In his
introductory remarks he states that the compiler, Hopkin Thomas Philip,
wrote this piece about the year 1370. He lived in Morganwg or Glamorgan.
The same tale was published by Lady Charlotte Guest in 1849, in the
third volume of her Mabinogion; and she states that her copy was made up
from two fragments--the one contained in a MS. of the library of the
Welsh school in London, written in a modern hand, and dated in 1758; the
other from a MS. belonging to Iolo Morganwg. The fragment in the Welsh
school library was probably that printed in. the Myvyrian Archæology;
and the MS. belonging to Iolo Morganwg, that used by Dr. Owen Pughe, as
the latter states in his introductory remarks, "Of the narrative part
but one version exists." Iolo Morganwg himself states that the romance
entitled *Hanes Taliessin*--*i.e.* the history of Taliessin--was
"written so late at least as the fourteenth, or rather the fifteenth,
century," and that he used the expression fifteenth century in the loose
sense of the century from 1500 to 1600 is plain, as he likewise states
that Hopkin Thomas Philip flourished about 1560. This is the same Hopkin
Thomas Philip who, Dr. Owen Pughe says, wrote it about 1370; but there
is no real difference between them as to his true age, for in his
*Cambrian Biography*, published in 1803, thirty years before, Dr. Owen
Pughe, then Mr. William Owen, has the following: "Hopcin Thomas Phylip,
a poet who flourished between A.D. 1590 and 1630." At that

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

time, therefore, the compilation of the *Hanes Taliessin* was not placed
further back than the end of the sixteenth or beginning of the
seventeenth century. The prose narrative contains a number of poems
stated to have been composed by Taliessin in connection with the events
of his life, but these will be noticed when we come to deal with the
poetry attributed to that bard.

It is a peculiarity attaching to almost all of the documents which have
emanated from the chair of Glamorgan, in other words, from *Iolo
Morganwg*, that they are not to be found in any of the Welsh MSS.
contained in other collections, and that they must be accepted on his
authority alone. It is not unreasonable, therefore, to say that they
must be viewed with some suspicion, and that very careful discrimination
is required in the use of them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter III. Sources of the Early History of Wales](fab005)
