[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fab005)  [Next](fab007.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# CHAPTER IV.

### STATE OF THE COUNTRY IN THE SIXTH CENTURY, AND ITS HISTORY PRIOR TO A.D. 560.

THE State of Wales and the distribution of the Cymric population,
between the termination of the Roman dominion and the sixth century, so
far as we can gather it from these ancient authorities, does not accord
with what we should expect from the ordinary conception of the history
of that period, but contrasts in many respects strangely with it.

We are accustomed to regard the Cymric population as occupying Britain
south of the wall between the Tyne and the Solway; as exposed to the
incursions of the Picts and Scots from the country north of the wall,
and inviting the Saxons to protect them from their ravages, who in turn
take possession of the south of Britain, and drive the native population
gradually back till they are confined to the mountainous region of Wales
and to Cornwall. We should expect, therefore, to find Wales the
stronghold of the Cymry and exclusively occupied by them; the Saxons in
the centre of Britain, and the country north of the wall between the
Tyne and Solway surrendered to the barbaric tribes of the Picts and
Scots. The picture presented to us, when we call first survey the
platform

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

of these contending races; is something very different. We find the
sea-board of Wales on the west in the occupation of the *Gwyddyl* or
Gael, and the Cymry confined to the eastern part of Wales only, and
placed between them and the Saxons. A line drawn from Conway on the
north to Swansea on the south would separate the two races of the
Gwyddyl and the Cymry, on the west and on the east. In North Wales, the
Cymry possessing Powys, with the Gwyddyl in Gwynned. and Mona or
Anglesea; in South Wales, the Cymry possessing Gwent and Morganwg, with
the Gwyddyl in Dyfed; and Brecknock occupied by the mysterious Brychan
and his family.

On the other hand, from the Dee and the Humber to the Firths of Forth
and Clyde, we find the country almost entirely possessed by a Cymric
population, where ultimately a powerful Cymric kingdom was formed; but
this great spread of the Cymric population to the north not entirely
unbroken. On the north of the Solway Firth, between the Nith and
Lochryan, was Galloway with its *Galwydel*; in the centre the great
wood, afterwards forming the forests of Ettrick and Selkirk and the
district of Tweeddale, extending from the Ettrick to the range of the
Pentland Hills, and north of that range, stretching to the river Carron,
was the mysterious Manau Gododin with its *Brithwyr*. On, the east
coast, from the Tyne to the Esk, settlements of Saxons gradually
encroaching on the Cymry.

A very shrewd and sound writer, the Rev. W. Basil Jones, now Archdeacon
of York, struck with this

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

strange distribution of the population in Wales, has, in his essay,
*Vestiges of the Gael in Gwynedd*, revived a theory first suggested by
Edward Lhuyd that the Gael preceded the Cymry in the occupation of the
whole of Britain, and that these Gael in the western districts of Wales
were the remains of the original population, seen, as it were, in the
act of departing from the country before the presence of the Cymry; but,
though maintained with much ingenuity, it runs counter both to the
traditions, which indicate their presence and to the real probabilities
of the case. Till the year 360 the Roman province extended to the
northern wall which crossed the isthmus between the Forth and the Clyde,
and the Cymric population was no doubt co-extensive; but in that year
barbarian tribes broke into the province, which the Roman authors tell
us consisted of the Picts, Scots, and Saxons, and, though driven back,
renewed their incursions from time to time. The Saxons, of course, made
their descents on the east coast, and Gildas tells us that the Picts
came *ab aquilone*, the Scots *a circione*, implying that they came from
different directions; while all authorities concur in making Ireland the
head-quarters of the latter. The Saxons made their descents on the east
coast, the Picts from the north, and the Scots from the West.

Gildas tells us that the Picts finally occupied the country up to the
southern wall *pro indigenis*, and settled down in the northern regions;
and Nennius, in his account of the arrival of the Scots in Ireland, adds

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

four settlements of them *in regionibus Britanniæ*, one of which he
expressly says was in Demetia, or South Wales, and terms the people
expelled by Cunedda and his sons, Scotti. The Scots, therefore, probably
effected a settlement on the west coast of Wales, as they did on that of
Scotland; and these foreign settlements in the heart of the Cymric
population of Wales and the North seem more probably to have been
permanent deposits remaining from the frequent incursions of the
so-called barbaric tribes on the Roman province, than vestiges of an
original population.

Relieved from the erroneous chronology applied by Bode to the events
narrated by Gildas, into which he was led by the false place occupied by
the letter to Aetius, the statements of Gildas harmonise perfectly with
the facts indicated by contemporary Roman and Greek authors. The
barbaric tribes who broke into the province in 360 were driven back by
Theodosius in 368, and the province restored to the northern wall. Then
follows the usurpation of the title of Imperator by Maximus in 383, who
takes the Roman troops over to Gaul. This is succeeded by the first
*devastatio* by the Picts and Scots, when the Britons apply to the
Romans for assistance. Stilicho sends a single legion, who drive them
back and reconstruct the northern wall. Claudian records the defeat of
the barbarian tribes, which he names Picts, Scots, and Saxons, the
fortifying the wall, and the return of the legion, which was recalled in
402.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Then follows the second *devastatio* by the
Picts and Scots, and the second appeal for assistance, and a larger
force is sent, by whom they are again driven back. The Roman troops then
elect Marcus, after him Gratian Municeps, and finally Constantine, as
Imperator, who likewise passes over to Gaul with the troops in 409,
after having repaired the southern wall. Then follows the third
*devastatio* by the Picts and Scots, and Honorius writes to the cities
of Britain that they must protect themselves. The Picts settle down in
the region north of the wall, the Scots return to Ireland, soon to
reappear and again effect settlements on the western sea-board. The
Saxons are appealed to for help, but unite with the Picts to attack the
Britons, and finally bring the greater part of the country under their
subjection in 441, and the Britons vainly appeal to Aetius for
assistance in 446.

Such is a rapid sketch of the events which brought about the destruction
of the Roman province, when the statements of Gildas are brought into
harmony with those of the classical writers, and which produced the
relative position of the different races presented to us soon after the
final departure of the Romans.

Passing over the legends connected with Gortigern, as involving an
inquiry into his real period and history, which has no direct bearing
upon our immediate object, and would lead us beyond the, limits of this
sketch, the first event that emerges from the darkness which surrounds
the British history at this period, and which influenced the relative
position

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

of the different races constituting its population, is the appearance of
Cunedda, his retreat from the north, and the expulsion of the Gael from
Wales by his descendants. We are told in the *Historia Britonum* that
the Scots who occupied Dyfed and the neighbouring districts of Gower and
Cedgueli "expulsi sunt a Cuneda et a filiis ejus;" and in the
*Genealogia* that "Maelcunus Magnus rex apud Brittones regnabat, id est,
in regione Guenedote, quia atavus illias, id est, Cunedag, cum filiis
suis, quorum numerus octo erat, venerat prius de parte sinistrali, id
est, de regione que vocatur Manau Guotodin, centum quadraginta sex annis
antequam Mailcun regnaret, et Scottos cum ingentissima clade expulerunt
ab istis regionibus." As Mailcun was the first king to reign in Gwynedd
after the Scots were driven out, and he was fourth in descent from
Cunedda, it is clear that the expression, that they were expelled "a
Cuneda cum filiis ejus," is used somewhat loosely, and that the actual
expulsion must have been effected by his descendants. In point of fact,
we know from other documents that the real agent in the expulsion of the
Scots from Gwynedd was Caswallawn Law Hir, the great-grandson of Cunedda
and father of Mailcun. If four generations existed between Cunedda and
Mailcun, this interval is well enough expressed by a period of 146
years; but an unfortunate date in the Chronicle of 977 has perplexed the
chronology of this period, and led to Cunedda being placed earlier than
is necessary. The Chronicle has, under the year 547, "Mortalitas

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

magna in qua pausat Mailcun rex Guenedote;" and if Mailcun died in 547,
a period of 146 years from the beginning of his reign would take us back
to the fourth century, and place Cunedda towards the end of it; but we
know from Gildas that Mailcun did not die in 547, as he was alive and
rapidly rising to power when Gildas wrote in 560, and the date in the
chronicle seems to be a purely artificial date, produced by adding the
period 146 years to the beginning of the century. Gildas mentions that
Maglocunus or Mailcun had, some time previously, retired into a
monastery, from whence he emerged not long before he wrote, and this is
probably the true commencement of his reign. A period of 146 years prior
to 560 brings us to 414; and some years before that must be considered
the true era of the exodus of Cunedda, with his sons, from Manau
Guotodin. It thus coincides very closely with the period of the
occupation of territory between the walls by the Picts on the final
withdrawal of the Roman troops in 409.

Cunedda is termed in all Welsh documents *Guledig*, a name derived from
the word *Gulad*, a country, and signifying Ruler. The same term is
applied to Maximus, who is called in Welsh documents, *Maxim Guledig*.
It is therefore equivalent to the title and position of Imperator
conferred upon him by the troops in Britain. After Maximus, and before
the Roman troops left Britain, they elected three Imperatores, the last
of whom, Constantine, withdrew the army to Gaul. We know from the
*Notitia Imperii* 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

that the Roman legionary troops were mainly stationed at the Roman wall
and on the Saxon shore, to defend the province from inroads of the
barbarian tribes; and when the Roman army was finally withdrawn, and
Honorius wrote to the cities of Britain that they must defend
themselves, the Roman troops were probably replaced by native bodies of
warriors, and the functions of the Roman Imperator continued in the
British *Guledig*. If this view be correct, the real fact conveyed by
Nennius' intimation, that Cunedda had left the regions in the north
called Manau Guotodin 146 years before the reign of Mailcun, is that in
410, on the Picts conquering the land up to the southern wall, the
Guledig had withdrawn from the northern to within the southern wall. In
the Welsh documents there is also frequent mention of the *Gosgordd* or
retinue in connection with the *Guledig*, which appears to have usually
consisted of 300 horse. It was certainly a body of men specially
employed in the defence of the borders, as the Triads of Arthur and his
warriors--a document not subject to the same suspicion as the Historical
Triads--mentions the "three *Gosgordds* of the passes of the island of
Britain," and the *Gosgordd mur* or Gosgordd of the wall, is also
mentioned in the poems. It seems to be equivalent to the body of 300
cavalry attached to the Roman legion; three times that number, or 900
horse, forming the horse of the auxiliary troops attached to a legion.

The next *Guledig* mentioned is the notice by Gildas, in a part of his
narrative that indicates a time

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

somewhat later, that the Britons took arms "duce Ambrosio Auerliano," a
man of Roman descent. whose relations had borne the purple. The term
"Aurelianus" is Gildas' equivalent for *Guledig*, as he afterwards
mentions Aurelius Conanus, and both are known in Welsh documents by the
names of *Emmrys Guledig* and *Cynan Guledig*; and Ambrosius must have
been connected by descent with prior "Imperatores" created by the Roman
troops. Gildas then adds that after this "nunc cives, nunc hostes,
vincebant usque ad annum, obsessionis Badonici montis", and the date of
this event is fixed by the chronicle attached to Nennius, which places
it in the year 516, in which year Gildas was born.

The period between the success of Ambrosius and the siege of Badon Hill
is filled up in the *Historia Britonum* with the account of twelve
battles fought by Arthur, of which that of Badon Hill is the last. In
the oldest form of the text he is simply termed Arthur, and the title
only of "dux bellorum" is given him. It says, "Tunc Arthur pugnabat
contra illos (*i.e.* Saxones), in illis diebus cum regibus Britannorum,
sed ipse dux erat bellorum." He was not "dux" or "rex Britannorum," but
"dux bellorum," a title which plainly indicates the *Guledig*. That he
bears here a very different character from the Arthur of romance is
plain enough. That the latter was entirely a fictitious person is
difficult to believe. There is always some substratum of truth on which
the wildest legends are

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

based, though it may be so disguised and perverted as hardly to be
recognised; and I do not hesitate to receive the Arthur of Nennius as
the historic Arthur, the events recorded of him being not only
consistent with the history of the period, but connected with localities
which can be identified, and with most of which his name is still
associated. That the events here recorded of him are not mentioned in
the Saxon Chronicle and other Saxon authorities, is capable of
explanation. These authorities record the struggle between the Britons
and the Saxons south of the Humber; but there were settlements of Saxons
in the north even at that early period, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) and it is with these settlements that the
war narrated in the *Historia Britonum* apparently took place.

The *Historia Britonum* records among the various bodies of Saxons who
followed Hengist to Britain one led by his son Octa and his nephew
Ebissa, to whom he promises "regiones que sunt in aquilone juxta murum
qui vocatur Gual"--the name given by Nennius to the northern wall. They
arrive with forty ships, and after ravaging the Orkneys and
circumnavigating the Picts, they occupy "regiones plurimas usque ad
confinia Pictorum." The Harleian MS. inserts; the words "ultra
Frenessicum Mare," to which the Durham MSS. add, "quod inter nos
Scotosque est," to show that the,

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Firth of Forth is meant. That they may have had
settlements beyond the Firth is very probable, but the regions next the
wall, as far as the confines of the Picts, can mean nothing but the
districts lying between the Forth and Clyde, through which the northern
wall passes, as far as the river Forth, which formed at all times the
southern boundary of the kingdom of the Picts. These regions are nearly
equivalent to the modern counties of Stirling and Dumbarton. All Welsh
traditions connected with this war invariably designate Octa and Ebissa,
or Eossa as they termed him, and their successors, as Arthur's
opponents, and we shall see that the localities of his twelve battles,
as recorded by Nennius, are all more or less connected with the
districts in the vicinity of the northern wall.

The first battle was "in ostium fluminis quod dicitur Glein." There are
two rivers of this name--one in Northumberland, mentioned by Bode as the
river where Paulinus baptized the Angles in 627, and the other in
Ayrshire. It rises in the mountains which separate that county from
Lanarkshire, and falls into the Irvine in the parish of Loudoun. It is
more probable that Arthur advanced into Scotland on the west, where he
would pass through the friendly country peopled by the Cymry, than
through Bernicia, already strongly occupied by bodies of Angles; and it
is at the mouth of the latter river, probably, that he first encountered
his opponents. It accords better, too, with the order of his battles,
for the second, third,

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

fourth, and fifth, were "super aliud flumen quod dicitur Dubglas et est
in regione Linnuis." Here must have been the first severe struggle, as
four battles were fought on the same river, and here he must have
penetrated the "regiones juxta murum," occupied by the Saxons. Dubglas
is the name now called Douglas. There are many rivers and rivulets of
this name in Scotland; but none could be said to be "in regione
Linnuis," except two rivers--the Upper and Lower Douglas, which fall
into Loch Lomond, the one through Glen Douglas, the other at Inveruglas,
and care both in the district of the Lennox, the Linnuis of Nennius.
Here, no doubt, the great struggle took place, and the hill called Ben
Arthur at the head of Loch Long, which towers over this district between
the two rivers, perpetuates the name of Arthur in connection with it.

The sixth battle was "super flumen quod vocatur Bassas." <span
id="fr_7"></span>[1](#fn_7.md) There is now no river of this name in
Scotland, and it has been supposed to have been somewhere near the Bass
Rock, the vicinity of which it is presumed may have given its name to
some neighbouring stream. The name Bass, however, is also applied to a
peculiar mound having the appearance of being artificial, which is
formed near a river, though really formed by natural causes. There is
one on the Ury river in Aberdeenshire termed the Bass of Inverury, and
there are two on the bank of the Carron, now called Dunipace,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

erroneously supposed to be formed from the Gaelic and Latin words *Duni
pacis*, or hills of peace, but the old form of which was *Dunipais*, the
latter syllable being no doubt the same word Bass. Directly opposite,
the river Bonny flows into the Carron, and on this river I am disposed
to place the sixth battle.

The seventh battle was "in silva Caledonis, id est, Cat Coit
Celidon"--that is, the battle was so called, for *Cat* means a battle,
and *Coed Celyddon* the Wood of Celyddon. This is the Nemus Caledonis
that Merlin is said, in the Latin *Vita Merlini*, to have fled to after
the battle of Ardderyth, and where, according to the tradition reported
by Fordun (B. iii. c. xxvi.), he met Kentigern, and afterwards was slain
by the shepherds of Meldredus, a regulus of the country on the banks of
the Tweed, "prope oppidum Dunmeller." Local tradition places the scene
of it in Tweeddale, where, in the parish of Drumelzier, anciently
Dunmeller, in which the name of Meldredus is preserved, is shown the
grave of Merlin. The upper part of the valley of the Tweed was once a
great forest, of which the forests of Selkirk and Ettrick formed a part,
and seems to have been known by the name of the *Coed Celyddon*.

The eighth battle was "in Castello Guinnion." The word *castellum*
implies a Roman fort, and *Guinnion* is in Welsh an adjective formed
from *gwen*, white. The Harleian MS. adds that Arthur carried into
battle upon his shoulders an image of the Virgin Mary, and that the
Pagani were put to flight and a great slaughter made of them by virtue
of the Lord Jesus Christ and of Saint

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Mary his mother. Henry of Huntingdon, who
likewise gives this account, says the image was upon his shield; and it
has been well remarked that the Welsh *ysgwyd* is a shoulder and
*ysgwydd* a shield, and that a Welsh original had been differently
translated. Another MS. adds that he likewise took into battle a cross
he had brought from Jerusalem, and that the fragments are still
preserved at Wedale. Wedale is a district watered by the rivers Gala and
Heriot, corresponding to the modern parish of Stow, anciently called the
Stow in Wedale. The name Wedale means "The dale of woe," and that name
having been given by the Saxons implies that they had experienced a
great disaster here. The church of Stow being dedicated to St. Mary,
while General Roy places a Roman castellum not far from it, indicates
very plainly that this was the scene of the battle.

The ninth battle was "in urbe Leogis" according to the Vatican,
"Legionis" according to the Harleian text. The former adds "qui
Britannice Kairlium dicitur." It seems unlikely that a battle could have
been fought at this time with the Saxons at either Caerleon on the Esk
or Caerleon on the Dee, which is Chester; and these towns Nennius terms
in his list not Kaerlium or Kaerlion, but Kaer Legion. It is more
probably some town in the north, and the *Memorabilia* of Nennius will
afford some indication of the town intended. The first of his
*Memorabilia* is "Stagnum Lumonoy," or Loch Lomond, and he adds "non
vadit ex eo ad mare nisi unum flumen quod vocatur Leum"--that is the
Leven. The Irish Nennius gives the name

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

correctly *Leamhuin*, and the Ballimote text gives the name of the town,
*Cathraig in Leomhan* (for *Leamhan*), the town on the Leven. This was
Dumbarton, and the identification is confirmed by the *Bruts*, which
place one of Arthur's battles at Alclyd, while his name has been
preserved in a parliamentary record of David II. in 1367, which
denominates Dumbarton "Castrum Arthuri."

The tenth battle was "in littore fluminis quod vocatur Treuruit." There
is much variety in the readings of this name, other MSS. reading it
"Trath truiroit," or the shore of Truiroit; but the original Cymric form
is given us in two of the poems in the *Black Book*: it is in one
*Trywruid*, and in the other *Tratheu Trywruid*. There is no known river
bearing a name approaching to this. *Tratheu*, or shores, implies a
sea-shore or sandy beach, and can only be applicable to a river having
an estuary. An old description of Scotland, written in 1165 by one
familiar with Welsh names, says that the river which divides the "regna
Anglorum et Scottorum et currit juxta oppidum de Strivelin" was
"Scottice vocata *Froch*, Britannice *Werid*." <span
id="fr_8"></span>[1](#fn_8.md) This Welsh name for the Forth at Stirling
has disappeared, but it closely resembles the last Part of Nennius'
name, and the difference between *wruid*, the last part of the name

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Try-wruid, and Werid is trifling. The original
form must have been Gwruid or Gwerid, the G disappearing in combination.
If by the *traetheu Try-wruid* the Links of Forth are meant, and
Stirling was the scene of this battle, the name of Arthur is also
connected with it by tradition, for William of Worcester, in his
*Itinerary*, says "Rex Arthurus custodiebat le round table in castro de
Styrlyng aliter Snowdon West Castle."

The eleventh battle was fought "in monte qui dicitur Agned,"--that is in
*Mynyd Agned*, or Edinburgh, and here too the name is preserved in
*Sedes Arthuri* or Arthur's Seat. This battle seems not to have been
fought against the Saxons, for one MS. adds "Cathregonnum," and another
"contra illos que nos Catlibregyon appellamus." They were probably
Picts.

The twelfth battle was "in Monte Badonis." This is evidently the
"obsessio Montes Badonici" of Gildas, and was fought in 516. It has been
supposed to have been near Bath, but the resemblance of names seems
alone to have led to this tradition. Tradition, equally points to the
northern Saxons as the opponents, and in Ossa Cyllellaur, who is always
named as Arthur's antagonist, there is no doubt that a leader of Octa
and Ebissa's Saxons is intended; while at this date no conflict between
the Britons and the West Saxons could have taken place so far west as
Bath. The scene of the battle near Bath was said to be on the Avon,
which Layamon mentions as flowing past Badon Hill. But on the Avon, not
far from Linlithgow, is a very remarkable hill, of considerable size,
the top of which is strongly fortified with double ramparts, and

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

past which the Avon flows. This hill is called Bouden Hill. Sibbald
says, in his *Account of Linlithgowshire in* 1710:--"On the Buden hill
are to be seen the vestiges of an outer and inner camp. There is a great
cairn of stones upon Lochcote hills over against Buden, and in the
adjacent ground there have been found chests of stones with bones in
them, but it is uncertain when or with whom the fight was." As this
battle was the last of twelve which seem to have formed one series of
campaigns, I venture to identify Bouden Hill with the Mons Badonicus.

According to the view I have taken of the site of these battles,
Arthur's course was first to advance through the Cymric country, on the
west, till he came to the Glen where he encountered his opponents. He
then invades the regions about the wall, occupied by the Saxons in the
Lennox, where he defeats them in four battles. He advances along the
Strath of the Carron as far as Dunipace, where, on the Bonny, his fifth
battle is fought; and from thence marches south through Tweeddale, or
the Wood of Celyddon, fighting a battle by the way, till he comes to the
valley of the Gala, or Wedale, where be defeats the Saxons of the east
coast. He then proceeds to master four great fortresses: first,
*Kaerlium*, or Dumbarton; next, Stirling, by defeating the enemy in the
*tratheu Tryweryd*, or Carse of Stirling; then *Mynyd Agned*, or
Edinburgh, the great stronghold of the Picts, here called *Cathbregion*;
and, lastly, Boudon Hill, in the centre of the country, between these
strongholds.

The Bruts probably relate a fact, in which there is

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

a basis of real history, when they state that he gave the districts he
had wrested from the Saxons to three brothers--Urien, Llew, and Arawn.
To Urien he gave Reged, and the district intended by this name appears
from a previous passage, where Arthur is said to have driven the Picts
from Alclyde into "Mureif, a country which is otherwise termed *Reged*,"
and that they took refuge there in Loch Lomond. Loch Lomond was
therefore in it, and it must have been the district on the north side of
the Roman wall or *Mur*, from which it was called *Mureif*. To Llew he
gave Lodoncis or Lothian. This district was partly occupied by the Picts
whom Arthur had subdued at the battle of *Mynyd Agned*; and this is the
Lothus of the Scotch traditions, who was called King of the Picts, and
whose daughter was the mother of Kentigern. And to Arawn he gave a
district which they call *Yscotlont* or *Prydyn*, and which was probably
the most northern parts of the conquered districts, at least as far as
Stirling.

In 537, twenty-one years after, the Chronicle of 977 records, "Gweith
Camlan in qua Arthur et Medraut coruere;" the battle of Camlan, in which
Arthur and Medraut perished. This is the celebrated battle of Camlan,
which figures so largely in the Arthurian romance, where Arthur was said
to have been mortally wounded and carried to Avallon, that mysterious
place; but here he is, simply recorded as having been killed in battle.
It, is surprising that historians should have endeavoured to place this
battle in the south, as the same traditions, which encircle it

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

with so many fables, indicate very clearly who his antagonists were.
Medraut or Modred was the son of that Llew to whom Arthur is said to
have given Lothian, and who, as Lothus, King of the Picts, is invariably
connected with that part of Scotland. His forces were Saxons, Picts, and
Scots, the very races Arthur is said to have conquered in his Scotch
campaigns. If it is to be viewed as a real battle at all, it assumes the
appearance of an insurrection of the population of these conquered
districts, under Medraut, the son of that Llew to whom one of them was
given, and we must look for its site there. On the south bank of the
Carron, in the very heart of these districts, are remains which have
always been regarded as those of an important Roman town, and to this,
the name of Camelon has long been attached. It has stronger claims than
any other to be regarded as the Camlan where Arthur encountered Medraut,
with his Picts, Scots, and Saxons, and perished; and its claims are
strengthened by the former existence of another ancient building on the
opposite side of the river--that singular monument, mentioned as far
back as 1293 by the name of "Furnus Arthuri," and subsequently known by
that of Arthur's O'on.

In thus endeavouring to identify the localities of these events
connected with the names of Cunedda and of Arthur, I do not mean to say
that it is all to be accepted as literal history, but as a legendary
account of events which had assumed that shape as early as the seventh
century, when the text of the *Historia Britonum* was first put
together, and which are commemorated in local tradition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[51:1](fab006.htm#fr_6.md) I may refer the reader on
this subject to my paper on the "Early Frisian Settlements in Scotland,"
printed in the *Proceedings of the Society of Antiquaries* (vol. iv. p.
169). For the struggle in the south, the reader cannot do better than
refer to Dr. Guest's very able papers in the *Archæological Journal*.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[53:1](fab006.htm#fr_7.md) The printed text of the
Vatican MS. of Nennius has "Lussas," but this is a mistake. The original
MS. reads "Bassas."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[56:1](fab006.htm#fr_8.md) *Chronicle of the Picts
and Scots*, p. 136.--It may seem strange that I should assert that Gwryd
and Forth are the same word. But *Gwer* in Welsh is represented by
*Fear* in Irish, the old form of which was *For*, and final *d* in Welsh
is in Irish *ch*, in Pictish *th*. The river which falls into the Dee
near Bala, in North Wales, is called the Try-weryn, a very similar
combination.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. State of Britain in A.D. 560 When Gildas Wrote, and
Kings of the Line of Dyfi](fab007.md)
