[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](fab007)  [Next](fab009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# CHAPTER VI.

### MANAU GODODIN AND THE PICTS.

THE name of Manau was applied by the Welsh to the Isle of Man. Thus, in
Nennius, "tres magnas insulas habet, quarum una vergit contra Armoricas
et vocatur Inisgueith; secunda sita est in umbilico maris inter
Hiberniam et Britanniam et vocatur nomen ejus Eubonia, id est, Manau."
Thus the Latin form was Eubonia, the Cymric, Manau; but it appears from
Nennius that this name of Manau was also applied to a district in North
Britain, when he says that Cunedda with his sons "venerat prius de parte
sinistrali, id est, de regione que vocatur Manau Guotodin."

The Irish name for the Isle of Man is Manand or Manann; and it appears
from the Irish Annals that a district on the north was likewise known by
that name, as they record in 711 a slaughter of the Picts by the Saxons
*in Campo Manand*, or the Plain of Manann, as distinguished from the
island. It is, of course, difficult to discriminate between the two
places, and to ascertain whether an event recorded is taking place in
Manau or Manann belongs to the island or the district. Events which
really belong to the one are often attributed to the other; and the fact
that there existed a district

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

bearing this name, having become comparatively forgotten, has led to the
presumption in almost every case that the events recorded in connection
with the word Manau or Manann belong to the island. It may help us to
discriminate between. the two to refer to the legendary matter, both
Irish and Welsh, connected with this name of Manau or Manann.

From Manau in Welsh is formed the word Manawyd, and from Manawyd the
personal name Manawydan. From Manann in Irish is formed the personal
name Manannan. Manawydan in Welsh and Manannan in Irish are synonymous
terms. In a curious tract in the Irish MS., termed the Yellow Book of
Lecan, is the following account of the different persons bearing the
name of Manannan:--

There were four Manannans in it. It was not in the same time they were.

Manandan mac Alloit, a Druid of the Tuath De Danann, and in the time of
the Tuath De Danann was he. Oirbsen, so indeed, was his proper name. It
is he, that Manannan, who was in Arann, and it is of him it is called
Eamain Abhlach. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) And it was he that
was killed in the battle of Cuilleann by Uilleann Abradhruadh, son of
Caithir, son of Nuadad of the silver hand, in defending the sovereignty
of Connaught. And when his grave was dug, it was there sprang forth Loch

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Oirbsen over the land, so that from him (is
named) Loch Oirbsen. This was the first Manannan.

Manannan mac Cirp, king of the Isles and of Manann, in the time of
Conaire, son of Edersecoil, was he. And it was he made the espousal of
Tuaide, daughter of Conall Collamracli, the foster child of Conaire, and
from him is named Tuagh Inbhir.

Manannan mac Lir, *i.e.* a celebrated merchant was he between Erin, and
Alban, and Manann, and a Druid was he also, and he was the best
navigator that was frequenting Erin, and it was he used to know through
science, by observing the sky, the period that the calm or the storm
should continue, and of him the one Manannan nominabatur et ideo Scoti
et Britones eum dominum maris vocaverunt et inde filium maris esse
dixerunt ut deum et ideo adorabatur a gentibus ut deum quia transformat
se in multis formis per gentilitatem.

Manandan mac Atgnai was the fourth Manannan. He it was that came to
avenge the children of Uisnech, and it was he that had sustained the
children of Usnech in Alban, and they had conquered what was from Manann
northwards of Alban, and it was they that drove out the three sons of
Gnathal, son of Morgann--viz. Iathach, and Tuathach, and Mani
Lamhgarbh--from these lands, for it was their father that had dominion
of that country, and it was the children of Usnech that killed
him--(*Yellow Book of Lecan*, Trin. Coll. Dub. H. 2. 16.)

An account of Manannan mac Llyr is found almost in the same words in
Cormac's Glossary, and by other Irish traditions he is made the same
person with Manannan mac Alloid, as in the following stanza in an old
Irish poem.:--

Manannan, son of Lir, from the Lake,  
  Fought many battles:  
Oirbsen was his name; after hundreds  
  Of victories, of death he died.

Both of them belong to the mythic people termed in Irish traditions,
Tuatha De Danann. The second

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

people who are said to have colonised Ireland, according to the oldest
traditions, which seem to have furnished the account in Nennius, were
the Nemedians or children of Nemeid. They were driven out of Ireland by
the pirates called the *Fomoire*. They left in three bodies, commanded
by the three grandsons of Nemeid. Simon Breac, son of Starn, son of
Nemeid, went to Thrace with his band, and from him descended the
Firbolg; Jobaath, son of Jarbhainel, son of Nemeid, went to the north of
Europe, and from him descended the Tuatha De Danann; and Briotan Maol,
the son of Fergus Leithdearg, son of Nemeid, went to Dovar and Iardovar
in Alban, and dwelt there with his posterity; and this colony is
mentioned in the Albanic Duan, where the Nemedians are said to have been
the second people in Alban. The third colony in Ireland were the
Firbolg, and the fourth the Tuatha De Danann, who came from the north of
Europe to Alban, and remained seven years in Dovar and Iardovar, whence
they went to Ireland. There they found the Firbolg and drove them out, a
part of whom, according to Irish tradition, passed over into Manann, Ili
or Isla, Recra, and other islands. The Irish Nennius mentions this
occupation of Manann and other islands by the Firbolg; and it is
obviously the same event which is stated in the Latin Nennius as one of
the four settlements of Scots in Britain, "Builc autem cum suis tenuit
Euboniam insulam et alias circiter."

The only other Irish traditionary notices of

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Manann are that Cormac Ulfata, a king of
Ireland, said to have reigned in the third century, was so named from
having banished the *Uladh*, or Picts of Ulster, from Ireland, and
driven them to Manann; and that an ancient Irish tract in the Book of
Ballimote mentions Scal balbh *Ri Cruithentuaith acus Manaind*--that is,
king of Pictland in Alban and of Manann.

According to Welsh traditions, Manawydan was the son of a British king
called Llyr Lediaith. It is hardly possible to doubt the identity of the
Manannan mac Llir of the Irish legends, and Manawydan ap Llyr of the
Welsh, and the epithet Lediaith indicates that he was not of a people
speaking a pure Cymric dialect. There are three very significant words
which are applied in Welsh to indicate the mutual relation of languages.
These are--*Cyfiaith*, where two tribes have a common speech;
*Lediaith*, or half-speech, where is a certain amount of deviation or
dialectic difference; and *Anghyfiaith*, the opposite of *Cyfiaith*,
where the languages are considered as foreign to each other; and the
epithet of *Llediaith* indicates that Llyr belonged to a race who spoke
a peculiar dialect of Cymric. One of the kings in the list of shadowy
monarchs of Britain contained in the Bruts is Llyr. He is the King Lear
of Shakespeare, and the father of Gonorylla, Ragan, and Cordeylla; but
Creidylad, who is the same as Cordeylla, is by other traditions the
daughter of Llud Law Ereint. There seems, therefore, to have been the
same juggle between the names Llyr and Llud in the Welsh legends as
between Lir and Alloit in the Irish.

Cunedda is said in the *Genealogia* to have gone

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

with his sons from a *regio* in the north called Manau Guotodin, and in
the Welsh genealogies attached to Nennius his eldest son Typipaun is
said to have died "in regione que vocatur Manau Guodotin."

According to the *Bonhed y Saint* there were three holy families of
Britain. The second was the family of Cunedda. The third was that of
Brychan. He is said to have been the son of Anllech or Aullech, a
Gwyddelian, who married Marchell, daughter of Tewdwr, king of
Garthmadrin, the region afterwards known by the name of Brecknock which
took its name from Brychan, and to have had twenty-four sons and as many
daughters. It has been supposed that there were more persons than one of
the name, and the families of different Brychans have been combined by
tradition in one; but be this as it may, some of the sons are connected
with Manau and several of the daughters with the Men of the North. Thus
Rhun Dremrudd and Rhawin, two of the sons, are said to have been slain
by the Saxons and Picts, and to have founded churches in Manau. Another
son, Arthen, was buried in Manau, and Rhun had a son Nevydd, who is said
to have been a bishop in *y Gogledd*, where he was slain by the Saxons
and Picts. Of the daughters, Nefyn was the wife of Cynvarch, and mother
of Urien; Gwawr was the, wife of Eledyr Lydanwyn, and mother of Llywarch
Hen; Lleian was the wife of Gafran, and mother of Aeddan; Nefydd was the
wife of Tudwal, and a saint at Llech Celyddon in the north; Gwrgon
Goddeu was the wife of Cadrod Calchvynydd, and Gwen was the wife of Llyr
Merini, and mother of

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Caradawc. These were all of the *Gwyr y
Gogledd*, or Men of the North, and Corth or Cymorth, another daughter,
was wife of Brynach Wyddel, the father of Daronwy, and one of the
Gwyddel of Gwynedd. In the *Cognatio de Brachan*, in the Cotton Library
(Vesp. A. xiv.), the sepulchre of Brychan is said to be "in insula que
vocata Enysbrachan que est juxta Manniam."

Lastly, we have in a poem, which is not in either of the Four Books, but
is placed by Stephens in the tenth century, mention of the *Brithwyr du
o Fanaw*, or Black Brithwyr from Manau.

That these notices of Manau or Manann in the Irish and Welsh legends do
not all apply to the same place seems plain enough, and it remains to
find a clue to disentangle them. That the second of the four Manannans
belongs to the island, and the fourth to the region in Alban, seems
obvious. The first and third, whether they are to be viewed as the same
or different Manannans, equally belong to the legend of the Tuatha De
Danann; and as they occupied a district in Alban, it is probable that
they are associated with both island and region. The Manann colonised by
the Firbolg was certainly the island; on the other hand, Cunedda came
from the region in the north, and the family of Brychan, whose sons were
slain in Manau by the Picts and Saxons, and whose daughters married Men
of the North, also belongs to the region in the North.

The clue seems to be that the island was associated with the name of the
Scots, and the region with that of the Picts. Nennius includes the
settlement of "Builc

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

cum suis," or of the Firbolg, in Man and other islands, among the
colonies of the Scots in Britain; and Orosius, who wrote in the fifth
century, says that "Mevania insula a Scotorum gentibus habitatur." On
the other hand, the Picts seem peculiarly connected with the region of
Manau in the north. Cormac drove Picts of Ulster to Manann, and it is
connected with the kingdom of *Cruithentuath*, or Pictland in Alban.
Nennius calls the people whom Arthur defeated at Mynyd Agned, or
Edinburgh, *Cath Bregion*, and the *Brithwyr* are frequently mentioned
in the poems. The words which form the root of these epithets are,
*Brith*, forming in the feminine *Braith*, Diversicolor, Maculosus, and
*Brych*--the equivalent in Cymric of the Gaelic *Breac*--Macula. Both
refer to the name Picti, or painted; and Agned or Mynyd Agned probably
comes from an obsolete word, *agneaw*, to paint, *agneaid*, painted. It
is singular enough that in the pedigree of Cunedda, given in the Welsh
genealogies as 977, it is deduced from a certain *Brith*guein, grandson
of Aballec, son of Amelach, son of Beli Mawr, and the name of Brychan
obviously comes from *Brych*.

The history of this region, so far as we can trace it, will likewise
show the connection of these painted men, or Picts, with it. The first
event that seems founded on some historic truth is the battle fought at
Mynyd Agned, by which the people called the Cath Bregion were defeated,
and the establishment of Llew as ruler over Lothian. He is the Lothus of
the legends of Saint Kentigern, and is said to have been buried near
Dunpender Law, in East Lothian. His

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

daughter Thenew, the mother of Kentigern, after an attempt to put her to
death, in one legend on Dunpender, in another on Kepduff, now Kilduff,
is cast adrift in a boat from Aberlady Bay.

Some of the localities connected with this district also emerge in the
legends of Saint Monenna or Darerca of Killsleibeculean, in Ulster, who
is recorded by Tighernac as dying in the year 518. There are three lives
of St. Monenna, but they do not differ much in the leading incidents of
her life. She was born in Ireland, and associated eight virgins with
her, and, according to all of the lives, a widow (una vidua), with her
son Lugar. In Scotland, she founded, according to one life, a church in
Galloway, called Chilnacase; according to another life, three churches
in Galloway; and the following churches on the summits of several
mountains in Scotland, in honour of St. Michael: one "in cacumine montis
qui appellatur Dundevenel;" another "in monte Dunbretan;" a third "in
Castello quod dicitur Strevelin;" a fourth "in Dunedene que Anglica
lingua dicitur Edineburg," where she left five virgins; and a fifth on
the "Mons Dunpeledur." The first was on Dundonald in Ayrshire, near the
mouth of the Irvine, into which the Glen flows, where Arthur's first
battle was fought; and the three next were on the three fortified rocks
of Dumbarton, Stirling, and Edinburgh, where Arthur fought three of his
battles; while Dunpeledur, on which she founded another, is associated
with Llew or Lothus, on whom Arthur bestowed the territory of Lothian.
As Arthur was pre-eminently a Christian

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

hero fighting against pagan Saxons and apostate Picts, these foundations
appear to synchronise with the re-establishment of the Christian church
there; and as one of Monenna's churches was on Dunpender Law, it seems
not improbable that Thenew, the mother of Kentigern, was, in point of
fact, one of the virgins in that church. Kentigern must have been born
about 518, which synchronises with the date of Monenna's death; and one
of her virgins, called Tannat, is said in one of the lives to have died
three days after her. Monenna's church was in that part of Ulster called
Dalaraidhe, and peopled by the Irish Picts; and her foundations in
Scotland being in Galloway and in the regions near Edinburgh, show that
her mission mainly was to the Picts of Galloway and of Manann.

The connection between the Picts of Ulster and the Picts of Manann,
obscurely shadowed forth in the legendary expulsion of the Ultonians to
Manann, by Cormac, king of Ireland, in the third century, appears to
have existed at this time. An old notice, in some of the Irish MSS.
states that Baedan, son of Cairill, king of Ulster, "cleared Manann of
Galls or strangers, so that the sovereignty belonged to the Ultonians
thenceforth, and the second year after his death the Gael abandoned
Manann." <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12) Baedan died, according to
Tighernac, in 581. In 577, he records, "primum periculum *Ulad an
Eaman*;" and, in 578, "abreversio Ulad do Umania." The Annals of Ulster
give these names as Eufania and Eumania. It has

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

been supposed that Eamania or Eaman, the old capital of Ulster, is
meant; but the expression "abreversio" could hardly be used with
reference to a place within Ulster, and the Irish annalists were not
likely to pervert the name of a place so celebrated as that of Eamania.
These names Eumania and Eufania are more probably attempts to express
the Latin name Eubonia, and to refer to Manann, and to the expedition by
which Baedan cleared it of Galls. Two years after his death the Gael are
said to have left it; and, in 583, Tighernac records the battle of
Manann by Aedan mac Gabran, king of Dalriada, which likewise appears in
the old Welsh chronicle in 584 as "Bellum contra Euboniam." It was
therefore a battle fought between Aedan and the people of Manann.

The next event recorded in connection with Manann is the war between
Penda with the aid of the Britons, and Oswy, in which the former was
overthrown and slain, and the latter extended his dominion over the
Britons, and wrested from the Picts a part of their "Provincia." Bode
tells us that in a year which he does not specify, but which must have
been after the year 653, Oswy was exposed to the fierce and intolerable
eruptions of Penda, king of the Mercians, and promised to give him more
and greater royal ornaments than can be imagined to purchase peace,
provided the king would return home and cease to ravage and destroy the
provinces of his kingdom; but that Penda refused to grant his request,
and resolved to destroy and extirpate all his nation. Whereupon Oswy
attacked him with a small army, though he had thirty legions led on by
most skilful

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

commanders, the Pagans were defeated and. slain, the thirty royal
commanders were almost all of them killed; and he adds, "The battle was
fought near the river Winwaed." The same transaction is narrated by the
author of the *Genealogia*, but it is obvious that he is making use of
two separate accounts; for the second paragraph narrates what must have
preceded the conclusion of the first, and in the one the king of Mercia
is called Pantha, and in the other Penda. By this account, the thirty
commanders were kings of the Britons, who go with Pantha on an
expedition as far as the city of *Iudeu* (usque in urbem quo vocatur
Iudeu), and Oswy gave to Penda all the wealth that he had in the city,
even into Manau (reddidit divitias cum eo in urbe, usque in Manau,
Pendæ), and Penda gave it to the British kings, and this was called
*Atbret Iudeu*--the ransom of Iudeu. Oswy then attacked Penda, and slew
the thirty kings, Catgabail alone escaping, and this was the "Strages
Gai Campi." The one is the Anglic account, the other is the Cymric. By
the latter, Oswy bought off the attack upon the city of Iudeu, and the
city itself, and the battle which followed must have been in or near
Manau. The two accounts are not inconsistent, except in so far as Bede
says that Penda refused the redemption-money, while the Welsh account
says he took it and gave it to the British kings. Both agree that he was
attacked, and the thirty commanders slain. Bede does not say where this
happened, except that the battle was near the river Winwaed. The Welsh
account says it was in the north, and is corroborated both by Florence
of Worcester, who

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

says that Penda invaded Bernicia, and by Tighernac, who says that he was
accompanied by thirty kings. Bede does not expressly say that Penda was
slain in that battle, but in the next section he adds that Oswy brought
the war to a conclusion by his slaughter, "in regione Loidis," on the
15th November in the thirteenth year of his reign, which represents in
Bede the year 655; and the Chronicle of 977 implies that the two events
were not the same, for it has in 656 "Strages Gai Campi," and in the
following year, 657, "Pantha occisio."

This defeat was followed by the subjugation of the greater part of the
Picts, who had probably aided Penda and Cadwalla, and not only Manau and
Galwethia, or Galloway, became subject to Oswy, but a part of the
"provincia Pictorum" on the north of the Firth of Forth. This subjection
lasted for nearly thirty years, till the defeat of Ecfrid at Dunnichen
in 686 enabled the Picts to regain that part of their provincia which
had been wrested from them. Manau and Galloway seem, however, to have
been considered still part of the Anglic kingdom, and their Pictish
population subject to them, as we find the Angles establishing a
Bishopric in Galloway after 686, and the Picts of Manann or Manau
obviously rebelling against them. In 698 Tighernac records a "battle
between the Saxons and the Picts, in which the son of Bernith, who was
called Brechtraig, was slain," and the Saxon Chronicle mentions the same
transaction under the year 699,--"In this year the Picts slew Beorht,
the alderman." He was probably their Saxon governor. In 711, Tighernac
also records "the slaughter of the

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Picts on the plain of Manann (in campo Manand)
by the Saxons, where Findgaine, the son of Deleroith, perished by
immature death;" and the Saxon Chronicle thus records the same event in
710,--"In the same year the alderman Beorhtfrith fought against the
Picts between Haefe and Caere." Florence of Worcester says that
"Berhfrid, the prefect of King Osred, fought against and overcame the
Picts." Here again, Beorhtfrith appears as the Saxon Governor under the
king of Northumberland, and the name of the leader of the Picts is also
given as Findgaine, son of Deleroith. In the year 716, Osred, king of
Northumberland, was slain; and in recording this event, the Annals of
Ulster add that Garnat, son of Deleroith, obviously of the same Pictish
family of Manann, died. In 729 a great battle was fought between the
army of Angus, king of the Picts, and the host of Nechtain; and the
annalist adds, that the "exactatores" of Nechtain fell--viz. Biceot son
of Moneit, and his son, and Finguine son of Drostan, Ferot son of
Finguine, and many others. This word "exactatores," or rather
"exactores," was a word expressive of a Saxon officer, and was the Latin
equivalent of "Gerefa," and the names show the connection of these
leaders with the Picts of Manann, with whom the name of Finguine was
especially connected.

We have no further notice of Manann. It owes its separate existence, and
its loose connection with the Anglic kingdom, to its inhabitants
possessing a community of race with the powerful kingdom of the Picts
north of the Forth; and after the termination of that kingdom, when the
name of Pict was merged in

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

that of Scot, it too disappears as possessing any separate position from
the other inhabitants of Lothian.

It has been necessary to be thus minute in giving these notices of Manau
or Manann as its history as a separate region in North Britain has, in
fact, to be reconstructed, and it will enable us now better to determine
its precise situation and extent.

When the notices of the slaughter of the Picts in 710 by the Irish
annalists and the Saxon historians are compared, they give us the
situation of the "Campus Manann"--a battle fought on it was "between
Haefe and Caere." It is impossible here to mistake the rivers Avon and
Carron, which flow within some miles of each other; and the Avon rises
in a moor called now Slamannan, and of old Slamannan Moor. This name is,
in fact, *Sliabhmannan*, the moor or plain of Manann. *Mynyd Agned*, or
Edinburgh, was in it, where the population of the region about it was
called *Catbregion*. The Dovar and Iardovar of the Irish legends formed
the whole or part of it. Bede tells us that of the two firths of the
sea, one of which runs in far and broad into the land of Britain from
the Eastern Ocean and the other from the Western, though they do not
reach, so as to touch one another, the Eastern has in the midst of it
the city *Giudi* (orientalis habet in medio sui urbem Giudi), the
Western has on it, that is, on the right hand thereof, the city
Alcluith, which in their language signifies the "rock Cluith," for it is
close by the river of that name. Bede's city of *Giudi* is the same as
Nennius' urbs *Iudeu*, the, G falling away in Welsh in combination, and
in an old tract in the Book

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

of Lecan ascribed to Angus the Culdee, who lived in the ninth century,
Cuilennros or Culross is said to be between the *Sliabhnochel*, or range
of the Ochils, and *Muir-n-Giudan*, or the Sea of Giudan (Reeves'
*Culdees*, p. 124), and we learn from Simeon of Durham that the see of
Lindisfarne, which marks the actual possessions of the Angles, extended
to the river Esk, beyond which they only possessed settlements.

Manau or Manann, therefore, in its widest sense included Slamannan, and
the western frontier proceeded in a line from thence to the Pentland
Hills, so as to take in the great moor formerly called Cal*dover* Moor,
consisting of what is now the three parishes of West, Mid, and East
Calder, and thus included that mountainous region forming the west part
of Linlithgowshire, embracing the parishes of Torphichen, Bathgate, and
Whitburn. It probably also included that part of the range of the
Pentland Hills called of old Pentland Moor, till it came down upon the
North Esk, which formed its eastern boundary to the sea. On the
northwest there lay between it and the Carron the district of Calatria
or *Calathros*, containing on the coast the parishes of Kinnell and
Carriden, while from Carriden to the Esk the coast would belong to
Manann. At the point now called the Queensferry, it approaches within a
short distance of the opposite coast, and the name of Clackmannan on the
northern shore indicates that that district likewise belonged to it. On
some one of the islands in the Firth which lie between the mouth of the
Esk and Carriden was the City of Giudi or Iudeu, which may have been
founded by

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the people Bede terms the Jutes, while the fortified rock of Mynyd Agned
or Dunedin was the great stronghold of its Pictish inhabitants.

Lying as this region did in the intermediate part of the country where
the kingdoms of the Picts in the north, the Angles in the east, and the
Cymry in the west, approached each other, and the Pictish, Anglic, and
Cymric populations met, it could not but have had a mixed population. We
see that an early colony of Saxons bad obtained settlements in this part
of the country. Arthur fought several of his battles against them within
its limits; and the king of Ulster cleared Manand of *Galls*. Here also
dwelt the Picts of Lothian, known under the names of *Brithwyr* and of
*Catbregion*. The former name comes from *Brith*, which in its primary
sense means speckled or spotted; but in its secondary sense mixed, and
may indicate a mixed people. Bregion comes from *Brych* or *Breac*, and
this word crops up here and there over the district. Falkirk was in
Gaelic, *Eglais Breac*, and in Saxon, *Fahkirk*, the spotted or brindled
church; *Mynyd Agned*, the Painted Mount; while Caldovar Moss is bounded
on the west by the river Brych. When Medrawd, the son of Llew, rebelled
against Arthur, it was with a mixed army of Picts, Saxons, and Britons.

From this region Cunedda went with his sons, and gave a royal house to
the throne of Wales in the person of Maelgwn and his descendants. When
this house failed in the person of Cynan Tyndathwy, there is every
reason to believe that the same region gave a

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

second royal house to Wales, in the person of Mervyn *Frych*, and that
he came from the region of Manau, and not from the island. His epithet
of *Brych* points to this. He was the son of Gwriad, who married Nest,
daughter of Cadell Deyrnllug, Prince of Powys, and *Gwriad* is the same
name as the Pictish *Ferat*. His pedigree is deduced from Dwywc, a son
of Llywarch Hen, and Llywarch Hen was one of the Men of the North, and
his mother was a daughter of Brychan. Mervyn is said in the Cyvoesi to
be *o dir Manau*, from the region of Manau, and not *o ynys Manau*, from
the island of Manau. This derivation of the kings of the house of Mervyn
Frych explains a passage in a tract contained in the text of the Irish
Nennius, preserved in the Book of Ballemote, but which is not to be
found elsewhere. After stating the first departure of the Romans, this
text proceeds to say that Sarran then assumed the sovereignty of
Britain, and established his power over the Saxons and Picts. That his
eldest son was Luirig, and that Mucertach mac Erca having taken his
wife, she bore him four sons, two of whom were Constantine and Gaidel
Ficht, from whom descended the provincial kings of Britain and the kings
of Cornwall. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) This legend seems to
apply to Manann, and if the house of Mervyn Frych sprang from its mixed
population, we can understand in what sense the kings of Wales and
Cornwall were said to be descended from Gaidel Ficht. Mervyn Frych
married Essyllt, the daughter of Cynan, the last king of the house of
Maelgwn Gwynedd, and inherited Powys

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

through his mother, and acquired Gwynedd through his wife. His death is
recorded in 844, so that he died in the very year that the kingdom of
the Scots superseded that of the Picts, when all the old landmarks of
the North British districts were changed, and the memory of Manau
Gododin, as a region in the north distinct from the island of Manau,
passed away for ever. Mervyn Frych was succeeded by his son Rodri Mawr,
who acquired South Wales through his wife, and thus became king of all
Wales. He divided Wales into three petty kingdoms among his three
sons--Anaraut, Cadell, and Mervyn--the eldest, Anaraut, obtaining
Gwynedd, with Aberfraw in Anglesea as his capital; Cadell, South Wales,
with Dynevor for his capital; and Mervyn, Powis, with Mathraval for his
capital; and the king of Gwynedd was to be supreme over the other two.
He was succeeded by his eldest son Anarawd, who died in 913, and he by
his son Edwal foel, after which Howel dda, son of Cadell, king of South
Wales, obtained the dominion of the whole of Wales, from 940 to his.
death in 948. After his death a struggle commenced between the
descendants of Edwal foel and of Howel dda for supremacy in Wales till
the year 1000, when the sovereignty was usurped by Aeddan ap Blegwred,
and a period of confusion ensued both in North and South Wales, during
which Cynan, the rightful heir of North Wales, took refuge in Ireland,
and Rhys, the rightful heir of South Wales, in Armorica, and which was
only terminated when Rhys ap Tewdwr succeeded in establishing himself in
South Wales, in the year 1077,

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

and Gruffudh, the son of Cynan, in North Wales, in 1080.

The kingdom of South Wales soon came to an end, in consequence of
Jestin, the Lord of Glamorgan, having called in the assistance of Robert
Fitzhamon, a Norman knight. Rhys ap, Tewdwr was defeated in battle and
slain by him in 1090, and, according to the Brut y Tywysogion, "then
fell the kingdom of the Britons," and Robert Fitzhamon, with his Norman
knights, took possession of Glamorgan, and "the French came into Dyned
and Ceredigion, which they have still retained, and fortified the
castles, and seized upon all the land of the Britons." This was true of
South Wales only, as in North Wales the native princes still ruled till
the year 1282, when the death of Llywelyn, the last prince of North
Wales, was followed by the subjugation of all Wales by King Edward the
First.

Rhys ap Tewdwr had an only daughter, Nest, who had a son by King Henry
the First, Robert, Earl of Gloucester. By marriage with the daughter of
Robert Fitzhamon, he succeeded to all his possessions in South Wales;
and, as the son of Nest, the only daughter of Rhys, was regarded by the
Welsh as representing in some degree the princes of South Wales. He died
in the year 1147.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[78:1](fab008.htm#fr_11) The island of Arran in
the Firth of Clyde, here called Eamhain Ablach, or Eamania of the Apple
Trees. Eamain is said in Cormac's Glossary to be derived from Eomain,
and that from *Eo* i. *rind*, or breast-pin, and *Muin* i. *braige*, or
neck. This word Muin is represented in Welsh by Mynyw, as St. David's is
called in Irish Cillemuine, in Welsh, Mynyw. I conjecture, therefore,
that Arran being called Eamain is the Insula Minau or Mynyw mentioned in
the life of Gildas.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[86:1](fab008.htm#fr_12) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, p. 127.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[94:1](fab008.htm#fr_13) *Chron. Picts and
Scots*, p. 54.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Races of Britain and the Place of the Picts
Among Them](fab009)
