[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md)  [Legends &
Sagas](../../index)  [Celtic](../index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](fab006)  [Next](fab008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

# CHAPTER V.

### STATE OF BRITAIN IN A.D. 560 WHEN GILDAS WROTE, AND KINGS OF THE LINE OF *DYFI*.

GILDAS, in his epistle, written probably from Armorica, draws a dark
picture of the state of Britain. The colours may be overcharged and the
lines deepened; but, exaggerated though it may be by a Christian zeal,
which may have driven him from the country, his language, if there is
any reality in it at all, implies a great departure from the Christian
faith, and a deep corruption of manners. The expressions which he
employs regarding the state of the princes of Wales are but an echo of
what is used by other writers regarding the more northern Cymry. In the
oldest life of Saint Kentigern, Llew, or Lothus as he is there called,
whose daughter was his mother, is described as "vir semipaganus;" and
Joceline, who used older documents, calls him "secta paganissimi," and
describes the infant church, which had been founded shortly before at
Glasgow by Kentigern, as being oppressed by "quidam tyrannus vocabulo
Morken," that he "viri Dei vitam atque doctrinam sprevit atque
despexit," and that after his death his "Cognati" obliged him to take
refuge in Wales, where, under Caswallawn law Hir, the father of Maelgun,
Kentigern founded the monastery

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of Llanelwy, or St. Asaph's. He also says of the Picts, "Picti vero
prius per Sanctum Ninianum ex magna parte; postea per Sanctos
Kentegernum et Columbam fidem susceperunt; dein in apostasiam lapsi,
iterum per predicationem Sancti Kentegerni, non solum Picti, sed et
Scoti, et populi innumeri in diversis finibus Britanniæ constituti, ad
fidem conversi vel in fide confirmati sunt." There is here indicated a
wide-spread apostasy from the Christian church founded by Ninian, which
drove Kentigern from Glasgow, and which, on his return from Wales, he
was mainly instrumental in healing. His expulsion from Glasgow must have
taken place between 540 and 560, as he was a considerable time in Wales
and returned in 573. It therefore closely followed the battle of Camlan.
Arthur was pre-eminently a Christian leader. The legends connected with
the battle in which he carried the image of Saint Mary on his shield,
and the cross he obtained from Jerusalem, indicate this. Medraut was the
son of that "vir semipaganus" Llew or Loth, and his insurrection with
his Pictish and Saxon allies seems like the outburst of a Pagan party.
The arrival in 547, no long time after, of Ida, the Anglic king, and the
consolidation of the Saxon settlements on the eastern sea-board of the
north into the Anglic kingdom of Bernicia, stretching first from the
southern wall to the Tweed, with Bainborough for its capital, and
pushing its way north until it eventually reached the Firth of Forth,
must have strengthened the increasing Paganism, both by the direct
subjugation

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

of British and Pictish population by a Pagan king, but also by the
insensible influence of the vicinity of a Pagan power. A struggle seems
to have taken place between the Christian and Pagan elements in the
country, in which the latter at first prevailed, but which terminated in
the triumph of the Christian party, and the consolidation of the various
petty states into regular kingdoms under its leaders.

Gildas, in his Epistle, addresses five kings by name, and of those he
sufficiently indicates the locality of three. The first is Constantine,
whom he terms "The tyrannical whelp of the unclean lioness of Damnonia"
(immundæ leænæ Damnoniæ tyrannicus catulus), and who must have reigned
in Devon and Cornwall. The second is Aurelius Conanus, whom he addresses
as "Thou lion's whelp" (Catule leonine). His title of Aurelius is
equivalent to *Guledig*. The third was Vortipore, whom he calls "Thou
foolish tyrant of the Demetians" (tyrannus Demetarum), and who must have
ruled over Dyfed and the regions in South Wales rescued from the Scots
by Cunedda and his sons. The fourth was Cuneglase, whom he, addresses as
"Thou bear, thou rider and ruler of many, and guider of the chariot
which is the receptacle of the bear" (urse multorum sessor aurigaque
currus receptaculi ursi); and the fifth was Maglocunus, whom he calls
"Thou dragon of the island" (insularis draco). This was Maelgun, who, we
learn from the *Genealogia*, ruled in Gwynedd, and was called the Island
Dragon, from Mona or Anglesea, from which his father Caswallawn law Hir
had expelled the Gwyddyl.

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

\[paragraph continues\] The two kings, whose possessions are not
indicated, probably possessed the two eastern kingdoms of Powys and
Gwent, and Conan, the former, as the genealogies attached to Nennius
call Brochwail Powys, who fought in 613, son of Cynan or Conanus.

It is plain, from the language of Gildas, that Maglocunus was one who
swayed between Christianity and Paganism, and was rapidly rising into
power over the other kings. He describes, him as having "deprived many
tyrants as well of their kingdoms is of their lives," as "exceeding many
in power," and "strong in arms," and that the King of kings had made
him, as well. in kingdom as in stature of body, higher than almost all
the other chiefs of Britain. He also describes him as in the beginning
of his youth oppressing with sword, spear, and fire, the king his uncle;
then repenting "and vowing himself before God a monk," and taking refuge
"in the cells where saints repose;" and then being seduced by a crafty
wolf out of the fold, and returning to evil, slaying his brother's son
and marrying his widow; and he concludes by an urgent appeal to him
again to repent and be converted.

There is a curious legend preserved in the old Welsh Laws. It is as
follows:--

After the taking of the crown and sceptre of London from the nation of
the Cymry, and their expulsion from Lloegyr, they instituted an inquiry
to see who of them should be supreme king. The place they appointed was
on Traeth Maelgwn at Aber Dyvi, and thereto came the men of Gwynedd, the
men of Powys, the men of South Wales, of Reinwg, Morganwg, and of
Scissyllwg. And there Maeldav the elder, son of Unhwch Unachen, chief of

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Moel Esgidion in Meirionydd, placed a chair
composed of waxed wings under Maelgwn, so when the tide flowed no one
was able to remain excepting Maelgwn because of his chair. And by that
means Maelgwn became supreme king, with Aberfraw for his principal
court, and the Jarll Mathraval, and the Jarll Dinevwr, and the Jarll
Kaer Llion, subject to him, and his word paramount over all, and his law
paramount, and he not bound to observe their law. (P. 412)

The Dyvi or Dovey flows into the sea in Cardigan Bay, and terminates in
an estuary which divides North from South Wales. On the north shore of
the estuary rise the hills of Merioneth. On the south shore is an
extensive and dreary moss, extending to the Cardigan hills in the
background, and interspersed with a few green knolls rising here and
there. Between this moss and the estuary is a flat sandy beach, left dry
far into the estuary at low water. The moss is called *Corsfochno*, the
sandy shore *Traeth Maelgwn*; and here some transaction took place--some
struggle hidden under the disguise of this fable--by which Maelgwn made
himself supreme over the other three kings of Wales. This struggle, I
take it, was the *Gwaeth Corsfochno*, or the affair of Corsfochno, of
the Bards.

But the true field of the contest between the Christian and semi-pagan
chiefs was further north, where the great struggle for the mastery took
place not long after. The chronicle of 977 records, in 573, "Bellum
Armterid." About nine miles north of Carlisle, on the western bank of
the river Esk, are two small rising grounds or knolls, called the Knows
of Arthuret, and still further north is a ravine, in which a stream

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

called the Carwinelow falls into the Esk. On the north side of that
stream the ground rises till it reaches an elevation terminating
abruptly in a cliff which overhangs the river Liddel, and on the summit
of this cliff is a magnificent native stronghold, with enormous earthen
ramparts, now called the Moat of Liddel.

Arthuret is the *Roddwyd Ardderyd*, or Pass of Ardderyd, forming the
great western pass leading from the Roman wall into Scotland. Carwinelow
is Caer Wendolew, or the city of Gwenddolew, so called from the adjacent
stronghold; and here, in 573, was fought the great battle of
Ardderyd, <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) between Gwenddolew, whose
name is surrounded by bardic tradition with every type and symbol of a
semi-pagan cult, and on the other side three leading chiefs, who each
became the founder of a kingdom--Maelgwn Gwynedd, Rydderch Hael, and
Aedan, son of Gafran, called Fradawg, or the treacherous. The importance
of this battle may be inferred from the part it plays in bardic
tradition, from the exaggeration with which it is attended when 80,000
Cymry are said to have been engaged in it, and, historically, from the
results which followed. Rydderch Hael established himself in Alclyde, or
Dumbarton, as the first monarch of the kingdom of Cambria, or
Strathclyde, embracing all the petty Cymric states from the Derwent to
the Firth of Clyde, and recalled Kentigern from Wales to resume his
ecclesiastical

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

primacy over that region, as Bishop of Glasgow and Aedan was solemnly
inaugurated king of Dalriada by St. Columba in the island of Iona. <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_10.md)

The establishment of these kingdoms seems to have terminated the
functions of the *Guledig*, and more thoroughly separated the north, or
*Y Gogled*, from Wales, or *Cymru*--Rydderch Hael being now the monarch
of the one, and Maelgwn Gwynedd of the other; but when we read in Bode
of Aedan, the petty king of the small Scottish state of Dalriada,
invading the kingdom of Bernicia in 603 at the head of an immense and
mighty army, it is difficult to avoid the suspicion that he was for the
time the Dux Bellorum, or *Guledig*, in the north, and had ranged under
him the whole Celtic force of the country. Maelgwn, however, by this
time must have been dead, the latest date assigned by any writer for the
termination of his reign being 586. According to the Bruts he did not
transmit his kingdom to his son, and the subsequent history, as given by
Welsh authorities, is as follows:--Maelgwn was succeeded in the
sovereignty of Britain by Caredig, and in Gwynedd, or North Wales, by
Iago, son of Beli, his great-grandson. Under Caredig, the Cymry were
finally driven by the Saxons across the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Severn, and confined to Cornwall and Wales. Ingo
was slain in 603 by Cadavael, and was succeeded in North Wales by his
son Cadvan, who joined Brochwel, Prince of Powis, and defeated
Ethelfirth, king of Bernicia, on the banks of the Dee, in the year 607.
Edwin, the son of Ella, had taken refuge with Cadvan, and was brought up
along with his son Cadwallawn, who succeeded his father in the same year
that Edwin obtained the throne--that is in 617. Cadwallawn was, after
two years, expelled from his throne by Edwin, who defeated him in a
great battle, and driven to Ireland; but after some years he obtained
assistance from Salomon, king of Armorica, returned to Britain, and
encountered Penda, king of Mercia, whom he defeated and took prisoner,
but, having afterwards united with him, they jointly attacked Edwin, and
defeated and slew him. During the reign of Oswald, Cadwallawn joined
Penda in the war against him, which resulted in Oswald's defeat and
death. He likewise took part in the war with his successor Oswy, when
Penda was slain in 657, and died after a reign of forty-two years. This
brings us to the year 659. Cadwaladyr succeeded him, and reigned twelve
years, when the plague broke out in Britain, before which he fled to
Armorica. The plague lasted eleven years, and these two periods bring us
to the year 682. Cadwaladyr applies to Alan, king of Armorica, who sends
his son Ivor, and his nephew Ynyr, with a large force, who carry on the
war against the Saxons for twenty-eight years, while Cadwaladyr himself
goes to Rome, where

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

he dies. The date of his death is variously given in the Bruts as 12th
May 687, 12th May 688, and 12th day before the kalends of May 689. It is
necessary to give this narrative simply as we find it in the Bruts,
without attempting to adjust it to the true history, as has been done in
later authorities. The *Brut y Brenhinoed* terminates with the death of
Cadwaladyr. The *Brut y Tywysogion* states that Ivor carried on the war
for fifty-eight years, and was succeeded in 720 by Rodri Molwynog, son
of Idwal Iwrch, son of Cadwaladyr.

This narrative will not stand the test of a comparison with older
authorities, and the attempts to bring them more into harmony have not
been very successful. The connecting links are of course the battles,
which are likewise recorded by Bede. The first battle, or that fought
with Brochwel on the banks of the Dee, is mentioned by Bede without the
date being given, but both the Chronicle of 977 and the Irish Annals of
Tighernac agree in assigning it to the year 613. It is plain, however,
from Bede's narrative, that the Britons were not the victors, but were
defeated, and the death of Iago, son of Beli., is placed by both
chronicles in the same year. The Welsh Chronicle records in 616 the
death of Ceretic, so that it is probable that a king of that name did
succeed Maelgwn in the sovereignty over all Wales. In the following year
the Chronicle records, "Etguin incipit regnare," which likewise
indicates the year of Cadwallawn's accession, who thus appears to have
succeeded Ceretig in the sovereignty

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

of Britain, while his father Cadvan had succeeded Iago in 613 in the
kingdom of Gwynedd, and his not having possessed the sovereignty of all
Wales will account for his not being mentioned in the Chronicle. The
Welsh Chronicle records, in 629, "Obsessio Catguollauni regis in insula
Glannauc," which may indicate the war between him and Edwyn.

Bede narrates that, after a reign of seventeen years, Cadwalla, king of
the Britons, rebelled against Edwin, being supported by Penda, a most
warlike man of the royal race of the Mercians, and that a great battle
was fought in the plain called Haethfelth, when Edwin was killed, on the
12th October 633, and all his army either slain or dispersed. This
battle is called by Nennius "Bellum Meicen," in which he says Edwin and
his sons were slain "ab exercitu Catguollauni regis Gwenedote regionis;"
and the Welsh Chronicle records, in 630, "Gueith Meiceren et ibi
interfectus est Etguin cum duobus filiis suis. Catguollaun autum victor
fuit." Tighernac places it in 631, and says that Edwin was slain "a Chon
rege Britonum et Panta Saxano."

Bede tells us that a great slaughter was made of the church or nation of
the Northumbrians, and that Cadwalla ravaged the whole country for a
long time. The kingdom of Deira had devolved upon Osric, son of Edwin's
uncle Elfric, and the kingdom of Bernicia upon Eanfred, the son of
Ethelfrid, who had, during Edwin's life, lived in banishment among the
Picts or Scots, but Cadwalla slew them both. Osric the next

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

summer, and Eanfred after Cadwalla had ruled over Northumberland for an
entire year. Bede then tells us that after the death of his brother
Eanfred, Oswald advanced with an army, small indeed in number, but
strengthened by the faith of Christ, and that the "impious commander of
the Britons" (infandus Britonum dux) was slain, though he had most
numerous forces, at a place called Denises-burn near the Roman wall.

It has been assumed that this "infandus Britonum dux" was the same
Cadwalla who had defeated Edwin, and that the Bruts misrepresent his
history in continuing his reign through those of Oswald and Oswy when he
was in reality slain in 634; but it is remarkable that while Bede names
Cadwalla on every occasion when he has to record his previous acts, he
does not do so here, but says simply that the "dux Britonum" was slain.
Nennius calls this battle "Bellum Catscaul"--that is *Cad ys guaul*, the
battle at the wall, and says the commander slain was "Catgublaun, rex
Gwenedote regionis," while he calls Cadwalla, *Catguollaun*; and
Tighernac still further varies the name, for in 632 he records a battle
by *Cathlon*, "in quo Oswalt mac Etalfraith victor erat et Cathlon rex
Britonum cecedit;" while he had named Cadwalla *Chon* in the previous
year. There seems, therefore, some indication that the Cadwalla who
defeated and slew Edwin, and the "dux Britonum" who was slain by Oswald,
were different persons, and the probability is that the two
kings--Cadvan king of Gwynedd, and Cadwallon

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

king of Wales--reigned during some years together, that their real names
approached each nearly in sound, and that it was Cadvan, the father, who
was slain in 634, while the Bruts are in this instance not unworthy of
credit in representing the reign of Cadwallawn, the son, as lasting many
years longer. There is every reason to believe that he continued in
successful hostility to the Angles at least as long as the war with
Penda lasted, and the remark of Bede that the occupation of Northumbria
by Cadwallawn was looked upon as so unhappy and hateful, that it had
been agreed by all who have written about the reigns of kings to
interdict the memory of those perfidious monarchs and to assign that
year to the reign of the following king, Oswald, shows that there was a
strong desire to suppress as much as possible the acts of Cadwallawn. It
is therefore not unlikely that Cadwallawn assisted Penda in the war when
Oswald was slain, and in the war between Oswy and Penda, in 655, when
Penda was eventually slain. It is stated by Bede that Penda had thirty
legions with him, led on by thirty commanders who had come to his
assistance. Tighernac, in narrating the same event, calls them *reges*,
and Nennius says that the "reges Britonum interfecti sunt, qui exierant,
cum rege Pantha in expeditione," but that "solus autem Catgabail rex
Guenedote regionis cum exercitu evasit de nocte consurgens." That the
Britons largely assisted in this war is therefore plain, and by
Catgabail here probably Cadwallawn is meant. His death four years after,
in 659, as stated by the

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Bruts, seems to me, therefore, quite in
accordance with probability.

No such view, however, can be taken of the two subsequent reigns. In
them, as stated by the Bruts, there are the obvious marks of
fabrication. Cadwaladyr goes to Rome, where he dies on the 12th day
before the kalends of May 689. Ceadwealla, king of the West Saxons--a
Saxon by birth and descent--likewise goes to Rome, where he dies on the
20th of April 689; and the actions of Ivor, Cadwaladyr's successor on
the throne of Wales, precisely correspond with those of Ina,
Ceadwealla's successor on the throne of Wessex. There are, therefore,
the obvious signs of artificial construction here, and the process seems
to have been this:--The plague or pestilence before which Cadwaladyr is
said to have fled to Armorica really took place, as we learn from Bede
and Tighernac, in 664, and it did not last for eleven, but for only one
year; and Nennius states explicitly that Cadwaladyr died in it. "Dum
ipse (Osguid) regnabat venit mortalitas hominum, Catgualart regnante
apud Britones post patrem suum *et in ea periit.*" As Osguid or Oswy
died in 670, there can be no doubt that the plague in 664 is meant; but
in the Chronicle of 977, it is advanced nearly twenty years, and there
we read, in 682--"Mortalitas magna fuit in Britannia in qua Catgualart
filius Catguollaun obiit." When this chronicle is woven into still later
chronicles, instead of "in qua Catgualart filius Catguollaun obiit," we
read, pro qua Catwaladir filius

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Catwallaun in Minorem Britanniam aufugit;" and
Geoffrey of Monmouth adds the pilgrimage to Rome, and his death there.

The steps are plain enough. First., the plague and the death of
Cadwaladyr in it, advanced from 664 to 682; and secondly, the death
denied, and Cadwaladyr said to have retired to Armorica; and thirdly,
the incident which really terminated the life of Ceadwealla of Wessex
adopted and applied to that of Cadwaladyr.

The motives which led to this fabrication are probably the same with
those which led to the consensus of English historians to suppress the
acts of Cadwalla. Cadwallawn was evidently a powerful king and had
waged, in conjunction with Penda, a successful war against the Angles of
Northumbria. For one year he had actually been in possession of the
kingdom, and his successful career of upwards of twenty years must have
raised the courage and the hopes of the, Cymry to the highest. Then came
the disaster of 655, when Oswy crushed the combination against him, when
Penda and most of his British auxiliaries were slain, and Cadwallawn
only escaped with his life, and died four years after. The result of
this victory was that Oswy brought the Britons into subjection under
him--a subjection which continued during his reign and that of his
successor Ecfrid, till the latter was slain in the battle of Dunnichen
in 686, and as, in the case of Northumbria, the year of Cadwalla's
occupation was added to the reign of Oswald, so the twenty years

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

of this subjection was added, to the reign of Cadwaladyr. The fact that
he had died in the pestilence was not altered, but the date of it was
advanced from 664 to 682; and, subsequently, the death was denied, and
he was said to have retired to Armorica, whence the Cymry looked for him
to return and re-establish the supremacy over the Angles lost by the
disaster of 655. When the battle of Dunnichen terminated this
subjection, Bede records that, "Nonulla pars Britonum"--some but not
all--recovered their liberty, and this part was the kingdom of the
northern Britons of Cumbria, for the Chronicle of 977 records no king of
Wales between the death of Cadwaladyr in 664 and that of Rodri in 754,
when it has the entry, "Rotri rex Britonum moritur," but during that
period records the deaths of the kings of Strathclyde. In 722, "Beli
filius Elfin moritur;" and, in 750, "Teudubr filius Beli moritur." This
interval was filled up by the fictitious reign of Ivor the events of
which were taken from those of Ina, the successor of Ceadwealla.

Rotri, or, as he is usually termed, Rodri Molwynog, was the first real
king of Wales after the death of Cadwaladyr; and when the Chronicle of
977 records, in 722, "Bellum Hehil apud Cornuenses; Gueith Gartmailauc;
Cat Pencon apud dextrales Brittones et Brittones victores fuerunt in
istis tribus bellis," it probably narrates the successes which led to
the termination of the subjection of the Britons to the Saxons, and the
reestablishment of the Welsh kingdom in the person of Rodri. He died in
754, and was succeeded by his son

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Conan or Cynan Tindaethwy, whose death is
recorded by the Welsh Chronicle in 816, "Cinan rex moritur," in whom the
direct line of Cadwaladyr failed, and the marriage of his only daughter
placed a new family on the throne.

Her husband was Morvyn Frych, king of Manau; or, as he is designated in
the Cyvoesi, *o dir Manan*, from the land of Manau.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[66:1](fab007.htm#fr_9.md) For these
identifications, see notice of the site of the battle of Ardderyd,
*Proc. Ant. Soct*. vol. vi. p. 91.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[67:1](fab007.htm#fr_10.md) I cannot help
suspecting that the advantages held, out by the ecclesiastics were the
main cause of uniting these Celtic leaders against the paganism of the
country. Columba certainly made Aedan the first independent king of
Dalriada, Kentigern was closely leagued with Rydderch, and the Maeldav
of the Welsh Laws was probably an ecclesiastic who had undertaken to
make Maelgwn supreme king of Wales by some stratagem cloaked under the
fable of the floating chair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VI. Manau Gododin and the Picts](fab008.md)
