[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vrb06)  [Next](vrb08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vampire Ritual Book*, © by Michelle Belanger, \[2003\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage. Material can be reproduced for personal use on an
individual basis in private spellbooks, books of shadows, and the like.
Reproduction for distribution in any media or format is not allowed. To
reprint material that appears in this book in a book, magazine, or
website, please contact the author at the official House Kheperu
website. For more information, consult www.kheperu.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter Five:

### Personal Rites

** **

These are rites that I perform that have a special significance for me. 
I am presenting these to give you a feel for what ritual can be like on
a private and solitary level.  I personally find these rites very useful
and fulfilling, so you are welcome to try them out for yourself,
tweaking the wording a little bit if need be, to see how they work for
you.

     As you have probably learned from the introduction to this little
book of rituals, rites and rituals are intensely personal things, and no
single ritual can be written that will work for every person in every
situation.  Often, even writing a ritual for a group is a delicate
balance of each person’s preferences from that group.  Some people are
very internal with their ritual: they don’t like to do a whole lot of
ritual activity.  Chants and dancing seem a little hokey to them, and
they feel awkward reciting memorized prayers.  Other people are very
hands-on with their rituals, and the real power of a rite for them is in
the performance of ritual actions, drawing the circle with a sword, for
example, or sharing cakes and wine among the group.

     As you learn more about private and group ritual, you will find
that there is no way you can satisfy everyone with one version of a
ritual.  For me, that’s why personal rituals are so important – they
allow me to do a rite just for me, with the words that work for me, and
with the actions and the feel to things that work for me.  In a group
ritual, I have to compromise with everyone in what we do and say so that
some aspect of the ritual speaks to everyone in the group.  This may
seem like appealing to the least common denominator, and it’s true that
some rituals written for groups will feel really watered-down and pale,
but making certain that group ritual speaks to everyone present is very
important for building a solid sense of community.

     What all of this is intended to convey ultimately is that writing,
performing, and participating in ritual is an intensely personal
experience, and it is an experience that must be flexible, changing as
your attitudes and needs change, and as the attitudes and needs of the
group change.  Don’t ever be afraid to experiment with ritual, and don’t
ever feel that there is a right or a wrong way of doing a ritual.  The
right and the wrong of ritual lies only with you.  Take what you want
from these examples, and make them your own. 

 

**The Welcome of Twilight**

** **

     This is a personal rite that I often perform when my regular life
is starting to overwhelm the magick and mystery that I feel in the
Darkside of my being.  Whenever I am getting bogged down in work or
bills or other mundane issues, I pick a cool, clear night, and I go out
and watch the sun go down.  I usually stand in an open place, far from
people and buildings, where I can feel the darkness settling over all of
nature.   The birds settle down for the night and the night creatures
begin to stir.  I can hear bats chirping and fluttering overhead and
some of the feral cats in the neighborhood call as they are stalking
through the tall grasses.  The sunset is really just a time of
reflection.  I allow it to remind me that the day-lit world is only one
half of my existence, and that in time, it always gives over to
something darker, wilder, and more mysterious.

     As twilight falls and the light fades from the sky, I face the
west, raise my arms above my head, and take several deep, cleansing
breaths.  I take in the energy of the night as it begins to wash over
the land, and I feel the cool nightwind begin to pick up through the
grasses and trees.

     Sometimes out loud, sometimes silently to myself, I greet the
night.  I drink the darkness in, and I allow it to re-awaken that part
of myself that is also darker, wilder, and more mysterious than anything
the mundane world has to offer.  Then I will usually say a prayer to the
night as a reminder of why I cherish the darkness and why it speaks to
me so much.  This is a good example of my typical night-prayer:

 

# Hymn to the Night

 

*I welcome the Night and the silence it brings.  
I welcome the solitude, and the cool, soothing shadows.*

*The night is my time,  
the time of mysteries, dreams, and contemplation.  
The darkness within me now blankets the world*.

*The rising night-tide fills me with power and revelation.  
Fortress! Sanctuary! Blessed Haven!  
No matter my trials in the day-lit world,  
I know the night will always be mine*.

 

After that, I continue with my head thrown back and my arms outstretched
for just a little while, feeling the night wash over me as twilight
fades to a glittered midnight-blue.  Then I clasp my hands before me and
bow my head, holding my power within me and giving thanks for the
reminder of why that power is so special.  In silence, I turn and leave
the place I chose for this personal ritual, and return to my ordinary
routine feeling empowered ands renewed.

     You can do this every night, or you may choose to do it only on
nights of special importance.  If you are feeling out of touch with
yourself or your nature, I recommend performing this brief ritual in
order to get reconnected.  Use this as a re-affirmation of your power. 
Use it to invoke your Self and to establish dominion over the area in
which you live.  You can say the prayer out loud, or you can reflect
upon it silently, meditating upon the meaning the words hold for you. 
It is a very useful centering ritual and it calls power that you can
later direct as you please.

 

## My Daily Meditation

 

     Almost universally, we use candles during our meditations and in
our rites.  For myself, when I do my daily mediation, I start off in the
darkened shrine, and I mark the beginning of the meditation with the
lighting of the pillar candle in there. 

     The lighting of the flame, that first burst of light, is, for me, a
symbol of beginning.  As I hold the match to the wick, I reflect on
where we have come from, how all of this started. And as the candle
takes light, I recite the Im Kheperu prayer taken from the ancient
Egyptian Text *The Modes of Ra*:

 

           

Kheper-i kheper kheperu, kheper-kuy,  
          m kheper n khepri kheperu m sep tepy.

 

*“I became, and the becoming became. I became by becoming the form of
Khepra, god of transformations, who came into being in the First Time.
 Through me all transformations were enacted.”*

 

     After this, I continue with my daily meditation, reflecting on what
I want to accomplish for the day. I state my concerns and my intentions
out loud so I cannot later deny them.  Speaking them out loud to myself
is a kind of oath.  I have said it, and in saying it, made it real. 
Later, if I begin to waver in my intentions, all I have to do is think
back to saying the intention to myself.  If I do not fulfill what was
spoken, I have made it a lie.  And I hate being a liar. This of itself
is enough motivation for me to always get done what I have set out to do
each day – even when the tasks I have set myself are a challenge to
fulfill.

     When I am finished with my goals for the day, there is a daily
affirmation that I conclude with.  This is a simple prayer, a prayer for
strength.  In its original version, I focused on the negative feelings,
and I countered them by asking for strength.  Later, I realized that
this was not the proper approach.  It made the prayer too weak, and
almost implied a giving in to the weaknesses.  So instead, I re-worded
it to focus on the strength, and through the language of the secondary
line, to eradicate the weakness from my being.  It was a small change in
syntax, but overall, it makes a huge difference in the statement and its
psychological affect:

*I have my Balance,  
So I am not weak.*

*I have my Self,  
So I am not lost.*

*I have my Power,  
So I am not frightened.*

*I have my Path,  
So I will progress*.

*    * Finally, when I have said all that needs to be said for the day,
and I feel much stronger and centered in myself and focused on achieving
my goals, I conclude the meditation.  Since I started out by lighting
the candle, I finish by blowing the candle out.  Now, since I don’t want
to think that anything I’ve done in that shrine is finished once the
candle is no longer burning, what I say as I blow out the candle is
this:  “The candle goes out, but the energy remains.”  And then I leave
the shrine and go out to meet my day.

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Six: Archetype Rituals](vrb08.md)
