[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vrb01)  [Next](vrb03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vampire Ritual Book*, © by Michelle Belanger, \[2003\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage. Material can be reproduced for personal use on an
individual basis in private spellbooks, books of shadows, and the like.
Reproduction for distribution in any media or format is not allowed. To
reprint material that appears in this book in a book, magazine, or
website, please contact the author at the official House Kheperu
website. For more information, consult www.kheperu.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Introduction:

### The Vampire Ritual Book

 

Back in 1999, Father Sebastian asked me if I would be up to the task of
composing a vampire ritual book for the Sanguinarium. This was at a time
when I was highly active on a couple of Internet sites that allowed
freelancers to post their work and then paid them a small amount of
money for each independent hit that their work received.  I had found
early on that I had great success with my rites and rituals on these
sites. I got a great deal of fan mail from Pagans and Wiccans who had
encountered my work on the sites, and there were many requests to use my
rituals for handfastings, child naming ceremonies, funerals, and the
like.

     I had already been hard at work developing the ritual structure for
House Kheperu, and some of the early versions of seasonal rites and
rites of initiation were up on my website at www.kheperu.org.  These
also gained me a great deal of email from individuals who wanted to make
use of the rites or who simply wanted to let me know how much the
rituals there had moved them.

     However, House Kheperu is a pretty unique animal in the vampire
community.  At that time, our caste system was still very controversial,
and many of our past life beliefs also distinguished us from other
vampire households.  As the past life material was worked into a number
of our rites, it made them a little hard for groups that didn’t have
that background to make use of.  Many of the other rites have integral
roles played by members of each caste, and this further excluded the
Kheprian rituals from a widespread, general use.  Several groups were
still borrowing bits and pieces of our rites and integrating them into
their own practices, mainly because there were no other well-written
ritual traditions publicly available that were vampire-based.

     At first, Sebastian and I considered developing “official”
Sanguinarium rituals, but I tabled that idea right away because there
was too great a chance such a tradition would just degrade into
something rigid and inflexible.  Based on my experiences with ritual and
my strong beliefs on the purpose of ritual for the group and the
individual, I felt it would be healthier to develop sample rituals that
would serve as a guideline for others who could use them as inspiration
for writing their own.

     I wrote up a number of rites, rituals, and prayers that I felt
would appeal to a generalized vampire audience. In the meantime,
Sebastian continued to evolve the Sanguinarium, taking it in different
directions, until it gave way to his private occult order, the OSV. The
idea for the Sanguinarium ritual book was tabled, and nothing more
became of the manuscript. However, as I’m wont to do, I kept the
completed manuscript on my hard drive, tinkering with it now and again,
and adding new rituals as they occurred to me. Some were adaptations of
Kheprian rites, but others were designed exclusively to answer needs I
saw within the vampire subculture.

     Today the community is constantly changing, but the need created by
organizations like the Sanguinarium remains. Many people are drawn
toward the vampire as a spiritual archetype, and those people feel a
need for rites and rituals that differ from those belonging to more
typical Pagan and Wiccan traditions. In the interest of helping such
people develop a tradition more suited to their tastes, I picked up the
old ritual book, dusted it off, and presented it here. Several of these
rites have a distinctly Sanguinarium flair, for they were written with
that tradition in mind.

     Even in its heyday, the Sanguinarium did not appeal to everyone,
but there are many individuals who celebrate the spirituality of the
vampire. Because of this, even with the lingering Sanguinarium
influence, I feel the rituals compiled here can have relevance to some
aspects of our community. Certainly, with a few alterations here and
there to customize the rites for a specific group, many of these rituals
can be appropriate to anyone who feels drawn to that powerful archetype.
It’s important to keep in mind that even at the time of their original
writing, none of these rituals were cast in stone. The section on
“living ritual” addresses this more fully, but suffice to say that I
firmly believe rituals should grow and change as the need for them grows
and changes, and individuals should never feel shy about tailoring the
rites to their own tastes in whatever ways seem most appropriate.
Perhaps the most important lesson you can take away from the
introductory portions of this book is the knowledge that a ritual has no
power if it does not appeal directly to those who are participating in
it. As such, treat your ritual work as divine play. Change the rules
when it feels right, and adapt the words so you can feel your heart
resonating through them.

 

                                                *--Michelle Belanger*

*                                                  December 14, 2003*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter One: An Introduction to Ritual](vrb03.md)
