[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gothic](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](vrb02)  [Next](vrb04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Vampire Ritual Book*, © by Michelle Belanger, \[2003\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage. Material can be reproduced for personal use on an
individual basis in private spellbooks, books of shadows, and the like.
Reproduction for distribution in any media or format is not allowed. To
reprint material that appears in this book in a book, magazine, or
website, please contact the author at the official House Kheperu
website. For more information, consult www.kheperu.org

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Chapter One:

### An Introduction to Ritual

 

Ritual is most often associated with gods and with religion. When
Wiccans perform ritual, they are invoking the Goddess and her consort,
the God, bringing their presence down into the sacred space. When
Catholics perform ritual, they are calling their God to be present at
the ceremony, in the form of the Eucharist. However, ritual itself can
be independent of specific gods or even specific religious practices. In
this respect, ritual is a tool used to achieve a heightened state of
consciousness, awareness, and focus, especially in a group setting.

     Ritual is often performed with an expressed purpose such as to
reaffirm the bonds shared by a community, to celebrate a particular time
of the year, or to acknowledge an individual's rite of passage. Rituals
can be constructed for extremely specific goals, and these will vary
depending upon the group, the individual, and the situation. The
heightened state that ritual inspires in the participants enables them
to raise energy, harness it, and direct it toward a unified goal.

     An additional purpose of ritual is to build a temporary or
permanent structure of energy known as sacred space. Within the confines
of sacred space, ordinary reality is heightened and refined so that it
may come more completely into contact with the realm of spirit. Ritual
establishes sacred space as a crossing-over point between the spiritual
and the mundane so that the participants can move beyond the confines of
ordinary reality.

     Ritual often utilizes hand gestures, drama, music, the spoken word,
and objects that appeal to all the senses. The use of candles and
incense is common, as is the use of specific ritual clothes. These all
serve as tools that establish focus and move awareness from ordinary
reality to a more elevated frame of mind.

     Ritual balances the sacred and the mundane, integrating body and
spirit for all who participate. The elevated state of ritual is very
energetically healthy and it provides an atmosphere that induces
clarity, focus, and refined awareness. Ritual can also facilitate
contact and integration with your Higher Self and for this reason can be
very enlightening and empowering.

     Sacred space improves the quality of energy in an area, and
maintaining a constant presence of sacred space creates a cascade affect
that heightens and refines the energy in a widespread location. For
these reasons, it is very helpful to integrate some aspect of ritual
into your regular routine. It does not matter what form the ritual takes
or even if it is an active expression of religious sentiment. How you
choose to express and perform ritual will be unique to you and your
particular interests and needs. As long as your ritual work is a
striving toward something finer than ordinary reality, it will
ultimately benefit and enrich you.

 

**Vampire Ritual**

The rituals of the vampire community have grown into a unique tradition
all their own. Often separate from rituals invoking gods or goddesses,
the rituals of the vampire community are typically focused on
reaffirming the bonds of that community and evoking the power of the
individual.

     Great emphasis is placed on individuality in the vampire community,
so there are no absolutes to ritual. Intent is everything. Dress,
symbols, and tools vary from group to group and even ritual to ritual.
The format of ritual also varies according to group. Not only is ritual
form often customized according to the needs of each different group,
vampires typically change their ritual format from ritual to ritual,
maintaining a level of spontaneity that engages all involved, making
each ritual a special and personal instance of divine play. 

     The design of vampire rituals is often syncretic, integrating
elements from a variety of other systems and adding concepts relevant to
vampires. Pagan and Wiccan rituals can serve as inspiration, but
vampires will feel free to draw material from the rituals of ancient
Egypt, from Hinduism, Persian traditions, Japanese Shinto, shamanism,
and even LaVeyan Satanism. As long as the symbols and ritual activities
speak on a meaningful level to those involved in the ritual, vampires
feel free to innovate and explore a myriad of ritual expressions.

     Although vampires have borrowed the basic structure of the Pagan
Wheel of the Year, most vampire traditions play down the connection to
nature. While many Pagan rituals take place in natural settings and out
of doors, vampire rituals often occur indoors. The vast majority of
vampires live in urban settings, and some people have suggested that
vampirism itself is an urban phenomenon, a response to the city’s lack
of sources of natural energy. Whether people tend to be vampiric because
their environment is lacking in natural sources of energy is a matter of
debate. However, the fact remains that most vampires are city-dwellers.
Not only do vampire rituals typically take place inside, it is not
uncommon for vampire rituals to occur at night clubs or other social
events, tucked in among the bands and other performers. Possibly as a
result of this, vampire ritual often has a very theatrical element to
it, with the participants dressing in Gothic finery in honor of the
event.

     In addition to a certain flair for the dramatic, vampire rituals
tend to place a strong emphasis on energy and the energetic structure of
sacred space. The sacred space in a vampire ritual is typically set up
through a series of actions that are often delegated to three separate
individuals or groups. First, the space is cleared energetically and the
boundaries of the circle are established. After this, new energy is
raised in the space, infused with raw, creative potential. Finally, the
energy is harnessed and shaped into a spiritual temple. Every person
present in the sacred space is seen as being a part of that temple,
contributing some vital aspect to its structure.

     Especially when a vampire ritual is being performed for an
audience, the individuals involved in creating sacred space will use
words, gestures, tools, and other ritual actions to demonstrate their
work. However, these things are not seen as ends to themselves but as
methods of focus. Each activity is accomplished by intent alone. For
some groups, no outward action may occur to mark each step. Even though
items are approached in terms of symbol only, there are still some
significant meanings attached to colors and objects. Colors that will
occur again and again in vampire ritual items and ritual clothes are:

 

black (shadows, hidden knowledge)

purple (wisdom, magickal power)

silver (psychic energy, the moon)

red (life-force, blood)

 

Once the space is prepared, participants will typically file into the
space and form a circle. They often hold hands, sharing energy around
the circle before beginning anything else. The sharing of energy is very
important within the vampire tradition, and it is not uncommon for
vampires to greet one another by touching energy or presenting their
energy, unshielded, to be touched. This is a gesture of trust and it is
also a way of connecting beyond words and beyond the facades so many
people tend to keep up. Since vampires are uniquely tuned to this type
of energy, it feels natural and right to open one’s energy to companions
in this way.

Vampire ritual is run by at least one priest. Gender is inconsequential.
The priest often operates within the circle and may have one or two
assistants. These assistants are often representatives of the different
castes, a concept we will delve into in more detail in the next chapter.
Although vampires do not often keep altars, a table is often kept in the
center of the circle simply to hold any books or ritual tools that might
be used during the course of the ritual. As there is such a heavy focus
on energy and intent, vampire rituals do not require the use of ritual
tools. The individual is seen as his or her own tool, and all ritual
actions can be accomplished through an extension of energy or a focusing
of intent. However, going back to the dramatic aspect of ritual, some
groups do choose to use items simply for the aesthetic or theatrical
qualities they bring to the ritual. These items can change from group to
group and even from ritual to ritual.

After the sharing of energy, most rituals are opened with a statement or
charge that expresses the sacred identity of the group. Specific deities
are very rarely invoked. Even when they are specifically called upon,
deities are still often seen in terms of symbol and archetype rather
than as objectively real beings. If deities are called upon, they are
almost always dark gods and goddesses with chthonic associations or
associations with magick and forbidden wisdom. Some of the most common
beings names are Lilith, Set, and Lucifer in his guise as Lightbringer.

This symbolic approach to deity arises because most vampires see the
real "deity" at work in ritual as the individual. “Thou art god, thou
art goddess,” is taken very literally in this system, and each
individual reverences his or her own divine spark. Because of this,
vampire ritual is less a "drawing down" and more a "drawing out" -- the
power of the ceremony comes from invoking the divinity within each
participant.

Vampires most commonly gather for ritual for social reasons. Vampire
rituals honor some aspect of the community, such as a rite of passage,
or celebrate a specific holiday. Group ritual among vampires is very
rarely used to accomplish magickal effects. Magickal rituals are almost
always solitary affairs.

Raising energy and sharing it within the group is both a main function
and a main goal of vampiric ritual. Creating sacred space, where spirit
and divinity are more keenly felt, is also both a function and a goal of
vampire ritual. A vampire ritual has been successful if the participants
come away more aware of their energy and the way that energy connects
all of them and if the participants come away with a heightened
awareness of their immortal Selves – that divine spark that is their
inner divinity.

Other concepts and symbols relevant to vampires that might be
encountered in vampire ritual:

 

Spiritual immortality and rebirth

Life-force, manifested as either prana or blood

Energetic connection and exchange between individuals

Affinity with night, darkness, and shadows

Rapport with spirits, mainly spirits of the dead

Death as change

Ankhs as symbols of life and eternity

Skulls, skeletons, or coffins as symbols of power/triumph over death

Ancient, hidden, or forbidden knowledge

Exceeding human limitations/becoming more than human

 

Ancient Egypt is often revered and drawn upon for inspiration because of
its antiquity, its reverence for death and personal immortality, and its
mythic connection with forgotten wisdom. In addition to this, the
Watcher Angel and Enochian myths often hold significance among vampires.
This is largely because of the notion that more-than-human beings at
some point in the distant past made a conscious choice to become flesh.
Adding to the potent allure of this mythos is the forbidden knowledge
possessed by the Watchers, which was then passed on to humanity against
the will of the gods. The Promethian aspect of this cycle of myths is
also a strong part of the allure the figure of Lucifer holds for many
vampires.

 

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter Two: Ritual and Sacred Space](vrb04.md)
