[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ama03)  [Next](ama05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

# CHAPTER III

### THE AMAZONS OF ANTIQUITY--(continued)

MUCH as these writers had to say of the Amazons in the era of their
glory, they are equally eloquent and entertaining when dealing with the
wondrous women in the days of the community's decadence. One of the most
picturesque incidents relates to the Amazonian hatred for the Greeks.
After the death of Achilles and the fall of Troy, we are told, the dead
captain-demigod reigned over an enchanted isle in the Black Sea at the
mouth of the Danube, which must, therefore, have been close to that Isle
of Ares where the Amazons, on their way to Athens, erected a temple to
the god of war. When Thetis was lamenting over the funeral pyre of
Achilles, Neptune consoled her by the promise--

There is an island in the Euxine Sea  
Where, by my power, Achilles shall be deem'd  
A god; and him with sacrificial rites  
The neighbouring nations shall adore."

\[paragraph continues\] Whatever the exact position of the island may
have been, tales of the glory of this shadowy kingdom reached the
Amazons in their capital on the Thermodon, and there, maddened by fierce
hatred for Queen Penthesilea's slayer, they determined to follow the
hero even in this dominion of ghosts. So they

 

<span id="img_04800"></span>

[![SECTION OF PHIGALEIAN FRIEZE. COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS.&lt;BR&gt;
BRITISH MUSEUM.](tn/04800.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/04800.jpg)  
SECTION OF PHIGALEIAN FRIEZE. COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS.  
BRITISH MUSEUM.  

 

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

laid violent hands on certain navigators who came up the river, and
compelled them to build a fleet of galleys. They embarked thereon a
strong force of horse, and bade the sailors to steer them to the
mysterious isle. The vengeful and impious armada reached the beautiful
shores clothed with stately groves. A safe landing was effected, but as
the Amazons approached a magnificent temple half hidden in a luxuriantly
growing wood, their horses gave every sign of anxiety, which, as they
advanced, waxed into ungovernable terror. Curveting and rearing, they
threw their exhausted riders, who, as they lay on the ground, were
trampled upon and bitten by the demented steeds as they turned and
bolted to the cliffs, where, not pausing an instant, they dashed
themselves to destruction among the raging waves. A terrific storm of
wind and lightning sprang up, involving the Amazons in the havoc created
by the raging tempest. Few escaped the warring elements to convey the
tidings to Themyscira.

Apollonius Rhodius in his "Argonautic" gives us glimpses of two forms of
Amazons. He tells how the bold navigators going in search of the Golden
Fleece visited the island of Lemnos, which they found inhabited solely
by women and ruled over by the gentle Hypsipile. Jason and his
companions were received with a considerable show of suspicion, for the
women appeared in battle array--

Hypsipile assum'd her father's arms  
And led the van, terrific in her charms."

But when it became evident that the Argonauts had no evil intentions,
the youthful queen told them

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

a pitiful tale. Lemnos, she said, had been invaded and all the men
killed. This was not an account to raise the suspicions, though it might
kindle the pity, of the Greeks, who were invited to stay in the island
and fill the places of the slain. The truth was, however, that the men
of Lemnos had been killed by their own womenkind, a crime brought about
by a neglect of the gods. Venus, forgotten by the women, took her
revenge by causing them to become obnoxious to their husbands and
lovers, who, turning in loathing away from them, brought girl slaves
from the mainland. Angered by this course of affairs, the women slew all
males and the slaves, then assumed arms, daily expecting that, their
exploits having been noised abroad, men from adjacent countries would
come to punish them. To the guilty spouses and daughters the Argonauts
as they first appeared were a cause of dread, then, as their pacific
intentions became known, a source of hope; and so the women did their
best to make the intrepid explorers forget their dangerous quest.
However, after some little delay, the Argonauts sailed away, and passing
through the Hellespont, creeping up the Euxine, they wisely

           "flee the Amazonian shore,  
Else Themyscira soon, with rude alarms,  
Had seen th' assembled Amazons in arms."

\[paragraph continues\] Such was the repute of these women, who were
more to be dreaded than the armies, powerful kings, and magic spells
Jason and his following had to face.

Of another momentous maritime adventure we have many details from
Herodotus, who, speaking

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

of the Sauromatœ, says that after the battle of Thermodon, which was the
second strenuous effort of the Greeks to drive back the women
barbarians, three galleys were loaded by Hercules with Amazon prisoners.
These galleys becoming separated from the fleet, they sailed for the
Bosphorus on the way to Greece; but suddenly the prisoners mutinied, and
succeeded in killing their guards and the sailors. It was a victory
which threatened to cost them dear, for the women, having slain the
navigators, found themselves helpless owing to their lack of knowledge
of ships, which drifted about at the mercy of the elements. The galleys
were blown in a northerly direction, and passing through dangerous
straits, reached the Palus Mæotis (Sea of Azof), there running ashore,
close to certain "white cliffs," which have not been identified.
Scrambling ashore on a strange coast, the women seized the first herd of
horses they encountered, and thus mounted, feeling more at home, began
exploring the surrounding country. They fell upon the unsuspecting
Scythians, slaughtering and pillaging right and left. The Scythians
could not tell who these raiders were dress, language, and all were
quite unfamiliar to them. On the other hand, the Amazons mistook the
shaven inhabitants for bands of youths. But in the fights some of the
Amazons fell, and then the truth was revealed, and this made the men
loath to repel the invaders with arms, so they hit upon a deep and
poetic stratagem. They sent youths, lightly armed, to watch them.
Camping at some distance from the Amazons, following their every
movement at a respectful distance, the chances

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

of the chase brought members of the two forces together; and as the
youths did all in their power to show their pacific intentions, the
camps gradually drew nearer. There were meetings, designed on the part
of the young men, and at last the warrior women, realising that there
was no danger from this quarter, hastened opening up communications,
with the result that what could not be done by Scythian valour was
speedily accomplished by the sarkless blind boy with his invisible
darts. Mistrust gave way before love, the two camps blended, and the
women soon acquired the local tongue. Then the youths desired to go home
and settle down--they wanted no other wives than the Amazons. But to
this proposal their companions replied: "We could not live with your
women--our customs are quite different to theirs. To draw the bow, to
hurl the javelin, to bestride the horse, these are our arts--of womanly
employments we know nothing. Your women, on the contrary, do none of
these things, but stay at home in their wagons, engaged in womanish
tasks, and never go out to hunt or to do anything. We should never
agree!" So they suggested that the young men should go to their parents
and ask them for their inheritance, to enable them to form separate
camps. This the youths agreed to do, and coming back with their
property, ceded by the politic fathers, offered it to the strange women.
Then these said that they were ashamed to remain in the country, for,
not content with killing and robbing the inhabitants, they had now
stolen sons from their fathers: to dwell in peace they would have to go
elsewhere.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

\[paragraph continues\] This also was agreed upon. Crossing the Tanais,
they journeyed eastward a distance of three days north from that stream,
and then again northward another three days' march. From this it would
appear that the camp was first formed in what is now Europe, but the new
nation subsequently moved north-east.

Herodotus adds: "The women of the Sauromatœ have continued from that day
to the present to observe their ancient customs, frequently hunting on
horseback with their husbands, sometimes even unaccompanied, in war
taking the field, and wearing the very same dress as the men." It was of
these people that Pliny also had much to say. We are here on somewhat
more solid ground, and can see how the marvellous grew out of the
natural. Certainly this account of Herodotus destroys the extravagant
claims put forth by some historians as to the widespread nature of the
Amazonian conquests. For, after all, the Palus Mæotis is not very far
from the Thermodon, and, as we see, Herodotus makes both parties
absolutely unknown to each other, which could scarcely have been the
case if we follow Diodorus Siculus or Apollonius Rhodius and many
another of the rhetorical school of writers. Some foundation there was,
however, for there is no smoke without fire.

We must not wonder too much that all kinds of traditions concerning the
Amazons lingered on. References to them in many directions are found in
the pages of chronicles and geographical treatises. Justinus says that
when Alexander the Great was in Hyrcania he was visited by Thalestris,
queen of the Amazons, who came at the head of 300 horse-women,

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

travelling twenty-five days through populous and dangerous countries to
ask favours from the Macedonian conqueror. She remained thirteen days
with Alexander, and returning to her country, died shortly after, and
with her passed away the glory of her race. Quintus Curtius is even more
circumstantial, but Arrian says Thalestris, who, according to him, came
with a following of 100 Amazons all armed with double-headed axes and
carrying half-moon shields, was sent as a present to Alexander by the
governor of the neighbouring province. Arrian quotes with caution, and
says that if these women did really come into the Macedonian camp, they
must have been other warriors than the famous Amazons, in which opinion
others agree with him, while many altogether dispute the truth of the
alleged incidents. Plutarch says that Clitarchus, Policritus,
Onesicritus, Antigenes, Ister, and several more give the story as an
authentic fact, while Aristobulus, Chares of Theangela, Ptolemy,
Anticlides, Philo the Theban, Philip of Theangela, Hecatœus of Eretria,
Philip of Chalcis, and Duris of Samos treated the matter as a pure
fable. He reports that Lysimachus, ridiculing the story when read out to
him by Onesicritus, laughingly asked, "Where was I at that time?" which
Plutarch thinks conclusive coming from so important a lieutenant of
Alexander, one who must have been privy to any such event.

Though we hear of women coming armed into battle long after the
conquests of Alexander, we are told very little more about the Amazons
by the Greeks themselves.

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

Many of the later Greek writers treated the whole Amazon story as a
myth, to be placed on the same level as the gigantomachia, the tales of
the Gorgons, centaurs, and so on; which is probably true--that is to
say, they must be looked upon as symbolical exaggerations of certain
ancient facts. Strabo, Herodotus, and Pliny have been blamed by these
later authors for giving credit to the legends. This is not fair so far
as regards Strabo. No doubt he has much to say about the Amazons, their
places of dwelling and their exploits, but in all this he is merely
acting as reporter, recording the opinions of other authors and local
traditions. Of his own attitude to the subject there can be no doubt,
for in an outspoken passage he says: "There is a peculiarity in the
history of the Amazons. In other histories the fabulous and the
historical parts are kept distinct. For what is ancient, false, and
marvellous is called fable. But history has truth for its object,
whether it be old or new, and it either rejects or rarely admits the
marvellous. But with regard to the Amazons, the same facts are related
both by modern and ancient writers; they are marvellous, and exceed
belief. For who can believe that an army of women, or a city, or a
nation, could ever subsist without men? and not only subsist, but make
inroads upon the territories of other people, and obtain possession not
only of the places near them, and advance as far as the present Ionia,
but even dispatch an expedition across the sea to Attica?" Plutarch, as
we have seen, while discrediting the story of Thalestris's visit to
Alexander, is not found among, those who doubt the existence

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

of the Amazon state, as may be gathered particularly in his handling of
the life of Theseus. While we need have little compunction in regarding
Quintus Curtius and Diodorus Siculus as romancers, the reports recorded
in such manner as Strabo and Herodotus do must cause us to hesitate
before passing a rash judgment, and send us to inquire into the
philosophy of the obscure subject.

Both writers and artists have given a fairly consistent idea of the
costumes and equipments of the Amazons. In the early stages of their
history they wore a scanty chiton, or tunic, caught up at the waist by
the celebrated girdle, so that it scarcely reached the knees, the upper
part being fastened over the left shoulder, leaving the right breast
bare. But at a later period the robe is more ample and flowing, which
probably denoted the transition from the habit of fighting on foot to
the general use of the horse. It is said that the early chitons were
nothing more than the skins of beasts killed in hunting. Strabo
specially mentions that "they make helmets and coverings for the body,
and girdles, of the skins of wild animals." Of course untanned pelts
have in all times and places been used for clothing, for the special
reason that they afforded some sort of defence against darts and other
weapons; so the use of skins of wild beasts in Asia, and of serpents in
the case of the African women, merely pointed to their power having
arisen while they were still in the early barbarous stages of
development. In art, with the possible exception of the primitive
fictile specimens, however, the drapery is generally of the nature of a
textile. For defensive

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

armour they are given low breastplates, sometimes, in the late examples,
the queens' cuirasses being adorned with the Medusa mark; greaves for
the front parts of the legs, thigh plates, and helmets. The helmets at
first appear to be of the Minerva type, tall, with the protecting comb,
and often plumed; then they are lighter, more approaching the shape of
the head; and after the Eastern adventures the high kidaris or
Phrygian-like cap, occasionally with points falling over the ears and
the nape of the neck, is worn. To the greaves are added sandles, a strap
over the ankle to hold the spur, and in default of leg armour the
lacings of the sandle may be carried half-way up to the knee. Sometimes
we see, as in the interesting fragment of terra-cotta in the Towneley
Collection at the British Museum, Amazons in short chitons and wearing
high boots with turned-over tops and lion's face at the front and
turned-up toes, which footgear is suggestive of Eastern influence. In
the best specimens of art the feet and legs are bare, only the ankle
strap for the spur being shown. After the conquests in Phrygia and
expeditions to Persia, we find the Amazons in Persian raiment,
consisting of close-fitting tunic and trousers, high boots, and either
skull-cap helmets or the kidaris. Their shields, known as the pelta, are
small, and either half-moon shaped or showing a double crescent, the
outer edge forming a nearly complete circle, while the inner one is
dented so as to present two concave curves and three horns; often,
however, we see the completely circular target. All these three forms
have been regarded as lunar emblems.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

Their offensive arms consisted of the bow and arrow, the dart, javelin,
and the long lance, the latter being merely the adaptation of the
missile spear to the need of cavalry fighting at close quarters. A
characteristic weapon was the double-headed axe, to which many
attributed a symbolical meaning. It was undoubtedly looked upon as an
emblem of authority, originally of divine authority, being analogous to
the double thunderbolt. As a weapon, it was of Asiatic origin, and
appears to have been introduced into Asia Minor by the terrible
Hittites. It created great terror among both Greeks and Romans when
first met with by those fighting races in the hands of Eastern hordes.
Quintus Smyrnus repeats a tradition that Hercules, having ravished the
sacred double-headed axe from the Amazonian queen, bestowed it on
Omphale, Queen of Lydia. It is said that the axe was preserved as an
emblem of regality down to the days of Candaules, last of the Heraclidæ.
The sword is only rarely mentioned in connection with the Amazons, which
points to extreme antiquity, or at least primitive customs. Of their
skill with the bow and arrow many are the wondrous tales that are
recorded. Their darts flew as rapid as a glance, as quick as thought,
and so the soldiers of Marcus Crasus at a much later date said of the
"strange sort of arrows" used against them by the Parthians. These
weapons, the distressed Romans found, were "swifter than lightning,
reaching their mark before you can see they are discharged." The
barbarians drew the arrows to the feather, and let fly with such force
that they pierced light armour, fastening feet to the ground, pinning
hands to shields as they transfixed the

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

enemies' limbs. Much the same is told us of the women warriors, for
there was little protection against their strength, unless the magic of
the Nemean lion's skin or a talismanic shield was there to protect a
Hercules or an Achilles.

At first, according to the accounts, tactics similar to those of the old
Scythians and Parthians fighting at a distance, common, indeed, to most
of the early barbarians, were adopted. There was a swift rush forward, a
discharge of arrows and darts, and then a speedy retreat, but a retreat
which was as dangerous to the enemy as an advance, for they covered
their strategic movements to the rear by a flight of arrows, aiming over
their shoulders or turning half round as they fled. Every arrow had its
billet. As Plutarch says of the Parthians and Scythians: "It is indeed
an excellent expedient, because they save themselves by retiring, and,
by fighting all the while, escape the disgrace of flight." This retreat
and advance seems to have been accompanied by a mazy dance as part of
the tactics, in which swiftness and uncertainty of movement was the
essential factor. We are told that, besides the use of trumpets, they
advanced to combat to the music of the systrum, which would be in
keeping with the semi-sacred, semi-barbarous dance, the waving helmet
plumes, and the startling Medusa heads on the leaders' shields. With
their wider conquests we find a partial abandonment of the swift advance
and retreat strategy, which was supplemented by the advance in force,
entailing the adoption of the lance and double-headed axe for use at
close quarters. But, as we have said, the sword was rarely associated
with the Asiatic Amazons. From early times the

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

horse was made the companion of the youthful warrior, and the prowess of
the Amazons on horseback won the admiration of all beholders, when it
did not inspire terror. Theirs was always light cavalry, the horses
practically without trappings save a simple bridle, and swift manœuvring
being adhered to. They used the bow and arrow and the dart, as well as
the lance and axe, when mounted, aiming backwards as they retreated, and
even vaulting round on the horses' backs to fight, facing the enemy
though retiring. So artists have depicted the Amazons, and sculptors too
have shown us these and many other tricks, which we know are quite
consistent with barbarian tactics. It was one of the Greek ways of
insisting upon the origin of these warriors from the bleak steppes. And
so we are told that when the prisoners escaped from the galleys of
Hercules, their first action on landing on the Sarmatian shore was to
seize horses, and then, like wildly beautiful she-centaurs, descend with
disconcerting suddenness upon the unsuspecting inhabitants.

In the writings of certain authors we find brief allusion to the use of
nets among Amazons when in battle, the nets being thrown over enemies,
who were then strangled or dispatched with the lance. No doubt this
accretion to the picturesque legends is due to a poetical metaphor,
symbolising either entanglement through feminine wiles, or the
bewildering enveloping movements of the agile warriors, who harassed the
enemy on all sides, but swiftly retired to renew the attack, so that
they encompassed their opponents like the meshes of a net, out of which
there appeared to be no way, for, subtly yielding, they

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

could not be reached or cut through. That barbarian gladiators (the
retiarii, who carried tridents) did use nets in combats in the arena we
know, but there is no mention of their employment in actual warfare. On
the other hand, the use of entangling nets and knotted thongs by gods
and supernatural creatures in their struggles among themselves or
against man is a commonplace in most mythologies, and is closely
associated with incantations and magic.

All these niceties of detail have reached us through the minor lights of
art and literature, for it is to be observed that in the best of Greek
art that has come down to us the Amazons are always treated with
pleasing simplicity. The costume generally consists of short tunic; the
arms, legs, head, and part of the bust are bare, though occasionally in
the later sculptures the chiton is worn long, reaching well below the
knee, and is somewhat ample, while sandles are shown. There is little
evidence of defensive armour beyond the rare use of helmets and the
small shield. The weapons are the bow and arrow, the lance, and the
double-headed axe. Elaboration only comes into minor art. No doubt this
studied simplicity was largely due to the desire to convey an idea of
the remoteness of the scenes shown; so the Greek warriors are seen
either entirely naked or very scantily clad, though they wear fine
helmets and carry large shields.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IV: Amazons in Far Asia](ama05)
