[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ama08)  [Next](ama10.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_139">p. 139</span>

# CHAPTER VIII

### AMAZONS OF AMERICA

WHEN Christopher Columbus was returning from his first voyage of
discovery, he was told by the Indians of Hispaniola of another island,
called Mantinino, which was inhabited solely by women. They employed
themselves in labour not suited to their sex, using the bow and arrow,
hunting, and going to war. Once a year they received Caribs from other
islands among them, the men only staying a short time, and on their next
annual visit taking away with them the male infants that had been born,
the girls remaining with their mothers. These women, besides using bows
and arrows, had defensive armour of brass plates. This intelligence
added to the admiral's conviction that he was on the coast of the
Indies, for the ancients had spoken of islands where the Themysciran
Amazons had taken refuge, and one of his own countrymen, a great
traveller by land, the Venetian, Marco Polo, as we know, had given an
account of what was considered by many as their last abode. But although
Columbus constantly heard rumours of the mysterious island, which often
seemed to be in the immediate neighbourhood, yet ever receded, he was
not destined to see it or any of its inhabitants. No one, indeed,
succeeded

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

in identifying the particular island of which the natives of the
Caribbean Sea seemed to give such explicit details. Other Spanish
adventurers, however, had different tales to tell.

In 1540, some forty years after Allonzo Pinzon had discovered the great
Marañon, Francesco de Orellana, making his way from far-off Peru to the
Atlantic through the Brazils, explored the magnificent river, he and his
companions meeting with many difficulties. They were told of a race of
pigmies, of men whose heads grew out of their backs, of others whose
feet were turned the wrong way round, so that if any one attempted to
follow in their tracks, the pursuers were misled, actually receding from
those they desired to catch up. There were also men with tails, and
stories of the Ozacoulets, a tribe of warriors with white skins, blue
eyes, and long light-coloured beards; but most persistent of all were
the rumours of warrior women who lived apart from men. The grandeur and
novelty of the scenes they were passing through, the weirdness of the
stories they heard, all prepared the Spanish adventurers to accept the
marvellous, so that when they had accomplished rather more than half of
their journey, and were approaching the Trombetus River in the
neighbourhood of the great, densely wooded island of Tumpinambaranas,
formed by the junction of the Madera with the Marañon, they found
themselves opposed by warlike natives gathered on the banks, and among
them noticed women seemingly acting as leaders of the men, they readily
fell into the notion that here they had stumbled upon the renowned
Amazons. In this belief they were confirmed by the

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

natives whom they cross-examined, and de Orellana, duly impressed with
this wonderful discovery, and some say actuated by a desire to magnify
his own exploits, renamed the Marañon River the Amazon, a name
subsequently given to a whole vast province.

Garcilaso Inca de la Vega, in his account of the expedition of Gonzalo
Pizarro and his lieutenants, quotes Father Carbajal, who was in the
train of de Orellana. The good father says that the Indians attacked the
small but well-armed party of Spaniards so fiercely because they were
tributaries to the Amazons, which betrays a certain confusion of ideas
with Asiatic traditions. However, he and others of his Spanish
companions saw some ten or twelve Amazons who were fighting in the front
ranks of the Indians, acting as though they were in command, and with
such vigour that the Indians did not dare to turn their backs, and those
who fled before the enemy were killed with sticks by their own party.
These women appeared to be very tall, robust, fair of complexion, with
long hair twisted over their heads, skins of wild beasts wound round
their loins, and carried bows and arrows in their hands, with which they
killed many of the explorer's party.

These rumours of the Amazonian nation were plentiful, but no one ever
came across the country, at least no one of sufficient standing to give
accurate geographical indications. The country was supposed to be buried
in the gloomy forests, though it was said to possess rich cities. Some
time after the adventure of de Orellana and Carbajal, another
missionary, Father Cristobal de Acuña, who had long dwelt

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

in the Brazils, gave, in his *New Discovery of the Great River of the
Amazons*, considerably more details. "These man-like women," he writes,
"have their abodes in the extensive forests and lofty hills, among which
that which rises above the rest, and is therefore beaten by the winds
for its pride with most violence, so that it is bare and clear of
vegetation, is called Yacamiaba. The Amazons are women of great valour,
and they have always preserved themselves without the ordinary
intercourse with men; and even when these, by agreement, come every year
to their land, they receive them with arms in their hands, such as bows
and arrows, which they brandish about for a time, until they are
satisfied that the Indians come with peaceful intentions. They then drop
their arms and go down to the canoes of their guests, where each one
chooses a hammock, the nearest at hand, which they take to their own
houses, and, hanging them in a place where their owners could recognise
them, they receive the Indians as guests for a few days. After this the
Indians return to their own country, repeating their visits every year
at the same season. The daughters who are born from this intercourse are
preserved and brought up by the Amazons themselves, as they are destined
to inherit their valour and the customs of the nation; but it is not so
certain what they do with the sons. An Indian who had gone with his
father to this country when very young stated that the boys were given
to their fathers when they returned the following year. But others--and
they appear most probable, as it is most general--say that when the
Amazons find that a baby is a male, they kill it. Time will discover the

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

truth; and if these are the Amazons made famous by historians, there are
treasures shut up in their territory which would enrich the whole
world." This is much the same story that was gathered by Columbus,
though the admiral's will-o'-the-wisp tribe are supposed to be on an
island of the Caribbean Sea, while those brought before de Orellana were
on the mainland, some said hidden in the forests, others safe on an
island formed by the sweep of two rivers, an island like
Tumpinambaranas, which is 210 miles long and contains 950 square miles,
or, again, on an island in one of the great lakes.

Alas for the good father! time exploded the legend, at least as he
understood the matter. Neither Amazon nation nor their fabulous
treasures have ever been found. Yet it was not from any want of
willingness or energy on the part of the Spaniards. Animated by stories
such as those recorded by Acosta and Herrera and sworn to by wandering
whites and natives before the Royal Audienza at Quito, there was real
enthusiasm and emulation displayed in furthering exploration for this
constantly receding country "where women alone are." Nuño de Gusman,
writing in July 1530 from Omittan to the Emperor Charles V. (Charles I.
of Spain), says, with cheerful anticipation of what was in store for a
lucky and enterprising Don, "I shall go to find the Amazons, which some
say dwell in the sea, some in an arm of the sea, and that they are rich
and accounted of the people for goodness, and whiter than other women.
They use bows and arrows and targets; have many great treasures." We
find, among others, Hernando de Ribera conducting a search party. He
came

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

across many natives who reported to him that beyond the Mansion of the
Sun--that is to say, westward of a great lake wherein the sun sank daily
to rest--there would be found that much-sought-after country "where
women alone dwelt." This might allude even to Peru, where, among the
Cordilleras of the Andes, temples of the sun had been built on high
mountains, such as Intihuatana, "the Seat of the Sun," a fortress temple
on a high hill near Cuzco, in the vicinity of Lake Titikaka, some 1300
feet above sea-level. There was, however, no record of women warriors on
that side of the Andes, at all events in the days of the Incas. To
return to Brazil, Ribera was told that the women possessed both white
and yellow metal (silver and gold) in such abundance that they made
their seats and household utensils out of them. Close neighbours of
theirs, so it was said, were the pigmies, who formed a nation by
themselves. About forty-seven years later Anthony Knivet, who went with
Thomas Candish on his second voyage to the South Seas, was captured by
the Portuguese, escaped, and wandered through Brazil. He heard of the
Amazons, and, indeed, claimed that his Indian companions said that they
traversed the mysterious country; but when Knivet urged an attack on the
women, the natives "durst not, for they said, We know that the country
is very populous, and we shall all be killed."

On the other hand, we hear rumours of the Amazons in quite another
direction. Sir Walter Raleigh, in his *Discovery of Guiana*, says that
he spoke to a cacique who had been to the Amazon River and beyond. This
chief reported that "the

 

<span id="img_14400"></span>

[![I.--FIGURES FROM CRATES FROM SIR WM. TEMPLE'S COLL. BRITISH MUSEUM.
COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS.&lt;BR&gt; II.--KYLIX. TWO AMAZONS
CHARGING. BRITISH MUSEUM.](tn/14400.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/14400.jpg.md)  
I.--FIGURES FROM CRATES FROM SIR WM. TEMPLE'S COLL. BRITISH MUSEUM.
COMBAT OF GREEKS AND AMAZONS.  
II.--KYLIX. TWO AMAZONS CHARGING. BRITISH MUSEUM.  

 

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

nations of these women are on the south side of the river, in the
province of Topago, and their chiefest strength and retreats are in the
lands situate on the south side of the entrance, some sixty leagues
within the mouth of the same river. The memories of the like women,"
adds the gallant knight, "very ancient as well in Africa as in Asia, in
many histories they are verified to have been in divers ages and
provinces, but they which are not far from Guiana do accompany with men
but once a year, and for the time of one month, which I gather by their
relations to be April. At that time all the kings of the borders
assemble and the queens of the Amazons; and after the queens have
chosen, the rest cast lots for their valentines. This one month they
feast, dance, and drink of their wines in abundance; and the moon being
done, they all depart to their own provinces. If they conceive and be
delivered of a son, they return him to the father; if of a daughter,
they nourish it and retain it. And as many as have daughters send unto
the begetter presents, all being desirous to increase their own sex and
kind; but that they cut off the right breast I do not find to be true.
It was further told me that if in the wars they took any prisoners that
they would accompany with those also at what time soever, but in the end
for certain they put them to death; for they are said to be very cruel
and bloodthirsty, especially to such as offer to invade their country.
These Amazons have likewise great store of these plates of gold, which
they recover in exchange chiefly for a kind of green stones, which the
Spaniards call *piedras hijadas*, and we use for spleen stones: and for
the disease of the stone we also esteem them. Of these

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

\[paragraph continues\] I saw divers in Guiana, and commonly every
cacique has one, which their wives for the most part wear, and they
esteem them as great jewels."

Then the direction again changes, and we hear of the women on the north
side of the great river, retreating up the Rio Negro, ultimately hiding
successfully in Guiana. Raleigh says: "On the south side of the main
mouth of the Orinoco are the Arwacas, and beyond them the cannibals
\[Caribs\], and to the south of them the Amazons." Many years after this
Father Gili, writing of the Orinoco and its neighbourhood, said he
closely questioned an Indian as to the surrounding tribes. Several were
mentioned, and among them were the Aikeambenanoes: "Well acquainted with
the Tanamac tongue," the priest declares, "I instantly comprehended the
sense of the last word, which is a compound and signifies 'women living
alone.'" The Indian at once confirmed his interrogator's conjecture, and
giving certain details of these near yet unapproachable women, alleged
that their chief industry was the making of blowpipes for the discharge
of poisoned arrows in war and in the chase. When de la Condamine went
through Brazil in 1745 he also questioned the natives closely as to the
Amazons, and he heard of an old Indian whose father had actually
conversed with "the women without husbands." On reaching the village, it
was found that the old man was dead, but his son, aged apparently
seventy, said that his grandfather had spoken to four Amazons, one of
whom was suckling an infant at her breast, as they passed from the south
side of the river to go up the valley of the Rio Negro. Another

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Indian living near Para actually offered to show
a river farther up which (beyond the falls in the mountain fastness) the
Amazons were to be found to that day. Unfortunately, this offer does not
seem to have been accepted. The upper regions of Guiana appeared to be
the centre most spoken of in these days as the home of the women.
Although he says, "I know that all or the greater part of the Indians of
South America are liars, credulous, and enamoured of the marvellous,"
still de la Condamine saw no reason for scepticism, even as regards the
more elaborate details of the tribe and the manner of its maintenance.

Of the origin of the "women who live without husbands" a very
significant legend appears to have been current along the middle and
lower reaches of the Amazon. We are told that in some far-off
indeterminate age the women rebelled against their husbands and retired
to the hills accompanied by only one old man. They lived by their own
industry, quite isolated. All daughters born to this lopsided community
were carefully reared, while all boys were killed. Then one luckless
male baby, coming into the world deformed and covered with scars, called
forth maternal pity. In secrecy the mother lavished all her tenderness
and art in the endeavour to cure her child, but without effect until she
placed him in a strongly woven bag and squeezed him into a lovely shape.
Thereafter he grew apace in seclusion, day by day becoming more charming
in form and character. Eventually his retreat was discovered. Then began
a long and tender persecution from the women, though the boy remained
unmoved. Mother and son

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

consulted together, and to escape his tormentors the youth was thrown
into the lake, where he assumed the shape of a fish. Whenever the mother
called, the fish swam ashore and was instantly transformed into his
beautiful human form, taking food from the hands of his mother.
Jealously guarded though the secret was, feminine curiosity soon
ferreted it out; and then the other women, imitating the calls, clasped
the deceived young man in their arms. It was next the turn of the old
man to grow uneasy, for he noticed that he was being neglected. So he
set himself to watch, and the spy was driven to fierce anger by the
scene of magic enacted before his eyes. His own calls to the fish were
of no avail, so he made strong nets. None was stout enough, however, for
always the boy-fish escaped, breaking through the meshes. The old man
sat down and thought deeply, and decided upon a plan. Going to each
woman of the tribe, he craftily begged them for tresses of their hair.
Therewith he made a net so strong and entangling that he promptly caught
and killed the fish. After this the women finally abandoned the slayer;
but while he was away in his fields, his hut was always put in order by
some unknown agency, and his meals prepared for him by unseen hands. So
again he hid and set himself to spy. And then he saw a pet parrot fly
down, put off her feathers, and swiftly change into a beautiful girl,
who at once set about her duties with painstaking industry. To rush
forward and fling the feathers into the fire was the work of an instant,
then the watcher turned and demanded, "Who are you?" "I am," replied the
mysterious squaw, "the only woman who ever loved you. Now

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

you have broken the spell I was under, and I am glad." <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md)

A variant of this is given by Barboza Rodriguez. He records a legend
which shows the women as rebels against their husbands, flying to the
woods, and protected in their flight by the elements and wild beasts.
The men found their passage barred by flood and tempest; fierce animals
fought them; monkeys gathered in the trees and pelted them with deadly
missiles. So the women retired and led their own lives. Then they
repented, and admitted the men to their presence once a year, giving up
the boys to them, but retaining the girls. And so matters went on, until
one day the whole tribe of women disappeared down a hole in the earth,
led to their last resting-place by an armadillo.

It would take us too long and certainly carry us too far from our
present inquiry to fully analyse each clause of these exceedingly
picturesque and pregnant stories. Some points, however, may be briefly
noted. In these accounts of the Amazons we have a motive for their
existence introduced which is quite distinct from anything suggested by
the Greeks in the case of those of Asia. In the first story, the women
retiring to the hills accompanied by one old man have all the

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

appearance of a religious guard surrounding a priest-king. There is more
than one hint of sacrifice, pre-eminently so in the case of the
boy-fish, here introduced as a symbol of fertility; and finally in the
most instructive version of the fable of net-entanglements--magic and
woman's wiles. Hair is woman's delight and glory, but also a great means
of offence. In certain cities of Asia Minor, Ashtoreth demanded the
shaven head as the lesser of two personal sacrifices from her female
worshippers. The Talmudists say that Lilith, the semi-human, semi-demon
first wife of Adam, would, when she could, strangle the sons of men with
tresses of her golden hair, out of revenge for the disinheritance of her
own offspring, the Jinns. For this reason the amulet "childbirth
tablets" hung on the walls of lying-in rooms of Jews both in the East
and Eastern Europe always bore a representation of Lilith with an
invocation for protection. But to return to our Brazilian legends. In
the second, far less complicated, there is yet much that is suggestive,
for here too we see the women set apart, protected supernaturally, and
ending by sacrifice. For the descent into the earth means death, and its
collective form and the leadership of the armadillo hints if not at the
inhumation of the living, at least sacrificial burial on the death of
some semi-divine chief.

It will be observed that in these two fables we are not asked to look
upon the women as of a bellicose disposition-apart from their initiatory
quarrel with their husbands--or as belonging to a war organisation. As a
rule, however, the stories all laid stress upon their fighting,
qualities, and this was very persistent among the Caribs, themselves a
most warlike people.

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Sir Robert Schomburgk, who knew Guiana and
Venezuela so well, declaring that the "Caribs are most versed in
wonderful tales," disbelieved all these rumours. Of course it was
impossible altogether to ignore the positive assertions of
eye-witnessing Spaniards, and so, to explain these away, Sir Robert
suggested that they had mistaken young men with flowing hair, and
wearing necklaces and ear-rings, for women; an opinion backed up by
several other authors. This is not convincing, for we must remember that
Father Carbajal expressly states that the fighting women he and his
companions saw had their hair twisted round their heads. A recent
writer, Mr. C. R. Enoch, in his book *The Andes and the Amazon*, quotes
an official Peruvian report on the native tribes inhabiting the forest
regions and eastern slope of the Andes, in which the following passage
occurs: "The Nahumedes are an almost extinct tribe, on the river of the
same name. They are those who attacked the explorer de Orellana, who
believed that these savages, with their chemises and skirts and long
hair, were women warriors, or Amazons, and which name was given to the
river. This must be the explanation of the supposed existence of women
warriors in these regions, for no legend or history among the Indians
can be found relating to any empire of women." This is an example of
doubt carried to extreme limits. If the Nahumedes are the people who
attacked de Orellana, they have shifted their ground considerably,
which, of course, is quite possible; but it is too much to say that the
Indians possess no traditions of a tribe of fighting women, in face of
the legends and rumours gathered not only by such men as Father de Acuña
and those

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

more or less his contemporaries, but by such travellers as de la
Condamine and others.

We do not find among early writers any claim that the female warriors
were called by any local name remotely approaching that of Amazons,
although these writers had always clearly in their minds the Asiatic and
African stories. A recent authority, Dr. D. G. Brinton, however, has
made the curious discovery that the word *amazunu* is used by the
natives at the mouth of the mighty river to describe "a torrent of
roaring water," and as especially applied to a bore at the outfall of
the Marañon. Thereupon he suggests that the Spaniards heard this term
used in reference to something wild, impetuous, and dangerous in
connection with the river, and straightway evolved a non-existent tribe.
It is only fair to say that there is no evidence of this in Carbajal's
account or that of de Acuña. Still, it would be interesting to trace the
origin of such a compound word. It is certain that the river and
province was named by the Spaniards from "the Amazons made famous by
historians," descendants of whom they imagined they had stumbled upon,
and not from any chance name uttered by the Indians. Is it possible that
the compound word is, after all, of later date than the Spanish Conquest
and the renaming of the river? Such tricks of philology are by no means
uncommon.

As late as 1743, when de la Condamine was travelling through the
country, rumours about the Amazons still persisted, but, like de Acuña,
de Ribera, Gili, and many more, this worthy explorer never caught a
glimpse of them or the mysterious Manoa. He could only meet people who
said they had seen

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

them in some remote, ill-defined region, and who knew others who had
years before visited the women and country, which, however, could never
be located. When de la Condamine was making his inquiries, it was said
that the Amazons had moved off up the Rio Negro, and they continued to
retreat before the inquisitive whites into the unmapped forest regions
of Guiana. Humboldt, like de la Condamine, was a strong believer in the
tales, though his investigations were as little conclusive. Sceptics
were equally numerous, and some had made their voices heard even in the
days of the conquistadors. There were those ready to insist that the
legend grew from the crafty designs of de Orellana, who wished by these
devious means to wipe out the memory of his gross treachery to his chief
Pizarro, thinking that by marvellous accounts of his own exploits he
would wrest applause and rewards from those at home. It is scarcely
necessary to attribute wilful intention to mislead on the part of Father
Carbajal and other explorers on this head. That women did appear in arms
in America as well as in Asia, and for the matter of that in Europe too,
there is no reason to doubt. Many instances may be cited.

Juan de lo Cosa reported that when he sailed with Rodrigo de Bastides in
1501 he landed with a party far north of the Orinoco on the site now
occupied by Cartagena, and he and his party were boldly attacked by men
and women who mingled in the fight, both sexes wielding most dexterously
the long dart, or azagay, and bow with poisoned arrows. Hulderick
Schnirdel, who travelled in company with Spaniards through the country
of the River

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Plate and the Amazon between the years 1534 and
1554, heard much of the fighting Amazons, who were said to live in an
island, to have no silver or gold, which they left with their husbands
on the mainland--altogether a novel account. Schnirdel went in search of
the island, but fruitlessly. He doubted that a nation existed, though he
attests that the fighting of women in the ranks with their menkind was
common enough. A little later, in 1587, Lopez Vaz recounts the
adventures of Lopez de Agira. This de Agira was the rebel and renegade
who murdered Don Fernando de Gusman, who had proclaimed himself Emperor
of Peru. After the murder, de Agira, accompanied by a few soldiers and
natives, started down the Amazon *en route* for the Atlantic. They met
with some opposition, and found it was true that Amazons existed--"that
is to say, women who fight in the wars with bows and arrows; but these
women fight to aid their husbands, and not by themselves alone without
companies of men, as de Orellana reports. There were of these women upon
divers parts of the river, who, seeing Spaniards fighting with their
husbands, came in to succour them, and showed themselves more valiant
than their husbands." But the comparative rarity of the phenomena would
be sufficient to stir the imagination of the Spaniards, whose minds, as
we have said, were stored with stories of the classic period and tales
of the East.

The early Spanish critics accepted the story of the fighting women, as
evidence to this effect accumulated, while more or less politely
disbelieving the story of Amazon "nations," and their arguments

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

are based on the very fact that women fight side by side with their
husbands, and that such-like warrior women were well known both in
ancient and modern history. It must also be remembered that America was
still part of the Indies to most of the early explorers, and to them it
seemed quite natural that the famous Themysciran nation should have
migrated farther afield. It followed that these explorers should find
that these warrior women were white, for so the fitness of things
demanded, though there is a possible explanation for a light-coloured
band of women if we suppose them to have belonged to a semi-religious
caste. Then there was another school, holding that this nation of women
was the remnant of those who had escaped from Asia through Africa by way
of Hesperides or the lost Atlantis. To most of the travellers, as with
Father de Acuña, the "Amazons made famous by historians," or, in other
words, the Asiatic dames, could not be forgotten, and the stories of
fabulous wealth could only contribute to their belief.

Down to quite recent times there were persistent rumours of wonderful
cities hidden away in almost impenetrable forests, stored with great
treasures of gold, and often said to be guarded by women, though we see
from Schnirdel's report that the office of treasure-guardianship might
be reversed. The typical examples were the phantom cities of Dobayba,
where there existed a golden temple to a Nature goddess, and Manoa del
Dorado, so constantly talked about as near at hand, but never seen: the
latter a city with houses roofed with gold, bathed by a crystal-clear
lake, the waters rippling over

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

sands of gold. Now, in justification of this, we may point out that when
the Spaniards came to Peru for the second time, and made the unfortunate
Emperor Atahualpa prisoner in his own castle of Cajamarca, the Inca
offered as a ransom to fill a room, said to be 22 feet by 27 feet, as
high as he could reach, say 6 feet, with gold. This, it has been
estimated, would have amounted to a value of a hundred million sterling.
But the Spaniards were impatient, and slaughtered their prisoner, a
proceeding indefensible on moral grounds, and as a matter of policy less
sensible than killing the goose that laid the golden eggs. The treasure
was never forthcoming. Yet at Cuzco, the true capital of the Inca power,
and at Pachacamac, the Spaniards found the palace walls covered with
plates of gold. Offerings of gold chains and flowers of golden plates
also seem to have been thrown into lakes. At the birth of the last
undoubted heir of the Incas, who received the symbolic name of Huasca,
"The Chain," or "The Cable," a commemorative chain said to be 233 yards
long and composed of heavy links of gold was made and cast into Lake
Orcos, no doubt as a thanksoffering.

That the sands of lakes and rivers abounded in alluvial deposits of
finely powdered gold is true to this day as it was of old. Stories of
such richly endowed cities were not confined to Brazil and Peru, but
were common to Guiana, Honduras, and so on. The grounds for these
legends were perfectly natural, as we have just shown. Besides, many of
the most wonderful buildings of the Incas, Aztecs, and others were
placed either in most difficultly

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

accessible mountains, or on islands in big lakes, or in dense forests.
Von Hassell in 1905 explored much of the upper reaches of the Amazon on
the Atlantic side of the Cordilleras, and he visited the great fluvial
island of Tumpinambaranas, where he found stupendous ruins, reminding
him of the civilisation of the Incas. He says that the Amazon plain must
have been visited by repeated waves of emigrants, having civilisation as
advanced as that of the Incas, but who had disappeared, leaving faint
traces behind them. Baron Nordenskold, on his travels in Chaco, in
Argentina, "found large places in the primeval forests beyond the real
Calchaqui territory, in districts at present very sparsely inhabited."

The Toltec city of Quiché, capital of Utatlan, Central America,
apparently had a population of 3,000,000, and the Spaniards' description
of the Royal Palace reads like an account of the Alhambra in its days of
glory. Experience taught that it was customary for people threatened
with invasion to remove their treasures to as inaccessible retreats as
possible, where, also, the womenfolk would be gathered, and these, in
default of men, would as occasion demanded take part in the defence of
their lares and penates. Villages, too, were often occupied by women,
old men, and young children alone for many weeks together, while the men
and youths were away on the war-path or some great hunting expedition.
Moreover, in this part of the American continent, where moon-worship
prevailed, there were certain ceremonies connected with womanhood and
child-bearing involving the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

separation of women from all males, and apparently elaborate dances in
the moonlight. Upon these solid enough foundations the Spaniards, by
frequently injudicious questioning of the natives, built up a rickety
superstructure of many strange fables. The evil practice of our own
Counsels learned in the law have taught us the very real danger of
putting leading questions, even when addressed to educated people able
to grasp their meaning. But when you have a credulous cross-examiner,
bewildered by the novelty of his surroundings, his head stuffed full
with the stories from Quintus Curtius and Diodorus the Sicilian, and on
the other hand a horde of naked savages, or even of semi-barbarians,
catching most imperfectly at the meaning of their questioners, it will
be readily seen that the answers easily took the form that the
interlocutor more or less unconsciously desired.

That women did fight on occasion--and this would be particularly true of
the hill and forest tribes--we have already seen by various travellers'
accounts. That they were occasionally for a length of several moons a
tribe, as it were, by themselves, and guardians of tribal treasures,
there is no reason to disbelieve. Ample material here for a very robust
and circumstantial legend, without either party to the making thereof
being, liars of malice aforethought.

An extraordinary fact, which should be mentioned in this place, as it
may have some bearing on the subject, is that the Lenâpé tribe of North
American Indians were called "Women." They were a branch of the great
Algonkin nation, but found

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

themselves down in Delaware, surrounded by the warlike Iroquois. That
they could boast of an honourable origin is proved by the fact that the
three Delaware sub-tribes had as their totems the tortoise (above all
honoured as the servant of the All-Powerful Creator, and on whose back
the earth was built up), the wolf, and the turkey. Moreover, Dr. Brinton
informs us that Lenâpé means "men of our nation," or "our men." Yet it
appears that for a lengthy period this tribe never went to war, and
although in later years apparently not held in high esteem,
unquestionably filled an important office as a kind of buffer nation of
peacemakers. Among most American tribes there existed a Council of
Women, composed of the old matrons, whose privilege it was to meet in
war-time and discuss matters affecting the tribe. If they advocated
peace, it was no disgrace for the "braves" to listen to them and
consider the advisability of offering terms to the enemy. It was in some
such position as this that the whole tribe of Delaware Algonkins were
placed. According to their own statements, the Lenâpés became the
peacemaking tribe at the special request of the Iroquois, who saw that
the nations were eating each other up. So they approached the Lenâpés
with an honourable proposition, and in the presence of the other
assembled tribes gave the Delawares the long robe and ear-rings of
women, so that they should not bear arms or mingle in strife; the
calabash of oil and medicine, to the end that they might become the
nurses; the corn pestle and hoe, so that they might cultivate the land;
and, in order to emphasise the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

whole solemnity, bestowed on the chiefs of the "Women" tribe a belt of
wampum, the greatest of symbols of peace and fraternity within their
gift, as each division of the strange ceremony was reached. That the
Lenâpés fulfilled their mission seems certain, although as time went on
the Iroquois began to treat them as a conquered tribe, and used the term
"Women" as applied to them with some contumely. This buffer tribe, with
its claims to a high mission and its equivocal position and attributes,
appears to be unique in American Indian social economy; on the other
hand, at all events in the southern part of the continent, there were
classes of men in the barbarian nations dressed and treated as women.
The whole problem of the "Women" tribe, however, is far from being
cleared up. Was it cajoled into its curious place as the result of some
dim recollection of a once-powerful women-priest caste? Or was it merely
a clever device suggested by pressing needs when it began to be
recognised that there must be occasional cessation from the interminable
intertribal slaughter? It is a mystery full of suggestion.

To most, if not to all, of the tales that the Spaniards gave a willing
credence there was a solid substratum of truth. The splendid build of
the Caribs, the abnormal proportions of the men down in the terrible
Tierra del Fuego, and the dwarfish tribes of the forest regions and of
the degenerate Aztecs, would account for the giants and pigmies of whom
so much was heard. In such matters the terms are essentially comparative
to both questioner and questioned, and, moreover, the "little men" term
may be relative not only to their

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

 

<span id="img_16100"></span>

[![HYDRA (PITCHES) COMBAT OF HERCULES WITH AMAZONS. HAMILTON COLL.
BRITISH MUSEUM.](tn/16100.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/16100.jpg.md)  
HYDRA (PITCHES) COMBAT OF HERCULES WITH AMAZONS. HAMILTON COLL. BRITISH
MUSEUM.  

 

stature but to moral qualities also. To the hard-fighting, hungry Carib
the man of peace was unquestionably a "little man" no matter how tall or
broad-shouldered he might be, just as to-day in the East the mass of
people without influence are "little men" to the rulers and their
satellites. Even the men with their toes pointing the wrong way (of whom
the world had heard before from the early Greek writers on India)
existed, for the reversing of moccasins or other feet-covering is a
natural dodge adopted to bewilder, and the attempted explanation of such
a trick would be quite sufficient to make confusion worse confounded.

Nor need we have a moment's hesitation in crediting the existence of
tailed tribes, for totemism and the respect that comes of fear inspired
by wild horned beasts was quite sufficient to make man proud of caudal
appendages and to supply his own deficiencies in this matter. Even
Hercules so managed the draping of the lion's skin about his own body as
to secure a very fine tail. Dionysus also treated his panther's skin in
the same way, while his Seleni sported the tails of giddy goats with
waggish effrontery. In most parts of Africa the buffalo's tail is an
emblem of power, as the horse's tail is in Northern Africa and Arabia,
whether carried in the hand or worn pendant behind from the waist, the
latter method of personal adornment applying to the buffalo's tail, and
is found to prevail in the south, east, and west.

Lord Hindlip, writing of the Kavirondo tribes in British East Africa,
says the women are fond of a certain amount of adornment, and that "a
peculiar ornament is a grass tail tied round the waist generally by a
string of beads. I believe," he adds, "that this

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

is an emblem of marriage, and to touch one of those tails is a breach of
good manners, the offender being liable to a fine of five goats." Bruce
and Baker also mention women in the far Sudan and in the Upper Nile
Valley wearing tails of plaited skin or of string. In North America
certain ceremonials include the Buffalo Dance, when every "brave"
carries horns on his head and a tail waggles fiercely in the rear during
the saltatory performance. Both the men and women of the Aymara Indians
of Peru and Bolivia wear their hair long and plaited into tails, hence
it was supposed that they had originally emigrated from China, or at
least been influenced by a Chinese invasion prior to the Inca era. To
all these, tails are of no small importance, and would be looked upon by
their neighbours with awe or contempt according to tribal relations.

It is in this spirit that most of the Amazon stories must be treated. At
the same time, we must not omit to quote some weighty opinions pointing
to a more direct acceptation. De la Condamine, who was a thoroughgoing
believer in the American Amazon nation, argued that its evolution was
quite natural and a development for which we might have looked with
confidence. He held that the women leading migratory lives, often
following their husbands to war, were usually compelled to submit to
very harsh domestic conditions. But the very conditions imposed upon
them by their mode of life afforded ample opportunities for them to
escape from the tyranny by simply detaching themselves from the tribe
and forming a community wherein, if they did not exactly gain
independence, they would no longer be slaves and beasts of burden. This
method of establishing new communities was, he pointed out, going on

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

in every colony where slave-holding was tolerated; the slaves growing
tired of ill-treatment escaped to the forests or swamps, setting up
their own camps and villages. Robert Southey re-echoed this opinion that
"the lot of women is usually dreadful among savages. . . . Had we never
heard of the Amazons of antiquity, I should, without hesitation, believe
in those of America." To him the terrible hardships of the Indian
women's lives demanded some such relief, and he looked upon the
existence of such communities as redounding to the credit of humanity,
showing that there was hope for its regeneration. A recent writer of
deep philosophic tendencies, Mr. E. J. Payne, follows on the same lines.
He regards the whole phenomena of Amazonian states as a perfectly
legitimate and understandable outcome of the transition from savagery to
barbarism, a period when life is peculiarly harsh to womankind. But, as
he says, such communities always carry within themselves the seeds of
decay, for they cannot extend, cannot indeed exist for long, without the
tolerance of man. A day comes when he grows tired of a complacent
attitude, and the women then have nothing to do but surrender on his own
terms. These are undoubtedly both interesting and plausible theories,
which do not really enter into conflict with the opinions that we have
ventured to advance on the whole subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_4"></span>[149:1](ama09.htm#fr_4.md) A point not noted by the
American Orientalists is that Kamas, the Hindu god of love, is often
shown astride a parrot, and was probably originally a parrot god. In
Hindu stories the parrot constantly intervenes in amatory matters. It is
curious to approach this bit of Hindu mythology with the Amazon legend
and its romantic application. But for our own part we see in this only
another instance of close observation of facts, in this case the
peculiarly demonstrative affection most parrots have for their mates,
which may even be carried further, as in the tale of the bird mourning
and longing for death because the tree which had given it shelter had
withered away. It is, in fact, an example of natural spontaneous
symbolism.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter IX: The Amazon Stones](ama10.md)
