[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos02)  [Next](wos04) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8177557459/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya*, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

### SELECT WORKS

##### OF

# Sri Sankaracharya

### Hymn to Hari.

I praise, with devotion, the All-pervading (Vishṇu), Who, Himself
without origin, is the origin of the universe, in Whom this wheel of
*samsâra* <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0) revolves in this wise, and,
on realising Whom, this wheel of *samsâra* is destroyed—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (1)

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

Him, from a single aspect of Whom this whole universe has sprung into
existence, by Whom again it is held together in this manner, by Whom it
is pervaded, and by Whom it is illumined through pleasure and pain,—that
Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (2)

Him, Who is all-knowing, Who is indeed all and perfect, Who is bliss
itself, Who resides in the qualities <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1)
and has therefore endless attributes, Who is the Unmanifest that
differentiates the undifferentiated, and Who is both the real

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

and the unreal,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (3)

There is naught else than Him; yet, this universe is not his real
nature. He is not the objective world, for He is of the nature of
nonobjective consciousness. And though He is devoid of the distinction
of the knower, knowledge and the known, He is nevertheless always the
knower,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise.
(4)

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord by those who, having learnt from
proper preceptors the extremely subtle nature of the

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Immutable, are
engaged in the contemplation of the ultimate Unity with the help of
renunciation, constant meditation and firm devotion,—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (5)

Him Who is realised as "I am the self-resplendent Self" when, by the
control of the life-forces, the mind is confined within the heart amidst
the repetition of the sound Om and, all other memory being excluded, is
merged therein and is finally dissolved,—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (6)

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Him Whom the knowers of Brahman realise by meditation as the Supreme
Lord within themselves known as Brahman, as the second-less, infinite,
unborn, subtle, inscrutable Resplendence residing in the heart and
attainable only by devotees,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of
*samsâra*, I praise. (7)

Him Who is understood as the unsurpassable bliss realisable only by the
spirit by those who perceive within their own hearts That which is
beyond the senses, being realisable only by the expansion of the
individual self, and beyond the cognisable, being cognition itself,—that
Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (8)

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

Him Whom, the Unborn, sages like Sanaka meditate upon by understanding
that every object of perception has an underlying reality and is
identical with Brahman and by realising "I am That",—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (9)

Him Whom the knowers of the <span class="smallcaps">Self</span> know as
the Supreme Lord "in whom I am" by eliminating as not-I whatever is
perceptible, and by realising that bliss which is self- resplendent
consciousness,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (10)

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

Him in Whom the devotees of the Immutable, forsaking their bodies, merge
themselves by realising Him as the pure self-resplendent <span
class="smallcaps">Self</span>, infinite like space, as That which alone
remains when all that is cognisable and differentiated is eliminated
step by step,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (11)

Him Who is in all, Whose body is this all, and yet Who is not this all,
Who knows all, but Whom none knows at all, and Who, as stated above,
holds all this together, being the inner spirit thereof,—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (12)

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

Him Who is realised as "I am the One that is the All" by those who see,
by their reason, all this universe as existing within themselves and
their own self as the Unborn residing in the heart of all beings,—that
Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (13)

Him Who is described by some as the One in all beings that sees and
smells and tastes and touches and hears and knows, and by others as the
witness that is the seer in all doers,—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (14)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord, the <span
class="smallcaps">Self</span> that is the knower of objects, Who sees
and hears and tastes and smells and knows and holds this body together
as the individual self therein,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness
of *samsâra*, I praise. (15)

He Who sees objects of gross matter in the waking state, illusion in
dream, and blissful repose in deep sleep and Himself in the fourth state
and is happy,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (16)

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

Him Who, though pure, imperishable, one and unborn, nevertheless imposes
upon Himself <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2) different qualities and
different shapes and, like a crystal <span id="fr_3"></span>[†](#fn_3),
shines variegated, differentiated and hidden by the fruits of
action—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise.
(17)

Him Who is the one Reality, but Who owing to the diversity of
intellects, is conventionally spoken of in various ways as Brahman,
Vishṇu, Rudra, Fire, the Sun, the Moon, Indra, Vâyu (the God of Wind),
and sacrifice,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (18)

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Him, the Unborn, Whom, at the beginning of the Taittirîya-Upanishad,
Varuṇa explained to Bhṛigu <span id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) as being
uncontradictable, conscious,. pure, imperishable, transcendental,
unperturbed, unperceivable, without parts, blissful, and without a
second,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise.
(19),

Him Whom, as stated at the end of the Taittirîya-Upanishad, Bhṛigu,
taught by his father, realised as the witness in everything after having
determined within. himself "I am

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

the Brahman beyond these five sheaths of taste, etc. <span
id="fr_5"></span>[\*](#fn_5)",—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness
of *samsâra*, I praise. (20)

Him by Whose inspiration, by Whose power, <span
id="fr_6"></span>[†](#fn_6) and on Whom depending, the knower of the
field <span id="fr_7"></span>[‡](#fn_7) directs the active principle in
all creatures, and by Whose power <span id="fr_8"></span>[\*\*](#fn_8)
is impelled the self that is the doer and enjoyer in this world,—that
Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (21)

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

Him, the one Supreme <span class="smallcaps">Self</span>, Who created
all this indescribable universe and Who fully permeates every part of
that creation, being identical therewith, and thus becomes all that is
manifest and unmanifest,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of
*samsâra*, I praise. (22)

Him Whom, by the help of the Vedântas, the sciences treating of the
self, the Purânas, the cults of Vishnu-worship and other sciences, many
have realised as the Supreme Lord within their own selves and, knowing
thus, have merged themselves into Him,—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (23)

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

Him, the resplendent Lord, Who is speedily realisable even in this world
by those who strive to seek him by means of faith, devotion, meditation,
self-control and other expedients, but Who is hard to realise even
through hundreds of lives for those who are devoid of those
expedients,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (24)

Him, the indescribable glory . of Whose manifestation has been defined
by the Vedic seers in the passage "All this indeed is Brahman", that is,
all this, being born of Him, being in Him and dissolving in Him, is
identical with Him, like the waves of the ocean,—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (25)

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

Him Who is realised by intense devotion as the unborn and indestructible
principle, the pure intelligence residing as Witness in the heart, and
by meditating "I am in Him", as taught in the Gîta and in the manner
laid down therein,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of
*samsâra*, I praise. (26)

Him, the Infinite, Who, assuming the condition of the individual self
and dwelling in nature, incessantly enjoys the objects of enjoyment
through the five gateways of the senses, and Who, though one, appears as
different in different bodies like the moon reflected in the

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

waters,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise.
(27)

Him Who is named Purusha and Who is realised, even in this world, as "He
who is I is that Supreme Lord and I am verily He" by those who
intelligently investigate the teachings of Vyâsa <span
id="fr_9"></span>[\*](#fn_9) and understand the distinction between the
field and the knower of the field, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[†](#fn_10)—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness
of *samsâra*, I praise. (28)

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

Him, the conscious principle residing in innumerable bodies, Whose
oneness realising, men speedily become Himself in this very life, and;
in Whom merged, they come no more to birth in this world,—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (29)

Him Who is realised as "He that is the Supreme Lord is I and I am verily
He" by those who understand the unity in duality taught by the passages
of the Madhu-Brâhmaṇa <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11) and attain a
supremacy that exacts veneration even at the hands of Indra,—that Hari,
the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (30)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

Him Who is realised as the Supreme Lord by those who meditate on the
unity of the <span class="smallcaps">Self</span>, as "He that, dwelling
in the mind, impels the body to action, He too that, residing in the
sun, causes him to -radiate heat, I am verily He,"—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (31)

Him, the ultimate reality, a spark of Whose consciousness reflected in
nature <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) cognises the objects of
cognition outside the mind, but does not cognise Him that dwells within
the mind and inspires the cognition,—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (32)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

Him Who is realised as "I am that conscious principle in this body" by
those who intelligently enquire "Who is this Shining One in the body?"
and determine that this Shining One is indeed the knower, the hearer and
the thinker,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (33)

Who indeed can live, if He do not reside in the body? He alone,
therefore, is the Supreme Bliss and He is the incoming and outgoing
life. By such reasoning does the Scripture <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_13) declare that He is,—that Hari, the
destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (34)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

"Am I the vital energy <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_14)? Or speech?
Or the senses of hearing etc? Or the mind <span
id="fr_15"></span>[†](#fn_15)? Or the intellect? <span
id="fr_16"></span>[‡](#fn_16) Am I a particular entity or the collective
whole?" Him Who, by thus meditating, is realised as "I am the conscious
principle in this body",—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of
*samsâra*, I praise. (35)

Him Who is realised as "I am not the vital energy <span
id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_14), nor the body, nor the mind <span
id="fr_18"></span>[†](#fn_15), nor the intellect <span
id="fr_19"></span>[‡](#fn_16), nor the ego <span
id="fr_20"></span>[§](#fn_17), nor the understanding <span
id="fr_21"></span>[\*\*](#fn_18), but am verily He that is the

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

conscious principle in this body,"—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (36)

Him Whom, in the Upanishad of the Sâmaveda <span
id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_19), the father <span
id="fr_23"></span>[†](#fn_20) explains to his son <span
id="fr_24"></span>[‡](#fn_21) as pure existence, pure consciousness, the
unborn, the real, the transcendental, the eternal, the infinite, the
first cause, and by declaring "That thou art",—that Hari, the destroyer
of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (37)

Him Who is realised as the ultimate reality by those who, through
perfect absorption of

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

thought <span id="fr_25"></span>[\*](#fn_22), attain to the knowledge of
the conscious principle within themselves by first excluding all
conditioned and unconditioned existence and then eliminating all that is
perceptible as "Not this" "Not this,"—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (38)

Him Who is the warp and woof of the web of this universe including the
undifferentiated ether, Who is established under the designation of the
Indestructible in such passages as "It is not gross, It is not atomic
etc.", Who can only be understood as "There is no knower but He", but
Who is not the object of cognition,—that Hari, the destroyer of the
darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (39)

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

Him, the Knower, without realising Whom within one's self as "I am He",
all this appears as real, but, Who being realised, all this becomes
unreal,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise.
(40)

Him Who is realised as the consciousness that ultimately remains when
the self that is not free from impurity is burnt in the fire of
knowledge. kindled by eightfold Yôga <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_23), like gold alloyed with iron in the
furnace,—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I
praise. (41)

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

Him Who is the resplendent light of consciousness, the first cause, the
praiseworthy, Who shines like lightning within the heart amidst the
spheres of the sun, moon and fire, <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_24)
in Whom the sages, worshipping Him with devotion as the ultimate reality
within their own selves, merge themselves even in this life,—that Hari,
the destroyer of the darkness of *samsâra*, I praise. (42)

May He, the all-pervading (Vishnu), protect this devotee who is an
individual self <span id="fr_28"></span>[†](#fn_25) existing

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

in Himself, considering "This devotee praises Me Who am the essence of
all organs with constant devotion and single-mindedness and withdrawing
himself within his own self"—that Hari, the destroyer of the darkness of
*samsâra*, I praise. (43)

He who recites or hears this. hymn of the venerable teacher, valuable to
devotees and resembling the sun in dispelling the darkness of the fear
of *samsâra*, attains the state of the All-pervading (Vishnu) and;
becoming a seer, realises both knowledge and the object of
knowledge <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_26) within himself. (44)

Thus ends the hymn to Hari.

\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:\*](wos03.htm#fr_0) Phenomenal existence; the
succession of births and deaths.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:\*](wos03.htm#fr_1) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[10:\*](wos03.htm#fr_2) Lit: Sees.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[10:†](wos03.htm#fr_3) Reflecting external
colours.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[11:\*](wos03.htm#fr_4) Son of Varuṇa.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[12:\*](wos03.htm#fr_5) The five *kosas*, namely,
annamaya, prâṇamaya, manomaya, vijṇânamaya and ànandamaya.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[12:†](wos03.htm#fr_6) Mâyâ-ṣakti, the power of
illusion.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[12:‡](wos03.htm#fr_7) Kshetrajṇa, the individual
conscious self.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[12:\*\*](wos03.htm#fr_8) Chit-ṣakti, the power
of intelligence.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[16:\*](wos03.htm#fr_9) The Brahma-Sûtras of
Vyâsa.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[16:†](wos03.htm#fr_10) Kshetra, the field or
the body, and Kshetrajṇa, the knower of the field or the individual
self.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[17:\*](wos03.htm#fr_11) Bṛih. Up., II. 5.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[18:\*](wos03.htm#fr_12) *I.e.*, the individual
self.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[19:\*](wos03.htm#fr_13) The
Taittirîya-Upanishad.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[20:\*](wos03.htm#fr_17) Prâṇa.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[20:†](wos03.htm#fr_18) Manas.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[20:‡](wos03.htm#fr_19) Buddhi.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[20:§](wos03.htm#fr_20) Ahankâra.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[20:\*\*](wos03.htm#fr_21) Dhî.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[21:\*](wos03.htm#fr_22) Chhândogya-Upanishad.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21:†](wos03.htm#fr_23) Uddâlaka.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[21:‡](wos03.htm#fr_24) Svetaketu.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[22:\*](wos03.htm#fr_25) Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[23:\*](wos03.htm#fr_26) Yama, Niyama, Âsana,
Praṇâyâma, Pratyâhâra, Dhâraṇâ, Dhyâna and Samâdhi.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[24:\*](wos03.htm#fr_27) This is a technicality
of the higher *Yoga*.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[24:†](wos03.htm#fr_28) Purusha.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[25:\*](wos03.htm#fr_29) The Supreme Being

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Ten-versed Hymn.](wos04)
