[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos00)  [Next](wos02.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8177557459/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index.md)  
*Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya*, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_i">p. i</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> main object of this publication is to
present, in simple English, some of the works of Sri Sankaràchàrya in
which he tried to expound, in a popular style, the philosophy of the
non-dualistic Vedànta of which he was the well-known founder. With this
view the present translation has been rendered free of technical words
and phrases, and, in some instances, literal and technical accuracy has
been purposely sacrificed in order to make the translation readable and
comprehensible by itself independently of the text. It is however hoped
that the juxtaposition of the Samskrit text and the English translation
will serve the double object of enabling the student of Samskrit to
understand the text better and to correct, by a reference to the text,
any defect of expression in the translation as an inevitable result of
the attempt to garb it in a popular style. To those that have had no
training in metaphysics or dialectics and have neither the leisure nor
the capacity to read the original standard works of Sankara,—mostly
elaborate commentaries on the Vedànta aphorisms, the Bhagavad-gíta and
the Upanishads—a publication of this kind should be specially helpful
for a proper understanding of the broad outline of Sankara's philosophy
of non-dualism. The main feature of that philosophy, as will be apparent
from a study of the following pages, may be summed up very briefly as
follows.

<span id="page_ii">p. ii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Samsára* or
phenomenal existence, whose mar factor is the bondage of births and
deaths it succession, is unreal and is the result of illusion.—the
ignorance by which the only and absolute reality, the Supreme Self, is
mistaken for the unreal world, in the same way as a rope may be mistaken
for a serpent in the dusk of the evening. Both bondage and liberation
are thus illusory, for, since there is no real bondage at all, how can
there be a liberation from it? Yet, liberation or *moksha* is relatively
spoken of and can only result from a thorough knowledge of the reality
behind and beyond and underneath and within the unreal. Sankara
emphasises the fact that such knowledge is not a mere theoretical one
which can be gathered from books or lectures, but is of the nature of
direct realisation or actual experience. The sole source of this
knowledge is a clear and accurate understanding of the Vedic text "That
thou art," but, however much one may analyse its meaning by means of his
own reason or with the aid of commentaries, the direct realisation of
the self cannot take place unless the Vedic text in question reaches the
student through the mouth of a spiritual teacher (the *guru*). It is
then, and only then, that the disciple realises in a flash, as it were,
"I am Brahman," the individual soul is seen, at all times and in all
conditions, to be identical with the Supreme Self, and the knowledge
springs up that all this is indeed the Self and there is naught but the
Self. This is the highest goal of spiritual endeavour, the *moksha* or
liberation of the

<span id="page_iii">p. iii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Vedanta
philosophy. Further detail would be out of place in a short preface of
this kind, but the translator feels bound to call attention to one very
prominent teaching of Sankara which will be evident from a perusal of
the present publication,—namely, that devotion to a personal God
(*Saguna-Brahman*) is not inconsistent with the true Vedanta philosophy,
but, on the other hand, spiritual perfection or liberation is impossible
without the grace of God attainable by devotion and the grace of the
Master (*guru*) who alone can reveal the true nature of the Self to the
ardent aspirant for the Absolute that is beyond all word and thought.

<span class="smallcaps">The Translator.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](wos02.md)
