[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Hinduism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](wos07)  [Next](wos09) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/8177557459/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](../../img/tn_hin.jpg)](index)  
*Select Works of Sri Sankaracharya*, tr. by S. Venkataramanan, \[1921\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

### Knowledge of Self.

This treatise called "Knowledge of Self" is written for the sake of
those whose sins have been destroyed by austerities and who, with a
tranquil mind and free from attachment, long for liberation. (1).

Compared with all other means, knowledge is the only direct means to
liberation. As cooking is impossible without fire, so is liberation
impossible without knowledge. (2).

Ritual cannot dispel ignorance, because they are not mutually
contradictory. But knowledge

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

surely destroys ignorance, as light destroys the densest darkness. (3).

The self appears to be conditioned by virtue of ignorance. But when that
(ignorance) is destroyed, the unconditioned self shines by its own
light, like the sun when the clouds have disappeared. (4).

Having purified, by repeated instruction, the soul that is turbid with
ignorance, knowledge should efface itself, as the paste of the
cleaning-nut does with water. <span id="fr_154"></span>[\*](#fn_148)
(5).

The phenomenal world, abounding in desire, hatred, etc., is verily like
a dream. While

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

it lasts, it seems to be real, but, when one awakes, it becomes unreal.
(6).

Like the (illusion of) silver in mother-o’-pearl, the world appears to
be real only until the Supreme Self, the immutable reality behind
everything, is realised. (7).

Like bubbles in water, the worlds are born, remain and dissolve in the
Supreme Lord that is the material cause and foundation of all things.
(8).

On the eternal Vishnu, who is pure existence and consciousness, as the
common factor, all these various appearances are superimposed, like
wristlets and other forms on gold. (9).

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

Like space, the Lord Vishnu, coming in contact with various conditions,
appears to be different by reason of their differences, but is seen to
be undifferentiated when those (conditions) are destroyed. (10).

Only by virtue of varying conditions are caste, name, periods of
religious life, etc., imposed on the self, like taste, colour and other
distinctions imposed on water. (11).

The place for experiencing happiness and misery, which is made up of the
fivefold compounds of the great elements and is obtained as the result
of past actions, is called the (dense) body. (12).

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

The instrument of enjoyment, which is made up of the uncompounded
elements and which consists of the five life-forces, the mind, the
consciousness, and the ten senses <span
id="fr_155"></span>[\*](#fn_149), is the subtle body. (13).

The beginningless illusion that is indefinable is called the causal
body. One should understand the self as other than these three bodies
(or conditions). (14).

The pure self, by the relation of the five sheaths, etc., appears to
assume their respective natures, like a crystal reflecting a blue cloth,
etc. (15).

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

One should separate the grain of the pure inner self from the chaff of
the body and- other sheaths by the threshing of reason. (16).

Although the self is at all times and in all things, yet it cannot shine
in everything, but will shine only in the consciousness, just as a
reflection will appear only in polished surfaces. (17).

One should understand the self to be always like a king, different from
the body, senses, mind, consciousness, and eyes, the witness of their
activities. (18).

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

To the indiscriminating, the self appears to be active while (in
reality) the senses (alone) are active, in the same way that the moon is
seen as if running, when the clouds move. (19).

The body, senses, mind and consciousness, carry on their respective
activities by depending on the consciousness of the self, like men
depending on the sun's light. (20).

Owing to indiscrimination, men attribute the qualities and activities of
the body and the senses to the self that is pure existence and
consciousness <span id="fr_156"></span>[\*](#fn_150), in the same way as
blue colour is attributed to the sky. (21).

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

Moreover, the nature of doer, etc., that belongs to the conditioning
mind, is attributed to the self, just as the motion, etc., of water is
attributed to the refection of the moon therein. (22).

Passions, desires, happiness, misery, etc., exercise their function when
the consciousness is present, and do not exist in deep sleep when the
consciousness is absent. They belong, therefore, to the consciousness
and not to the self. (23).

As light is the very nature of the sun, coldness of water, heat of fire,
so are being, consciousness, bliss, eternity and absoluteness the very
nature of the self. (24).

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

By indiscriminately mixing up the aspect of being and consciousness of
the self with the function of the individual consciousness, there
springs up the idea "I know." (25).

The self undergoes no modification, nor can knowledge arise in any
manner from individual consciousness (alone). And yet, one ignorantly
imagines that the individual soul knows, does and sees everything well.
(26).

By mistaking the self to be the individual soul, as a rope for a
serpent, one is subject to fear. But if he realises, "I am not the
individual soul, but the Supreme Self," then he is free from fear. (27).

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The self alone illumines the consciousness; the senses, etc., as a light
reveals the pot and other objects; (but) one's own self is not illumined
by the illuminable objects. <span id="fr_157"></span>[\*](#fn_151) (28).

The very nature of the self being knowledge, it does not depend, for a
knowledge of itself, on any other knowledge, in the same way as a light
does not need another light to reveal itself. (29).

Eliminating all limitations with the help of the passage "not this, not
this," one should realise the identity of the individual soul and the
supreme self by means of the principal scriptural passages. (30).

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

The body and other objects of perception are the products of ignorance
and are as evanescent as bubbles. The self that is unconditioned is
other than these and should be understood as "I am Brahman." (31).

Birth, old age, decay, death, etc., are not for me, because I am other
than the body. Sound and other objects of sense have no connection with
me, for I am other than the senses. (32).

I am not the mind, and, therefore, sorrow, desire, hatred, fear, etc.,
are not for me. As declared by the scripture, the self is neither the
senses nor mind, but is unconditioned. (33).

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

I am attributeless, functionless, eternal, doubtless, stainless,
changeless, formless, eternally free, and unconditioned. (34).

Like ether, I pervade everything, inside and outside. I am imperishable,
ever the established (truth), alike to all, unattached, unconditioned,
imperturbable. (35).

I am that very supreme Brahman that is reality, knowledge and infinity,
that is ever unconditioned and ever free, the one undivided bliss that
is without a second. (36).

Such incessant impression on the mind that "I am only Brahman" removes
the turbulences of ignorance, as the elixir of life cures all diseases.
(37).

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

Sitting in a lonely place, free of all passions, with the senses
subjugated, one should contemplate that one infinite self, without
thinking of anything else. (38).

A wise man should, by his intelligence, submerge, in the self all that
is objective and should ever contemplate the one self that is like
unlimited space. (39).

One who has realised the supreme truth gives up everything, such as
form, caste, etc., and abides, by nature, in (the self that is) infinite
consciousness and bliss. (40).

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

The distinction of knower, knowledge and the known does not exist in
respect of the supreme self. Being sole consciousness and bliss, it
shines by itself alone. (41).

The flame of knowledge that arises by this constant churning of
meditation on the wood <span id="fr_158"></span>[\*](#fn_152) of the
self, will completely burn away the fuel of ignorance. (42).

When knowledge has destroyed ignorance, the self will manifest itself,
in the same way as the sun rises as soon as the dawn <span
id="fr_159"></span>[†](#fn_153) of day has dispelled darkness. (43).

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

The self, that is ever with us, appears, by ignorance, as if it were
unattained and, when that (ignorance) is destroyed, attained, like one's
own necklace. <span id="fr_160"></span>[\*](#fn_154) (44).

The condition of individual soul has been imposed on Brahman by
illusion, as the form of a man on a post, but disappears when the true
nature of the individual soul is realised. (45).

The knowledge that arises from the realisation of one's own true nature,
directly destroys the illusion of "I" and "mine" which resembles the
confusion of the directions. <span id="fr_161"></span>[†](#fn_155) (46).

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

The devotee (*yogin*) that has gained right realisation sees all things,
by the eye of knowledge, as existing in his own self, and the one self
as all things. (47).

He sees all things as his own self in the same way as one sees pots,
etc., as (mere) clay; (for), all this universe is only the self, and
there is naught other than the self. (48).

Liberation-while-living means that the wise person, having abandoned his
former limitations and qualities, and acquiring the properties of being,
consciousness (and bliss), attains Brahman, in the same way as the worm
becomes the wasp. (49).

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

Having crossed the ocean of ignorance and having slain the demons of
likes and dislikes, etc., the seer, united to tranquillity, is supremely
happy in the enjoyment of the bliss of his own self <span
id="fr_162"></span>[\*](#fn_156). (50).

Leaving aside all attachments to external and transient pleasures, and
happy in the bliss of the self, such a one, for ever, shines within,
like a light inside a globe. (51).

The seer, though remaining amidst limitations, should yet be unaffected
by their qualities, like space. Knowing all, he should be like one that
knows not, and should wander about, unattached, like the wind. (52).

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

When the limitations disappear, the seer merges unreservedly in the
Supreme (*vishnu*), like water in water, space in space, or light in
light. (53).

Than gaining which there is no greater gain, than whose bliss there is
no higher bliss, than knowing which there is no higher knowledge,—that
should be understood as Brahman. (54).

Seeing which naught else remains to be seen, becoming which there is no
becoming <span id="fr_163"></span>[\*](#fn_157) again, knowing which
naught else remains to be known,—that should he understood as Brahman.
(55).

That which is all-pervading, around, above, below, which is being,
consciousness and bliss,

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

which is without a second, without end, eternal, sole,—that should be
understood as Brahman. (56).

The immutable, the one uninterrupted bliss, which is indicated by the
Vedanta by excluding what is not it,—that should be understood as
Brahman. (57).

(The four-faced) Brahma and others, that are but parts of that self
which is uninterrupted bliss, become happy, each in his own degree, by
possessing a particle of that bliss. (58).

Every object (is such because. it) possesses that. All activity has
consciousness running through it <span id="fr_164"></span>[\*](#fn_158).
The Supreme Self, therefore, pervades

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

the whole universe, as butter is in every part of milk. (59).

That which is neither subtle nor dense, neither short nor long, which is
unborn, immutable, devoid of form, quality, caste or name,—that should
be understood as Brahman. (60).

By whose light the sun, etc., shine, but which is not illumined by these
that are illuminable, and by virtue of which all this (universe)
shines <span id="fr_165"></span>[\*](#fn_159),—that should be understood
as Brahman. (61).

Pervading the whole universe, internally and externally, and illumining
it, the Brahman shines by itself, like a red-hot iron ball. (62).

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

The Brahman is different from the universe. There is naught other than
Brahman. If anything other than Brahman is perceived, it is as unreal as
the mirage in the desert. (63).

Whatever is seen or heard, other than Brahman, cannot be (real). Even
that is Brahman, the secondless being, consciousness and bliss, when the
reality is known. (64).

He who has the eye of knowledge sees Brahman that is being,
consciousness and bliss, in all things; but he who has not the eye of
knowledge cannot see it thus, as a blind man cannot see the shining sun.
(65).

<span id="page_181">p. 181</span>

The individual soul, melted in the fire of knowledge kindled by
instruction, etc., is freed from all taints, like gold, and shines by
itself. (66).

The self is the sun of knowledge that, rising in the firmament of the
heart, destroys the darkness of ignorance, and, pervading all and
supporting all, shines—and makes everything shine. (67).

He who, unmindful of (the limitations of) direction, space, time, etc.,
and perfectly tranquil, attains the sanctum of the self, that is the
all-pervading, stainless, eternal bliss

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

which dispels (all qualities like heat and) cold, etc.,—he becomes
all-knowing, all-pervading, and immortal. (68).

 

 

Thus ends <span class="smallcaps">Knowledge of Self.</span>

\_\_\_\_

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_148"></span>[161:\*](wos08.htm#fr_154) The cleaning-nut,
rubbed into a paste and thrown into dirty water, clears the water and
itself settles down along with the dirt as a sediment.

<span id="fn_149"></span>[164:\*](wos08.htm#fr_155) The five senses of
perception and the five motor members of the body.

<span id="fn_150"></span>[166:\*](wos08.htm#fr_156) The self is absolute
consciousness as distinguished from *buddhi*, the individual
consciousness.

<span id="fn_151"></span>[169:\*](wos08.htm#fr_157) The mind, senses,
etc.

<span id="fn_152"></span>[173:\*](wos08.htm#fr_158) Araṇi wood, used to
kindle fire for sacrifices by churning it.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[173:†](wos08.htm#fr_159) Aruṇa, the charioteer
of the sun; the dawn-god.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[174:\*](wos08.htm#fr_160) One appears to
search for his necklace and find it, although it has been on his neck
all the time.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[174:†](wos08.htm#fr_161) One who mistakes the
directions, north, east, etc., corrects himself as soon as be clearly
understands his own position.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[176:\*](wos08.htm#fr_162) This an allegorical
explanation, incidentally, of the story of the Râmâyaṇa.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[177:\*](wos08.htm#fr_163) Birth.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[178:\*](wos08.htm#fr_164) These are the *sat*
(being) and *chit* (consciousness) aspects of the self. The *ânanda*
(bliss) aspect has been dealt with in the previous verse.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[179:\*](wos08.htm#fr_165) Is manifest; is
perceived.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Commentary on the Text](wos09)
