[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020305)  [Next](2020307.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—*What Constantine the
Great effected about the Oak in Mamre; he also built a Temple*.

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.iv-p2.1"></span>I consider</span> it necessary to detail the
proceedings of Constantine in relation to what is called the oak of
Mamre. <span id="fr_1146"></span>[1147](#fn_1146.md) This place is now
called Terebinthus, and is about fifteen stadia distant from Hebron,
which lies to the south, but is two hundred and fifty stadia distant
from Jerusalem. It is recorded that here the Son of God appeared to
Abraham, with two angels, who had been sent against Sodom, and foretold
the birth of his son. Here the inhabitants of the country and of the
regions round Palestine, the Phœnicians, and the Arabians, assemble
annually during the summer season to keep a brilliant feast; and many
others, both buyers and sellers, resort thither on account of the fair.
Indeed, this feast is diligently frequented by all nations: by the Jews,
because they boast of their descent from the patriarch Abraham; by the
Pagans, because angels there appeared to men; and by Christians, because
He who for the salvation of mankind was born of a virgin, afterwards
manifested Himself there to a godly man. This place was moreover honored
fittingly with religious exercises. Here some prayed to the God of all;
some called upon the angels, poured out wine, burnt incense, or offered
an ox, or he-goat, a sheep, or a cock. Each one made some beautiful
product of his labor, and after carefully husbanding it through the
entire year, he offered it according to promise as provision for that
feast, both for himself and his dependents. And either from honor to the
place, or from fear of Divine wrath, they all abstained from coming near
their wives, although during the feast these were more than ordinarily
studious of their beauty and adornment. Nor, if they chanced to appear
and to take part in the public processions, did they act at all
licentiously. Nor did they behave imprudently in any other respect,
although the tents were contiguous to each other, and they all lay
promiscuously together. The place is open country, and arable, and
without houses, with the exception of the buildings around Abraham’s old
oak and the well he prepared. No one during the time of the feast drew
water from that well; for according to Pagan usage, some placed burning
lamps near it; some poured out wine, or cast in cakes; and others,
coins, myrrh, or incense. Hence, as I suppose, the water was rendered
useless by commixture with the things cast into it. Once whilst these
customs were being celebrated by the Pagans, after the aforesaid manner,
and as was the established usage with hilarity, the mother-in-law <span
id="fr_1147"></span>[1148](#fn_1147.md) of Constantine was present for
prayer, and apprised the emperor of what was being done. On receiving
this information, he rebuked the bishops of Palestine in no measured
terms, because they had neglected their duty, and had permitted a holy
place to be defiled by impure libations and sacrifices; and he expressed
his godly censure in an epistle which he wrote on the subject to
Macarius, bishop of Jerusalem, to Eusebius Pamphilus, and to the bishops
of Palestine. He commanded these bishops to hold a conference on this
subject with the Phœnician bishops, and issue directions for the
demolition, from the foundations, of the altar formerly erected there,
the destruction of the carved images by fire, and the erection of a
church worthy of so ancient and so holy a place. The emperor finally
enjoined, that no libations or sacrifices should be offered on the spot,
but that it should be exclusively devoted to the worship of God
according to the law of the Church; and that if any attempt should be
made to restore the former rites, the bishops were to inform against the
delinquent, in order that he might be subjected to the greatest
punishment. The governors and priests of Christ strictly enforced the
injunctions contained in the emperor’s letter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1146"></span>[261:1147](2020306.htm#fr_1146.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C*. iii. 51–53; Soc. i. 18. As
a native of Palestine, Soz. here adds local details.

<span id="fn_1147"></span>[261:1148](2020306.htm#fr_1147.md) <span
id="iii.vii.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.iv-p4"></span>Eutropia, the mother of Fausta.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constantine destroyed the Places dedicated to the Idols, and
persuaded the People to prefer Christianity.](2020307.md)
