[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020393)  [Next](2020395.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.i"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p1"></span><span id="page_325">p. 325</span> <span
id="iii.x.i-Page_325"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="iii.x.i-p1.1"></span>Book V.</span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*Apostasy of Julian, the
Traitor. Death of the Emperor Constantius*.

<span id="iii.x.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.i-p3.1"></span>Such</span> were the transactions which
took <span id="fr_1359"></span>[1360](#fn_1359.md) place in the Eastern
Church. In the meantime, however, Julian, the Cæsar, attacked and
conquered the barbarians who dwelt on the banks of the Rhine; many he
killed, and others he took prisoners. As the victory added greatly to
his fame, and as his moderation and gentleness had endeared him to the
troops, they proclaimed him Augustus. Far from making an excuse to
Constantius for this act, he exchanged the officers who had been elected
by Constantius, and industriously circulated letters wherein Constantius
had solicited the barbarians to enter the Roman territories, and aid him
against Magnentius. He then suddenly changed his religion, and although
he had previously confessed Christianity, he declared himself
high-priest, frequented the pagan temples, offered sacrifices, and
invited his subjects to adopt that form of worship.

<span id="iii.x.i-p5"></span>As an invasion of Roman territory by the
Persians was expected, and as Constantius had on this account repaired
to Syria, Julian conceived that he might without battle render himself
master of Illyricum; he therefore set out on his journey to this
province, under pretense that he intended to present an apology to
Constantius for having, without his sanction, received the symbols of
imperial power. It is said, that when he arrived on the borders of
Illyria, the vines appeared full of green grapes, although the time of
the vintage was past, and the Pleiades had set; and that there fell upon
his followers a dashing of the dew from the atmosphere, of which each
drop was stamped with the sign of the cross. He and many of those with
him regarded the grapes appearing out of season as a favorable omen;
while the dew had made that figure by chance on the garments upon which
it happened to fall.

<span id="iii.x.i-p6"></span>Others thought that of the two symbols, the
one of the green grapes signified that the emperor would die
prematurely, and his reign would be very short; while the second sign,
that of the crosses formed by the drops of dew, indicated that the
Christian religion is from heaven, and that all persons ought to receive
the sign of the cross. I am, for my own part, convinced that those who
regarded these two phenomena as unfavorable omens for Julian, were not
mistaken; and the progress of time proved the accuracy of their opinion.

<span id="iii.x.i-p7"></span>When Constantius heard that Julian was
marching against him at the head of an army, he abandoned his intended
expedition against the Persians, and departed for Constantinople; but he
died on the journey, when he had arrived as far as Mopsucrenæ, which
lies near the Taurus, between Cilicia and Cappadocia.

<span id="iii.x.i-p8"></span>He died in the forty-fifth year of his age,
after reigning thirteen years conjointly with his father Constantine,
and twenty-five years after the death of that emperor.

<span id="iii.x.i-p9"></span>A little while after the decease of
Constantius, Julian, who had already made himself master of Thrace,
entered Constantinople and was proclaimed emperor. Pagans assert that
diviners and demons had predicted the death of Constantius, and the
change in affairs, before his departure for Galatia, and had advised him
to undertake the expedition. This might have been regarded as a true
prediction, had not the life of Julian been terminated so shortly
afterwards, and when he had only tasted the imperial power as in a
dream. But it appears to me absurd to believe that, after he had heard
the death of Constantius predicted, and had been warned that it would be
his own fate to fall in battle by the hands of the Persians, he should
have leaped into manifest death,—offering him no other fame in the world
than that of lack of counsel, and poor generalship,—and who, had he
lived, would probably have suffered the greater part of the Roman
territories to fall under the Persian yoke. This observation, however,
is only inserted lest I should be blamed for omitting it. I leave every
one to form his own opinion.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1359"></span>[325:1360](2020394.htm#fr_1359.md) <span
id="iii.x.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.i-p4"></span>Soc. ii. 47, and iii. 1; Ruf. *H. E.* i.
26; Orosius, vii. 29, 30; Philost. vi. 5, 6. Soz. has much that is
independent. Cf. Eunapius, Zos., and Am. Marcel. under the reigns of
Constantius and Julian. Eutrop. *Brev. Hist. Rom.* x. 14, 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Life, Education, and Training of Julian, and his Accession to
the Empire.](2020395.md)
