[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020351)  [Next](2020353) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Didymus the Blind, and
Aëtius the Heretic*.

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xv-p2.1"></span>Didymus</span>, <span
id="fr_1261"></span>[1262](#fn_1261) an ecclesiastical writer and
president of the school of sacred learning in Alexandria, flourished
about the same period. He was acquainted with every branch of science,
and was conversant with poetry and rhetoric, with astronomy and
geometry, with arithmetic, and with the various theories of philosophy.
He had acquired all this knowledge by the efforts of his own mind, aided
by the sense of hearing, for he became blind during his first attempt at
learning the rudiments. When he had advanced to youth, he manifested an
ardent desire to acquire speech and training, and for this purpose he
frequented the teachers of these branches, but learned by hearing only,
where he made such rapid progress that he speedily comprehended the
difficult theorems in mathematics. It is said that he learned the
letters of the alphabet by means of tablets in which they were engraved,
and which he felt with his fingers; and that he made himself acquainted
with syllables and words by the force of attention and memory, and by
listening attentively to the sounds. His was a very extraordinary case,
and many persons resorted to Alexandria for the express purpose of
hearing, or, at least, of seeing him. His firmness in defending the
doctrines of the <span id="page_295">p. 295</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xv-Page_295"></span>Nicæan council was extremely
displeasing to the Arians. He easily carried conviction to the minds of
his audience by persuasion rather than by power of reasoning, and he
constituted each one a judge of the ambiguous points. He was much sought
after by the members of the Catholic Church, and was praised by the
orders of monks in Egypt, and by Antony the Great.

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p4"></span>It is related that when Antony left the
desert and repaired to Alexandria to give his testimony in favor of the
doctrines of Athanasius, he said to Didymus, “It is not a severe thing,
nor does it deserve to be grieved over, O Didymus, that you are deprived
of the organs of sight which are possessed by rats, mice, and the lowest
animals; but it is a great blessing to possess eyes like angels, whereby
you can contemplate keenly the Divine Being, and see accurately the true
knowledge.” In Italy and its territories, Eusebius and Hilary, whom I
have already mentioned, were conspicuous for strength in the use of
their native tongue, whose treatises <span
id="fr_1262"></span>[1263](#fn_1262) concerning the faith and against
the heterodox, they say, were approvingly circulated. Lucifer, as the
story goes, was the founder of a heresy which bears his name, <span
id="fr_1263"></span>[1264](#fn_1263) and flourished at this period.
Aëtius <span id="fr_1264"></span>[1265](#fn_1264) was likewise held in
high estimation among the heterodox; he was a dialectician, apt in
syllogism and proficient in disputation, and a diligent student of such
forms, but without art. He reasoned so boldly concerning the nature of
God, that many persons gave him the name of “Atheist.” It is said that
he was originally a physician of Antioch in Syria, and that, as he
frequently attended meetings of the churches, and thought over the
Sacred Scriptures, he became acquainted with Gallus, who was then Cæsar,
and who honored religion much and cherished its professors. It seems
likely that, as Aëtius obtained the esteem of Cæsar by means of these
disputations, he devoted himself the more assiduously to these pursuits,
in order to progress in the favor of the emperor. It is said that he was
versed in the philosophy of Aristotle, and frequented the schools in
which it was taught at Alexandria.

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p8"></span>Besides the individuals above
specified, there were many others in the churches who were capable of
instructing the people and of reasoning concerning the doctrines of the
Holy Scriptures. It would be too great a task to attempt to name them
all. Let it not be accounted strange, if I have bestowed commendations
upon the leaders or enthusiasts of the above-mentioned heresies. I
admire their eloquence, and their impressiveness in discourse. I leave
their doctrines to be judged by those whose right it is. For I have not
been set forth to record such matters, nor is it befitting in history; I
have only to give an account of events as they happened, not
supplementing my own additions. Of those who at that time became most
distinguished in education and discourse and who used the Roman and
Greek languages, I have enumerated in the above narrative as many as I
have received an account of.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1261"></span>[294:1262](2020352.htm#fr_1261) <span
id="iii.viii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 7; i. 30, 31; Soc. iv.
25; iii. 10; ii. 35; Hieron. *de vir. illust.* c. cix.

<span id="fn_1262"></span>[295:1263](2020352.htm#fr_1262) <span
id="iii.viii.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p5"></span>He alludes to the treatises of Hilary
against the Arians and Auxentius, and against Constantius.

<span id="fn_1263"></span>[295:1264](2020352.htm#fr_1263) <span
id="iii.viii.xv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p6"></span>That, namely, of the Luciferians. Cf.
Soc. iii. 9.

<span id="fn_1264"></span>[295:1265](2020352.htm#fr_1264) <span
id="iii.viii.xv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xv-p7"></span>Cf. Soc. ii. 35; Philost. iii. 15–20;
supplementa from Phot. cod. 40; fragmenta from Suidas, s.v.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning St. Ephraim.](2020353)
