[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020495)  [Next](2020497.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Serapion, the
Archdeacon, and St. Olympias. Some of the Celebrated Men insolently bear
down upon John, traducing him as Impracticable and Passionate*.

<span id="iii.xiii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.ix-p2.1"></span>The</span> enmity of the clergy against
John was greatly increased by Serapion, his archdeacon. He was an
Egyptian, naturally prone to anger, and always ready to insult his
opponents. <span id="fr_1594"></span>[1595](#fn_1594.md) The feelings of
hostility were further fostered by the counsel which Olympias received
from John. Olympias was of most illustrious birth, and although she had
become a widow while young, and was zealously attached to the exercises
of monastic philosophy according to the laws of the church, yet
Nectarius had ordained her <span id="page_405">p. 405</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.ix-Page_405"></span>as deaconess. John, perceiving that she
bestowed her goods liberally on any one who asked her for them, and that
she despised everything but the service of God, said to her: “I applaud
your intentions; but would have you know that those who aspire to the
perfection of virtue according to God, ought to distribute their wealth
with economy. You, however, have been bestowing wealth on the wealthy,
which is as useless as if you had cast it into the sea. Know you not
that you have voluntarily, for the sake of God, devoted all your
possessions to the relief of the poor. You ought, therefore, to regard
your wealth as belonging to your Master, and to remember that you have
to account for its distribution. If you will be persuaded by me, you
will in future regulate your donations according to the wants of those
who solicit relief. You will thus be enabled to extend the sphere of
your benevolence, and your mercy and most zealous care will receive
reward from God.”

<span id="iii.xiii.ix-p4"></span>John had several disputes with many of
the monks, particularly with Isaac. He highly commended those who
remained in quietude in the monasteries and practiced philosophy there;
he protected them from all injustice and solicitiously supplied whatever
necessities they might have. But the monks who went out of doors and
made their appearance in cities, he reproached and regarded as insulting
philosophy. For these causes, he incurred the hatred of the clergy, and
of many of the monks, who called him a hard, passionate, morose, and
arrogant man. They therefore attempted to bring his life into public
disrepute, by stating confidently, as if it were the truth, that he
would eat with no one, and that he refused every invitation to a meal
that was offered him. I know of no pretext that could have given rise to
this assertion, except that, as I have been assured by a man of
undoubted veracity, John had, by rigorous asceticism, rendered himself
liable to pain in the head and stomach, and was thus prevented from
being present at some of the choicest symposia. Hence, however,
originated the greatest accusation that was ever devised against him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1594"></span>[404:1595](2020496.htm#fr_1594.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.ix-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 4, 11; Pallad. *Dialog.*
Pallad. *H. L.* cxliv.; *Epp.* xvii. *ad Olympiadem.* Soz. has
independent material concerning Olympias and Isaac.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Severian, Bishop of Gabales, and Antiochus, Bishop of Ptolemaïs.
Dispute between Serapion and Severian. Reconciliation between them
effected by the Empress.](2020497.md)
