[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020158)  [Next](2020160) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV</span>.—*Admission of the
Fugitive Goths into the Roman Territories, which caused the Emperor’s
Overthrow, and eventually the Ruin of the Roman Empire.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after the barbarians had
entered into a friendly alliance with one another, they were again
vanquished by other barbarians, their neighbors, called the Huns; and
being driven out of their own country, they fled into the <span
id="page_116">p. 116</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxxiv-Page_116"></span>territory of the Romans, offering to
be subject to the emperor, and to execute whatever he should command
them. When Valens was made acquainted with this, not having the least
presentiment of the consequences, he ordered that the suppliants should
be received with kindness; in this one instance alone showing himself
compassionate. He therefore assigned them certain parts of Thrace for
their habitation, deeming himself peculiarly fortunate in this matter:
for he calculated that in future he should possess a ready and
well-equipped army against all assailants; and hoped that the barbarians
would be a more formidable guard to the frontiers of the empire even
than the Romans themselves. For this reason he in the future neglected
to recruit his army by Roman levies; and despising those veterans who
had bravely straggled and subdued his enemies in former wars, he put a
pecuniary value on the militia which the inhabitants of the provinces,
village by village, had been accustomed to furnish, ordering the
collectors of his tribute to demand eighty pieces of gold for every
soldier, although he had never before lightened the public burdens. This
change was the origin of many disasters to the Roman empire
subsequently.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Abatement of Persecution against the Christians because of the
War with the Goths.](2020160)
