[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020409)  [Next](2020411) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*In Order that he might
not be thought Tyrannical, Julian proceeds artfully against the
Christians. Abolition of the Sign of the Cross. He makes the Soldiery
sacrifice, although they were Unwilling*.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xvii-p2.1"></span>When</span> Julian acted and wrote in the
manner aforesaid, he expected that he would by these means easily induce
his subjects to change their religious opinions. <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[1406](#fn_1405) Although he earnestly desired to
abolish the Christian religion, yet he plainly was ashamed to employ
violent measures, lest he should be accounted tyrannical. He used every
means, however, that could possibly be devised to lead his subjects back
to paganism; and he was more especially urgent with the soldiery, whom
he sometimes addressed individually and sometimes through the medium of
their officers. To habituate them in all things to the worship of the
gods, he restored the ancient form of the standard of the Roman
armies, <span id="fr_1406"></span>[1407](#fn_1406) which, as we have
already stated, Constantine had, at the command of God, converted into
the sign of the cross. Julian also <span
id="fr_1407"></span>[1408](#fn_1407) caused to be painted, in
juxtaposition with his own figure, on the public pictures, a
representation either of Jupiter coming out of heaven and presenting to
him the symbols of imperial power, a crown or a purple robe, or else of
Mars, or of Mercury, with their eyes intently fixed upon him, as if to
express their admiration of his eloquence and military skill. He placed
the pictures of the gods in juxtaposition with his own, in order that
the people might secretly be led to worship them under the pretext of
rendering due honor to him; he abused ancient usages, and endeavored to
conceal his purpose from his subjects. He considered that if they would
yield obedience on this point, they would be the more ready to obey him
on every other occasion; but that if they ventured to refuse obedience,
he would have reason to punish them, as infringers of the Roman customs
and offenders against the emperor and the state. There were but very few
(and the law had its course against them) who, seeing through his
designs, refused to render the customary homage to his pictures; but the
multitude, through ignorance or simplicity, conformed as usual to the
ancient regulation, and thoughtlessly paid homage to his image. The
emperor derived but little advantage from this artifice; yet he did not
cease from his efforts to effect a change in religion.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p6"></span>The next machination to which he had
recourse was less subtle and more violent than the former one; and the
fortitude of many soldiers attached to the court was thereby tested.
When the stated day came round for giving money to the troops, <span
id="fr_1408"></span>[1409](#fn_1408) which day generally fell upon the
anniversary of some festival among the Romans, such as that of the birth
of the emperor, or the foundation of some royal city, Julian reflected
that soldiers are naturally thoughtless and simple, and disposed to be
covetous of money, and therefore concluded that it would be a favorable
opportunity to seduce them to the worship of the gods. Accordingly, as
each soldier approached to receive the money, he was commanded to offer
sacrifice, fire and incense having been previously placed for this
purpose near the emperor, according to an ancient Roman custom. Some of
the soldiers had the courage to refuse to offer sacrifice and receive
the gold; others were so habituated to the observance of the law and
custom that they conformed to it, without imagining that they were
committing sin. Others, again, deluded by the luster of the gold, or
compelled by fear and consideration on account of the test which was
immediately in sight, complied with the pagan rite, and suffered
themselves to fall into the temptation from which they ought to have
fled.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p8"></span>It is related that, as some of them who
had ignorantly fallen into this sin were seated at table, and drinking
to each other, one among them happened to mention the name of Christ
over the cups. Another of the guests immediately exclaimed: “It is
extraordinary that you should call upon Christ, when, but a short time
ago, you denied him for the sake of the emperor’s gift, by throwing
incense into the fire.” On hearing this observation, they all became
suddenly conscious of the sin they had committed; they rose from table
and rushed into the public streets, where they screamed and wept and
called upon all men to witness that they were and would remain
Christians, and that they had offered incense unawares, and with the
hand alone, and not with the assent of the judgment. They then presented
themselves before the emperor, threw back his gold, and courageously
asked him to take back his own gift, and besought him to put them to
death, protesting that they would never renounce their sentiments, <span
id="page_340">p. 340</span> <span
id="iii.x.xvii-Page_340"></span>whatever torments might, in consequence
of the sin committed by their hand, be inflicted on the other parts of
their body for the sake of Christ.

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p9"></span>Whatever displeasure the emperor might
have felt against them, he refrained from slaying them, lest they should
enjoy the honor of martyrdom; he therefore merely deprived them of their
military commission and dismissed them from the palace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[339:1406](2020410.htm#fr_1405) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 13; Ruf. *H. E.* i. 32; Greg.
Naz. *cont. Jul.* i. 66, 80, 84; Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 16, 17.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[339:1407](2020410.htm#fr_1406) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p4"></span>Greg. Naz. *Or. cont. Jul.* i. 66.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[339:1408](2020410.htm#fr_1407) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p5"></span>*Id.*80, 81.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[339:1409](2020410.htm#fr_1408) <span
id="iii.x.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvii-p7"></span>Greg. Naz. *Or. cont. Jul.* i. 82–84;
Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 17; the variations.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He prohibited the Christians from the Markets and from the
Judicial Seats and from Sharing in Greek Education. Resistance of Basil
the Great, Gregory the Theologian, and Apolinarius to this Decree. They
rapidly translate the Scripture into Greek Modes of Expression.
Apolinarius and Gregory Nazianzen do this more than Basil, the one in a
Rhetorical Vein, the other in Epic Style and in Imitation of every
Poet.](2020411)
