[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020192)  [Next](2020194.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.i"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p1"></span><span id="page_137">p. 137</span> <span
id="ii.ix.i-Page_137"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p1.1"></span>Book VI.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p2.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.i-p3.1"></span>The</span> commission with which you charged
us, O holy man of God, Theodore, we have executed in the five foregoing
books; in which to the best of our ability, we have comprised the
history of the Church from the time of Constantine. Notice, however,
that we have been by no means studious of style; for we considered that
had we showed too great fastidiousness about elegance of expression we
might have defeated the object in view. <span
id="fr_816"></span>[817](#fn_816.md) But even supposing our purpose could
still have been accomplished, we were wholly precluded from the exercise
of that discretionary power of which ancient historians seem to have so
largely availed themselves, whereby any one of them imagined himself
quite at liberty to amplify or curtail matters of fact. Moreover,
refined composition would by no means be edifying to the masses and
illiterate men, who are intent merely on knowing the facts, and not on
admiring beauty of diction. In order therefore not to render my
production unprofitable to both classes of readers,—to the learned on
the one hand, because no elaboration of language could satisfy them to
rank it with the magniloquence of the writers of antiquity, and to the
unlearned on the other, because they could not understand the facts,
should they be clouded by a parade of words,—we have purposely adopted a
style, divested indeed of all affectation of sublimity, but at the same
time clear and perspicuous.

<span id="ii.ix.i-p5"></span>As we begin, however, our sixth book, we
must premise this, that in undertaking to detail the events of our own
age, we are apprehensive of advancing such things as may be unpalatable
to many: either because, according to the proverb, ‘Truth is bitter;’ on
account of our not mentioning with encomium the names of those whom some
may love; or from our not magnifying their actions. The zealots of our
churches will condemn us for not calling the bishops ‘Most dear to God,’
‘Most holy,’ and such like. Others will be litigious because we do not
bestow the appellations ‘Most divine,’ and ‘Lords’ on the emperors, nor
apply to them such other epithets as they are commonly assigned. But
since I could easily prove from the testimony of ancient authors, <span
id="fr_817"></span>[818](#fn_817.md) that among them the servant was
accustomed to address his master simply by name, without reference to
his dignity or titles, on account of the pressure of business, I shall
in like manner obey the laws of history, which demand a simple and
faithful narration, unobscured by a veil of any kind. I shall proceed to
record accurately what I have either myself seen, or have been able to
ascertain from actual observers; having tested the truth by the
unanimity of the witnesses that spoke of the same affairs, and by every
means I could possibly command. The process of ascertaining the truth
was indeed laborious, inasmuch as many and different persons gave
different accounts and some claimed to be eyewitnesses, while others
professed to be more intimately acquainted with these things than any
others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_816"></span>[137:817](2020193.htm#fr_816.md) <span
id="ii.ix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p4"></span>Cf. V. Int.

<span id="fn_817"></span>[137:818](2020193.htm#fr_817.md) <span
id="ii.ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.i-p6"></span>The comic poets, e.g. Menander, Plautus,
Terence.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I](2020194.md)
