[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020470)  [Next](2020472) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Birth of Honorius.
Theodosius leaves Arcadius at Constantinople, and proceeds to Italy.
Succession of the Novatian and other Patriarchs. Audacity of the Arians.
Theodosius, after destroying the Tyrant, celebrates a Magnificent
Triumph in Rome*.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p2.1"></span>While</span> Theodosius was making
preparations for a war against Maximus, his son Honorius was born. <span
id="fr_1541"></span>[1542](#fn_1541) On the completion of these warlike
preparations, he left his son Arcadius to govern at Constantinople, and
proceeded to Thessalonica, where he received Valentinian. He refused
either to dismiss openly, or to give audience to the embassy sent by
Maximus, but continued his journey at the head of his troops towards
Italy.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p4"></span>About this period, Agelius, bishop of
the Novatians at Constantinople, feeling his end approaching, nominated
Sisinius, one of the presbyters of his church, as his successor. The
people, however, murmured that the preference had not rather been given
to Marcian, who was noted on account of his piety, and Agelius therefore
ordained him, and addressed the people who were assembled in the church
in the following words: “After me you shall have Marcian for your
bishop, and after him, Sisinius.” Agelius died soon after he had uttered
these words. He had governed his church forty years with the greatest
approbation from his own heretical party; and some assert that during
the times of Pagan persecution, he had openly confessed the name of
Christ.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p5"></span><span id="page_385">p. 385</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-Page_385"></span>Not long after Timothy and Cyril died;
Theophilus succeeded to the see of Alexandria, and John to that of
Jerusalem. Demophilus, leader of the Arians at Constantinople, likewise
died and was succeeded by Marinus of Thrace; but he was superseded by
Dorotheus, who soon after arrived from Antioch in Syria, and who was
considered by his sect to be better qualified for the office than
Marinus.

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p6"></span>Theodosius, having in the meantime
entered Italy, various conflicting reports were spread as to the success
of his arms. It was rumored among the Arians that the greater part of
his army had been cut to pieces in battle, and that he himself had been
captured by the tyrant; and assuming this report to be true, these
sectarians became bold and ran to the house of Nectarius and set it on
fire, from indignation at the power which the bishop had obtained over
the churches. The emperor, however, carried out his purpose in the war,
for the soldiers of Maximus, impelled by fear of the preparations
against them, or treachery, seized and slew the tyrant. Andragathius,
the murderer of Gratian, no sooner heard of the death of Maximus, than
he leaped into the river with his armor, and perished. The war having
been thus terminated, and the death of Gratian avenged, Theodosius,
accompanied by Valentinian, celebrated a triumph in Rome, and restored
order in the churches of Italy, for the Empress Justina was dead.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1541"></span>[384:1542](2020471.htm#fr_1541) <span
id="iii.xii.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiv-p3"></span>Soc. v. 12–14, 21, is the main source
for Soz. Cf. Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 17; Philost. x. 8, 9, 11; Theodoret, *H.
E.* v. 15; Zos. iv. 45–47.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Flavian and Evagrius, Bishops of Antioch. The Events at
Alexandria upon the Destruction of the Temple of Dionysus. The Serapeum
and the other Idolatrous Temples which were destroyed.](2020472)
