[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020180)  [Next](2020182.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Demolition of the
Idolatrous Temples at Alexandria, and the Consequent Conflict between
the Pagans and Christians.*

<span id="ii.viii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p2.1"></span>At</span> the solicitation of Theophilus
bishop of Alexandria the emperor issued an order at this time for the
demolition of the heathen temples in that city; commanding also that it
should be put in execution under the direction of Theophilus. Seizing
this opportunity, Theophilus exerted himself to the utmost to expose the
pagan mysteries to contempt. And to begin with, he caused the
Mithreum <span id="fr_737"></span>[738](#fn_737.md) to be cleaned out, and
exhibited to public view the tokens of its bloody mysteries. Then he
destroyed the Serapeum, and the bloody rights of the Mithreum he
publicly caricatured; the Serapeum also he showed full of extravagant
superstitions, and he had the phalli of Priapus carried through the
midst of the forum. The pagans of Alexandria, and especially the
professors of philosophy, were unable to repress their rage at this
exposure, and exceeded in revengeful ferocity their outrages on a former
occasion: for with one accord, at a preconcerted signal, they rushed
impetuously upon the Christians, and murdered every one they could lay
hands on. The Christians also made an attempt to resist the assailants,
and so the mischief was the more augmented. This desperate affray was
prolonged until satiety of bloodshed put an end to it. Then it was
discovered that very few of the heathens had been killed, but a great
number of Christians; while the number of wounded on each side was
almost innumerable. Fear then possessed the pagans on account of what
was done, as they considered the emperor’s displeasure. For having done
what seemed good in their own eyes, and by their bloodshed having
quenched their courage, some fled in one direction, some in another, and
many quitting Alexandria, dispersed themselves in various cities. Among
these were the two grammarians Helladius and Ammonius, whose pupil I was
in my youth at Constantinople. <span id="fr_738"></span>[739](#fn_738.md)
Helladius was said to be the priest of Jupiter, and Ammonius of
Simius. <span id="fr_739"></span>[740](#fn_739.md) Thus this disturbance
having been terminated, the governor of Alexandria, and the
commander-in-chief of the troops in Egypt, assisted Theophilus in
demolishing the heathen temples. These were therefore razed to the
ground, and the images of their gods molten into pots and other
convenient utensils for the use of the Alexandrian church; for the
emperor had instructed Theophilus to distribute them for the relief of
the poor. All the images were accordingly broken to pieces, except one
statue of the god before mentioned, which Theophilus preserved and set
up in a public place; ‘Lest,’ said he, ‘at a future time the heathens
should deny that they had ever worshiped such gods.’ This action gave
great umbrage to Ammonius the grammarian in particular, who to my
knowledge was accustomed to say that ‘the religion of the Gentiles was
grossly abused in that that single statue was not also molten, but
preserved, in order to render that religion ridiculous.’ Helladius
however boasted in the presence of some that he had slain in that
desperate onset nine men with his own hand. Such were the doings at
Alexandria at that time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_737"></span>[126:738](2020181.htm#fr_737.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xvii-p3"></span>See III. 2.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[126:739](2020181.htm#fr_738.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xvii-p4"></span>Cf Introd. p. 8.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[126:740](2020181.htm#fr_739.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xvii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.viii.xvii-p5.1"></span>πιθήκου</span>, ‘the ape-god.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Hieroglyphics found in the Temple of Serapis.](2020182.md)
