[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020111)  [Next](2020113) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Flight of Athanasius.*

<span id="ii.vi.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xiv-p2.1"></span>But</span> he fled again, saying to his
intimates, ‘Let us retire for a little while, friends; it is but a small
cloud which will soon pass away.’ He then immediately embarked, and
crossing the Nile, hastened with all speed into Egypt, closely pursued
by those who sought to take him. When he understood that his pursuers
were not far distant, his attendants were urging him to retreat once
more into the desert, but he had recourse to an artifice and thus
effected his escape. He persuaded those who accompanied him to turn back
and meet his adversaries, which they did immediately; and on approaching
them they were simply asked ‘where they had seen Athanasius’: to which
they replied that ‘he was not a great way off,’ and, that ‘if they
hastened they would soon overtake him.’ Being thus deluded, they started
afresh in pursuit with quickened speed, but to no purpose; and
Athanasius making good his retreat, returned secretly to Alexandria; and
there he remained concealed until the persecution was at an end. Such
were the perils which succeeded one another in the career of the bishop
of Alexandria, these last from the heathen coming after that to which he
was before subjected from Christians. In addition to these things, the
governors of the provinces taking advantage of the emperor’s
superstition to feed their own cupidity, committed more grievous
outrages on the Christians than their sovereign had given them a warrant
for; sometimes exacting larger sums of money than they ought to have
done, and at others inflicting on them corporal punishments. The emperor
learning of these excesses, connived at them; and when the sufferers
appealed to him against their oppressors, he tauntingly said, ‘It is
your duty to bear these afflictions patiently; for this is the command
of your God.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Martyrs at Merum in Phrygia, under Julian.](2020113)
