[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020047)  [Next](2020049.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX</span>.—*The Emperor falls
sick and dies.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p2"></span>A <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p2.1"></span>year</span> having passed, the Emperor
Constantine having just entered the sixty-fifth year of his age, was
taken with a sickness; he therefore left Constantinople, and made a
voyage to Helenopolis, that he might try the effect of the medicinal hot
springs which are found in the vicinity of that city. Perceiving,
however, that his illness increased, he deferred the use of the baths;
and removing from Helenopolis to Nicomedia, he took up his residence in
the suburbs, and there received Christian baptism. <span
id="fr_257"></span>[258](#fn_257.md) After this he became cheerful; and
making his will, appointed his three sons heirs to the empire, allotting
to each one of them his portion, in accordance with the arrangements he
had made while living. He also granted many privileges to the cities of
Rome and Constantinople; and entrusting the custody of his will <span
id="fr_258"></span>[259](#fn_258.md) to that presbyter by whose means Arius
had been recalled, and of whom we have already made mention, he charged
him to deliver it into no one’s hand, except that of his son
Constantius, to whom he had given the sovereignty of the East. After the
making of his will, he survived a few days and died. Of his sons none
were present at his death. A courier was therefore immediately
despatched into the East, to inform Constantius of his father’s decease.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_257"></span>[35:258](2020048.htm#fr_257.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p3"></span>It was the belief of many in the
earlier ages of the church that baptism had a certain magical power
purging away the sins previous to it, but having no force as regards
those that might follow; this led many to postpone their baptism until
disease or age warned them of the nearness of death; such delayed
baptism was called ‘clinic baptism,’ and was discouraged by the more
judicious and spiritual-minded Fathers, some of whom doubted its
validity and rebuked those who delayed as actuated by selfishness and
desire to indulge in sin. The church, however, encouraged it in the
cases of gross offenders. Cf. Bingham, *Eccl. Antiq.* IV. 3, and XI. 11,
and Bennett, *Christian Archæology,* pp. 407 and 409.

<span id="fn_258"></span>[35:259](2020048.htm#fr_258.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxix-p4"></span>Cf. Euseb. *Life of Const.* IV. 63, and
Rufinus, *H. E.* I. 11. The story is, however, doubtful, as Valesius
observes. It is more likely that some one of the lay officials of the
government, or, as Philostorgius says, Eusebius of Nicomedia, was
entrusted with this will, and not a mere presbyter. That it was probably
Eusebius of Nicomedia becomes the more probable when we consider that
that bishop also probably baptized Constantine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Funeral of the Emperor Constantine.](2020049.md)
