[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020328)  [Next](2020330) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Concerning the
Presbyter by whom Constantine was persuaded to recall Arius and Euzoïus
from Exile; the Tractate concerning his Possibly Pious Faith, and how
Arius was again received by the Synod assembled at Jerusalem*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> bishops who had embraced the
sentiments of Arius found a favorable opportunity of restoring him and
Euzoïus to communion, by zealously striving to have a council in the
city of Jerusalem. They effected their design in the following
manner <span id="fr_1194"></span>[1195](#fn_1194) :—

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p4"></span>A certain presbyter who was a great
admirer of the Arian doctrines, was on terms of intimacy with the
emperor’s sister. At first he concealed his sentiments; but as he
frequently visited and became by degrees more familiar with Constantia,
for such was the name of the sister of Constantine, he took courage to
represent to her that Arius was unjustly exiled from his country, and
cast out from the Church, through the jealousy and personal enmity of
Alexander bishop of the Alexandrian Church. He said that his jealousy
had been excited by the esteem which the people manifested towards
Arius.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p5"></span>Constantia believed these
representations to be true, yet took no steps in her lifetime to
innovate upon the decrees of Nicæa. Being attacked with a disease which
threatened to terminate in death, she besought her brother, who went to
visit her, to grant what she was about to ask, as a last favor; this
request was, to receive the above mentioned presbyter on terms of
intimacy, and to rely upon him as a man who had correct opinions about
the Divinity. “For my part,” she added, “I am drawing nigh to death, and
am no longer interested in the concerns of this life; the only
apprehension I now feel, arises from dread lest you should incur the
wrath of God and suffer any calamity, or the loss of your empire, since
you have been induced to condemn just and good men wrongfully to
perpetual banishment.” From that period the emperor received the
presbyter into favor, and after permitting him to speak freely with him
and to commune on the same topics concerning which his sister had given
her command, deemed necessary to subject the case of Arius to a fresh
examination; it is probable that, in forming this decision, the emperor
was either influenced by a belief in the credibility of the attacks, or
by the desire of gratifying his sister. It was not long before he
recalled Arius from exile, <span id="fr_1195"></span>[1196](#fn_1195)
and demanded of him a written exposition of his faith concerning the
Godhead. Arius avoided making use of the new terms which he had
previously devised, and constructed another exposition by using simple
terms, and such as were recognized by the sacred Scriptures; he declared
upon oath, that he held the doctrines set forth in this exposition, that
he both felt these statements *ex animo* and had no other thought than
these. It was as follows: <span id="fr_1196"></span>[1197](#fn_1196)
“Arius and Euzoïus, presbyters, to Constantine, our most pious emperor
and most beloved of God.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p8"></span>“According as your piety, beloved of
God, commanded, O sovereign emperor, we here furnish a written statement
of our own faith, and we protest before God that we, and all those who
are with us, believe what is here set forth.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p9"></span>“We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, and in His Son the Lord Jesus Christ, who was begotten from
Him before all ages, God the Word, by whom all things were made, whether
things in heaven or things on earth; He came and took upon Him flesh,
suffered and rose again, and ascended into heaven, whence He will again
come to judge the quick and the dead.

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p10"></span>“We believe in the Holy Ghost, in
the resurrection of the body, in the life to come, in the kingdom of
heaven, and in one Catholic Church of God, established throughout the
earth. We have received this faith from the Holy Gospels, in which the
Lord says to His disciples, ‘Go forth and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost.’
If we do not so believe this, and if we do not truly receive the
doctrines concerning the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, as they
are taught by the whole Catholic Church and by the sacred Scriptures, as
we believe in every point, let God be our judge, both now and in the day
which is to come. Wherefore we appeal to your piety, O our emperor most
beloved of God, that, as we are enrolled among the members of the
clergy, and as we hold the faith and thought of the Church and of the
sacred Scriptures, we may be openly reconciled to our mother, the
Church, through your peacemaking and pious piety; so that useless
questions and disputes may be cast aside, and that we and the Church may
dwell together in peace, and we all in common may offer the customary
prayer for your peaceful and pious empire and for your entire family.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p11"></span>Many considered this declaration of
faith as an artful compilation, and as bearing the appearance of
difference in expression, while, in reality, it supported the doctrine
of Arius; the terms in which it was couched being so vague <span
id="page_278">p. 278</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-Page_278"></span>that it was susceptible of diverse
interpretations. The emperor imagined that Arius and Euzoïus were of the
same sentiments as the bishops of the council of Nicæa, and was
delighted over the affair. He did not, however, attempt to restore them
to communion without the judgment and approval of those who are, by the
law of the Church, masters in these matters. He, therefore, sends them
to the bishops who were then assembled at Jerusalem, and wrote, desiring
them to examine the declaration of faith submitted by Arius and Euzoïus,
and so to influence the Synod that, whether they found that their
doctrine was orthodox, and that the jealousy of their enemies had been
the sole cause of their condemnation, or that, without having reason to
blame those who had condemned them, they had changed their minds, a
humane decision might, in either case, be accorded them. Those who had
long been zealous for this, seized the opportunity under cover of the
emperor’s letter, and received him into fellowship. They wrote
immediately to the emperor himself, to the Church of Alexandria, and to
the bishops and clergy of Egypt, of Thebes, and of Libya, earnestly
exhorting them to receive Arius and Euzoïus into communion, since the
emperor bore witness to the correctness of their faith, in one of his
own epistles, and since the judgment of the emperor had been confirmed
by the vote of the Synod. <span id="fr_1197"></span>[1198](#fn_1197)

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p13"></span>These were the subjects which were
zealously discussed by the Synod of Jerusalem.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1194"></span>[277:1195](2020329.htm#fr_1194) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 11; Soc. i. 25, 26,
33.

<span id="fn_1195"></span>[277:1196](2020329.htm#fr_1195) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p6"></span>This letter of the emperor is in Soc.
i. 25.

<span id="fn_1196"></span>[277:1197](2020329.htm#fr_1196) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p7"></span>Soc. i. 26, verbal variations. Both
probably from Sabinus.

<span id="fn_1197"></span>[278:1198](2020329.htm#fr_1197) <span
id="iii.vii.xxvii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxvii-p12"></span>Ruf. *H. E,* i. 11; Soc. i. 33. For
the letter of the Synod, cf. Athan. *de Synodis,* 21; a part is also
given in *Apol. cont. Arian.* 84.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter from the Emperor Constantine to the Synod of Tyre, and
Exile of St. Athanasius through the Machination of the Arian
Faction.](2020330)
