[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020438)  [Next](2020440.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Death of Liberius,
Bishop of Rome. He is succeeded by Damasus and Syricius.* <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[1471](#fn_1470.md) *Orthodox Doctrines prevail
Everywhere throughout the West, except at Milan, where Auxentius is the
High-Priest. Synod held at Rome, by which Auxentius is deposed; the
Definition which it sent by Letter*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p3.1"></span>About</span> this period Liberius
died, <span id="fr_1471"></span>[1472](#fn_1471.md) and Damasus succeeded
to the see of Rome. <span id="fr_1472"></span>[1473](#fn_1472.md) A deacon
named Ursicius, who had obtained some votes in his favor, but could not
endure the defeat, therefore caused himself to be clandestinely ordained
by some bishops of little note, and endeavored to create a division
among the people and to hold a separate church. He succeeded in
effecting this division, and some of the people respected him as bishop,
while the rest adhered to Damasus. This gave rise <span id="page_360">p.
360</span> <span id="iii.xi.xxiii-Page_360"></span>to much contention
and revolt among the people, which at length proceeded to the evil of
wounds and murder. The prefect of Rome was obliged to interfere, and to
punish many of the people and of the clergy; and he put an end to the
attempt of Ursicius. <span id="fr_1473"></span>[1474](#fn_1473.md)

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p7"></span>With respect to doctrine, however, no
dissension arose either at Rome or in any other of the Western churches.
The people unanimously adhered to the form of belief established at
Nicæa, and regarded the three persons of the Trinity as equal in dignity
and in power.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p8"></span>Auxentius and his followers differed
from the others in opinion; he was then president of the church in
Milan, and, in conjunction with a few partisans, was intent upon the
introduction of innovations, and the maintenance of the Arian dogma of
the dissimilarity of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, according to the
inquiry which had last sprung up, in opposition to the unanimous
agreement of the Western priests. The bishops of Gaul and of Venetia
having reported that similar attempts to disturb the peace of the Church
were being made by others among them, the bishops of several provinces
assembled not long after at Rome, and decreed that Auxentius and those
who held his sentiments should be aliens from their communion. They
confirmed the traditional faith established by the council of Nicæa, and
annulled all the decrees that had been issued at Ariminum contrary to
that faith, under the plea that these decrees had not received the
assent of the bishop of Rome, nor of other bishops who agreed with them,
and that many who had been present at the Synod, had disapproved of the
enactments there made by them. That such was the decision really formed
by the Synod is testified by the epistle <span
id="fr_1474"></span>[1475](#fn_1474.md) addressed by Damasus, the Roman
bishop, and the rest of the assembly, to the bishops of Illyria. It is
as follows: <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1476](#fn_1475.md) —

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p11"></span>“Damasus, Valerius, <span
id="fr_1476"></span>[1477](#fn_1476.md) and the other bishops of the holy
assembly convened at Rome to the dearly beloved brethren settled in
Illyria, greeting in the Lord.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p13"></span>“We believe that you uphold and teach
to the people our holy faith, which is founded on the doctrine of the
apostles. This faith differs in no respect from that defined by the
Fathers; neither is it allowable for the priests of God, whose right it
is to instruct the wise, to have any other thought. We have, however,
been informed by some of our brethren of Gaul and of Venice, that
certain individuals are bent upon the introduction of heresy.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p14"></span>“All bishops should diligently guard
against this evil, lest some of their flock should be led by
inexperience, and others by simplicity, to oppose the proper
interpretations.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p15"></span>“Those who devise strange doctrines
ought not to be followed; but the opinions of our fathers ought to be
retained, whatever may be the diversity of judgment around us.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p16"></span>“Hence Auxentius, bishop of Milan,
has been publicly declared to be condemned pre-eminently in this matter.
It is right, therefore, that all the teachers of the Roman world should
be of one mind, and not pollute the faith by divers conflicting
doctrines.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p17"></span>“For when the malice of the heretics
first began to mature itself, as the blasphemy of the Arians has even
now done,—may it be far from us,—our fathers to the number of three
hundred and eighteen elect, after making an investigation in Nicæa,
erected the wall against the weapons of the devil, and repelled the
deadly poison by this antidote.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p18"></span>“This antidote consists in the
belief, that the Father and the Son have one Godhead, one virtue, and
one substance (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p18.1"></span>χρῆμα</span>). It is also requisite to
believe that the Holy Ghost is of the same hypostasis. We have decreed
that those who hold any other doctrines are to be aliens from our
communion.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p19"></span>“Some have decreed to discolor this
saving definition and adorable view; but in the very beginning, some of
the persons who made the innovation at the council of Ariminum, or who
were compelled to vote for the change, have since, in some measure, made
amends by confessing that they were deceived by certain specious
arguments, which did not appear to them to be contrary to the principles
laid down by our fathers at Nicæa. The number of individuals congregated
at the council of Ariminum proves nothing in prejudice of orthodox
doctrines; for the council was held without the sanction of the bishops
at Rome, whose opinion, before that of all others, ought to have been
received, and without the assent either of Vincentius, who during a very
long series of years guarded the episcopate without spot, or of many
other bishops who agreed with those last mentioned.

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p20"></span>“Besides, as has been before stated,
those very persons who seemed inclined to something illusory, testified
their disapprobation of their own proceedings as soon as they made use
of a better judgment. Therefore your purity must see that this alone is
the faith which was established at Nicæa upon the authority of the
apostles, and which must ever be retained inviolate, and that all
bishops, whether of the East, or of the West, who profess the Catholic
religion, ought to consider it an honor to be in communion with us. We
believe that it will not be long <span id="page_361">p. 361</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-Page_361"></span>before those who maintain other
sentiments will be excluded from communion, and deprived of the name and
dignity of bishop; so that the people who are now oppressed by the yoke
of those pernicious and deceitful principles, may have liberty to
breathe. For it is not in the power of these bishops to rectify the
error of the people, inasmuch as they are themselves held by error. Let,
therefore, the opinion of your honor also be in accord with all the
priests of God, in which we believe you to be holy and firm. That we
ought so to believe along with you will be proved by the exchange of
letters with your love.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[359:1471](2020439.htm#fr_1470.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p2"></span>For Ursicius.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[359:1472](2020439.htm#fr_1471.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p4"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 366, Sept. 24.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[359:1473](2020439.htm#fr_1472.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p5"></span>Soc. iv. 29; Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 10. Soz.
omits the name of the prefect.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[360:1474](2020439.htm#fr_1473.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p6"></span>Cf. Am. Marcel. xxvii. 3. 12–15.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[360:1475](2020439.htm#fr_1474.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p9"></span>This epistle is first given by Soz.;
it is repeated in Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 22. The Synod was held <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 369.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[360:1476](2020439.htm#fr_1475.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p10"></span>All these prefatory details are
unique with Soz.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[360:1477](2020439.htm#fr_1476.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxiii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxiii-p12"></span>He was bishop of Aquileia. Theodoret
calls him Valerianus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning St. Ambrose and his Elevation to the High Priesthood;
how he persuaded the People to practice Piety. The Novatians of Phrygia
and the Passover.](2020440.md)
