[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020468)  [Next](2020470.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Project of Theodosius
to unify all the Heresies. The Propositions made by Agelius and
Sisinius, the Novatians. At another Synod, the Emperor received those
only who represent Consubstantiality; those who held a different View he
ejected from the Churches*.

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xii-p2.1"></span>Although</span> all the houses of prayer
were at this period in the possession of the Catholic Church, many
troubles occurred in various parts <span id="page_383">p. 383</span>
<span id="iii.xii.xii-Page_383"></span>of the empire, instigated by the
Arians. <span id="fr_1537"></span>[1538](#fn_1537.md) The Emperor
Theodosius, therefore, soon after the council above mentioned, again
summoned together the presidents of the sects which were flourishing, in
order that they might either bring others to their own state of
conviction on disputed topics, or be convinced themselves; for he
imagined that all would be brought to oneness of opinion, if a free
discussion were entered into, concerning ambiguous points of doctrine.
The council, therefore, was convened. This occurred in the year of the
second consulate of Merobaudes, and the first of Saturninus, and at the
same period that Arcadius was associated with his father in the
government of the empire. Theodosius sent for Nectarius, consulted with
him concerning the coming Synod, and commanded him to introduce the
discussion of all questions which had given rise to heresies, so that
the church of the believers in Christ might be one, and might agree on
the doctrine according to which piety ought to be observed. When
Nectarius returned home, feeling anxious about the affair confided to
him, he made known the mandate of the emperor to Agelius, the president
of the church of the Novatians, who held the same religious sentiments
as himself. Agelius proved the virtue of his life by works, but was
unaccustomed to the finesse and deception of words; he therefore
proposed as a substitute, one of his readers, by name Sisinius, who
afterwards succeeded him as bishop, a man who could see what was
practical, and could debate, if that were necessary. Sisinius possessed
powers of intellect and of expression; he had an accurate knowledge of
the interpretation of the Holy Scriptures, and was well acquainted with
profane and with ecclesiastical literature. He proposed that all
disputation with the heterodox, as being a fruitful source of contention
and war, should be avoided; but recommended that inquiries should rather
be instituted, as to whether the heretics admitted the testimony of the
expositors and teachers of the sacred words, who lived before the Church
was rent in division. “If they reject the testimony of these great men,”
said he, “they will be condemned by their own followers; but if they
admit their authority as being adequate to resolve ambiguous points of
doctrine, we will produce their books.” For Sisinius was well aware
that, as the ancients recognized the Son to be eternal like the Father,
they had never presumed to assert that He had had an origin from some
beginning. This suggestion received the approbation of Nectarius, and
afterwards of the emperor; and investigations were set on foot as to the
opinions entertained by heretics concerning the ancient interpreters of
Scripture. As it was found that the heretics professed to hold these
early writers in great admiration, the emperor asked them openly whether
they would defer to the authority of the aforesaid on controverted
topics, and test their own doctrines by the sentiments propounded in
those works. This proposition excited great contention among the leaders
of the various heretical sects, for they did not all hold the same view
about the books of the ancients; the emperor knew that they were
convicted by the debates over their own words alone, and withdrew the
proposition. He blamed them for their opinion, and commanded each party
to draw up a written exposition of its own creed. On the day appointed
for the presentation of these documents, Nectarius and Agelius appeared
at the palace, as representatives of those who maintain the
consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity; Demophilus, the Arian president,
came forward as the deputy of the Arians; Eunomius represented the
Eunomians; and Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, appeared for the sectarians
denominated Macedonians. The emperor, after receiving their formularies,
expressed himself in favor of that one alone in which consubstantiality
of the Trinity was recognized, and destroyed the others. The interests
of the Novatians were not affected by this transaction, for they held
the same doctrines as the Catholic Church concerning the Divine nature.
The members of the other sects were indignant with the priests for
having entered into unwise disputations in the presence of the emperor.
Many renounced their former opinions, and embraced the authorized form
of religion. The emperor enacted a law, prohibiting heretics from
holding churches, from giving public instructions in the faith, and from
conferring ordination on bishops or others. <span
id="fr_1538"></span>[1539](#fn_1538.md) Some of the heterodox were expelled
from the cities and villages, while others were disgraced and deprived
of the privileges enjoyed by other subjects of the empire. Great as were
the punishments adjudged by the laws against heretics, they were not
always carried into execution, for the emperor had no desire to
persecute his subjects; he only desired to enforce uniformity of view
about God through the medium of intimidation. Those who voluntarily
renounced heretical opinions received commendation from him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1537"></span>[383:1538](2020469.htm#fr_1537.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p3"></span>Soc. v. 10, from whom Soz. borrows his
facts.

<span id="fn_1538"></span>[383:1539](2020469.htm#fr_1538.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xii-p4"></span>*Cod. Theod.* xvi. 5, 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maximus the Tyrant. Concerning the Occurrences between the
Empress Justina and St. Ambrose. The Emperor Gratian was killed by
Guile. Valentinian and his Mother fled to Theodosius in
Thessalonica.](2020470.md)
