[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020313)  [Next](2020315.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*Tarbula, the Sister of
Symeon, and her Martyrdom*.

<span id="iii.vii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xii-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same period, the queen was
attacked with a disease, and Tarbula, the sister of Symeon the bishop, a
holy virgin, was arrested with her servant, who shared in the same mode
of life, as likewise a sister of Tarbula, who, after the death of her
husband, abjured marriage, and led a similar career. The cause of their
arrest was the charge of the Jews, who reported that they had injured
the queen by their enchantments, on account of their rage at the death
of Symeon. As invalids easily give credit to the most repulsive
representations, the queen believed the charge, and especially because
it emanated from the Jews, since she had embraced their sentiments, and
lived in the observance of the Jewish rites, for she had great
confidence in their veracity and in their attachment to herself. The
Magi having seized Tarbula and her companions, condemned them to death;
and after having sawn them asunder, they fastened them up to poles and
made the queen pass through the midst of the poles as a medium for
turning away the disease. It is said that this Tarbula was beautiful and
very stately in form, and that one of the Magi, having become deeply
enamored with her, secretly sent a proposal for intercourse, and
promised as a reward to save her and her companions if she would
consent. But she would give no ear to <span id="page_267">p. 267</span>
<span id="iii.vii.xii-Page_267"></span>his licentiousness, and treated
the Magi with scorn, and rebuked his lust. She would rather prefer
courageously to die than to betray her virginity.

<span id="iii.vii.xii-p3"></span>As it was ordained by the edict of
Sapor, which we mentioned above, that the Christians should not be
slaughtered indiscriminately, but that the priests and teachers of the
opinions should be slain, the Magi and Arch-Magi traversed the whole
country of Persia, studiously maltreating the bishops and presbyters.
They sought them especially in the country of Adiabene, a part of the
Persian dominions, because it was wholly Christianized.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Martyrdom of St. Acepsimas and of his Companions.](2020315.md)
