[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020322)  [Next](2020324.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*The Melitians and the
Arians agree in Sentiment; Eusebius and Theognis endeavor to inflame
anew the Disease of Arius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p2.1"></span>In</span> the meantime the contention which
had been stirred in the beginning among the Egyptians, could not be
quelled. <span id="fr_1176"></span>[1177](#fn_1176.md) The Arian heresy had
been positively condemned by the council of Nice, while the followers of
Melitius had been admitted into communion under the stipulations above
stated. When Alexander returned to Egypt, Melitius delivered up to him
the churches whose government he had unlawfully usurped, and returned to
Lycus. Not long after, finding his end approaching, he nominated John,
one of his most intimate friends, as his successor, contrary to the
decree of the Nicæan Council, and thus fresh cause of discord in the
churches was produced. When the Arians perceived that the Melitians were
introducing innovations, they also harassed the churches. For, as
frequently occurs in similar disturbances, some applauded the opinion of
Arius, while others contended that those who had been ordained by
Melitius ought to govern the churches. These two bodies of sectarians
had hitherto been opposed to each other, but on perceiving that the
priests of the Catholic Church were followed by the multitude, they
became jealous and formed an alliance together, and manifested a common
enmity to the clergy of Alexandria. Their measures of attack and defense
were so long carried on in concert, that in process of time the
Melitians were generally called Arians in <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> <span id="iii.vii.xxi-Page_272"></span>Egypt, although they
only dissent on questions of the presidency of the churches, while the
Arians hold the same opinions concerning God as Arius. Although they
individually denied one another’s tenets, yet they dissimulated in
contradiction of their own view, in order to attain an underhanded
agreement in the fellowship of their enmity; at the same time each one
expected to prevail easily in what he desired. From this period,
however, the Melitians after the discussion on those topics, received
the Arian doctrines, and held the same opinion as Arius concerning God.
This revived the original controversy concerning Arius, and some of the
laity and clergy seceded from communion with the others. The dispute
concerning the doctrines of Arius was rekindled once more in other
cities, and particularly in Bithynia and Hellespontus, and in the city
of Constantinople. In short, it is said that Eusebius, bishop of
Nicomedia, and Theognis, bishop of Nicæa, bribed the notary to whom the
emperor had intrusted the custody of the documents of the Nicæan
Council, effaced their signatures, and attempted openly to teach that
the Son is not to be considered consubstantial with the Father. Eusebius
was accused of these irregularities before the emperor, and he replied
with great boldness as he showed part of his clothing. “If this robe,”
said he, “had been cut asunder in my presence, I could not affirm the
fragments to be all of the same substance.” The emperor was much grieved
at these disputes, for he had believed that questions of this nature had
been finally decided by the council of Nicæa, but contrary to his hopes
he saw them again agitated. He more especially regretted that Eusebius
and Theognis had received certain Alexandrians into communion, <span
id="fr_1177"></span>[1178](#fn_1177.md) although the Synod had recommended
them to repent on account of their heterodox opinions, and although he
had himself condemned them to banishment from their native land, as
being the exciters of sedition. <span
id="fr_1178"></span>[1179](#fn_1178.md) It is asserted by some, that it was
for the above reasons that the emperor in anger exiled Eusebius and
Theognis; but as I have already stated, I have derived my information
from those who are intimately acquainted with these matters.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1176"></span>[271:1177](2020323.htm#fr_1176.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p3"></span>This chapter is also unique with Soz.,
both as to the Melitians and Eusebius. The Melitian opposition is
evident from Soc. i. 27.

<span id="fn_1177"></span>[272:1178](2020323.htm#fr_1177.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p4"></span>Soz. has taken this from the Epistle of
Constantine to the Nicomedians against Eusebius and Theognis. This is
preserved by Theodoret, *H. E.* i. 20. Theodoret gives the full text; he
and Soz. both obtained it from some such collection as that of Sabinus.

<span id="fn_1178"></span>[272:1179](2020323.htm#fr_1178.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxi-p5"></span>Cf. Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 7 (in
the letter of the Alexandrian Synod).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Vain Machinations of the Arians and Melitians against St.
Athanasius.](2020324.md)
