[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020528)  [Next](2020530.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Concerning
Gerontius, Maximus, and the Troops of Honorius. Capture of Gerontius and
his Wife; their Death*.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiii-p2.1"></span>Meanwhile</span> Gerontius, from being the
most efficient of the generals of Constantine, became his enemy; <span
id="fr_1636"></span>[1637](#fn_1636.md) and believing that Maximus, his
intimate friend, was well qualified for the tyranny, he invested him
with the imperial robe, and permitted him to reside in Tarracona.
Gerontius then marched against Constantine, and took care to put
Constans, the son of Constantine, to death at Vienna.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiii-p4"></span>As soon as Constantine heard of the
usurpation of Maximus, he sent one of his generals, named Edovicus,
beyond the Rhine, to levy an army of Franks and Alemanni; and he sent
his son Constans to guard Vienna and the neighboring towns. Gerontius
then advanced upon Arles and laid siege to it; but directly, when the
army of Honorius had come to hand against the tyrant, under the command
of Constantius, the father of that Valentinian who subsequently became
emperor of Rome, Gerontius retreated precipitately with a few soldiers;
for the greater number of his troops deserted to the army of
Constantius. The Spanish soldiery conceived an utter contempt for
Gerontius, on account of his retreat, and took counsel how to slay him.
They gathered in close ranks and attacked his house at night; but he,
with one Alanus, his friend, and a few servants, ascended to the top of
the house, and did such execution with their arrows that no less than
three hundred of the soldiers fell. When the stock of arrows was
exhausted, the servants made their escape by letting themselves down
secretly from the building; and Gerontius, although he might have been
saved in a similar fashion, did not choose to do so, because he was
restrained by his affection for Nonnichia, his wife. At daybreak of the
next day, the soldiers cast fire into the house; when he saw that there
was no hope of safety left, he cut off the head of his companion,
Alanus, in compliance with his wish. After this, his own wife was
lamenting, and with tears was pressing herself with the sword, pleading
to die by the hand of her husband before she should be subjected to
others, and was supplicating for this last gift from him. And this woman
by her courage showed herself worthy of her religion, for she was a
Christian, and she died thus mercifully; she handed down to time a
record of herself, too strong for oblivion. Gerontius then struck
himself thrice with his sword; but perceiving that he had not received a
mortal wound, he drew forth his poniard, which he wore at his side, and
plunged it into his heart.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1636"></span>[426:1637](2020529.htm#fr_1636.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiii-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Olymp.
*Fragm.* 16; Zos. vi. 5; Oros. vii. 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constantine. The Army of Honorius and Edovicus his General.
Defeat of Edovicus by Ulphilas, the General of Constantine. Death of
Edovicus.](2020530.md)
