[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020250)  [Next](2020252) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV</span>.—*Synod at Ephesus
against Nestorius. His Deposition.*

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long time elapsed before a
mandate from the emperor directed the bishops in all places to assemble
at Ephesus. <span id="fr_1012"></span>[1013](#fn_1012) Immediately after
the festival of Easter therefore Nestorius, escorted by a great crowd of
his adherents, repaired to Ephesus, and found many of the bishops
already there. Cyril bishop of Alexandria making some delay, did not
arrive till near Pentecost. Five days after Pentecost, Juvenal bishop of
Jerusalem arrived. While John of Antioch was still absent, those who
were now congregated entered into the consideration of the question; and
Cyril of Alexandria began a sharp skirmish of words, with the design of
terrifying Nestorius, for he had a strong dislike for him. When many had
declared that Christ was God, Nestorius said: ‘I cannot term him God who
was two and three months old. I am therefore clear of your blood, and
shall in future come no more among you.’ Having uttered these words he
left the assembly, and afterwards held meetings with the other bishops
who entertained sentiments similar to his own. Accordingly those present
were divided into two factions. That section which supported Cyril,
having constituted themselves a council, summoned Nestorius: but he
refused to meet them, and put them off until the arrival of John of
Antioch. The partisans of Cyril therefore proceeded to the examination
of the public discourses of Nestorius which he had preached on the
subject in dispute; and after deciding from a repeated perusal of them
that they contained distinct blasphemy against the Son of God, they
deposed him. This being done, the partisans of Nestorius constituted
themselves another council apart, and therein deposed Cyril himself, and
together with him Memnon bishop of Ephesus. Not long after these events,
John bishop of Antioch made his appearance; and being informed of what
had taken place, he pronounced unqualified censure on Cyril as the
author of all this confusion, in having so precipitately proceeded to
the deposition of Nestorius. Upon this Cyril combined with Juvenal to
revenge themselves on John, and they deposed him also. When affairs
reached this confused condition, Nestorius saw that the contention which
had been raised was thus tending to the destruction of communion, in
bitter regret he called Mary *Theotocos,* and cried out: ‘Let Mary be
called *Theotocos,* if you will, and let all disputing cease.’ But
although he made this recantation, no notice was taken of it; for his
deposition was not revoked, and he was banished to the Oasis, where he
still remains. <span id="fr_1013"></span>[1014](#fn_1013) Such was the
conclusion of this Synod. These things were done on the 28th of June,
under the consulate of Bassus and Antiochus. <span
id="fr_1014"></span>[1015](#fn_1014) John when he had returned to his
bishopric, having convened several bishops, deposed Cyril, who had also
returned to his see: but soon afterwards, having set aside their enmity
and accepting each other as friends, they mutually reinstated each other
in their episcopal chairs. But after the deposition of Nestorius a
mighty agitation prevailed through the churches of Constantinople. For
the people was divided on account of what we have already called his
unfortunate utterances; and the clergy unanimously anathematized him.
For such is the sentence which we Christians are accustomed to pronounce
on those who have advanced any blasphemous doctrines, when we set up
their impiety that it may be publicly exposed, as it were, on a pillar,
to universal execration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1012"></span>[172:1013](2020251.htm#fr_1012) <span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p3"></span>This was the third of the Ecumenical or
General Synods; it was convened in 431 and dealt with the Nestorian
controversy. Cf. Hefele, *Hist. of the Councils of the Ch.* Vol. III. p.
1; also Evagrius, *H. E.* I. 2, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_1013"></span>[172:1014](2020251.htm#fr_1013) <span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p4"></span>After his deposition Nestorius was
banished to the Oasis, as above stated. This Oasis was ‘a miserable
place exposed to the wild nomad tribes; all around were shifting sands,
forming a pathless solitude. He…employed himself in writing a defense of
the opinions for which he had lost all. The Blemmyes at length invaded
the Oasis, and took Nestorius, among others, captive; then, by what he
calls a most unexpected act of compassion, released him, and bade him
hurry away. He thought it best to proceed to Panopolis in the Thebaid,
and voluntarily reported himself to the governor, who, unmoved by his
pathetic entreaty that the imperial authorities would not be less
merciful than the barbarians, ordered some soldiers to convey him to
Elephantine. The journey under such circumstances exhausted the old man;
a fall severely hurt his hand and side; and before he could reach
Elephantine, a mandate came for his return to Panopolis. Two more
compulsory changes of abode were added to sufferings which remind us
perforce of the last days of S. John Chrysostom; and then the unhappy
Nestorius was no more. The exact year of his death cannot be
ascertained.’—W. <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>Bright</span>, *Hist. of the Church* from
<span class="c13"><span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p4.2"></span>a.d.</span> 313 to
451, p. 371, 372.

<span id="fn_1014"></span>[172:1015](2020251.htm#fr_1014) <span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxiv-p5"></span>431 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxxiv-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Maximian elected to the Episcopate of Constantinople, though Some
wished Proclus to take that Place.](2020252)
