[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020408)  [Next](2020410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Efforts of Julian to
establish Paganism and to abolish our Usages. The Epistle which he sent
to the Pagan High-Priests*.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xvi-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor <span
id="fr_1401"></span>[1402](#fn_1401) was deeply grieved at finding that
all his efforts to secure the predominance of paganism were utterly
ineffectual, and at seeing Christianity excelling in repute; for
although the gates of the temples were kept open, although sacrifices
were offered, and the observance of ancient festivals restored in all
the cities, yet he was far from being satisfied; for he could plainly
foresee that, on the withdrawal of his influence, a change in the whole
aspect of affairs would speedily take place. He was particularly
chagrined on discovering that the wives, children, and servants of many
of the pagan priests had been converted to Christianity. On reflecting
that one main support of the Christian religion was the life and
behavior of its professors, he determined to introduce into the pagan
temples the order and discipline of Christianity, to insti<span
id="page_338">p. 338</span> <span id="iii.x.xvi-Page_338"></span>tute
various orders and degrees of ministry, to appoint teachers and readers
to give instruction in pagan doctrines and exhortations, and to command
that prayers should be offered on certain days at stated hours. He
moreover resolved to found monasteries for the accommodation of men and
women who desired to live in philosophical retirement, as likewise
hospitals for the relief of strangers and of the poor and for other
philanthropical purposes. He wished to introduce among the pagans the
Christian system of penance for voluntary and involuntary
transgressions; but the point of ecclesiastical discipline which he
chiefly admired, and desired to establish among the pagans, was the
custom among the bishops to give letters of recommendation to those who
traveled to foreign lands, wherein they commended them to the
hospitality and kindness of other bishops, in all places, and under all
contingencies. In this way did Julian strive to ingraft the customs of
Christianity upon paganism. But if what I have stated appears to be
incredible, I need not go far in search of proofs to corroborate my
assertions; for I can produce a letter written by the emperor himself on
the subject. He writes as follows: <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[1403](#fn_1402) —

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p5"></span>“To Arsacius, High-Priest of Galatia.
Paganism has not yet reached the degree of prosperity that might be
desired, owing to the conduct of its votaries. The worship of the gods,
however, is conducted on the grandest and most magnificent scale, so far
exceeding our very prayer and hope; let our Adrastea be propitious to
these words, for no one could have dared to look for so extensive and so
surprising a change as that which we have witnessed within a very short
space of time. But are we to rest satisfied with what has been already
effected? Ought we not rather to consider that the progress of Atheism
has been principally owing to the humanity evinced by Christians towards
strangers, to the reverence they have manifested towards the dead, and
to the delusive gravity which they have assumed in their life? It is
requisite that each of us should be diligent in the discharge of duty: I
do not refer to you alone, as that would not suffice, but to all the
priests of Galatia.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p6"></span>“You must either put them to shame, or
try the power of persuasion, or else deprive them of their sacerdotal
offices, if they do not with their wives, their children, and their
servants join in the service of the gods, or if they support the
servants, sons, or wives of the Galileans in treating the gods impiously
and in preferring Atheism to piety. Then exhort the priests not to
frequent theaters, not to drink at taverns, and not to engage in any
trade, or practice any nefarious art.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p7"></span>“Honor those who yield to your
remonstrances, and expel those who disregard them. Establish hostelries
in every city, so that strangers from neighboring and foreign countries
may reap the benefit of our philanthropy, according to their respective
need.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p8"></span>“I have provided means to meet the
necessary expenditure, and have issued directions throughout the whole
of Galatia, that you should be furnished annually with thirty thousand
bushels of corn and sixty thousand measures of wine, of which the fifth
part is to be devoted to the support of the poor who attend upon the
priests; and the rest to be distributed among strangers and our own
poor. For, while there are no persons in need among the Jews, and while
even the impious Galileans provide not only for those of their own party
who are in want, but also for those who hold with us, it would indeed be
disgraceful if we were to allow our own people to suffer from poverty.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p9"></span>“Teach the pagans to co-operate in this
work of benevolence, and let the first-fruits of the pagan towns be
offered to the gods.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p10"></span>“Habituate the pagans to the exercise of
this liberality, by showing them how such conduct is sanctioned by the
practice of remote antiquity; for Homer <span
id="fr_1403"></span>[1404](#fn_1403) represents Eumæus as saying,—

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p12"></span>‘My guest! I should offend, treating
with scorn

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p13"></span>The stranger, though a poorer should
arrive

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p14"></span>Than even thyself; for all the poor that
are,

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p15"></span>And all the strangers are the care of
Jove.”

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p16"></span>“Let us not permit others to excel us in
good deeds; let us not dishonor ourselves by violence, but rather let us
be foremost in piety towards the gods. If I hear that you act according
to my directions, I shall be full of joy. Do not often visit the
governors at their own houses, but write to them frequently. When they
enter the city, let no priest go to meet them; and let not the priest
accompany them further than the vestibule when they repair to the temple
of the gods; neither let any soldiers march before them on such
occasions; but let those follow them who will. For as soon as they have
entered within the sacred bounds, they are but private individuals; for
there it is your duty, as you well know, to preside, according to the
divine decree. Those who humbly conform to this law manifest that they
possess true religion; whereas those who contemn it are proud and
vainglorious.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p17"></span>“I am ready to render assistance to the
inhabitants of Pessinus, provided that they will propitiate the mother
of the gods; but if they neglect this duty, they will incur my utmost
displeasure.

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p18"></span><span id="page_339">p. 339</span> <span
id="iii.x.xvi-Page_339"></span>‘I should myself transgress,

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p19"></span>Receiving here, and giving conduct hence

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p20"></span>To one detested by the gods as
these.” <span id="fr_1404"></span>[1405](#fn_1404)

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p22"></span>“Convince them, therefore, that if they
desire my assistance, they must offer up supplications to the mother of
the gods.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[337:1402](2020409.htm#fr_1401) <span
id="iii.x.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p3"></span>Independent with Soz.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[338:1403](2020409.htm#fr_1402) <span
id="iii.x.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p4"></span>*Juliani Op. Ep.* xlix.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[338:1404](2020409.htm#fr_1403) <span
id="iii.x.xvi-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p11"></span>*Odyss.*xiv. 56.

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[339:1405](2020409.htm#fr_1404) <span
id="iii.x.xvi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xvi-p21"></span>*Odyss.*x. 74.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In Order that he might not be thought Tyrannical, Julian proceeds
artfully against the Christians. Abolition of the Sign of the Cross. He
makes the Soldiery sacrifice, although they were Unwilling.](2020410)
