[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020162)  [Next](2020164.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*The Emperor
Valens is ridiculed by the People on Account of the Goths; undertakes an
Expedition against them and is slain in an Engagement near Adrianople.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Emperor Valens arrived at
Constantinople on the 30th of May, in the sixth year of his own
consulate, <span id="fr_675"></span>[676](#fn_675.md) and the second of
Valentinian the Younger, and found the people in a very dejected state
of mind: for the barbarians, who had already desolated Thrace, were now
laying waste the very suburbs of Constantinople, there being no adequate
force at hand to resist them. But when they undertook to make near
approaches, even to the walls of the city, the people became exceedingly
troubled, and began to murmur against the emperor; accusing him of
having brought on the enemy thither, and then indolently prolonging the
struggle there, instead of at once marching out against the barbarians.
Moreover at the exhibition of the sports of the Hippodrome, all with one
voice clamored against the emperor’s negligence of the public affairs,
crying out with great earnestness, ‘Give us arms, and we ourselves will
fight.’ The emperor provoked at these seditious clamors, marched out of
the city, on the 11th of June; threatening that if he returned, he would
punish the citizens not only for their insolent reproaches, but for
having previously favored the pretensions of the usurper Procopius;
declaring also that he would utterly demolish their city, and cause the
plough to pass over its ruins, he advanced against the barbarians, whom
he routed with great slaughter, and pursued as far as Adrianople, a city
of Thrace, situated on the frontiers of Macedonia. Having at that place
again engaged the enemy, who had by this time rallied, he lost his life
on the 9th of August, under the consulate just mentioned, and in the
fourth year of the 289th Olympiad. Some have asserted that he was burnt
to death in a village whither he had retired, which the barbarians
assaulted and set on fire. But others affirm that having put off his
imperial robe he ran into the midst of the main body of infantry; and
that when the cavalry revolted and refused to engage, the infantry were
surrounded by the barbarians, and completely destroyed in a body. Among
these it is said the emperor fell, but could not be distinguished, in
consequence of his not having on his imperial habit. He died in the
fiftieth year of his age, having reigned in conjunction with his brother
thirteen years, and three years after the death of the brother. This
book therefore contains \[the course of events during\] the space of
sixteen years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_675"></span>[117:676](2020163.htm#fr_675.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p3"></span>378 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book V](2020164.md)
