[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020512)  [Next](2020514.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*Two Epistles from
Innocent, the Pope of Rome, of which one was addressed to John
Chrysostom, and the other to the Clergy of Constantinople concerning
John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p2.1"></span>Innocent</span>, <span
id="fr_1615"></span>[1616](#fn_1615.md) bishop of Rome, <span
id="fr_1616"></span>[1617](#fn_1616.md) was extremely indignant when
apprised of the measures that had been adopted against John, and
condemned <span id="page_416">p. 416</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-Page_416"></span>the whole proceedings. He then turned
his attention to the convocation of an œcumenical council, and wrote to
John and to the clergy of Constantinople in part. Subjoined are the two
letters, precisely as I found them, translated from the Latin into
Greek.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p5"></span>“Innocent, to the beloved brother
John.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p6"></span>“Although one conscious of his own
innocence ought to expect every blessing and to ask for mercy from God,
yet it seems well to us to send you a befitting letter by Cyriacus, the
deacon, and to counsel you to long-suffering, lest the contumely cast
upon you should have more power in subduing your courage than the
testimony of a good conscience in encouraging you to hope. It is not
requisite to teach you, who are the teacher and pastor of so great a
people, that God always tries the best of men to see whether they will
continue in the height of patience, and will not give way to any labor
of suffering; and how true it is that the conscience is a firm thing
against all that befalls us unjustly, and unless one be moved in these
misfortunes by patience, he furnishes a ground for evil surmising. For
he ought to endure everything, who first trusts in God, and then in his
own conscience. Especially when an excellent and good man can exercise
himself in endurance, he cannot be overcome; for the Holy Scriptures
guard his thoughts, and the devout lections, which we expound to the
people, abound in examples. These Scriptures assure us that almost all
the saints are variously and continuously afflicted, and are tested by
some investigation, and so have come to the crown of patience. Let thy
conscience encourage thy love, O most honored brother; for that faculty
amid tribulations possesses an encouragement for virtue. For since
Christ, the Master, is observing, the purified conscience will station
you in the haven of peace.”

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p7"></span>“Innocent, the bishop, to the
presbyters, deacons, and all the clergy, and to the people of the church
of Constantinople under John, the bishop, greeting to you, beloved
brethren.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p8"></span>“From the letters of your love that
you forwarded to me through Germanus, the presbyter, and Cassianus, the
deacon, I have learned, with anxious solicitude, the scenes of evil
which you have placed before our eyes. I have frequently seen during its
repeated reading with what calamities and labors the faith is wearied.
Only the consolation of patience heals such a state of affairs. Our God
will shortly put an end to such tribulations, and they will eventually
tend to your profit. But we recognized with approbation your
proposition, placed at the beginning of the letter of your love; to wit,
that this very consolation is necessary, and embraces many proofs of
your patience; for our consolation, which we ought to have conveyed, you
have anticipated in your epistle. Our Lord is wont to furnish this
patience to the suffering, in order that when they fall into
tribulations, the servants of Christ may encourage themselves; for they
should reason within themselves that what they suffer has happened
previously to the saints. And even we ourselves derive comfort from your
letters, for we are not strangers to your sufferings; but we are
disciplined in you. Who, indeed, can endure to witness the errors
introduced by those who were bound especially to be enthusiasts for the
quiet of peace and for its concord? But far from maintaining peace, they
expel guiltless priests from the front seat of their own churches. John,
our brother and fellow-minister and your bishop, has been the first to
suffer this unjust treatment without being allowed a hearing. No
accusation was brought, none was heard. What proposition was it that was
nullified, so that no show of judgment might arise or be sought? Others
were seated in the places of living priests, as though any who began
from such discord would be able to possess anything or do anything
rightly in any one’s judgment. We have never known such audacities to
have been done by our fathers. They rather prohibited such innovations
by refusing to give power to any one to be ordained in another’s place
while the occupant was living, since he is unable to be a bishop who is
unjustly substituted.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p9"></span>“With respect to the observance of
canons, we declare that those defined at Nicæa are alone <span
id="fr_1617"></span>[1618](#fn_1617.md) entitled to the obedience and
recognition of the Catholic Church. If any individuals should attempt to
introduce other canons, at variance with those of Nicæa, and such as are
a compilation by heretics, such canons ought to be rejected by the
Catholic Church, for it is not lawful to add the inventions of heretics
to the Catholic canons. For they always wish to belittle the decision of
the Nicene fathers through opponents and lawless men. We say, then, that
the canons we have censured are not only to be disregarded, but to be
condemned with the dogmas of heretics and schismatics, even as they have
been formerly condemned at the council of Sardica by the bishops who
were our predecessors. For it would be better, O most honored brethren,
that these transactions be condemned, than that any actions should be
confirmed contrary to the canons.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p11"></span>“What measures ought we to adopt now
in the present circumstances against such deeds? It is necessary that
there be a synodical investigation, and a synod we long ago said should
be gathered. There are no other means of arrest<span id="page_417">p.
417</span> <span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-Page_417"></span>ing the fury of the
tempest. In order that we may attain this it will be profitable
meanwhile for that healing to be exalted which comes by the will of the
great God and of His Christ, our Lord. We shall thus behold the
cessation of all the woes which have been excited by the envy of the
devil, and which have served as trials for our faith. If we remain
steadfast in the faith, there is nothing that we ought not to expect
from the Lord. We are constantly watching for the opportunity of
convening an œcumenical council, whereby, in accordance with the will of
God, an end may be put to these harassing commotions. Let us, then,
endure in the interval, and, fortified by the wall of patience, let us
trust in the help of our God for the restoration of all things.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p12"></span>“We had previously been made
acquainted with all that you have related concerning your trials, by our
fellow-bishops Demetrius, Cyriacus, Eulysius, and Palladius, who visited
Rome at different periods and are now with us; from them we had learned
all the details by a complete inquiry.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1615"></span>[415:1616](2020513.htm#fr_1615.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p3"></span>Independent chapter; cf. Pallad.
*Dialog.* 1–3.

<span id="fn_1616"></span>[415:1617](2020513.htm#fr_1616.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p4"></span>Innocent I., <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 402–417.

<span id="fn_1617"></span>[416:1618](2020513.htm#fr_1617.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvi-p10"></span>The reckless historical sense of the
West has a strong proof here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Terrible Events which resulted from the Treatment of John.
Death of the Empress Eudoxia. Death of Arsacius. And further concerning
Atticus, the Patriarch, his Birthplace, and Character.](2020514.md)
