[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020021)  [Next](2020023.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Of Eutychian the
Monk.*

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xiii-p2.1"></span>I have</span> heard moreover concerning
Eutychian, a devout person who flourished about the same time; who also
belonged to the Novatian church, yet was venerated for the performance
of similar miracles. I shall unequivocally state my authority for this
narrative, nor will I attempt to conceal it, even though I give offense
to some parties. It was Auxanon, a very aged presbyter of the Novatian
church; who when quite a youth accompanied Acesius to the Synod at
Nicæa, and related to me what I have said concerning him. His life
extended from that period to the reign of Theodosius the Younger; and
when I was a mere youth he recounted to me the acts of Eutychian,
enlarging much on the divine grace which was manifested in him: but one
circumstance he alluded to, which occurred in the reign of Constantine,
peculiarly worthy of mention. One of those military attendants, whom the
emperor calls his domestic \[or body\] guards having been suspected of
treasonable practices, sought his safety in flight. The indignant
monarch ordered that he should be put to death, wherever he might be
found: who, having been arrested on the Bithynian Olympus, was bound
with heavy and painful chains and kept imprisoned near those parts of
Olympus where Eutychian was leading a solitary life, and healing both
the bodies and souls of many. The aged Auxanon being then very young was
with him, and was being trained by him in the discipline of the monastic
life. Many persons came to this Eutychian, entreating him to procure the
release of the prisoner by interceding for him with the emperor. For the
fame of the miracles done by Eutychian had reached the ears of the
emperor. He readily promised to go to the sovereign; but as the chains
inflicted intolerable suffering, those who interested themselves on his
behalf declared that death caused by the effect of his chains would
anticipate both the emperor’s vengeance and any intercession that might
be made for the prisoner. Accordingly Eutychian sent to the jailers
requesting them to relieve the man; but they having answered that they
should bring themselves into danger by relieving a criminal, he went
himself to the prison, attended by Auxanon; and as they refused to open
the jail, the grace which rested on Eutychian was rendered more
conspicuous: for the gates of the prison opened of their own accord,
while the jailers had the keys in their custody. As soon as Eutychian,
together with Auxanon, had entered the prison, to the great astonishment
of all then present the fetters spontaneously fell from the prisoner’s
limbs. He then proceeded with Auxanon to the city which was anciently
called Byzantium but afterwards Constantinople, where having been
admitted into the imperial palace, he saved the man from death; for the
emperor, entertaining great veneration for Eutychian, readily granted
his request. This indeed occurred some time after \[the period to which
this part of our history refers\].

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p3"></span>The bishops who were convened at the
council of Nicæa, after having drawn up and enrolled certain other
ecclesiastical regulations which they are accustomed to term canons,
again departed to their respective cities: and as I conceive it will be
appreciated by lovers of learning, I shall here subjoin the names of
such as were present, as far as I have been able to ascertain them, with
the province and city over which they severally presided, and likewise
the date at which this assembly took place. Hosius, who was I believe
bishop of Cordova in Spain, as I have before stated. Vito and Vicentius,
presbyters of Rome, Alexander, bishop of Egypt, Eustathius of Antiochia
Magna, Macarius of Jerusalem, and Harpocration of Cynopolis: the names
of the rest are fully reported in *The Synodicon* <span
id="fr_199"></span>[200](#fn_199.md) of Athanasius, bishop of Alexandria.
This Synod was convened (as we have discovered from the notation of the
date prefixed to the record of the Synod) in the consulate of Paulinus
and Julian, on the 20th day of May, and in the 636th year from the reign
of Alexander the Macedonian. <span id="fr_200"></span>[201](#fn_200.md)
Accordingly the work of the council was accomplished. It should be noted
that after the council the emperor went into the western parts of the
empire.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_199"></span>[19:200](2020022.htm#fr_199.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p4"></span>This work of Athanasius is not now
extant.

<span id="fn_200"></span>[19:201](2020022.htm#fr_200.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xiii-p5"></span>May 20, 325 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.xiii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, and Theognis Bishop of Nicæa, who
had been banished for agreeing in Opinion with Arius, having published
their Recantation, and assented to the Creed, are reinstated in their
Sees.](2020023.md)
