[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020331)  [Next](2020333.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxx"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX</span>.—*Account given by the
Great Athanasius of the Death of Arius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxx-p2"></span>“<span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p2.1"></span>Arius, <span
id="fr_1200"></span>[1201](#fn_1200.md) the author of the heresy and the
associate of Eusebius, having been summoned before the most blessed
Constantine Augustus, at the solicitation of the partisans of Eusebius,
was desired to give in writing an exposition of his faith. He drew up
this document with great artfulness, and like the devil, concealed his
impious assertions beneath the simple words of Scripture. The most
blessed Constantine said to him, ‘If you have no other points in mind
than these, render testimony to the truth; for if you perjure yourself,
the Lord will punish you’; and the wretched man swore that he neither
held nor conceived any sentiments except those now specified in the
document, even if he had ever affirmed otherwise; soon after he went
out, and judgment was visited upon him; for he bent forwards and burst
in the middle. With all men the common end of life is death. We must not
blame a man, even if he be an enemy, merely because he died, for it is
uncertain whether we shall live to the evening. But the end of Arius was
so singular that it seems worthy of some remark. The partisans of
Eusebius threatened to reinstate <span id="page_280">p. 280</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xxx-Page_280"></span>him in the church, and Alexander,
bishop of Constantinople, opposed their intention; Arius placed his
confidence in the power and menaces of Eusebius; for it was the Sabbath,
and he expected the next day to be readmitted. The dispute ran high; the
partisans of Eusebius were loud in their menaces, while Alexander had
recourse to prayer. The Lord was the judge, and declared himself against
the unjust. A little before sunset Arius was compelled by a want of
nature to enter the place appointed for such emergencies, and here he
lost at once both restoration to communion and his life. The most
blessed Constantine was amazed when he heard of this occurrence, and
regarded it as the proof of perjury. It then became evident to every one
that the menaces of Eusebius were absolutely futile, and that the
expectations of Arius were vain. It also became manifest that the Arian
madness could not be fellowshipped by the Saviour both here and in the
church of the Firstborn. Is it not then astonishing that some are still
found who seek to exculpate him whom the Lord condemned, and to defend
that heresy which the Lord proved to be unworthy of fellowship, by not
permitting its author to enter the church? We have been duly informed
that this was the mode of the death of Arius.” It is said that for a
long period subsequently no one would make use of the seat on which he
died. Those who were compelled by necessities of nature, as is wont to
be the case in a crowd, to visit the public place, when they entered,
spoke to one another to avoid the seat, and the place was shunned
afterwards, because Arius had there received the punishment of his
impiety. At a later time a certain rich and powerful man, who had
embraced the Arian tenets, bought the place of the public, and built a
house on the spot, in order that the occurrence might fall into
oblivion, and that there might be no perpetual memorial of the death of
Arius. </span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1200"></span>[279:1201](2020332.htm#fr_1200.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxx-p3"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p3.1"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p3.2"></span><span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xxx-p3.3"></span>Cf. Athan. *Ep. ad Episc. Ægypt. et Lib.*
18, 19; cf. Athan. *Ep. ad Serapion,* which treats of the death of
Arius.</span></span></span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Events which occurred in Alexandria after the Death of Arius.
Letter of Constantine the Great to the Church there.](2020333.md)
