[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020207)  [Next](2020209) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*John is expelled from his
Church by a Synod held at Chalcedon on account of his Dispraise of
Women.*

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xvi-p2.1"></span>When</span> Epiphanius was gone, John was
informed by some person that the Empress Eudoxia had stimulated
Epiphanius against him. And being of a fiery temperament, and of a ready
utterance, he soon after pronounced a public invective against women in
general. The people readily took this as uttered indirectly against the
empress and so the speech was laid hold of by evil-disposed persons, and
reported to those in authority. At length on being informed of it the
empress immediately complained to her husband, telling him that the
insult offered to herself was equally an insult against him. The emperor
therefore authorized Theophilus to convoke a Synod without delay against
John; Severian also co-operated in promoting this, for he still retained
his grudge against Chrysostom. Not long time accordingly intervened
before Theophilus arrived, having induced several bishops from different
cities to accompany him; these however had been summoned by the
emperor’s orders also. Many of the bishops in Asia John had deposed when
he went to Ephesus and ordained Heraclides. Accordingly they all by
previous agreement assembled at Chalcedon in Bithynia. Cyrinus was at
that time bishop of Chalcedon, an Egyptian by birth, who said many
things to the bishops in disparagement of John, denouncing him as ‘the
impious,’ ‘the haughty,’ ‘the inexorable.’ They indeed were very much
satisfied at these denunciations. But Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia
having involuntarily trod on Cyrinus’ foot, he was severely hurt by it
and was unable to embark with the rest for Constantinople, but remained
behind at Chalcedon. The rest crossed over. Now Theophilus had so openly
avowed his hostility to John, that none of the clergy would go forth to
meet him, or pay him the least honor; but some Alexandrian sailors
happening to be on the spot—for at that time the grain transporting
vessels were there—greeted him with joyful acclamations. He excused
himself from entering the church, and <span id="page_149">p. 149</span>
<span id="ii.ix.xvi-Page_149"></span>took up his abode at one of the
imperial mansions called ‘The Placidian.’ Then on this account a torrent
of accusations began to be poured forth against John; for no mention was
now made of Origen, but all were intent on urging a variety of
criminations, many of which were ridiculous. Preliminary matters being
thus settled, the bishops were convened in one of the suburbs of
Chalcedon, a place called ‘The Oak,’ <span
id="fr_873"></span>[874](#fn_873) and immediately cited John to answer
the charges which were brought against him. He also summoned Serapion
the deacon; Tigris the eunuch presbyter, and Paul the reader, were
likewise summoned to appear there with him, for these men were included
in the impeachments, as participators in his guilt. And since John
taking exception to those who had cited him, on the ground of their
being his enemies, refused to attend, <span
id="fr_874"></span>[875](#fn_874) and demanded a general council,
without delay they repeated their citation four times in succession; and
as he persisted in his refusal to meet them as his judges, always giving
the same answer, they condemned him, and deposed him without assigning
any other cause for his deposition but that he refused to obey the
summons. This decision on being announced towards evening, incited the
people to a most alarming sedition; insomuch that they kept watch all
night, and would by no means suffer him to be removed from the church,
but cried out that his cause ought to be determined in a larger
assembly. A decree of the emperor, however, commanded that he should be
immediately expelled, and sent into exile; which as soon as John was
apprised of, he voluntarily surrendered himself about noon unknown to
the populace, on the third day after his condemnation: for he dreaded
any insurrectionary movement on his account, and was accordingly led
away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_873"></span>[149:874](2020208.htm#fr_873) <span
id="ii.ix.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p3"></span>Hence this is called the Synod at ‘the
Oak’ (*Synodus ad Quercum*). See Hefele, *History of the Church
Councils*, Vol. II. p. 430.

<span id="fn_874"></span>[149:875](2020208.htm#fr_874) <span
id="ii.ix.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xvi-p4"></span>For a similar action of Athanasius based
on the same reason, see I. 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sedition on Account of John Chrysostom's Banishment. He is
recalled.](2020209)
