[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020050)  [Next](2020052) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.i"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p1"></span><span id="page_36">p. 36</span> <span
id="ii.v.i-Page_36"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="ii.v.i-p1.1"></span>Book II.</span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*Introduction containing the
Reason for the Author’s Revision of his First and Second Books.*

<span id="ii.v.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.i-p3.1"></span>Rufinus,</span> who wrote an Ecclesiastical
History in Latin, <span id="fr_260"></span>[261](#fn_260) has erred in
respect to chronology. For he supposes that what was done against
Athanasius occurred after the death of the Emperor Constantine: he was
also ignorant of his exile to the Gauls and of various other
circumstances. Now we in the first place wrote the first two books of
our history following Rufinus; but in writing our history from the third
to the seventh, some facts we collected from Rufinus, others from
different authors, and some from the narration of individuals still
living. Afterward, however, we perused the writings of Athanasius,
wherein he depicts his own sufferings and how through the calumnies of
the Eusebian fiction he was banished, and judged that more credit was
due to him who had suffered, and to those who were witnesses of the
things they describe, than to such as have been dependent on conjecture,
and had therefore erred. Moreover, having obtained several letters of
persons eminent at that period, we have availed ourselves of their
assistance also in tracing out the truth as far as possible. On this
account we were compelled to revise the first and second books of this
history, using, however, the testimony of Rufinus where it is evident
that he could not be mistaken. It should also be observed, that in our
former edition, neither the sentence of deposition which was passed upon
Arius, nor the emperor’s letters were inserted, but simply the narration
or facts in order that the history might not become bulky and weary the
readers with tedious matters of detail. But in the present edition, such
alterations and additions have been made for your sake, O sacred man of
God, Theodore, <span id="fr_261"></span>[262](#fn_261) in order that you
might not be ignorant what the princes wrote in their own words, as well
as the decisions of the bishops in their various Synods, wherein they
continually altered the confession of faith. Wherefore, whatever we have
deemed necessary we have inserted in this later edition. Having adopted
this course in the first book, we shall endeavor to do the same in the
consecutive portion of our history, I mean the second. On this let us
now enter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_260"></span>[36:261](2020051.htm#fr_260) <span
id="ii.v.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p4"></span>Rufinus’ *Historia Ecclesiastica,* in two
books, begins with Arius and ends with Theodosius the Great. It is not
very accurate, but written largely from memory. It is dedicated to
Chromatius, bishop of Aquileja, and translated into Greek by Gelasius
and Cyril of Jerusalem. On the edition used by Socrates, see Introd. and
I. 12, note 1. Cf. also on his knowledge of Latin, II. 23, 30, and 37.

<span id="fn_261"></span>[36:262](2020051.htm#fr_261) <span
id="ii.v.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.i-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.i-p5.1"></span>ὦ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.i-p5.2"></span>ἱερὲ τοῦ Θεοῦ ἄνθρωπε Θεόδωρε</span>; cf.
Introd. p. x, also VI. Introd. and VII. 48.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eusebius, Bishop of Nicomedia, and his Party, by again
endeavoring to introduce the Arian Heresy, create Disturbances in the
Churches.](2020052)
