[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020114)  [Next](2020116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*The Emperor preparing
an Expedition against the Persians, arrives at Antioch, and being
ridiculed by the Inhabitants, he retorts on them by a Satirical
Publication entitled ‘Misopogon, or the Beard-Hater.’*

<span id="ii.vi.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor having extorted immense
sums of money from the Christians, hastening his expedition against the
Persians, arrived at Antioch in Syria. There, desiring to show the
citizens how much ­he affected glory, he unduly depressed the prices of
commodities; neither taking into account the circumstances of that time,
nor reflecting how much the presence of an army inconveniences the
population of the provinces, and of necessity lessens the supply of
provisions to the cities. The merchants and retailers <span
id="fr_535"></span>[536](#fn_535) therefore left off trading, being
unable to sustain the losses which the imperial edict entailed upon
them; consequently the necessaries failed. The Antiochians not bearing
the insult,—for they are a people naturally impatient with
insult,—instantly broke forth into invectives against Julian;
caricaturing his beard also, which was a very long one, and saying that
it ought to be cut off and manufactured into ropes. They added that the
bull which was impressed upon his coin, was a symbol of his having
desolated the world. For the emperor, being excessively superstitious,
was continually sacrificing bulls <span
id="fr_536"></span>[537](#fn_536) on the altars of his idols; and had
ordered the impression of a bull and altar to be made on his coin.
Irritated by these scoffs, he threatened to punish the city of Antioch,
and returned to Tarsus in Cilicia, giving orders that preparations
should be made for his speedy departure thence. Whence Libanius the
sophist took occasion to compose two orations, one addressed to the
emperor in behalf of the Antiochians, the other to the inhabitants of
Antioch on the emperor’s displeasure. It is however affirmed that these
compositions were merely written, and never recited in public. Julian
abandoning his former purpose of revenging himself on his satirists by
injurious deeds, expended his wrath in reciprocating their abusive
taunts; for he wrote a pamphlet against them which he entitled
*Antiochicus, or Misopogon,* thus leaving an indelible stigma upon that
city and its inhabitants. But we must now speak of the evils which he
brought upon the Christians at Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_535"></span>[88:536](2020115.htm#fr_535) <span
id="ii.vi.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvii-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>μεταβολεῖς</span> . Cf. <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xvii-p3.2"></span>μεταβολή</span>, used to
designate all merchandising, Julius Pollux, III. 25; hence <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xvii-p3.3"></span>μεταβολεύς</span> , a
‘retailer,’ ‘small merchant.’

<span id="fn_536"></span>[88:537](2020115.htm#fr_536) <span
id="ii.vi.xvii-p3.4"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvii-p4"></span>Hence Gregory of Nazianus calls him
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xvii-p4.1"></span>καυσίταυρος</span>
, ‘a burner of bulls.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor consulting an Oracle, the Demon gives no Response,
being awed by the Nearness of Babylas the Martyr.](2020116)
