[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020397)  [Next](2020399.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.v"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Julian restores Liberty to
the Christians, in order to execute Further Troubles in the Church. The
Evil Treatment of Christians he devised*.

<span id="iii.x.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.v-p2.1"></span>It</span> was from these motives that Julian
recalled from exile <span id="fr_1372"></span>[1373](#fn_1372.md) all
Christians who, during the reign of Constantius, had been banished on
account of their religious sentiments, and restored to them their
property that had been confiscated by law. He charged the people not to
commit any act of injustice against the Christians, not to insult them,
and not to constrain them to offer sacrifice unwillingly. He commanded
that if they should of their own accord desire to draw near the altars,
they were first to appease the wrath of the demons, whom the pagans
regard as capable of averting evil, and to purify themselves by the
customary course of expiations. He deprived the clergy, however, of the
immunities, honors, and provisions which Constantine had
conferred; <span id="fr_1373"></span>[1374](#fn_1373.md) repealed the laws
which had been enacted in their favor, and reinforced their statute
liabilities. He even compelled the virgins and widows, who, on account
of their poverty, were reckoned among the clergy, to refund the
provision which had been assigned them from public sources. For when
Constantine adjusted the temporal concerns of the Church, he devoted a
sufficient portion of the taxes raised upon every city, to the support
of the clergy everywhere; and to ensure the stability of this
arrangement he enacted a law which has continued in force from the death
of Julian to the present day. They say these transactions were very
cruel and rigorous, as appears by the receipts given by the receivers of
the money to those from whom it had been extorted, and <span
id="page_330">p. 330</span> <span id="iii.x.v-Page_330"></span>which
were designed to show that the property received in accordance with the
law of Constantine had been refunded.

<span id="iii.x.v-p5"></span>Nothing, however, could diminish the enmity
of the ruler against religion. In the intensity of his hatred against
the faith, he seized every opportunity to ruin the Church. He deprived
it of its property, votives, and sacred vessels, and condemned those who
had demolished temples during the reign of Constantine and Constantius,
to rebuild them, or to defray the expenses of their re-erection. On this
ground, since they were unable to pay the sums and also on account of
the inquisition for sacred money, many of the priests, clergy, and the
other Christians were cruelly tortured and cast into prison.

<span id="iii.x.v-p6"></span>It may be concluded from what has been
said, that if Julian shed less blood than preceding persecutors of the
Church, and that if he devised fewer punishments for the torture of the
body, yet that he was severer in other respects; for he appears as
inflicting evil upon it in every way, except that he recalled the
priests who had been condemned to banishment by the Emperor Constantius;
but it is said he issued this order in their behalf, not out of mercy,
but that through contention among themselves, the churches might be
involved in fraternal strife, and might fail of her own rights, or
because he wanted to asperse Constantius; for he supposed that he could
render the dead monarch odious to almost all his subjects, by favoring
the pagans who were of the same sentiments as himself, and by showing
compassion to those who had suffered for Christ, as having been treated
unjustly. He expelled the eunuchs from the palaces, because the late
emperor had been well affected towards them. He condemned Eusebius, the
governor of the imperial court, to death, from a suspicion he
entertained that it was at his suggestion that Gallus his brother had
been slain. He recalled Aëtius, the leader of the Eunomian heresy, <span
id="fr_1374"></span>[1375](#fn_1374.md) from the region whither Constantius
had banished him, who had been otherwise suspected on account of his
intimacy with Gallus; and to him Julian sent letters full of benignity,
and furnished him with public conveyances. For a similar reason he
condemned Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus, under the heaviest penalty, to
rebuild, within two months, and at his own expense, a church belonging
to the Novatians which he had destroyed under Constantius. Many other
things might be found which he did from hatred to his predecessor,
either himself effecting these or permitting others to accomplish them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1372"></span>[329:1373](2020398.htm#fr_1372.md) <span
id="iii.x.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 11; Philost. vi. 7, vii. 4.

<span id="fn_1373"></span>[329:1374](2020398.htm#fr_1373.md) <span
id="iii.x.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p4"></span>Eus. *V. C.* ii. 30–42.

<span id="fn_1374"></span>[330:1375](2020398.htm#fr_1374.md) <span
id="iii.x.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.v-p7"></span>*Juliani Op. Ep.* 31, a letter from him to
Aetius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius, after having been Seven Years concealed in the House
of a Wise and Beautiful Virgin, reappears at that time in Public, and
enters the Church of Alexandria.](2020399.md)
