[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020431)  [Next](2020433) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Basil becomes Bishop of
Cæsarea after Eusebius; his Boldness towards the Emperor and the
Prefect*.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p2.1"></span>Some</span> time after, the emperor again
visited Cappadocia, and found that Basil was administering the churches
there after the death of Eusebius. <span
id="fr_1456"></span>[1457](#fn_1456) He thought of expelling him, but
was unwillingly restrained from his intention. It is said that the night
after he had formed his plans his wife was disturbed by a frightful
dream, and that his only son Galates was cut off by a rapid disease. The
death of this son was universally attributed to the vengeance of God as
a punishment of his parents for the machinations that had been carried
on against Basil. Valens himself was of this opinion, and, after the
death of his son, offered no further molestation to the bishop.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p4"></span>When the prince was sinking under the
disease, and at the point of death, the emperor sent for Basil and
requested him to pray to God for his son’s recovery. For as soon as
Valens had arrived at Cæsarea, the prefect had sent for Basil and
commanded him to embrace the religious sentiments of the emperor,
menacing him with death in case of non-compliance. Basil replied that it
would be great gain to him and the grant of the highest favor to be
delivered as quickly as possible from the bondage of the body. The
prefect gave him the rest of the day and the approaching night for
deliberation, and advised him not to rush imprudently into <span
id="page_356">p. 356</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-Page_356"></span>obvious danger, but that he should come
on the day after and declare his opinion. “I do not require to
deliberate,” replied Basil. “My determination will be the same to-morrow
as it is to-day; for since I am a creature I can never be induced to
worship that which is similar to myself and worship it as God; neither
will I conform to your religion, nor to that of the emperor. Although
your distinction may be great, and although you have the honor of ruling
no inconsiderable portion of the empire, yet I ought not on these
accounts to seek to please men, and, at the same time, belittle that
Divine faith which neither loss of goods, nor exile, nor condemnation to
death would ever impel me to betray. Inflictions of this nature have
never excited in my mind one pang of sorrow. I possess nothing but a
cloak and a few books. I dwell on the earth as a traveler. The body
through its weakness would have the better of all sensation and torture
after the first blow.”

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p5"></span>The prefect admired the courage evinced
in this bold reply, and communicated the circumstance to the emperor. On
the festival of the Epiphany, the emperor repaired to the church, with
the rulers and his guards, presented gifts at the holy table, and held a
conference with Basil, whose wisdom and whose order and arrangement in
the conduct of the priesthood and the church elicited his praise.

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p6"></span>Not long after, however, the calumny of
his enemies prevailed, and Basil was condemned to banishment. The night
for the execution of the edict was at hand; the son of the emperor
suddenly fell ill with a pressing and dangerous fever. The father
prostrated himself on the earth and wept over the son who was still
alive, and not knowing what other measures to take towards effecting the
recovery of his son, he dispatched some of his attendants to Basil to
come and visit the prostrate child; because he himself feared to summon
the bishop, on account of the injury just inflicted upon him.
Immediately on the arrival of Basil, the boy began to rally; so that
many maintain that his recovery would have been complete, had not some
heretics been summoned to pray with Basil for the restoration of the
boy. It is said that the prefect, likewise, fell ill; but that on his
repentance, and on prayer being offered to God, he was restored to
health. The instances above adduced are quite inadequate to convey an
idea of the wonderful endowments of Basil; his extreme addiction to the
philosophic life and astonishing powers of eloquence attracted great
celebrity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1456"></span>[355:1457](2020432.htm#fr_1456) <span
id="iii.xi.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xvi-p3"></span>Greg. Naz. *Or.* xliii. 44–57; Greg.
Nyss. *contra Eunomium,* ii. 290–295; Ruf. ii. 9; Soc. iv. 26. Cf.
Theodoret, iv. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Friendship of Basil and of Gregory, the Theologian; being Peers
in Wisdom, they defend the Nicene Doctrines.](2020433)
