[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020434)  [Next](2020436.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Death of the Great
Athanasius; the Elevation of Lucius, who was Arian-Minded, to the See;
the Numerous Calamities he brought upon the Churches in Egypt; Peter,
who served after Athanasius, passed over to Rome*.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xix-p2.1"></span>Athanasius</span>, bishop of the church of
Alexandria, died about this period, after having completed his
high-priesthood in about forty-six years. <span
id="fr_1461"></span>[1462](#fn_1461.md) The Arians having received early
intelligence of his death, Euzoïus, president of the Arians at Antioch,
and Magnus, the chief treasurer, were sent by the emperor, and lost no
time in seizing and imprisoning Peter, whom Athanasius had appointed to
succeed him in the bishopric; and they forthwith transferred the
government of the church to Lucius.

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p4"></span>Hence those in Egypt suffered more
grievously than those in other places, and misfortunes piled upon
misfortunes oppressed the members of the Catholic Church; for as soon as
Lucius settled in Alexandria, he attempted to take possession of the
churches; he met with opposition from the people, and the clergy and
holy virgins were accused as originators of the sedition. Some made
their escape as if the city had fallen into the hands of an enemy;
others were seized and imprisoned. Some of the prisoners were afterwards
dragged from the dungeons to be torn with hooks and thongs, while others
were burned by means of flaming torches. It seemed wonderful how they
could possibly survive the tortures to which they were subjected.
Banishment or even death itself would have been preferable to such
sufferings. Peter, the bishop, made his escape from prison; and
embarking on board a ship, proceeded to Rome, the bishop of which church
held the same sentiments as himself. Thus the Arians, although not many
in number, remained in possession of the churches. At the same time, an
edict was issued by the emperor, enacting that as many of the followers
of the Nicene doctrines should be ejected from Alexandria and the rest
of Egypt, as might be directed by Lucius. Euzoïus, having thus
accomplished all his designs, returned to Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1461"></span>[357:1462](2020435.htm#fr_1461.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xix-p3"></span>Ruf. ii. 3; Soc. iv. 20–22. In c. 22 he
mentions a letter of Peter to the churches, giving an account of the
persecutions; and that Sabinus records none of these things. Cf.
Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 20–22. In c. 22 a part of Peter’s letter is
given. Hieron. *de vir. illust.* lxxxvii.; Greg. Naz. *Or*. xxi. *in
laudem Magni Athanasii episcopi Alexandrini.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Persecution of the Egyptian Monks, and of the Disciples of St.
Antony. They were enclosed in a Certain Island on Account of their
Orthodoxy; the Miracles which they Wrought.](2020436.md)
