[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020254)  [Next](2020256.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*Many of the Jews
in Crete embrace the Christian Faith.*

<span id="ii.x.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period a great number of
Jews who dwelt in Crete were convened to Christianity, through the
following disastrous circumstance. A certain Jewish impostor pretended
that he was Moses, and had been <span
id="fr_1023"></span>[1024](#fn_1023.md) sent from heaven to lead out the
Jews inhabiting that island, and conduct them through the sea: for he
said that he was the same person who formerly preserved the Israelites
by leading them through the Red Sea. During a whole year therefore he
perambulated the several cities of the island, and persuaded the Jews to
believe such assurances. He moreover bid them renounce their money and
other property, pledging himself to guide them through a dry sea into
the land of promise. Deluded by such expectations, they neglected
business of every kind, despising what they possessed, and permitting
any one who chose to take it. When the day appointed by this deceiver
for their departure had arrived, he himself took the lead, and all
followed with their wives and children. He led them therefore until they
reached a promontory that overhung the sea, from which he ordered them
to fling themselves headlong <span id="page_175">p. 175</span> <span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-Page_175"></span>into it. Those who came first to the
precipice did so, and were immediately destroyed, some of them being
dashed in pieces against the rocks, and some drowned in the waters: and
more would have perished, had not the Providence of God led some
fishermen and merchants who were Christians to be present. These persons
drew out and saved some that were almost drowned, who then in their
perilous situation became sensible of the madness of their conduct. The
rest they hindered from casting themselves down, by telling them of the
destruction of those who had taken the first leap. When at length the
Jews perceived how fearfully they had been duped, they blamed first of
all their own indiscreet credulity, and then sought to lay hold of the
pseudo-Moses in order to put him to death. But they were unable to seize
him, for he suddenly disappeared which induced a general belief that it
was some malignant fiend, <span id="fr_1024"></span>[1025](#fn_1024.md) who
had assumed a human form for the destruction of their nation in that
place. In consequence of this experience many of the Jews in Crete at
that time abandoning Judaism attached themselves to the Christian faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1023"></span>[174:1024](2020255.htm#fr_1023.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxviii-p3"></span>Nothing further is heard of this
strange affair.

<span id="fn_1024"></span>[175:1025](2020255.htm#fr_1024.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxviii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxxviii-p4.2"></span>λάστωρ</span>. Æschylus and Sophocles
apply this word to the *Furies.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Preservation of the Church of the Novatians from Fire.](2020256.md)
