[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020444)  [Next](2020446.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—*Concerning the Monks
of Thebaïs: Apollos, Dorotheus; concerning Piammon, John, Mark,
Macarius, Apollodorus, Moses, Paul, who was in Ferma, Pacho, Stephen,
and Pior*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p2"></span><span id="page_366">p. 366</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxix-Page_366"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxix-p2.1"></span>Apollos</span> flourished about the same
period in Thebaïs. He early devoted himself to a life of philosophy; and
after having passed forty years in the desert, he shut himself up, by
the command of God, in a cave formed at the foot of a mountain, near a
very populous district. By the multitude of his miracles, he soon became
distinguished, and was the head of many monks; for he directed them
profitably by his instructions. Timothy, who conducted the church of
Alexandria, has given us a history of his method of discipline and of
what divine and marvelous deeds he was a worker; he also narrates the
lives of other approved monks, many of whom I have mentioned. <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1489](#fn_1488.md)

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p4"></span>In that time many good monks, to the
number of about two thousand, preached philosophy in the neighborhood of
Alexandria; some in a district called the Hermitage, and others more
towards Mareotis and Libya. Dorotheus, a native of Thebes, was among the
most celebrated of these monks. He spent the day in collecting stones
upon the seashore, which he used in erecting cells to be given to those
who were unable to build them. During the night, he employed himself in
weaving baskets of palm leaves; and these he sold, to obtain the means
of subsistence. He ate six ounces of bread with a few vegetables daily,
and drank nothing but water. Having accustomed himself to this extreme
abstinence from his youth, he continued to observe it in old age. He was
never seen to recline on a mat or a bed, nor even to place his limbs in
an easy attitude, or willingly to surrender himself to sleep. Sometimes,
from natural lassitude, his eyes would involuntarily close when he was
at his daily labor or his meals; and when nodding during his eating, the
food would fall from his mouth. One day, being utterly overcome by
drowsiness, he fell down on the mat; he was displeased at finding
himself in this position, and said, in an undertone of voice, “If angels
are persuaded to sleep, you will persuade also the zealous.” Perhaps he
might have said this to himself, or perhaps to the demon who had become
an impediment to his zealous exercises. He was once asked by a person
who came to him while he was exhausting himself, why he destroyed his
body. “Because it destroys me,” was his reply.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p5"></span>Piammon and John presided over two
celebrated Egyptian monasteries near Diolcus. They were presbyters who
discharged their priesthood very carefully and reverently. It is said
that one day, when Piammon was officiating as priest, he beheld an angel
standing near the holy table and writing down in a book the names of the
monks who were present, while he erased the names of those who were
absent. John had received from God such power over sufferings and
diseases, that he healed the gouty and restored the paralytic.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p6"></span>A very old man, named Benjamin, was
practicing philosophy very brilliantly about this period, in the desert
near Scetis. God had bestowed upon him the power of relieving the sick
of every disease without medicine, by the touch only of his hand, or by
means of a little oil consecrated by prayer. The story is, that he was
attacked by a dropsy, and his body was swollen to such a size that it
became necessary, in order to carry him from his cell, to enlarge the
door. As his malady would not admit of his lying in a recumbent posture,
he remained, during eight months, seated on a very large skin, and
continued to heal the sick, without regretting that his own recovery was
not effected. He comforted those who came to visit him, and requested
them to pray for his soul; adding that he cared little for his body, for
it had been of no service to him when in health, and could not, now that
it was diseased, be of any injury to him.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p7"></span>About the same time the celebrated
Mark, Marcarius the younger, Apollonius, and Moses, an Egyptian, dwelt
at Scetis. It is said that Mark was, from his youth upwards,
distinguished by extreme mildness and prudence; he committed the Sacred
Scriptures to memory, and manifested such eminent piety that Macarius
himself, the presbyter of Celliæ, <span
id="fr_1489"></span>[1490](#fn_1489.md) declared that he had never given to
him what priests present to the initiated at the holy table, but that an
angel administered it to him whose hand up to the forearm he declares
himself to have seen.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p9"></span>Macarius had received from God the
power of dispelling demons. A murder which he had unintentionally
committed was the original cause of his embracing a life of philosophy.
He was a shepherd, and led his flock to graze on the banks of Lake
Mareotis, when in sport he slew one of his companions. Fearful of being
delivered up to justice, he fled to the desert. Here he concealed
himself during three years, and afterwards erected a small dwelling on
the spot, in which he dwelt twenty-five years. He was accustomed to say
that he owed much to the calamity that had befallen him in early life,
and even called the unintentional murder he had committed a salutary
deed, inasmuch as it had been the cause of his embracing philosophy and
a blessed mode of life.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p10"></span>Apollonius, after passing his life in
the pursuits of commerce, retired in his old age to Scetis. On
reflecting that he was too old to <span id="page_367">p. 367</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxix-Page_367"></span>learn writing or any other art,
he purchased with his own money a supply of every kind of drug, and of
food suited for the sick, some of which he carried until the ninth hour
to the door of every monastery, for the relief of those who were
suffering from disease. Finding this practice advantageous to himself,
he adopted this mode of life; and when he felt death approaching he
delivered his drugs to one whom he exhorted to go and do as he had done.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p11"></span>Moses was originally a slave, but was
driven from his master’s house on account of his immorality. He joined
some robbers, and became leader of the band. After having perpetrated
many evil deeds and dared some murders, by some sudden conversion he
embraced the monastic life, and attained the highest point of
philosophy. As the healthful and vigorous habit of body which had been
induced by his former avocations acted as a stimulus to his imagination
and excited a desire for pleasure, he resorted to every possible means
of macerating his body; thus, he subsisted on a little bread without
cooked food, subjected himself to severe labor, and prayed fifty times
daily; he prayed standing, without bending his knees or closing his eyes
in sleep. He sometimes went during the night to the cells of the monks
and secretly filled their pitchers with water, and this was very
laborious, for he had sometimes to go ten, sometimes twenty, and
sometimes thirty and more, stadia in quest of water. Notwithstanding all
his efforts to macerate his body, it was long before he could subdue his
natural vigor of constitution. It is reported that robbers once broke
into the dwelling where he was practicing philosophy; he seized and
bound them, threw the four men across his shoulders, and bore them to
the church, that the monks who were there assembled might deal with them
as they thought fit, for he did not consider himself authorized to
punish any one. For they say so sudden a conversion from vice to virtue
was never before witnessed, nor such rapid attainments in monastical
philosophy. Hence God rendered him an object of dread to the demons, and
he was ordained presbyter over the monks at Scetis. After a life spent
in this manner, he died at the age of seventy-five, leaving behind him
numerous eminent disciples.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p12"></span>Paul, Pachon, Stephen, and Moses, of
whom the two latter were Libyans, and Pior, who was an Egyptian,
flourished during this reign. Paul dwelt at Ferme, a mountain of Scetis,
and presided over five hundred ascetics. He did not labor with his
hands, neither did he receive alms of any one, except such food as was
necessary for his subsistence. He did nothing but pray, and daily
offered up to God three hundred prayers. He placed three hundred pebbles
in his bosom, for fear of omitting any of these prayers; and, at the
conclusion of each, he took away one of the pebbles. When there were no
pebbles remaining, he knew that he had gone through the whole course of
his prescribed prayers.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p13"></span>Pachon also flourished during this
period at Scetis. He followed this career from youth to extreme old age,
without ever being found unmanly in self-control by the appetites of the
body, the passions of the soul, or a demon,—in short, in all those
things which the philosopher should conquer.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p14"></span>Stephen dwelt at Mareotis near
Marmarica. During sixty years, through exactness, he attained the
perfection of asceticism, became very noted as a monk, and was intimate
with Antony the Great. He was very mild and prudent, and his usual style
of conversation was sweet and profitable, and well calculated to comfort
the souls of the afflicted, to transform them into good spirits, if even
they had previously been depressed by griefs which seemed necessary. He
behaved similarly about his own afflictions. He was troubled with a
severe and incurable ulcer, and surgeons were employed to operate upon
the diseased members. During the operation Stephen employed himself in
weaving palm leaves, and exhorted those who were around him not to
concern themselves about his sufferings. He told them to have no other
thought than that God does nothing but for our good, and that his
affliction would tend to his real welfare, inasmuch as it would perhaps
atone for his sins, it being better to be judged in this life than in
the life to come.

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p15"></span>Moses was celebrated for his meekness,
his love, and his power of healing of sufferings by prayer. Pior
determined, from his youth, to devote himself to a life of philosophy;
and, with this view, quitted his father’s house after having made a vow
that he would never again look upon any of his relations. After fifty
years had expired, one of his sisters heard that he was still alive, and
she was so transported with joy at this unexpected intelligence, that
she could not rest till she had seen him. The bishop of the place where
she resided was so affected by the groans and tears of the aged woman,
that he wrote to the leaders of the monks in the desert of Scetis,
desiring them to send Pior to him. The superiors accordingly directed
him to repair to the city of his birth, and he could not say nay, for
disobedience was regarded as unlawful by the monks of Egypt, and I think
also by other monks. He went with another monk to the door of his
father’s house, and caused himself to be announced. When he heard the
door being opened, he closed his eyes, and calling his sister by name,
he said to her, “I am Pior, your brother; look at me as much as you
please.” <span id="page_368">p. 368</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxix-Page_368"></span>His sister was delighted beyond measure
at again beholding him, and returned thanks to God. He prayed at the
door where he stood, and then returned to the place where he lived;
there he dug a well, and found that the water was bitter, but he
persevered in the use of it till his death. Then the height to which he
had carried his self-denial was known; for after he died, several
attempted to practice philosophy in the place where he had dwelt, but
found it impossible to remain there. I am convinced that, had it not
been for the principles of philosophy which he had espoused, he could
easily have changed the water to a sweet taste by prayer; for he caused
water to flow in a spot where none had existed previously. It is said
that some monks, under the guidance of Moses, undertook to dig a well,
but the expected vein did not appear, nor did any depth yield the water,
and they were about to abandon the task, when, about midday, Pior joined
them; he first embraced them, and then rebuked their want of faith and
littleness of soul; he then descended into the pit they had excavated;
and, after engaging in prayer, struck the ground thrice with a rod. A
spring of water soon after rose to the surface, and filled the whole
excavation. After prayer, Pior departed; and though the monks urged him
to break his fast with them, he refused, alleging that he had not been
sent to them for that purpose, but merely in order to perform the act he
had effected. <span id="fr_1490"></span>[1491](#fn_1490.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[366:1489](2020445.htm#fr_1488.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p3"></span>Here we learn that Timothy furnished
the storehouse for this monastic biography. The stories of this chapter
are probably also borrowed from him, at least in part. There is a more
conspicuous divergence from Palladius and Rufinus.

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[366:1490](2020445.htm#fr_1489.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p8"></span>Ruf. *H. M.* 22; the place was thus
named from the number of cells located there.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[368:1491](2020445.htm#fr_1490.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxix-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxix-p16"></span>See another story of Pior in Soc. iv.
23.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Monks of Scetis: Origen, Didymus, Cronion, Orsisius, Putubatus,
Arsion, Serapion, Ammon, Eusebius, and Dioscorus, the Brethren who are
called Long, and Evagrius the Philosopher.](2020446.md)
