[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020229)  [Next](2020231) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Conflict between the
Christians and Jews at Alexandria: and breach between the Bishop Cyril
and the Prefect Orestes.*

<span id="ii.x.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this same time it happened that
the Jewish inhabitants were driven out of Alexandria by Cyril the bishop
on the following account. The Alexandrian public is more delighted with
tumult than any other people: and if at any time it should find a
pretext, breaks forth into the most intolerable excesses; for it never
ceases from its turbulence without bloodshed. It happened on the present
occasion that a disturbance arose among the populace, not from a cause
of any serious importance, but out of an evil that has become very
popular in almost all cities, viz. a fondness for dancing
exhibitions. <span id="fr_939"></span>[940](#fn_939) In consequence of
the Jews being disengaged from business on the Sabbath, and spending
their time, not in hearing the Law, but in theatrical amusements,
dancers usually collect great crowds on that day, and disorder is almost
invariably produced. And although this was in some degree controlled by
the governor of Alexandria, nevertheless the Jews continued opposing
these measures. And although they are always hostile toward the
Christians they were roused to still greater opposition against them on
account of the dancers. When therefore Orestes the prefect was
publishing an edict—for so they are accustomed to call public notices—in
the theatre for the regulation of the shows, some of the bishop Cyril’s
party were present to learn the nature of the orders about to be issued.
There was among them a certain Hierax, a teacher of the rudimental
branches of literature, and one who was a very enthusiastic listener of
the bishop Cyril’s sermons, and made himself conspicuous by his
forwardness in applauding. When the Jews observed this person in the
theatre, they immediately cried out that he had come there for no other
purpose than to excite sedition among the people. Now Orestes had long
regarded with jealousy the growing power of the bishops, because they
encroached on the jurisdiction of the authorities appointed by the
emperor, especially as Cyril wished to set spies over his proceedings;
he therefore ordered Hierax to be seized, and publicly subjected him to
the torture in the theatre. Cyril, on being informed of this, sent for
the principal Jews, and threatened them with the utmost severities
unless they desisted from their molestation of the Christians. The
Jewish populace on hearing these menaces, instead of suppressing their
violence, only became more furious, and were led to form conspiracies
for the destruction of the Christians; one of these was of so desperate
a character as to cause their entire expulsion from Alexandria; this I
shall now describe. Having agreed that each one of them should wear a
ring on his finger made of the bark of a palm branch, for the sake of
mutual recognition, they determined to make a nightly attack on the
Christians. They therefore sent persons into the streets to raise an
outcry that the church named after Alexander was on fire. Thus many
Christians on hearing this ran out, some from one direction and some
from another, in great anxiety to save their church. The Jews
immediately fell upon and slew them; readily distinguishing each other
by their rings. At daybreak the authors of this atrocity could not be
concealed: and Cyril, accompanied by an immense crowd of people, going
to their synagogues—for so they call their house of prayer—took them
away from them, and drove the Jews out of the city, permitting the
multitude to plunder their goods. Thus the Jews who had inhabited the
city from the time of Alexander the Macedonian were expelled from it,
stripped of all they possessed, and dispersed some in one direction and
some in another. One of them, a physician <span
id="fr_940"></span>[941](#fn_940) named Adamantius, fled to Atticus
bishop of Constantinople, and professing Christianity, some time
afterwards returned to Alexandria and fixed his residence there. But
Orestes the governor of Alexandria was filled with great indignation at
these transactions, and was excessively grieved that a city of such
magnitude should have been suddenly bereft of so large a portion of its
population; he therefore at once communicated the whole affair to the
emperor. Cyril also wrote to him, describing the outrageous conduct of
the Jews; and in the meanwhile sent persons to Orestes who should
mediate concerning a reconciliation: for this the people had urged him
to do. And when Orestes refused to listen to friendly advances, Cyril
extended toward him the book of gospels, <span
id="fr_941"></span>[942](#fn_941) believing that respect for religion
would induce <span id="page_160">p. 160</span> <span
id="ii.x.xiii-Page_160"></span>him to lay aside his resentment. When,
however, even this had no pacific effect on the prefect, but he
persisted in implacable hostility against the bishop, the following
event afterwards occurred.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_939"></span>[159:940](2020230.htm#fr_939) <span
id="ii.x.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiii-p3"></span>As to how the ancient Church looked upon
theatrical shows, see Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* XVI. 11. 15, and
passages there referred to.

<span id="fn_940"></span>[159:941](2020230.htm#fr_940) <span
id="ii.x.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p4.1"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p4.2"></span>ατρικῶν λόγων σοφιστής</span>, also called by
other writers of the period <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p4.3"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xiii-p4.4"></span>ατροσοφιστής</span> ; see Sophocles, *Greek
Lex. of the Rom. and Byzant. Periods.*

<span id="fn_941"></span>[159:942](2020230.htm#fr_941) <span
id="ii.x.xiii-p4.5"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiii-p5"></span>As a mode of abjuration, see VI. 11, note
5. In this case the sacred volume takes the place of the child.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Monks of Nitria come down and raise a Sedition against the
Prefect of Alexandria.](2020231)
