[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020121)  [Next](2020123.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*The Bishops flock
around Jovian, each attempting to draw him to his own Creed.*

<span id="ii.vi.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Jovian</span> having returned from Persia,
ecclesiastical commotions were again renewed: for those who presided
over the churches endeavored to anticipate each other, in the hope that
the emperor would attach himself to their own tenets. He however had
from the beginning adhered to the homoousian faith, and openly declared
that he preferred this to all others. Moreover, he wrote letters to and
encouraged Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, who immediately after
Julian’s death had recovered the Alexandrian church, and at that time
gaining confidence from the letters \[spoken of\] put away all fear. The
emperor further recalled from exile all those prelates whom Constantius
had banished, and who had not been re-established by Julian. Moreover,
the pagan temples were again shut up, and they secreted themselves
wherever they were able. The philosophers also laid aside their
palliums, and clothed themselves in ordinary attire. That public
pollution by the blood of victims, which had been profusely lavished
even to disgust in the reign of Julian, was now likewise taken away.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Macedonians and Acacians meet at Antioch, and proclaim their
Assent to the Nicene Creed.](2020123.md)
