[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020088)  [Next](2020090) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIX</span>.—*Of the Synod at
Seleucia, in Isauria.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p2.1"></span>But</span> I must now give an account of the
other Synod, which the emperor’s edict had convoked in the east, as a
rival to that of Ariminum. It was at first determined that the bishops
should assemble at Nicomedia in Bithynia; but a great earthquake having
nearly destroyed that city, prevented their being convened there. This
happened in the consulate <span id="fr_416"></span>[417](#fn_416) of
Tatian and Cerealis, on the 28th day of August. <span
id="fr_417"></span>[418](#fn_417) They were therefore planning to
transfer the council to the neighboring city of Nicæa: but this plan was
again altered, as it seemed more convenient to meet at Tarsus in
Cilicia. Being dissatisfied with this arrangement also, they at last
assembled themselves at Seleucia, surnamed Aspera, <span
id="fr_418"></span>[419](#fn_418) a city of Isauria. This took place in
the same year \[in which the council of Ariminum was held\], <span
id="page_68">p. 68</span> <span id="ii.v.xxxix-Page_68"></span>under the
consulate of Eusebius and Hypatius, <span
id="fr_419"></span>[420](#fn_419) the number of those convened being
about 160. There was present on this occasion Leonas, an officer of
distinction attached to the imperial household, before whom the
emperor’s edict had enjoined that the discussion respecting the faith
should be entered into. Lauricius also, the commander-in-chief of the
troops in Isauria, was ordered to be there, to serve the bishops in such
things as they might require. In the presence of these personages
therefore, the bishops were there convened on the 27th of the month of
September, and immediately began a discussion on the basis of the public
records, shorthand writers being present to write down what each might
say. Those who desire to learn the particulars of the several speeches,
will find copious details of them in the collection of Sabinus; but we
shall only notice the more important heads. On the first day of their
being convened, Leonas ordered each one to propose what he thought fit:
but those present said that no question ought to be agitated in the
absence of those prelates who had not yet arrived; for Macedonius,
bishop of Constantinople, Basil of Ancyra, and some others who were
apprehensive of an impeachment for their misconduct, had not made their
appearance. Macedonius pleaded indisposition, and failed to attend;
Patrophilus said he had some trouble with his eyes, and that on this
account it was needful for him to remain in the suburbs of Seleucia; and
the rest offered various pretexts to account for their absence. When,
however, Leonas declared that the subjects which they had met to
consider must be entered on, notwithstanding the absence of these
persons, the bishops replied that they could not proceed to the
discussion of any question, until the life and conduct of the parties
accused had been investigated: for Cyril of Jerusalem, Eustathius of
Sebastia in Armenia, and some others, had been charged with misconduct
on various grounds long before. A sharp contest arose in consequence of
this demur; some affirming that cognizance ought first to be taken of
all such accusations, and others denying that anything whatever should
have precedence of matters of faith. The emperor’s orders contributed
not a little to augment this dispute, inasmuch as letters of his were
produced urging now this and now that as necessary to be considered
first. The dispute having arisen on this subject, a schism was thus
made, and the Seleucian council was divided into two factions, one of
which was headed by Acacius of Cæsarea in Palestine, George of
Alexandria, Uranius of Tyre, and Eudoxius of Antioch, who were supported
by only about thirty-two other bishops. Of the opposite party, which was
by far the more numerous, the principal were George of Laodicea in
Syria, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis in Paphlagonia, and Eleusius of
Cyzicus. It being determined by the majority to examine doctrinal
matters first, the party of Acacius openly opposed the Nicene Creed, and
wished to introduce another instead of it. The other faction, <span
id="fr_420"></span>[421](#fn_420) which was considerably more numerous,
concurred in all the decisions of the council of Nicæa, but criticised
its adoption of the term *homoousion.* Accordingly they debated on this
point, much being said on each side, until late in the evening, when
Silvanus, who presided over the church at Tarsus, insisted with much
vehemence of manner, ‘that there was no need of a new exposition of the
faith; but that it was their duty rather to confirm that which was
published at Antioch, <span id="fr_421"></span>[422](#fn_421) at the
consecration of the church in that place.’ On this declaration, Acacius
and his partisans privately withdrew from the council; while the others,
producing the creed composed at Antioch, read it, and then separated for
that day. Assembling in the church of Seleucia on the day following,
after having closed the doors, they again read the same creed, and
ratified it by their signatures. At this time the readers and deacons
present signed on behalf of certain absent bishops, who had intimated
their acquiescence in its form.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_416"></span>[67:417](2020089.htm#fr_416) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p3"></span>358 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_417"></span>[67:418](2020089.htm#fr_417) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p4"></span>In this calamity Cecropius, the bishop
of Nicomedia, perished, and the splendid cathedral of the city was
ruined; both of which misfortunes were attributed by the heathen to the
wrath of their gods. See Sozom. IV. 16.

<span id="fn_418"></span>[67:419](2020089.htm#fr_418) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p5.1"></span>Τραχεῖα</span>, on account of the
neighboring steep mountains. This Seleucia was the capital of Isauria.

<span id="fn_419"></span>[68:420](2020089.htm#fr_419) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p6"></span>359 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> See, on this double council of
Ariminum and Seleucia, Hefele, *Hist. of the Ch. Councils,* Vol. II. p.
346–371.

<span id="fn_420"></span>[68:421](2020089.htm#fr_420) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p7"></span>Cf Athan. *de Synodd.* 12.

<span id="fn_421"></span>[68:422](2020089.htm#fr_421) <span
id="ii.v.xxxix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxix-p8"></span>See chaps. 8 and 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acacius, Bishop of Cæsarea, dictates a new Form of Creed in the
Synod at Seleucia.](2020090)
