[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020496)  [Next](2020498) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Severian, Bishop of
Gabales, and Antiochus, Bishop of Ptolemaïs. Dispute between Serapion
and Severian. Reconciliation between them effected by the Empress*.

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.x-p2.1"></span>John</span> likewise incurred the enmity of
the empress, through the machinations of Severian, bishop of Gabali in
Syria. <span id="fr_1595"></span>[1596](#fn_1595) Severian and
Antiochus, bishop of Ptolemaïs, a city in Phœnicia, were both learned
men, and well qualified to teach in the churches. Antiochus had so fine
a voice and delivery that, by some persons, he was surnamed Chrysostom.
Severian, on the other hand, had the harshness of the Syrians in his
speech; but, in point of knowledge and the evidences of the Scriptures,
he was considered superior to Antiochus. It appears that Antiochus was
the first to visit Constantinople; he gained great applause by his
discourses, amassed some property, and then returned to his own city.
Severian followed his example, and went to Constantinople. He formed an
intimacy with John, spoke frequently in the churches, and was admired.
He was in honor, and became well known to many of those in power, and to
the emperor and empress. When John went to Asia, he commended the Church
to his care; for he was so far deceived by the adulation of Severian as
to imagine him to be his zealous friend. Severian, however, thought only
of gratifying his auditors, and of pleasing the people by his
discourses. <span id="fr_1596"></span>[1597](#fn_1596) When John was
apprised of this, he was filled with jealousy; and his resentment was
further kindled, it is said, by the representations of Serapion. After
the return of John from Asia, Serapion happened to see Severian passing;
but, instead of rising to salute him, he kept his seat, in order to show
his utter contempt for the man. Severian was offended by this
manifestation of disrespect, and exclaimed, “If Serapion die a
clergyman, then Christ was not incarnate.” Serapion reported these
words; and John, in consequence, expelled Severian from the city as
insolent, and as a blaspheme against God; for witnesses were brought
forward to attest that the above words had been really uttered by him.
Some of the friends of Serapion even went so far as to suppress part of
the speech of Severian, and to affirm that he had declared that Christ
was not incarnate. John also rebuked Severian, by asking whether, “If
Serapion should not die among the clergy, it would follow that Christ
had not been incarnate?” As soon as the wife of the emperor was informed
by the friends of Severian of what had occurred, she immediately sent
for him from Chalcedon. John, notwithstanding all her remonstrances,
positively refused to hold any intercourse with him, until the empress
placed her son Theodosius on his knees in the church named after the
apostles; then she entreated him persistently, and frequently adjured
him, until John yielded a reluctant consent to receive Severian into
friendship. Such are the accounts which I have received of these
transactions. <span id="fr_1597"></span>[1598](#fn_1597)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1595"></span>[405:1596](2020497.htm#fr_1595) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 11; Pallad. *Dialog.*

<span id="fn_1596"></span>[405:1597](2020497.htm#fr_1596) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p4"></span>A number of the homilies still
attributed to Chrysostom, as well as those now acknowledged not to be
his, were from the eloquent Severian.

<span id="fn_1597"></span>[405:1598](2020497.htm#fr_1597) <span
id="iii.xiii.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.x-p5"></span>Chrys. *Homilia de recipiendo
Severiano;* and*Sermo ipsius Severiam de pace*, iii. 421–423.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Question agitated in Egypt, as to whether God has a Corporeal
Form. Theophilus, Bishop of Alexandria, and the Books of
Origen.](2020498)
