[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020423)  [Next](2020425.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Revolt and
Extraordinary Death of Procopius. Eleusius, Bishop of Cyzicus, and
Eunomius, the Heretic. Eunomius succeeds Eleusius*.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.viii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is probable that a severe
persecution might have ensued at this juncture, had not Procopius
commenced a civil war. <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1442](#fn_1441.md) As he
began to play the tyrant at Constantinople, he soon collected a large
army, and marched against Valens.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p4"></span>The latter quitted Syria, and met
Procopius near Nacolia, a city of Phrygia, and captured him alive
through the treachery of Agelon and Gomarius, two of his generals.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p5"></span>Valens put him and his betrayers to a
cruel death; and although it is said that he had sworn to show favor to
the two generals, he caused them to be sawn asunder.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p6"></span>He commanded Procopius to be fastened
by the legs to two trees which had been bent to the ground, and he
allowed these to spring up; when the trees were left to resume their
natural position, the victim was torn in twain.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p7"></span>On the termination of this war, Valens
retired to Nicæa, and finding himself in possession of profound
tranquillity, he again began to molest those who differed from him in
opinion concerning the Divine nature.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p8"></span>His anger was unbounded against the
bishops of the council of Lampsacus, because they had condemned the
Arian bishops and the formulary of faith set forth at Ariminum.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p9"></span>While under the influence of these
resentful feelings, he summoned Eleusius from Syria, and having called
together a Synod of bishops who held his own sentiments, he endeavored
to compel him to assent to their doctrines. Eleusius at first manfully
refused compliance. But afterwards, from the dread of exile and
deprivation of his property, as was threatened by the emperor, he
yielded to the mandate. He soon repented of his weakness, and on his
return to Cyzicus he made a public confession of his fault in the
church, and urged the people to choose another bishop, for he said that
he could not discharge the duties of a priesthood after having been a
traitor to his own doctrine. The citizens respected his conduct and were
especially well-disposed to him, so that they did not choose to have
another bishop. Eudoxius, president of the Arians in Constantinople,
however, ordained Eunomius as bishop of Cyzicus; for he expected that by
his great powers of eloquence Eunomius would easily draw the people of
Cyzicus over to his own sentiments. On his arrival at that city he
expelled Eleusius, for he was furnished with an imperial edict to that
effect, and took possession of the churches himself.

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p10"></span>The followers of Eleusius built a
house of prayer without the walls of the city, and here they held their
assemblies. I shall soon again have occasion to revert to Eunomius and
the heresy which bears his name.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[351:1442](2020424.htm#fr_1441.md) <span
id="iii.xi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.viii-p3"></span>Soc. iv. 5–7; Philost. ix. 5; Eunap.
*Fr.* i. 5; ii. 28; Am. Marcel. xxvi. 5–10; Zos. iv. 4–8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sufferings of those who maintained the Nicene Faith. Agelius, the
Ruler of the Novatians.](2020425.md)
