[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020201)  [Next](2020203) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.x"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Dispute between Theophilus
and Peter leading to an Attempt on the Part of the Former to depose John
Bishop of Constantinople.*

<span id="ii.ix.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.x-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after this, the monks of the
desert, together with Dioscorus and his brothers, came to
Constantinople. There was also with them Isidore, <span
id="fr_857"></span>[858](#fn_857) formerly the most intimate friend of
the bishop Theophilus, but then become his bitterest enemy, on account
of the following circumstance: A certain man named Peter was at that
time the archpresbyter <span id="fr_858"></span>[859](#fn_858) of the
Alexandrian church; Theophilus being irritated against this person,
determined to eject him from the church; and as the ground of expulsion,
he brought the charge against him of having admitted to a participation
of the sacred mysteries, a woman of the Manichæan sect, without first
compelling her to renounce her Manichæan heresy. As Peter in his defence
declared, that not only had the errors of this woman been previously
abjured, but that Theophilus himself had sanctioned her admission to the
eucharist, Theophilus became indignant, as if he had been grievously
calumniated; whereupon he affirmed that he was altogether <span
id="page_145">p. 145</span> <span
id="ii.ix.x-Page_145"></span>unacquainted with the circumstance. Peter
therefore summoned Isidore to bear witness to the bishop’s knowledge of
the facts concerning the woman. Now Isidore happened to be then at Rome,
on a mission from Theophilus to Damasus the prelate of the imperial
city, for the purpose of affecting a reconciliation between him and
Flavian bishop of Antioch; for the adherents of Meletius had separated
from Flavian in detestation of his perjury, as we have already
observed. <span id="fr_859"></span>[860](#fn_859) When Isidore had
returned from Rome, and was cited as a witness by Peter, he deposed that
the woman was received by consent of the bishop; and that he himself had
administered the sacrament to her. Upon this Theophilus became enraged
and in anger ejected them both. This furnished the reason for Isidore’s
going to Constantinople with Dioscorus and his brethren, in order to
submit to the cognizance of the emperor, and John the bishop, the
injustice and violence with which Theophilus had treated them. John, on
being informed of the facts, gave the men an honorable reception, and
did not exclude them from communion at prayers, but postponed their
communion of the sacred mysteries, until their affairs should be
examined into. Whilst matters were in this posture, a false report was
brought to Theophilus’ ears, that John had both admitted them to a
participation of the mysteries, and was also ready to give them
assistance; wherefore he resolved not only to be revenged on Isidore and
Dioscorus, but also if possible to cast John out of his episcopal chair.
With this design he wrote to all the bishops of the various cities, and
concealing his real motive, ostensibly condemned therein the books of
Origen merely: which Athanasius, <span id="fr_860"></span>[861](#fn_860)
his predecessor, had used in confirmation of his own faith, frequently
appealing to the testimony and authority of Origen’s writings, in his
orations against the Arians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_857"></span>[144:858](2020202.htm#fr_857) <span
id="ii.ix.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.x-p3"></span>For an account of Theophilus’ outrageous
treatment of Isidore, see Palladius, *Vita S. Joannis Chrysost.* chap.
6.

<span id="fn_858"></span>[144:859](2020202.htm#fr_858) <span
id="ii.ix.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.x-p4"></span>See Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* II. 19–18,
for a statement of the functions of this office.

<span id="fn_859"></span>[145:860](2020202.htm#fr_859) <span
id="ii.ix.x-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.x-p5"></span>See above, V. 15.

<span id="fn_860"></span>[145:861](2020202.htm#fr_860) <span
id="ii.ix.x-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.x-p6"></span>Cf. Athan. *de Decr. Nic.* 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epiphanius Bishop of Cyprus convenes a Synod to condemn the Books
of Origen.](2020203)
