[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020028)  [Next](2020030.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p1"></span><span id="page_24">p. 24</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xx-Page_24"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*In what Manner the
Iberians were converted to Christianity.*

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xx-p2.1"></span>It</span> is now proper to relate how the
Iberians <span id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222.md) about the same time
became proselytes to the faith. A certain woman leading a devout and
chaste life, was, in the providential ordering of God, taken captive by
the Iberians. Now these Iberians dwell near the Euxine Sea, and are a
colony of the Iberians of Spain. Accordingly the woman in her captivity
exercised <span id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223.md) herself among the
barbarians in the practice of virtue: for she not only maintained the
most rigid continence, but spent much time in fastings and prayers. The
barbarians observing this were astonished at the strangeness of her
conduct. It happened then that the king’s son, then a mere babe, was
attacked with disease; the queen, according to the custom of the
country, sent the child to other women to be cured, in the hope that
their experience would supply a remedy. After the infant had been
carried around by its nurse without obtaining relief from any of the
women, he was at length brought to this captive. She had no knowledge of
the medical art, and applied no material remedy; but taking the child
and laying it on her bed which was made of horsecloth, in the presence
of other females, she simply said, ‘Christ, who healed many, will heal
this child also’; then having prayed in addition to this expression of
faith, and called upon God, the boy was immediately restored, and
continued well from that period. The report of this miracle spread
itself far and wide among the barbarian women, and soon reached the
queen, so that the captive became very celebrated. Not long afterwards
the queen herself having fallen sick sent for the captive woman.
Inasmuch as she being a person of modest and retiring manners excused
herself from going, the queen was conveyed to her. The captive did the
same to her as she had done to her son before; and immediately the
disease was removed. And the queen thanked the stranger; but she
replied, ‘this work is not mine, but Christ’s, who is the Son of God
that made the world’; she therefore exhorted her to call upon him, and
acknowledge the true God. Amazed at his wife’s sudden restoration to
health, the king of the Iberians wished to requite with gifts her whom
he had understood to be the means of effecting these cures; she however
said that she needed not riches, inasmuch as she possessed as riches the
consolations of religion; but that she would regard as the greatest
present he could offer her, his recognition of the God whom she
worshiped and declared. With this she sent back the gifts. This answer
the king treasured up in his mind, and going forth to the chase the next
day, the following circumstance occurred: a mist and thick darkness
covered the mountain tops and forests where he was hunting, so that
their sport was embarrassed, and their path became inextricable. In this
perplexity the prince earnestly invoked the gods whom he worshiped; and
as it availed nothing, he at last determined to implore the assistance
of the captive’s God; when scarcely had he begun to pray, ere the
darkness arising from the mist was completely dissipated. Wondering at
that which was done, he returned to his palace rejoicing, and related to
his wife what had happened; he also immediately sent for the captive
stranger, and begged her to inform him who that God was whom she adored.
The woman on her arrival caused the king of the Iberians to become a
preacher of Christ: for having believed in Christ through this devoted
woman, he convened all the Iberians who were under his authority; and
when he had declared to them what had taken place in reference to the
cure of his wife and child not only, but also the circumstances
connected with the chase, he exhorted them to worship the God of the
captive. Thus, therefore, both the king and the queen were made
preachers of Christ, the one addressing their male, and the other their
female subjects. Moreover, the king having ascertained from his prisoner
the plan on which churches were constructed among the Romans, ordered a
church to be built, and immediately provided all things necessary for
its erection; and the edifice was accordingly commenced. But when they
came to set up the pillars, Divine Providence interposed for the
confirmation of the inhabitants in the faith; for one of the columns
remained immovable, and no means were found capable of moving it; but
their ropes broke and their machinery fell to pieces; at length the
workmen gave up all further effort and departed. Then was proved the
reality of the captive’s faith in the following manner: going to the
place at night without the knowledge of any one, she spent the whole
time in prayer; and by the power of God the pillar was raised, and stood
erect in the air above its base, yet so as not to touch it. At daybreak
the king, who was an intelligent person, came himself to inspect the
work, and seeing the pillar suspended in this position <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> <span id="ii.iv.xx-Page_25"></span>without
support, both he and his attendants were amazed. Shortly after, in fact
before their very eyes, the pillar descended on its own pedestal, and
there remained fixed. Upon this the people shouted, attesting the truth
of the king’s faith, and hymning the praise of the God of the captive.
They believed thenceforth, and with eagerness raised the rest of the
columns, and the whole building was soon completed. An embassy was
afterwards sent to the Emperor Constantine, requesting that henceforth
they might be in alliance with the Romans, and receive from them a
bishop and consecrated clergy, since they sincerely believed in Christ.
Rufinus says that he learned these facts from Bacurius, <span
id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224.md) who was formerly one of the petty
princes <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225.md) of the Iberians, but
subsequently went over to the Romans, and was made a captain of the
military force in Palestine; being at length entrusted with the supreme
command in the war against the tyrant Maximus, he assisted the Emperor
Theodosius. In this way then, during the days of Constantine, were the
Iberians also converted to Christianity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_222"></span>[24:223](2020029.htm#fr_222.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p3"></span>These Iberians dwelt on the east shore of
the Black Sea in the present region of Georgia. What their relation to
the Spanish Iberians was, or why both the peoples had the same name it
is not possible to know at present. It was probably not the one
suggested by Socrates. For a similar identity of name in peoples living
widely apart, compare the Gauls of Europe and the Galatæ of Asia.

<span id="fn_223"></span>[24:224](2020029.htm#fr_223.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xx-p4.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xx-p4.2"></span>φιλοσόφει</span> : the ethical sense here
attached to the word became very common after the time of the Stoics and
their attempt to make ethics the basis and starting-point of philosophy.

<span id="fn_224"></span>[25:225](2020029.htm#fr_224.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xx-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p5"></span>Rufinus, *H. E.* I. 10, gives their story
and adds that Bacurius was a faithful and religious person and rendered
service to Theodosius in his war with Eugenius.

<span id="fn_225"></span>[25:226](2020029.htm#fr_225.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xx-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xx-p6.1"></span>βασιλίσκος</span> : lit. ‘little king.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Anthony the Monk.](2020030.md)
