[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020087)  [Next](2020089.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*Cruelty of
Macedonius, and Tumults raised by him.*

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> bishops of the Arian party
began to assume greater assurance from the imperial edicts. In what
manner they undertook to convene a Synod, we will explain somewhat
later. Let us now briefly mention a few of their previous acts. Acacius
and Patrophilus having ejected Maximus, bishop of Jerusalem, installed
Cyril in his see. Macedonius subverted the order of things in the cities
and provinces adjacent to Constantinople, promoting to ecclesiastical
honors his assistants in his intrigues against the churches. <span
id="fr_411"></span>[412](#fn_411.md) <span id="page_66">p. 66</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-Page_66"></span>He ordained Eleusius bishop of Cyzicus,
and Marathonius, bishop of Nicomedia: the latter had before been a
deacon under Macedonius himself, and proved very active in founding
monasteries both of men and women. But we must now mention in what way
Macedonius desolated the churches in the cities and provinces around
Constantinople. This man, as I have already said, <span
id="fr_412"></span>[413](#fn_412.md) having seized the bishopric, inflicted
innumerable calamities on such as were unwilling to adopt his views. His
persecutions were not confined to those who were recognized as members
of the catholic church, but extended to the Novatians also, inasmuch as
he knew that they maintained the doctrine of the *homoousion;* they
therefore with the others underwent the most intolerable sufferings, but
their bishop, Angelius by name, effected his escape by flight. Many
persons eminent for their piety were seized and tortured, because they
refused to communicate with him: and after the torture, they forcibly
constrained the men to be partakers of the holy mysteries, their mouths
being forced open with a piece of wood, and then the consecrated
elements thrust into them. Those who were so treated regarded this as a
punishment far more grievous than all others. Moreover they laid hold of
women and children, and compelled them to be initiated \[by baptism\];
and if any one resisted or otherwise spoke against it, stripes
immediately followed, and after the stripes, bonds and imprisonment, and
other violent measures. I shall here relate an instance or two whereby
the reader may form some idea of the extent of the harshness and cruelty
exercised by Macedonius and those who were then in power. They first
pressed in a box, and then sawed off, the breasts of such women as were
unwilling to communicate with them. The same parts of the persons. of
other women they burnt partly with iron, and partly with eggs intensely
heated in the fire. This mode of torture which was unknown even among
the heathen, was invented by those who professed to be Christians. These
facts were related to me by the aged Auxanon, the presbyter in the
Novatian church of whom I spoke in the first book. <span
id="fr_413"></span>[414](#fn_413.md) He said also that he had himself
endured not a few severities from the Arians, prior to his reaching the
dignity of presbyter; having been thrown into prison and beaten with
many stripes, together with Alexander the Paphlagonian, his companion in
the monastic life. He added that he had himself been able to sustain
these tortures, but that Alexander died in prison from the effects of
their infliction. He is now buried on the right of those sailing into
the bay of Constantinople which is called Ceras, close by the rivers,
where there is a church of the Novatians named after Alexander. Moreover
the Arians, at the instigation of Macedonius, demolished with many other
churches in various cities, that of the Novatians at Constantinople near
Pelargus. Why I particularly mention this church, will be seen from the
extraordinary circumstances connected with it, as testified by the same
aged Auxanon. The emperor’s edict and the violence of Macedonius had
doomed to destruction the churches of those who maintained the doctrine
of consubstantiality; the decree and violence reached this church, and
those also who were charged with the execution of the mandate were at
hand to carry it into effect. I cannot but admire the zeal displayed by
the Novatians on this occasion, as well as the sympathy they experienced
from those whom the Arians at that time ejected, but who are now in
peaceful possession of their churches. For when the emissaries of their
enemies were urgent to accomplish its destruction, an immense multitude
of Novatians, aided by numbers of others who held similar sentiments,
having assembled around this devoted church, pulled it down, and
conveyed the materials of it to another place: this place stands
opposite the city, and is called Sycæ, and forms the thirteenth ward of
the town of Constantinople. This removal was effected in a very short
time, from the extraordinary ardor of the numerous persons engaged in
it: one carried tiles, another stones, a third timber; some loading
themselves with one thing, and some with another. Even women and
children assisted in the work, regarding it as the realization of their
best wishes, and esteeming it the greatest honor to be accounted the
faithful guardians of things consecrated to God. In this way at that
time was the church of the Novatians transported to Sycæ. Long
afterwards when Constantius was dead, the emperor Julian ordered its
former site to be restored, and permitted them to rebuild it there. The
people therefore, as before, having carried back the materials, reared
the church in its former position; and from this circumstance, and its
great improvement in structure and ornament, they not inappropriately
called it *Anastasia.* The church as we before said was restored
afterwards in the reign of Julian. But at that time both the Catholics
and the Novatians were alike subjected to persecution: for the former
abominated offering their devotions in those churches in which the
Arians assembled, but frequented the other three <span
id="fr_414"></span>[415](#fn_414.md) —for this is the number of the <span
id="page_67">p. 67</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-Page_67"></span>churches which the Novatians have in
the city—and engaged in divine service with them. Indeed they would have
been wholly united, had not the Novatians refused from regard to their
ancient precepts. In other respects however, they mutually maintained
such a degree of cordiality and affection, as to be ready to lay down
their lives for one another: both parties were therefore persecuted
indiscriminately, not only at Constantinople, but also in other
provinces and cities. At Cyzicus, Eleusius, the bishop of that place,
perpetrated the same kind of enormities against the Christians there, as
Macedonius had done elsewhere, harassing and putting them to flight in
all directions and \[among other things\] he completely demolished the
church of the Novatians at Cyzicus. But Macedonius consummated his
wickedness in the following manner. Hearing that there was a great
number of the Novatian sect in the province of Paphlagonia, and
especially at Mantinium, and perceiving that such a numerous body could
not be driven from their homes by ecclesiastics alone, he caused, by the
emperor’s permission, four companies of soldiers to be sent into
Paphlagonia, that through dread of the military they might receive the
Arian opinion. But those who inhabited Mantinium, animated to
desperation by zeal for their religion, armed themselves with long
reap-hooks, hatchets, and whatever weapon came to hand, and went forth
to meet the troops; on which a conflict ensuing, many indeed of the
Paphlagonians were slain, but nearly all the soldiers were destroyed. I
learnt these things from a Paphlagonian peasant who said that he was
present at the engagement; and many others of that province corroborate
this account. Such were the exploits of Macedonius on behalf of
Christianity, consisting of murders, battles, incarcerations, and civil
wars: proceedings which rendered him odious not only to the objects of
his persecution, but even to his own party. He became obnoxious also to
the emperor on these accounts, and particularly so from the circumstance
I am about to relate. The church where the coffin lay that contained the
relics of the emperor Constantine threatened to fall. On this account
those that entered, as well as those who were accustomed to remain there
for devotional purposes, were in much fear. Macedonius, therefore,
wished to remove the emperor’s remains, lest the coffin should be
injured by the ruins. The populace getting intelligence of this,
endeavored to prevent it, insisting ‘that the emperor’s bones should not
be disturbed, as such a disinterment would be equivalent, to their being
dug up’: many however affirmed that its removal could not possibly
injure the dead body, and thus two parties were formed on this question;
such as held the doctrine of consubstantiality joining with those who
opposed it on the ground of its impiety. Macedonius, in total disregard
of these prejudices, caused the emperor’s remains to be transported to
the church where those of the martyr Acacius lay. Whereupon a vast
multitude rushed toward that edifice in two hostile divisions, which
attacked one another with great fury, and great loss of life was
occasioned, so that the churchyard was covered with gore, and the well
also which was in it overflowed with blood, which ran into the adjacent
portico, and thence even into the very street. When the emperor was
informed of this unfortunate occurrence, he was highly incensed against
Macedonius, both on account of the slaughter which he had occasioned,
and because he had dared to move his father’s body without consulting
him. Having therefore left the Cæsar Julian to take care of the western
parts, he himself set out for the east. How Macedonius was a short time
afterwards deposed, and thus suffered a most inadequate punishment for
his infamous crimes, I shall hereafter relate. <span
id="fr_415"></span>[416](#fn_415.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_411"></span>[65:412](2020088.htm#fr_411.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p3"></span>From this place it plainly appears, as
Valesius remarks, that the authority of the see of Constantinople was
acknowledged, even before the council of Constantinople, throughout the
region of the Hellespont and Bithynia, which conclusion is also
confirmed by the acts of Eudoxius, bishop of Constantinople, who made
Eunomius bishop of Cyzicus. Two causes co-operated to secure this
authority, viz. (1) the official establishment of the city as the
capital of the empire by Constantine, and (2) the transference to it of
Eusebius of Nicomedia, a most vigorous and aggressive bishop, who missed
no opportunity for enlarging and consolidating the power of his see.

<span id="fn_412"></span>[66:413](2020088.htm#fr_412.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4"></span>See above, ch. 16.

<span id="fn_413"></span>[66:414](2020088.htm#fr_413.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p5"></span>I. 13.

<span id="fn_414"></span>[66:415](2020088.htm#fr_414.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p6"></span>According to Valesius it appears
incredible that the Catholics should have done what Socrates says they
did. ‘For there is nothing more contrary to ecclesiastical discipline
than to communicate with heretics either in the sacraments or in
prayer.’ Hence ‘Socrates was probably imposed upon by the aged Auxano,
who fixed upon all the Catholics what was perhaps done by some few
Christians who were less cautious.’ But Socrates’ own attitude towards
the Novatians (cf. Introd. p. x.) shows that the difference between them
and the Catholics (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p6.1"></span>οἱ τῆς ἐκκλησίας</span>) was not
universally regarded as an absolute schism forbidding communication even
during such times of trial as these described here, which might
certainly have drawn together parties already as near to one another as
the Novatians and Catholics.

<span id="fn_415"></span>[67:416](2020088.htm#fr_415.md) <span
id="ii.v.xxxviii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxviii-p7"></span>See below, ch. 42.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Synod at Seleucia, in Isauria.](2020089.md)
