[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020501)  [Next](2020503) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*The Son of the Empress
and St. Epiphanius. Conference between the “Long Brothers” and
Epiphanius, and his Re-Embarkation for Cyprus. Epiphanius and John*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time, the son of the
empress was attacked by a dangerous illness, and the mother,
apprehensive of consequences, sent to implore Epiphanius to pray for
him. <span id="fr_1603"></span>[1604](#fn_1603) Epiphanius returned for
answer, that the sick one would live, provided that she would avoid all
intercourse with the heretic Dioscorus and his companions. To this
message the empress replied as follows: “If it be the will of God to
take my son, His will be done. The Lord who gave me my child, can take
him back again. You have not power to raise the dead, otherwise your
archdeacon would not have died.” She alluded to Chrispion, the
archdeacon, who had died a short time previously. He was brother to
Fuscon and Salamanus, monks whom I had occasion to mention <span
id="fr_1604"></span>[1605](#fn_1604) when detailing the history of
events under the reign of Valens; he had been companion of Epiphanius,
and had been appointed his archdeacon. Ammonius and his companions went
to <span id="page_409">p. 409</span> <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-Page_409"></span>Epiphanius, at the permission of the
empress. Epiphanius inquired who they were, and Ammonius replied, “We
are, O father, the Long Brothers; we come respectfully to know whether
you have read any of our works or those of our disciples?” On Epiphanius
replying that he had not seen them, he continued, “How is it, then, that
you consider us to be heretics, when you have no proof as to what
sentiments we may hold?” Epiphanius said that he had formed his judgment
by the reports he had heard on the subject; and Ammonius replied, “We
have pursued a very different line of conduct from yours. We have
conversed with your disciples, and read your works frequently, and among
others, that entitled ‘The Anchored.’ When we have met with persons who
have ridiculed your opinions, and asserted that your writings are
replete with heresy, we have contended for you, and defended you as our
father. Ought you then to condemn the absent upon mere report, and of
whom you know nothing with assured certitude, or return such an exchange
to those who have spoken well of you?” Epiphanius was measurably
convinced, and dismissed them. Soon after he embarked for Cyprus, either
because he recognized the futility of his journey to Constantinople, or
because, as there is reason to believe, God had revealed to him his
approaching death; for he died while on his voyage back to Cyprus. It is
reported that he said to the bishops who had accompanied him to the
place of embarkation, “I leave you the city, the palace, and the stage,
for I shall shortly depart.” I have been informed by several persons
that John predicted that Epiphanius would die at sea, and that this
latter predicted the deposition of John. For it appears that when the
dispute between them was at its height, Epiphanius said to John, “I hope
you will not die a bishop,” and that John replied, “I hope you will
never return to your bishopric.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1603"></span>[408:1604](2020502.htm#fr_1603) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Soc. vi. 14.

<span id="fn_1604"></span>[408:1605](2020502.htm#fr_1604) <span
id="iii.xiii.xv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xv-p4"></span>See above, vi. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Dispute between the Empress and John. Arrival of Theophilus
from Egypt. Cyrinus, Bishop of Chalcedon.](2020503)
