[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020419)  [Next](2020421.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—*Troubles again arise in
the Churches; Synod of Antioch, in which the Nicene Faith is confirmed;
the Points which this Important Synod wrote about to Jovian*.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.iv-p2.1"></span>The</span> presidents of the churches now
resumed the agitation of doctrinal questions and discussions. <span
id="fr_1433"></span>[1434](#fn_1433.md) They had remained quiet during the
reign of Julian when Christianity itself was endangered, and had
unanimously offered up their supplications for the mercy of God. It is
thus that men, when attacked by foreign enemies, remain in accord among
themselves; but, when external troubles are removed, then internal
dissensions creep in; this, however, is not a proper place for the
citation of the numerous examples in governments and nations which
history affords of this fact.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p4"></span>At this period Basil, bishop of Ancyra,
Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, Sophronius, bishop of Pompeiopolis, and
others of their party who regarded the heresy of the Anomians,
so-called, with the utmost aversion, and received the term “similar as
to substance,” instead of the term “consubstantial,” wrote a treatise to
the emperor; and after expressing their thankfulness to God for his
accession to the empire, besought him to confirm the decrees issued at
Ariminum and Seleucia, and to annul what had been established merely by
the zeal and power of certain individuals.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p5"></span>They also entreated that, if division,
which existed on account of the Synods, should still prevail in the
churches, the bishops from every region might be convened alone in some
place indicated by the emperor, and not be permitted to assemble
elsewhere and issue decrees at variance with each other, as had been
done during the reign of Constantius. They added that they had not gone
to visit him at his camp, because they were fearful of being burdensome
to him; but that if he desired to see them, they would gladly repair to
him, and defray all the expenses attendant on the journey themselves.
Such was the document written to the Emperor Jovian.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p6"></span>At this juncture a council was convened
at Antioch in Syria; the form of belief established by the council of
Nicæa was confirmed; and it was decided that the Son is incontrovertibly
of the same substance as the Father. Meletius, who then governed the
church of Antioch; Eusebius, bishop of Samosata; Pelagius, bishop of
Laodicea in Syria; Acacius, bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine; Irenius,
bishop of Gaza; and Athanasius, bishop of Ancyra, took part in this
council.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p7"></span>On the termination of the council they
acquainted the emperor with the transactions that had taken place, by
dispatching the following letter: <span
id="fr_1434"></span>[1435](#fn_1434.md) —

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p9"></span>“To the most religious and God-beloved
Augustus, our Sovereign Jovian, the Conqueror, from the bishops
assembled from divers regions, at Antioch.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p10"></span>“We know, O emperor, well-beloved of
God, that your piety is fully intent upon maintaining peace and concord
in the Church; neither are we ignorant that you have well received the
impress of the chief point of such unity, viz., the true and orthodox
faith.

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p11"></span>“Lest, therefore, we should be reckoned
among those who assail these doctrines of truth, we attest to your piety
that we receive and maintain the form of belief which was anciently set
forth by the holy council of Nicæa. Now, although the term
‘consubstantial’ appears strange to some persons, yet it was safely
interpreted by the Fathers, and signifies that the Son was begotten of
the substance of the Father. This term does not convey the idea of
unbroken generation; neither does it coincide with the use which the
Greeks make of the word ‘substance,’ but it is calculated to withstand
the impious and rash allegation of Arius, that the Son proceeded from
what had had no previous existence. The Anomians who have just sprung
<span id="page_349">p. 349</span> <span
id="iii.xi.iv-Page_349"></span>up have the shameless boldness to
maintain this word to the grief of the concord of the Church. We subjoin
to this letter a copy of the formulary of faith adopted by the bishops
assembled at Nicæa, which we also cherish.”

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p12"></span>Such were the decisions formed by the
priests convened at Antioch; and they appended to their letter a copy of
the Nicene formulary of faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[348:1434](2020420.htm#fr_1433.md) <span
id="iii.xi.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 24, 25; Philost. viii. 5;
Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 2, 4.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[348:1435](2020420.htm#fr_1434.md) <span
id="iii.xi.iv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.iv-p8"></span>From Sabinus, according to Soc. iv. 25,
who also gives the text.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius the Great is Very Highly Esteemed by the Emperor, and
rules over the Churches of Egypt. Vision of Antony the Great.](2020421.md)
