[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020095)  [Next](2020097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xlvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLVI</span>.—*Of the Apollinarians,
and their Heresy*. <span id="fr_454"></span>[455](#fn_454)

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p3.1"></span>There</span> were two men of the same name at
Laodicea in Syria, a father and son: their name was Apollinaris; the
former of them was a presbyter, and the latter a reader in that church.
Both taught Greek literature, the father grammar, and the son rhetoric.
The father was a native of Alexandria, and at first taught at Berytus,
but afterwards removed to Laodicea, where he married, and the younger
Apollinaris was born. They were contemporaries of Epiphanius the
sophist, and being true friends they became intimate with him; but
Theodotus bishop of Laodicea, fearing that such communication should
pervert their principles, and lead them into paganism, forbade their
associating with him: they, however, paid but little attention to this
prohibition, their familiarity with Epiphanius being still continued.
George, the successor of Theodotus, also endeavored to prevent their
conversing with Epiphanius; but not being able in any way to persuade
them on this point, he excommunicated them. The younger Apolli<span
id="page_75">p. 75</span> <span id="ii.v.xlvi-Page_75"></span>naris
regarding this severe procedure as an act of injustice, and relying on
the resources of his rhetorical sophistry, originated a new heresy,
which was named after its inventor, and still has many supporters.
Nevertheless some affirm that it was not for the reason above assigned
that they dissented from George, but because they saw the unsettledness
and inconsistency of his profession of faith; since he sometimes
maintained that the Son is like the Father, in accordance with what had
been determined in the Synod at Seleucia, and at other times
countenanced the Arian view. They therefore made this a pretext for
separation from him: but as no one followed their example, they
introduced a new form of doctrine, and at first they asserted that in
the economy of the incarnation, God the Word assumed a human body
without a soul. Afterwards, as if changing mind, they retracted,
admitting that he took a soul indeed, but that it was an irrational one,
God the Word himself being in the place of a mind. Those who followed
them and bear their name at this day affirm that this is their only
point of distinction \[from the Catholics\]; for they recognize the
consubstantiality of the persons in the Trinity. But we will make
further mention of the two Apollinares in the proper place. <span
id="fr_455"></span>[456](#fn_455)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_454"></span>[74:455](2020096.htm#fr_454) <span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p2"></span>Cf. Sozom. VI. 25; Schaff, *Hist. of the
Christ. Ch.,* Vol. III. p. 708 seq.; Walch, *Ketzerhistorie,* III. p.
119–229.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[75:456](2020096.htm#fr_455) <span
id="ii.v.xlvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xlvi-p4"></span>III. 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Successes of Julian; Death of the Emperor Constantius.](2020097)
