[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020149)  [Next](2020151) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Of Didymus the Blind
Man.* <span id="fr_637"></span>[638](#fn_637)

<span id="ii.vii.xxv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxv-p3.1"></span>About</span> the same period God brought
into observation another faithful person, deeming it worthy that through
him faith might be witnessed unto: this was Didymus, a most admirable
and eloquent man, instructed in all the learning of the age in which he
flourished. At a very early age, when he had scarcely acquired the first
elements of learning, he was attacked by disease in the eyes which
deprived him of sight. But God compensated to him the loss of corporeal
vision, by bestowing increased intellectual acumen. For what he could
not learn by seeing, he was enabled to acquire through the sense of
hearing; so that being from his childhood endowed with excellent
abilities, he soon far surpassed his youthful companions who possessed
the keenest sight. He made himself master of the principles of grammar
and rhetoric with astonishing facility; and proceeded thence to
philosophical studies, dialectics, arithmetic, music, and the various
other departments of knowledge to which his attention was directed; and
he so treasured up in his mind these branches of science, that he was
prepared with the utmost readiness to enter into a discussion of these
subjects with those who had become conversant therewith by reading
books. Not only this, but he was so well acquainted with the Divine
oracles contained in the Old and New Testament that he composed several
treatises in exposition of them, besides three books on the *Trinity.*
He published also commentaries <span id="fr_638"></span>[639](#fn_638)
on Origen’s book *Of Principles,* in which he commends these writings,
saying that they are excellent, and that those who calumniate their
author, and speak slightingly of his works, are mere cavilers. ‘For,’
says he, ‘they are destitute of sufficient penetration to comprehend the
profound wisdom of that extraordinary man.’ Those who may desire to form
a just idea of the extensive erudition of Didymus, and the intense ardor
of his mind, must peruse with attention his diversified and elaborate
works. It is said that after Anthony had conversed for some time with
this Didymus, long before the reign of Valens, when he came from the
desert to Alexandria on account of the Arians, perceiving the learning
and intelligence of the man, he said to him, ‘Didymus, let not the loss
of your bodily eyes distress you: for you are deprived of such eyes
merely as are the common possession of gnats and flies; rather rejoice
that you have eyes such as angels see with, by which the Deity himself
is discerned, and his light comprehended.’ This address of the pious
Anthony to Didymus was made long before the times we are describing: in
fact Didymus was then regarded as the great bulwark of the true faith,
answering the Arians, whose sophistic cavilings he fully exposed,
triumphantly refuting all their vain subtleties and deceptive
reasonings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_637"></span>[110:638](2020150.htm#fr_637) <span
id="ii.vii.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxv-p2"></span>Sozom. III. 15; Theodoret, IV. 26;
Pallad. *Hist. Lausiac.* 4; Jerom. *de Script. Eccl.* 109.

<span id="fn_638"></span>[110:639](2020150.htm#fr_638) <span
id="ii.vii.xxv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxv-p4"></span>Mentioned by Jerome, *adv. Rufinum,* 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Basil of Cæsarea, and Gregory of Nazianzus.](2020151)
