[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020027)  [Next](2020029.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>. <span
id="fr_219"></span>[220](#fn_219.md) —*In what Manner the Nations in the
Interior of India were Christianized in the Times of Constantine.*

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p3.1"></span>We</span> must now mention in what manner
Christianity was spread in this emperor’s reign: for it was in his time
that the nations both of the Indians in the interior, and of the
Iberians first embraced the Christian faith. But I shall briefly explain
why I have used the appended expression *in the interior.* When the
apostles went forth by lot among the nations, Thomas received the
apostleship of the Parthians; Matthew was allotted Ethiopia; and
Bartholomew the part of India contiguous to that country: but the
interior India, in which many barbarous nations using different
languages lived, was not enlightened by Christian doctrine before the
times of Constantine. I now come to speak of the cause which led them to
become converts to Christianity. A certain philosopher, Meropius, a
Tyrian by race, determined to acquaint himself with the country of the
Indians, being stimulated to this by the example of the philosopher
Metrodorus, who had previously traveled through the region of India.
Having taken with him therefore two youths to whom he was related, who
were by no means ignorant of the Greek language, Meropius reached the
country by ship; and when he had inspected whatever he wished, he
touched at a certain place which had a safe harbor, for the purpose of
procuring some necessaries. It so happened that a little before that
time the treaty between the Romans and Indians had been violated. The
Indians, therefore, having seized the philosopher and those who sailed
with him, killed them all except his two youthful kinsmen; but sparing
them from compassion for their tender age, they sent them as a gift to
the king of the Indians. He being pleased with the personal appearance
of the youths, constituted one of them, whose name was Edesius,
cup-bearer at his table; the other, named Frumentius, he entrusted with
the care of the royal records. The king dying soon after, left them
free, the government devolving on his wife and infant son. Now the queen
seeing her son thus left in his minority, begged the young men to
undertake the charge of him, until he should become of adult age.
Accordingly, the youths accepted the task, and entered on the
administration of the kingdom. Thus Frumentius controlled all things and
made it a task to enquire whether among the Roman merchants trafficking
with that country, there were any Christians to be found: and having
discovered some, he informed them who he was, and exhorted them to
select and occupy some appropriate places for the celebration of
Christian worship. In the course of a little while he built a house of
prayer; and having instructed some of the Indians in the principles of
Christianity, they fitted them for participation in the worship. On the
young king’s reaching maturity, Frumentius and his associates resigned
to him the administration of public affairs, in the management of which
they had honorably acquitted themselves, and besought permission to
return to their own country. Both the king and his mother entreated them
to remain; but being desirous of revisiting their native place, they
could not be prevailed on, and consequently departed. Edesius for his
part hastened to Tyre to see his parents and kindred; but Frumentius
arriving at Alexandria, reported the affair to Athanasius the bishop,
who had but recently been invested with that dignity; and acquainting
him both with the particulars of his wanderings and the hopes Indians
had of receiving Christianity. <span id="fr_220"></span>[221](#fn_220.md)
He also begged him to send a bishop and clergy there, and by no means to
neglect those who might thus be brought to salvation. Athanasius having
considered how this could be most profitably effected, requested
Frumentius himself to accept the bishopric, declaring that he could
appoint no one more suitable than he was. Accordingly this was done;
Frumentius invested with episcopal authority, returned to India and
became there a preacher of the Gospel, and built several churches, being
aided also by divine grace, he performed various miracles, healing with
the souls also the bodily diseases of many. Rufinus assures us that he
heard these facts from Edesius, who was afterwards ordained to the
priesthood at Tyre. <span id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_219"></span>[23:220](2020028.htm#fr_219.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p2"></span>‘In this chapter Socrates has translated
Rufinus (*H. E.* I. 9) almost word for word; and calls those <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.xix-p2.1"></span>τόπους ἰδιάζοντας</span>
, which Rufinus has termed *conventicula.* Now *conventicula* are
properly private places wherein collects or short prayers are made; and
from these places churches are distinguished, which belong to the right
of the public, and are not in the power of any private person. It is to
be observed that there are reasons for thinking that this conversion of
the Indians by Frumentius happened in the reign of Constantius and not
of Constantine’ (Valesius). See also Euseb. *H. E.* V. 10, attributing
an earlier work to the apostles Matthew and Bartholomew; and Cave,
*Lives of the Apostles.* The Indians mentioned in this chapter are no
other than the Abyssinians. The name India is used as an equivalent of
Ethiopia. The christianization of Ethiopia is attributed by the
Ethiopians in their own records to Fremonatos and Sydracos. See Ludolf
*Hist. Eth.* III. 2.

<span id="fn_220"></span>[23:221](2020028.htm#fr_220.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p4"></span>Christianity here must mean Christian
instruction.

<span id="fn_221"></span>[23:222](2020028.htm#fr_221.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xix-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xix-p5.1"></span>εὐκτήρια</span>: see note 5, chap. 17 above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In what Manner the Iberians were converted to
Christianity.](2020029.md)
