[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020453)  [Next](2020455.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*Concerning
Mania, the Phylarch of the Saracens. When the Treaty with the Romans was
dissolved, Moses, their Bishop, who had been ordained by the Christians,
renewed it. Narrative concerning the Ishmaelites and the Saracens, and
their Goods; and how they began to be Christianized through Zocomus,
Their Phylarch*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period the king of the
Saracens died, <span id="fr_1510"></span>[1511](#fn_1510.md) and the peace
which had previously existed between that nation and the Romans was
dissolved. Mania, <span id="fr_1511"></span>[1512](#fn_1511.md) the widow
of the late monarch, after attaining to the government of her race, led
her troops into Phœnicia and Palestine, as far as the regions of Egypt
lying to the left of those who sail towards the source of the Nile, and
which are generally denominated Arabia. This war was by no means a
contemptible one, although conducted by a woman. The Romans, it is said,
considered it so arduous and so perilous, that the general of the
Phœnician troops applied for assistance to the general of the entire
cavalry and infantry of the East. This latter ridiculed the summons, and
undertook to give battle alone. He accordingly attacked Mania, who
commanded her own troops in person; and he was rescued with difficulty
by the general of the troops of Palestine and Phœnicia. Perceiving the
extremity of the danger, this general deemed it unnecessary to obey the
orders he had received to keep aloof from the combat; he therefore
rushed upon the barbarians, and furnished his superior an opportunity
for safe retreat, while he himself yielded ground and shot at those who
fled, and beat off with his arrows the enemies who were pressing upon
him. This occurrence is still held in remembrance among the people of
the country, and is celebrated in songs by the Saracens.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p5"></span>As the war was still pursued with
vigor, the Romans found it necessary to send an embassy to Mania to
solicit peace. It is said that she refused to comply with the request of
the embassy, unless consent were given for the ordination of a certain
man named Moses, who practiced philosophy in a neighboring desert, as
bishop over her subjects. This Moses was a man of virtuous life, and
noted for performing the divine and miraculous signs. On these
conditions being announced to the emperor, the chiefs of the army were
commanded to seize Moses, and conduct him to Lucius. The monk exclaimed,
in the presence of the rulers and the assembled people, “I am not worthy
of the honor of bearing the name and dignity of chief priest; but if,
notwithstanding my unworthiness God destines me to this office, I take
Him to witness who created the heavens and the earth, that I will not be
ordained by the imposition of the hands of Lucius, which are defiled
with the blood of holy men.” Lucius immediately rejoined, “If you are
unacquainted with the nature of my creed, you do wrong in judging me
before you are in possession of all the circumstances of the case. If
you have been prejudiced by the calumnies that have been circulated
against me, at least allow me to declare to you what are my sentiments;
and do you be the judge of them.” “Your creed is already well known to
me,” replied Moses; “and its nature is testified by bishops, presbyters,
and deacons, who are suffering grievously in exile, and the mines. It is
clear that your sentiments are opposed to the faith of Christ, and to
all <span id="page_375">p. 375</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-Page_375"></span>orthodox doctrines concerning the
Godhead.” <span id="fr_1512"></span>[1513](#fn_1512.md) Having again
protested, upon oath, that he would not receive ordination from them, he
went to the Saracens. He reconciled them to the Romans, and converted
many to Christianity, and passed his life among them as a priest,
although he found few who shared in his belief.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p7"></span>This is the tribe which took its
origin and had its name from Ishmael, the son of Abraham; and the
ancients called them Ishmaelites after their progenitor. As their mother
Hagar was a slave, they afterwards, to conceal the opprobrium of their
origin, assumed the name of Saracens, as if they were descended from
Sara, the wife of Abraham. Such being their origin, they practice
circumcision like the Jews, refrain from the use of pork, and observe
many other Jewish rites and customs. If, indeed, they deviate in any
respect from the observances of that nation, it must be ascribed to the
lapse of time, and to their intercourse with the neighboring nations.
Moses, who lived many centuries after Abraham, only legislated for those
whom he led out of Egypt. The inhabitants of the neighboring countries,
being strongly addicted to superstition, probably soon corrupted the
laws imposed upon them by their forefather Ishmael. The ancient Hebrews
had their community life under this law only, using therefore unwritten
customs, before the Mosaic legislation. These people certainly served
the same gods as the neighboring nations, honoring and naming them
similarly, so that by this likeness with their forefathers in religion,
there is evidenced their departure from the laws of their forefathers.
As is usual, in the lapse of time, their ancient customs fell into
oblivion, and other practices gradually got the precedence among them.
Some of their tribe afterwards happening to come in contact with the
Jews, gathered from them the facts of their true origin, returned to
their kinsmen, and inclined to the Hebrew customs and laws. From that
time on, until now, many of them regulate their lives according to the
Jewish precepts. Some of the Saracens were converted to Christianity not
long before the present reign. They shared in the faith of Christ by
intercourse with the priests and monks who dwelt near them, and
practiced philosophy in the neighboring deserts, and who were
distinguished by the excellence of their life, and by their miraculous
works. It is said that a whole tribe, and Zocomus, their chief, were
converted to Christianity and baptized about this period, under the
following circumstances: Zocomus was childless, and went to a certain
monk of great celebrity to complain to him of this calamity; for among
the Saracens, and I believe other barbarian nations, it was accounted of
great importance to have children. The monk desired Zocomus to be of
good cheer, engaged in prayer on his behalf, and sent him away with the
promise that if he would believe in Christ, he would have a son. When
this promise was confirmed by God, and when a son was born to him,
Zocomus was initiated, and all his subjects with him. From that period
this tribe was peculiarly fortunate, and became strong in point of
number, and formidable to the Persians as well as to the other Saracens.
Such are the details that I have been enabled to collect concerning the
conversion of the Saracens and their first bishop.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1510"></span>[374:1511](2020454.htm#fr_1510.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 6; Soc. iv. 36. Cf.
Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 23; yet Soz. has original detail in the story of
Mania, and appends the story of Zocomus.

<span id="fn_1511"></span>[374:1512](2020454.htm#fr_1511.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p4"></span>Otherwise called Mavia.

<span id="fn_1512"></span>[375:1513](2020454.htm#fr_1512.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxviii-p6"></span>See above, vi. 19, 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Peter, having returned from Rome, regains the Churches of Egypt,
after Lucius had given way; Expedition of Valens into the West against
the Scythians.](2020455.md)
