[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020035)  [Next](2020037) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Arius having
returned to Alexandria with the Emperor’s Consent, and not being
received by Athanasius, the Partisans of Eusebius bring Many Charges
against Athanasius before the Emperor.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p2.1"></span>Arius</span> having thus satisfied the
emperor, returned to Alexandria. But his artifice for suppressing the
truth did not succeed; for on his arrival at Alexandria, as Athanasius
would not receive him, but turned away from him as a pest, he attempted
to excite a fresh commotion in that city by disseminating his heresy.
Then indeed both Eusebius himself wrote, and prevailed on the emperor
also to write, in order that Arius and his partisans might be readmitted
into the church. Athanasius nevertheless wholly refused to receive them,
and wrote to inform the emperor in reply, that it was impossible for
those who had once rejected the faith, and had been anathematized, to be
again received into communion on their return. But the emperor, provoked
at this answer, menaced Athanasius in these terms:

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p3"></span>‘Since you have been apprised of my
will, afford unhindered access into the church to all those who are
desirous of entering it. For if it shall be intimated to me that you
have prohibited any of those claiming to be reunited to the church, or
have hindered their admission, I will forthwith send some one who at my
command shall depose you, and drive you into exile.’

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p4"></span>The emperor wrote thus from a desire of
promoting the public good, and because he did not wish to see the church
ruptured; for he labored earnestly to bring them all into harmony. Then
indeed the partisans of Eusebius, ill-disposed towards Athanasius,
imagining they had found a seasonable opportunity, welcomed the
emperor’s displeasure as an auxiliary to their own purpose: and on this
account they raised a great disturbance, endeavoring to eject him from
his bishopric; for they entertained the hope that the Arian doctrine
would prevail only upon the removal of Athanasius. The chief
conspirators against him were Eusebius bishop of Nicomedia, Theognis of
Nicæa, Maris of Chalcedon, Ursacius of Singidnum in Upper Mœsia, and
Valens of Mursa in Upper Pannonia. These persons suborn by bribes
certain of the Melitian heresy to fabricate various charges against
Athanasius; and first they accuse him through the Melitians Ision,
Eudæmon and Callinicus, of having ordered the Egyptians to pay a linen
garment as tribute to the church at Alexandria. But this calumny was
immediately disproved by Alypius and Macarius, presbyters of the
Alexandrian church, who then happened to be at Nicomedia; they having
convinced the emperor that these statements to the prejudice of
Athanasius were false. Wherefore the emperor by letter severely censured
his accusers, but urged Athanasius to come to him. But before he came
the Eusebian faction anticipating his arrival, added to their former
accusation the charge of another crime of a still more serious nature
than the former; charging Athanasius with plotting against his
sovereign, and with having sent for treasonable purposes a chest full of
gold to one Philumenus. When, however, the emperor had himself
investigated this matter at Psamathia, which is in the suburbs of
Nicomedia, and had found Athanasius innocent, he dismissed him with
honor; and wrote with his own hand to the church at Alexandria to assure
them that their bishop had been falsely accused. It would indeed have
been both proper and desirable to have passed over in silence the
subsequent attacks which the Eusebians made upon Athanasius, lest from
these circumstances the Church of Christ should be judged unfavorably of
by those who are adverse to its interests. <span
id="fr_239"></span>[240](#fn_239) But since having been already
committed to writing, they have become known to everybody, I have on
that account deemed it necessary to make as cursory allusion to these
things as possible, the particulars of which would require a special
treatise. Whence the slanderous accusation originated, and the character
of those who devised it, I shall now therefore state in brief.
Mareotes <span id="fr_240"></span>[241](#fn_240) is a district of
Alexandria; there are contained in it very many villages, and an
abundant population, with numerous splendid churches; these churches are
all under the jurisdiction of the bishop of Alexandria, and are <span
id="page_30">p. 30</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxvii-Page_30"></span>subject
to his city as parishes. <span id="fr_241"></span>[242](#fn_241) There
was in this region a person named Ischyras, who had been guilty of an
act deserving of many deaths; <span id="fr_242"></span>[243](#fn_242)
for although he had never been admitted to holy orders, he had the
audacity to assume the title of presbyter, and to exercise sacred
functions belonging to the priesthood. But having been detected in his
sacrilegious career, he made his escape thence and sought refuge in
Nicomedia, where he implored the protection of the party of Eusebius;
who from their hatred to Athanasius, not only received him as a
presbyter, but even promised to confer upon him the dignity of the
episcopacy, if he would frame an accusation against Athanasius,
listening as a pretext for this to whatever stories Ischyras had
invented. For he spread a report that he had suffered dreadfully in
consequence of an assault; and that Macarius had rushed furiously toward
the altar, had overturned the table, and broken a mystical cup: he added
also that he had burnt the sacred books. As a reward for this
accusation, the Eusebian faction, as I have said, promised him a
bishopric; foreseeing that the charges against Macarius would involve,
along with the accused party, Athanasius, under whose orders he would
seem to have acted. But this charge they formulated later; before it
they devised another full of the bitterest malignity, to which I shall
now advert. Having by some means, I know not what, obtained a man’s
hand; whether they themselves had murdered any one, and cut off his
hand, or had severed it from some dead body, God knows and the authors
of the deed: but be that as it may, they publicly exposed it as the hand
of Arsenius, a Melitian bishop, while they kept the alleged owner of it
concealed. This hand, they asserted, had been made use of by Athanasius
in the performance of certain magic arts; and therefore it was made the
gravest ground of accusation which these calumniators had concerted
against him: but as it generally happens, all those who entertained any
pique against Athanasius came forward at the same time with a variety of
other charges. When the emperor was informed of these proceedings, he
wrote to his nephew Dalmatius the censor, who then had his residence at
Antioch in Syria, directing him to order the accused parties to be
brought before him, and after due investigation, to inflict punishment
on such as might be convicted. He also sent thither Eusebius and
Theognis, that the case might be tried in their presence. When
Athanasius knew that he was to be summoned before the censor, he sent
into Egypt to make a strict search after Arsenius; and he ascertained
indeed that he was secreted there, but was unable to apprehend him,
because he often changed his place of concealment. Meanwhile the emperor
suppressed the trial which was to have been held before the censor, on
the following account.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_239"></span>[29:240](2020036.htm#fr_239) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p5"></span>From the sentiments expressed here may
be inferred the respect of the author for the church. His view on the
suppression of facts which did not redound to the honor of the church
does not show a very high ideal of history, but it bespeaks a laudable
regard for the good name of Christianity.

<span id="fn_240"></span>[29:241](2020036.htm#fr_240) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p6"></span>This description is probably dependent
on Athanasius, who says in his *Apologia contra Arianos,* 85, ‘Mareotes
is a region of Alexandria. In that region there never was a bishop or a
deputy bishop; but the churches of the whole region are subject to the
bishop of Alexandria. Each of the presbyters has separate villages,
which are numerous,—sometimes ten or more.’ Ischyras was probably a
resident of one of the obscurest of these villages; and it can be seen
that what is said of his doings here could easily come to pass.

<span id="fn_241"></span>[30:242](2020036.htm#fr_241) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p7.1"></span>παροικία</span> = later ‘parochia’; hence
the derivatives.

<span id="fn_242"></span>[30:243](2020036.htm#fr_242) <span
id="ii.iv.xxvii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxvii-p8"></span>Another evidence of the author’s
reverence for the institutions of religion. For subsequent history of
Ischyras, see II. 20.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On Account of the Charges against Athanasius, the Emperor
convokes a Synod of Bishops at Tyre.](2020037)
