[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020451)  [Next](2020453.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI</span>.—*Expedition against
the Sarmatians; Death of Valentinian in Rome; Valentinian the Younger
proclaimed; Persecution of the Priests; Oration of the Philosopher
Themistius, on account of which Valens was disposed to treat those who
differed from him more Humanely*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>Such</span> subjects as the above,
however, are best left to the examination and decision of individual
judgment.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p3"></span>The Sarmatians <span
id="fr_1506"></span>[1507](#fn_1506.md) having invaded the western parts of
the empire, Valentinian levied an army to oppose them. As soon, however,
as they heard of the number and strength of the troops raised against
them, they sent an embassy to solicit peace. When the ambassadors were
ushered into the presence of Valentinian, he asked them whether all the
Sarmatians were similar to them. On their replying that the principal
men of the nation had been selected to form the embassy, the emperor
exclaimed, in great fury, “A terrible thing do our subjects endure, and
a calamity is surrounding the Roman government, if the Sarmatians, a
barbarous race, of whom these are your best men, do not love to abide by
themselves, but are emboldened to invade my government, and presume to
make war at all against the Romans.” He spoke in this strain for some
time in a very high pitch of voice, and his rage was so violent and so
unbounded, that at length he burst simultaneously a blood-vessel and an
artery. He lost, in consequence, a great quantity of blood, and expired
soon after in a fortress of Gaul. <span
id="fr_1507"></span>[1508](#fn_1507.md) He was about fifty-four years of
age, and had, during thirteen years, guided the reins of government with
good results and much distinction. Six days after his death his youngest
son, who bore the same name as himself, was proclaimed emperor by the
soldiers; and soon afterwards Valens and Gratian, his brother, formally
assented to this election, although they were at first irritated at the
soldiers having transferred the symbols of government to him without
their previous consent.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6"></span>During this period Valens had fixed
his residence at Antioch in Syria, and became more hostile to those who
differed from him in opinion concerning the divine nature, and he vexed
them more severely and persecuted them. The philosopher Themistius
pronounced an oration in his presence, in which he admonished him that
he ought not to wonder at the dissension concerning ecclesiastical
doctrines, for it was more moderate and less than among the pagans, for
the opinions among them are multiform; and that, in the number of dogmas
leading to perpetual disputes, necessarily the difference about them
makes more contentions and discussions; and accordingly it might
probably be pleasing to God not to be so easily known, and to have a
divergence of opinion, so that each might fear Him the rather, since an
accurate knowledge of Him is so unattainable. And in the attempt to
summarize this vastness, one would tend to conclude how great He is and
how good He is. <span id="fr_1508"></span>[1509](#fn_1508.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1506"></span>[372:1507](2020452.htm#fr_1506.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p4"></span>Soc. iv. 31, 32; Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 12;
Philost. ix. 16.

<span id="fn_1507"></span>[372:1508](2020452.htm#fr_1507.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p5"></span>Am. Marcel. xxx. 6, 1–4; Zos. iv. 17;
Orosius, vii. 32.

<span id="fn_1508"></span>[372:1509](2020452.htm#fr_1508.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvi-p7"></span>The extant oration, xii., on this
theme was addressed to Valens at an earlier date.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Barbarians beyond the Danube, who were driven out
by the Huns, and advanced to the Romans, and their Conversion to
Christianity; Ulphilas and Athanarichus; Occurrences between them;
whence the Goths received Arianism.](2020453.md)
