[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020483)  [Next](2020485) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*St. Epiphanius,
Bishop of Cyprus, and a Particular Account of his Acts*.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>Epiphanius</span> was at this period at
the head of the metropolitan church of Cyprus. <span
id="fr_1569"></span>[1570](#fn_1569) He was celebrated, not only for the
virtues he manifested and miraculous deeds during his life, but also for
the honor that was rendered to him by God after his death; for it was
said that demons were expelled, and diseases healed at his tomb. Many
wonderful actions wrought while he lived are attributed to him, of which
the following is one of the most remarkable that has come to our
knowledge. He was extremely liberal towards the needy, either to those
who had suffered from shipwreck or any other calamity; and after
expending the whole of his own patrimony in the relief of such cases, he
applied the treasures of the church to the same purpose. These treasures
had been greatly increased by the donations of pious men of various
provinces, who had been induced by their admiration of Epiphanius to
entrust him with the distribution of their alms during their lives, or
to bequeath their property to him for this purpose at their death. It is
said that on one occasion the treasurer, who was a godly man, discovered
that the revenues of the church had been nearly drained, and so little
remained in the treasury that he considered it his duty to rebuke the
bishop as a spendthrift. Epiphanius, however, having, notwithstanding
these remonstrances, given away the small sum that had remained, a
stranger went to the little house where the treasurer lived, and placed
in his hands a bag containing many gold coins. Since neither the giver
nor the sender was visible, it seemed very naturally miraculous, that in
a gift of so much money a man should keep him<span id="page_396">p.
396</span> <span id="iii.xii.xxvii-Page_396"></span>self unknown; thus
everybody thought it to be a Divine work.

<span id="iii.xii.xxvii-p4"></span>I desire also to relate another
miracle that is attributed to Epiphanius. I have heard that a similar
action has been related of Gregory, who formerly governed Neocæsarea;
and I see no reason to doubt the veracity of the account; but it does
not disprove the authenticity of the miracle attributed to Epiphanius.
Peter, the apostle, was not the only man who raised another from the
dead; John, the evangelist, wrought a similar miracle at Ephesus; as did
likewise the daughters of Philip at Hierapolis. Similar actions have
been performed in different ages by the men of God. The miracle which I
wish to instance is the following. Two beggars having ascertained when
Epiphanius would pass that way, agreed to extract a larger donation than
usual from him by having recourse to stratagem. As soon as the bishop
was seen approaching, one of the beggars flung himself on the ground and
simulated death; the other stood by and uttered loud lamentations,
deploring the loss of his companion, and his own poverty, which made him
unable to procure sepulture for him. Epiphanius prayed to God that the
deceased might rise in peace; he gave the survivor sufficient money for
the interment, and said to the weeper, “Take measures, my son, for the
burial of your companion, and weep no more; he cannot now arise from the
dead; the calamity was inevitable, therefore you ought to bear it with
resignation.” Saying these words, the bishop departed from the spot. As
soon as there was no one in sight, the beggar who had addressed
Epiphanius touched the other with his foot, as he lay extended on the
ground, and said to him, “You have well performed your part; arise now,
for through your labor, we have a good provision for to-day.” He,
however, lay in the same way, neither heard any cry, nor perceived him
who moved him with all his strength; the other beggar ran after the
priest and confessed their artifice, and, with lamentations and tearing
of his hair, he besought Epiphanius to restore his companion. Epiphanius
merely exhorted him to submit with patience to the catastrophe, and sent
him away. God did not undo what had happened, because, I feel persuaded,
it was his design to show that those who practice deception on his
servants are accounted as guilty of the fraud as if it had been
perpetrated against Him who sees all, and who hears all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1569"></span>[395:1570](2020484.htm#fr_1569) <span
id="iii.xii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxvii-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. life by
alleged Polybius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acacius, Bishop of Berœa, Zeno, and Ajax, Men Distinguished and
Renowned for Virtue.](2020485)
