[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020105)  [Next](2020107) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Quotations from
Athanasius’ ‘Defense of his Flight.’*

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>On</span> this occasion Athanasius read to
those present the *Defense* which he had composed some time before in
justification of his flight; a few passages from which it may be of
service to introduce here, leaving the entire production, which is too
long to be transcribed, to be sought out and perused by the
studious. <span id="fr_482"></span>[483](#fn_482) See the daring
enormities of the impious persons! Such are their proceedings: and yet
instead of blushing at their former clumsy intrigues against us, they
even now abuse us for having effected our escape out of their murderous
hands; nay, are grievously vexed that they were unable to put us out of
the way altogether. In short, they overlook the fact that while they
pretend to upbraid us with ‘cowardice,’ they are really criminating
themselves: for if it be disgraceful to flee, it is still more so to
pursue, since the one is only endeavoring to avoid being murdered, while
the other is seeking to commit the deed. But Scripture itself directs us
to flee: <span id="fr_483"></span>[484](#fn_483) and those who persecute
unto death, in attempting to violate the law, constrain us to have
recourse to flight. They should rather, therefore, be ashamed of their
persecution, than reproach us for having sought to escape from it: let
them cease to harass, and those who flee will also cease. Nevertheless
they set no bounds to their malevolence, using every art to entrap us,
in the consciousness that the flight of the persecuted is the strongest
condemnation of the persecutor: for no one runs away from a mild and
beneficent person, but from one who is of a barbarous and cruel
disposition. Hence it was that ‘Every one that was discontented and in
debt’ fled from Saul to David. <span id="fr_484"></span>[485](#fn_484)
Wherefore these \[foes of ours\] in like manner desire to kill such as
conceal themselves, that no evidence may exist to convict them of their
wickedness. But in this also these misguided men most egregiously
deceive themselves: for the more obvious the effort to elude them, the
more manifestly will their deliberate slaughters and exiles be exposed.
If they act the part of assassins, the voice of the blood which is shed
will cry against them the louder: and if they condemn to banishment,
they will raise so everywhere living monuments of their own injustice
and oppression. Surely unless their intellects were unsound they would
perceive the dilemma in which their own counsels entangle them. But
since they have lost sound judgment, their folly is exposed when they
vanish, and when they seek to stay they do not see their
wickedness. <span id="fr_485"></span>[486](#fn_485) But if they reproach
those who succeed in secreting themselves from the malice of their
blood-thirsty adversaries, and revile such as flee from their
persecutors, what will they say to Jacob’s retreat from the rage of his
brother Esau, <span id="fr_486"></span>[487](#fn_486) and to Moses <span
id="fr_487"></span>[488](#fn_487) retiring into the land of Midian for
fear of Pharaoh? And what apology will these babblers make for
David’s <span id="fr_488"></span>[489](#fn_488) flight from Saul, when
he sent messengers from his own house to dispatch him; and for his
concealment in a cave, after contriving to extricate himself from the
treacherous designs of Abimelech, <span
id="fr_489"></span>[490](#fn_489) by feigning madness? What will these
reckless asserters of whatever suits their purpose answer, when they are
reminded of the great prophet Elijah, <span
id="fr_490"></span>[491](#fn_490) who by calling upon God had recalled
the dead to life, hiding himself from dread of Ahab, and fleeing on
account of Jezebel’s menaces? At which time the sons of the prophets
also, being sought for in order to be slain, withdrew, and were
concealed in caves by Obadiah; <span id="fr_491"></span>[492](#fn_491)
or are they unacquainted with these instances because of their
antiquity? Have they forgotten also what is recorded in the Gospel, that
the disciples retreated and hid themselves for fear of the Jews? <span
id="fr_492"></span>[493](#fn_492) Paul, <span
id="fr_493"></span>[494](#fn_493) when sought for by the governor \[of
Damascus\] ‘was let down from the wall in a basket, and thus escaped the
hands of him that sought him.’ Since then Scripture relates these
circumstances concerning the saints, what excuse can they fabricate for
their temerity? If they charge us with ‘cowardice,’ it is in utter
insensibility to the condemnation it pronounces on themselves. If they
asperse these holy men by asserting that they acted contrary to the will
of God, they demonstrate their ignorance of Scripture. For it was
commanded in the Law that ‘cities of refuge’ should be
constituted, <span id="fr_494"></span>[495](#fn_494) by which provision
was made that such as were pursued in order to be put to death might
have means afforded of preserving themselves. Again in the consummation
of the ages, when the Word of the Father, who had before spoken by
Moses, came himself to the earth, he gave this express injunction, ‘When
<span id="page_83">p. 83</span> <span
id="ii.vi.viii-Page_83"></span>they persecute you in one city, flee unto
another:’ <span id="fr_495"></span>[496](#fn_495) and shortly after,
‘When therefore ye shall see the abomination of desolation, spoken of by
Daniel the prophet, stand in the holy place (let whosoever reads,
understand), then let those in Judea flee unto the mountains: let him
that is on the house-top not come down to take anything out of his
house; nor him that is in the fields return to take his clothes.’ <span
id="fr_496"></span>[497](#fn_496) The saints therefore knowing these
precepts, had such a sort of training for their action: for what the
Lord then commanded, he had before his coming in the flesh already
spoken of by his servants. And this is a universal rule for man, leading
to perfection, ‘to practice whatever God has enjoined.’ On this account
the Word himself, becoming incarnate for our sake, deigned to conceal
himself when he was sought for; <span id="fr_497"></span>[498](#fn_497)
and being again persecuted, condescended to withdraw to avoid the
conspiracy against him. For thus it became him, by hungering and
thirsting and suffering other afflictions, to demonstrate that he was
indeed made man. <span id="fr_498"></span>[499](#fn_498) For at the very
commencement, as soon as he was born, he gave this direction by an angel
to Joseph: ‘Arise and take the young child and his mother, and flee into
Egypt, for Herod will seek the infant’s life.’ <span
id="fr_499"></span>[500](#fn_499) And after Herod’s death, it appears
that for fear of his son Archelaus he retired to Nazareth. Subsequently,
when he gave unquestionable evidence of his Divine character by healing
the withered hand, ‘when the Pharisees took council how they might
destroy him, <span id="fr_500"></span>[501](#fn_500) Jesus knowing their
wickedness withdrew himself thence.’ Moreover, when he had raised
Lazarus from the dead, and they had become still more intent on
destroying him, \[we are told that\] ‘Jesus walked no more openly among
the Jews, <span id="fr_501"></span>[502](#fn_501) but retired into a
region on the borders of the desert.’ Again when the Saviour said,
‘Before Abraham was, I am;’ <span id="fr_502"></span>[503](#fn_502) and
the Jews took up stones to cast at him; Jesus concealed himself, and
going through the midst of them out of the Temple, went away thence, and
so escaped. Since then they see these things, or rather understand
them, <span id="fr_503"></span>[504](#fn_503) (for they will not see,)
are they not deserving of being burnt with fire, according to what is
written, for acting and speaking so plainly contrary to all that the
Lord did and taught? Finally, when John had suffered martyrdom, and his
disciples had buried his body, Jesus having heard what was done,
departed thence by ship into a desert place apart. <span
id="fr_504"></span>[505](#fn_504) Now the Lord did these things and so
taught. But would that these men of whom I speak, had the modesty to
confine their rashness to men only, without daring to be guilty of such
madness as to accuse the Saviour himself of ‘cowardice’; especially
after having already uttered blasphemies against him. But even if they
be insane they will not be tolerated and their ignorance of the gospels
be detected by every one. The cause for retreat and flight under such
circumstances as these is reasonable and valid, of which the evangelists
have afforded us precedents in the conduct of our Saviour himself: from
which it may be inferred that the saints have always been justly
influenced by the same principle, since whatever is recorded of him as
man, is applicable to mankind in general. For he took on himself our
nature, and exhibited in himself the affections of our infirmity, which
John has thus indicated: ‘Then they sought to take him; but no man laid
hands on him, because his hour was not yet come.’ <span
id="fr_505"></span>[506](#fn_505) Moreover, before that hour came, he
himself said to his mother, ‘Mine hour is not yet come;’ <span
id="fr_506"></span>[507](#fn_506) and to those who were denominated his
brethren, ‘My time is not yet come.’ Again when the time had arrived, he
said to his disciples, ‘Sleep on now, and take your rest: for behold the
hour is at hand, and the Son of man shall be betrayed into the hands of
sinners.’ <span id="fr_507"></span>[508](#fn_507) … So <span
id="fr_508"></span>[509](#fn_508) that he neither permitted himself to
be apprehended before the time came; nor when the time was come did he
conceal himself, but voluntarily gave himself up to those who had
conspired against him. <span id="fr_509"></span>[510](#fn_509) … Thus
also the blessed martyrs have guarded themselves in times of
persecution: being persecuted they fled, and kept themselves concealed;
but being discovered they suffered martyrdom.

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p31"></span>Such is the reasoning of Athanasius in
his apology for his own flight.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_482"></span>[82:483](2020106.htm#fr_482) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p3"></span>Athan. *de Fuga.* 7.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[82:484](2020106.htm#fr_483) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p4"></span>[Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[82:485](2020106.htm#fr_484) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p5"></span>[2 Kings xxii.
2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#002)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_485"></span>[82:486](2020106.htm#fr_485) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p6"></span>Athanas. *de Fuga.* 10.

<span id="fn_486"></span>[82:487](2020106.htm#fr_486) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p7"></span>[Gen.
xxviii](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#000)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_487"></span>[82:488](2020106.htm#fr_487) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p8"></span>[Ex. ii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[82:489](2020106.htm#fr_488) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p9"></span>[1 Sam. xix.
12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#012)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[82:490](2020106.htm#fr_489) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p10"></span>Rather Achisch, king of Gath, [1 Sam.
xxi. 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#010)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[82:491](2020106.htm#fr_490) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p11"></span>[1 Kings xix.
3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[82:492](2020106.htm#fr_491) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p12"></span>[1 Kings xviii.
4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#004)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[82:493](2020106.htm#fr_492) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p13"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[82:494](2020106.htm#fr_493) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p14"></span>[2 Cor.
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#032),
[33](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#033)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[82:495](2020106.htm#fr_494) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p15"></span>[Num. xxxv.
11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[83:496](2020106.htm#fr_495) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p16"></span>[Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[83:497](2020106.htm#fr_496) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p17"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
15-18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[83:498](2020106.htm#fr_497) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p18"></span>[John viii.
59](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#059)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[83:499](2020106.htm#fr_498) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p19"></span>Abbreviated from Athanasius.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[83:500](2020106.htm#fr_499) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p20"></span>[Matt.
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013),
[22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[83:501](2020106.htm#fr_500) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p21"></span>[Matt.
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#014),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#015)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[83:502](2020106.htm#fr_501) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p22"></span>[John
11:53](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#053),
[54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_502"></span>[83:503](2020106.htm#fr_502) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p23"></span>[John viii.
58](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#058)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[83:504](2020106.htm#fr_503) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p24"></span>[Matt.
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#013), [Isa.
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[83:505](2020106.htm#fr_504) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p25"></span>[Matt.
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_505"></span>[83:506](2020106.htm#fr_505) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p26"></span>[John vii.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_506"></span>[83:507](2020106.htm#fr_506) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p27"></span>[John
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#004), [John
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006)<span
id="ii.vi.viii-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_507"></span>[83:508](2020106.htm#fr_507) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p28"></span>[Matt. xxvi.
45](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#045)<span id="ii.vi.viii-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_508"></span>[83:509](2020106.htm#fr_508) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p28.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p29"></span>Athan. *de Fuga.* 15.

<span id="fn_509"></span>[83:510](2020106.htm#fr_509) <span
id="ii.vi.viii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.viii-p30"></span>Athan. *de Fuga.* 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After the Synod of Alexandria, Eusebius proceeding to Antioch
finds the Catholics at Variance on Account of Paulinus' Consecration;
and having exerted himself in vain to reconcile them, he departs;
Indignation of Lucifer and Origin of a Sect called after him.](2020107)
