[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020425)  [Next](2020427.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.x"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Concerning Valentinian the
Younger and Gratian. Persecution under Valens. The Homoousians, being
oppressed by the Arians and Macedonians, send an Embassy to Rome*. <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[1445](#fn_1444.md)

<span id="iii.xi.x-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.x-p3.1"></span>About</span> this period, a son was born to
Valentinian in the West, to whom the emperor gave his own name. Not long
after, he proclaimed his son Gratian emperor; this prince was born
before his father held the government.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p4"></span>In the meantime, although hailstones of
extraordinary magnitude fell in various places, and although many
cities, particularly Nicæa in Bithynia, were shaken by earthquakes, yet
Valens, the emperor, and Eudoxius, the bishop, paused not in their
career, but continued to persecute all Christians who differed from them
in opinion. They succeeded to the utmost of their expectations in their
machinations against those who adhered to the Nicene doctrines; for
throughout the greater time of Valens’ rule, particularly in Thrace,
Bithynia, and the Hellespont, and still further beyond, these Christians
had neither churches nor priests. Valens and Eudoxius then directed
their resentment against the Macedonians, who were more in number than
the Christians above mentioned in that region, and persecuted them
without measure.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p5"></span>The Macedonians, in apprehension of
further sufferings, sent deputies to various cities, and finally agreed
to have recourse to Valentinian and to the bishop of Rome rather than
share in the faith of Eudoxius and Valens and their followers; and when
this seemed favorable for execution, they selected three of their own
number,—Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste; Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus; and
Theophilus, bishop of Castabalis,—and sent them to the Emperor
Valentinian; they likewise intrusted them with a letter, addressed to
Liberius, bishop of Rome, and to the other priests of the West, in which
they entreated them as prelates who had adhered to the faith approved
and confirmed by the apostles, and who before others ought to watch over
religion, to receive their deputies with all confirmation, and to confer
with them about what should be done in the interval until the affairs of
the Church could be approvedly set in order.

<span id="iii.xi.x-p6"></span>When the deputies arrived in Italy, they
found that the emperor was in Gaul, engaged in war against the
barbarians. As they considered that it would be perilous to visit the
seat of war in Gaul, they delivered their letter to Liberius. <span
id="fr_1445"></span>[1446](#fn_1445.md) After having conferred with him
concerning the objects of their embassy, they condemned Arius and those
who held and taught his doctrines; they renounced all heresies opposed
to the faith established at Nicæa; and received the term
“consubstantial,” as being a word that conveys the same signification as
the expression “like in substance.” When they had presented a confession
of faith, analogous to the above, to Liberius, he received them into
communion with himself, and wrote to the bishops of the East, commending
the orthodoxy of their faith, and detailing what had passed in the
conference he had held with them. The confession of faith made by
Eustathius and his companions was as follows:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[352:1445](2020426.htm#fr_1444.md) <span
id="iii.xi.x-p1.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p2"></span>Valesius remarks that the title of this
chapter is incorrect, and that it was the Macedonians, and not the
orthodox Christians, who sent the embassy to Rome.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[352:1446](2020426.htm#fr_1445.md) <span
id="iii.xi.x-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.x-p7"></span>Soc. iv. 10, 11, 12, from whom Soz. seems
to have compressed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Confession of Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus, the
Deputies of the Macedonians, to Liberius, Bishop of Rome.](2020427.md)
