[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020412)  [Next](2020414) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*In Consequence of the
Translation, Many of the Christians are Ill-Treated. Theodore the
Confessor. Temple of Apollo at Daphne destroyed by Fire falling from
Heaven*.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xx-p2.1"></span>The</span> transaction above related <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[1416](#fn_1415) excited the indignation of the
emperor as much as if an insult had been offered him, and he determined
upon punishing the Christians; but Sallust, a prætorian prefect,
although a pagan, tried to dissuade him from this measure. The emperor,
however, could not be appeased, and Sallust was compelled to execute his
mandate, and arrest and imprison many Christians. One of the first whom
he arrested was a young man named Theodore, who was immediately
stretched upon the rack; but although his flesh was lacerated by the
application of the nails, he addressed no supplication to Sallust, nor
did he implore a diminution of his torments; on the contrary, he seemed
as insensible to pain as if he had been merely a spectator of the
sufferings of another, and bravely received the wounds; and he sang the
same psalm which he had joined in singing the day before, to show that
he did not repent of the act for which he had been condemned. The
prefect, struck with admiration at the fortitude of the young man, went
to the emperor and told him that, unless he would desist speedily from
the measure he had undertaken, he and his party would be exposed to
ridicule while the Christians would acquire more glory. This
representation produced its effect, and the Christians who had been
arrested were set at liberty. It is said <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[1417](#fn_1416) that Theodore was afterwards asked
whether he had been sensible of any pain while on the rack; and that he
replied that he had not been entirely free from suffering, but had his
pains assuaged by the attentions of a young man who had stood by him,
and who had wiped off the perspiration with the finest linen cloth, and
supplied him with coolest water by which he eased the inflammation and
refreshed his labors. I am convinced that no man, whatever magnanimity
he may possess, is capable, without the special assistance of Divine
Power, of manifesting such entire indifference about the body.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p5"></span>The body of the martyr Babylas was, for
the reasons aforesaid, removed to Daphne, and was subsequently conveyed
elsewhere. Soon after it had been taken away, fire suddenly fell upon
the temple of the Daphnic Apollo, the roof and the very statue of the
god were burned, and the naked walls, with the columns on which the
portico and the back part of the edifice had rested, alone escaped the
conflagration. <span id="fr_1417"></span>[1418](#fn_1417) The Christians
believed that the prayers of the martyr had drawn down fire from heaven
upon the demon; but the pagans reported the Christians as having set
fire to the place. This suspicion gained ground; and the priest of
Apollo was brought before the tribunal of justice to render up the names
of those who had dared the incendiary act; but though bound and
subjected to the most cruel tortures, he did not name any one.

<span id="iii.x.xx-p7"></span>Hence the Christians were more fully
convinced than before, that it was not by the deed of man, but by the
wrath of God, that fire was poured down from heaven upon the temple.
Such were the occurrences which then took place. The emperor, as I
conjecture, on hearing that the calamity at Daphne had been occasioned
by the martyr Babylas, and on being further informed that the honored
remains of the martyrs were preserved in several houses of prayer near
the temple of the Apollo Didymus, which is situated close to the city of
Miletus, wrote to the governor of Caria, commanding him to destroy with
fire all such edifices as were furnished with a roof and an altar, and
to throw down from their very foundations the houses of prayer which
were incomplete in these respects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[342:1416](2020413.htm#fr_1415) <span
id="iii.x.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 36; Soc. iii. 19;
Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 11; Am. Marcel. xxii. 13.

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[342:1417](2020413.htm#fr_1416) <span
id="iii.x.xx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p4"></span>Rufinus saw Theodore at Antioch, and asked
him this question, Ruf. i. 36; and Soc. shows the source from which he
borrowed the story by affirming that Rufinus, author of an
ecclesiastical history in Latin, had this interview with Theodore.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[342:1418](2020413.htm#fr_1417) <span
id="iii.x.xx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xx-p6"></span>Am. Marcel. xxii. 13. 1–3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Statue of Christ in Paneas which Julian overthrew and made
Valueless; he erected his own Statue; this was overthrown by a
Thunder-Bolt and destroyed. Fountain of Emmaus in which Christ washed
his Feet. Concerning the Tree Persis, which worshiped Christ in Egypt,
and the Wonders wrought through it.](2020414)
