[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020317)  [Next](2020319) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Eusebius and Theognis
who at the Council of Nice had assented to the Writings of Arius
restored to their own Sees*.

<span id="iii.vii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after the council of Nice,
Arius was recalled from exile; but the prohibition to enter Alexandria
was unrevoked. It shall be related in the proper place how he strove to
obtain permission to return to Egypt. Not long after, Eusebius, bishop
of Nicomedia, and Theognis, bishop of Nicæa, regained possession of
their churches after expelling Amphion and Chrestos who had been
ordained in their stead. <span id="fr_1163"></span>[1164](#fn_1163) They
owed their restoration to a document which they had presented to the
bishops, containing a retractation: “Although we have been condemned
without a trial by your piety, we deemed it right to remain silent
concerning the judgment passed by your piety. But as it would be absurd
to remain longer silent, when silence is regarded as a proof of the
truth of the calumniators, we now declare to you that we too agree in
this faith, and after a diligent examination of the thought in the word
‘consubstantial,’ we are wholly intent upon preserving peace, and that
we never pursued any heresy. Having proposed for the safety of the
churches such argument <span id="fr_1164"></span>[1165](#fn_1164) as
occurred to us, and having been fully convinced, and fully convincing
those who ought to have been persuaded by us, we undersigned the creed;
but we did not subscribe to the anathema, not because we impugned the
creed, but because we did not believe the accused to be what he was
represented to us; the letters we had received from him, and the
arguments he had delivered in our presence, fully satisfying us that he
was not such an one. Would that the holy Synod were convinced that we
are not bent on opposing, but are accordant with the points accurately
defined by you, and by this document, we do attest our assent thereto:
and this is not because we are wearied of exile, but because we wish to
avert all suspicion of heresy; for if you will condescend to admit us
now into your presence, you will find us in all points of the same
sentiments as yourselves, and obedient to your decisions, and then it
shall seem good to your piety to be merciful to him who was accused on
these points and to have him recalled. If the party amenable to justice
has been recalled and has defended himself from the charge made, it
would be absurd, were we by our silence to con<span id="page_269">p.
269</span> <span id="iii.vii.xvi-Page_269"></span>firm the reports that
calumny had spread against us. We beseech you then, as befits your
piety, dear to Christ, that you memorialize our emperor, most beloved of
God, and that you hand over our petition, and that you counsel quickly,
what is agreeable to you concerning us.” It was by these means that
Eusebius and Theognis, after their change of sentiment, were reinstated
in their churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1163"></span>[268:1164](2020318.htm#fr_1163) <span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvi-p3"></span>Cf. Soc. i. 14. The variations of text
are slight. Is the original from Sabinus’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p3.1"></span>ἡ</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p3.2"></span>συναγωγή τῶν συνοδικῶν</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xvi-p3.3"></span>?</span>

<span id="fn_1164"></span>[268:1165](2020318.htm#fr_1164) <span
id="iii.vii.xvi-p3.4"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvi-p4"></span>The facts (as we learn from the Epistle
of Eusebius of Cæsarea, which is given by Soc. i. 8, and Theodoret, *H.
E.* i. 12) are as follows: The bishops, who demurred to the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xvi-p4.1"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.vii.xvi-p4.2"></span>μοούσιον</span>, as
defined in the Nicene symbol, proposed another alleged older Antiochan
form to the Synod. But the Nicene Fathers rejected it, and refused to
depart from their own definition. Eusebius Pamphilus and his party then
signed the Catholic and Orthodox creed, for fear of the emperor and
other motives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: On the Death of Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, at his
Suggestion, Athanasius receives the Throne; and an Account of his Youth;
how he was a Self-Taught Priest, and beloved by Antony the
Great.](2020319)
