[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020203)  [Next](2020205) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Of Severian and
Antiochus: their Disagreement from John.*

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xii-p2.1"></span>The</span> odium against John Chrysostom was
considerably increased by another additional event as follows: two
bishops flourished at that time, <span id="page_146">p. 146</span> <span
id="ii.ix.xii-Page_146"></span>Syrians by birth, named Severian and
Antiochus; Severian presided over the church at Gabala, a city of Syria,
and Antiochus over that of Ptolemaïs in Phœnicia. They were both
renowned for their eloquence; but although Severian was a very learned
man, he did not succeed in using the Greek language perfectly; and so
while speaking Greek he betrayed his Syrian origin. Antiochus came first
to Constantinople, and having preached in the churches for some time
with great zeal and ability, and having thus amassed a large sum of
money, <span id="fr_863"></span>[864](#fn_863) he returned to his own
church. Severian hearing that Antiochus had collected a fortune by his
visit to Constantinople, determined to follow his example. He therefore
exercised himself for the occasion, and having composed a number of
sermons, set out for Constantinople. Being most kindly received by John,
to a certain point, he soothed and flattered the man, and was himself no
less beloved and honored by him: meanwhile his discourses gained him
great celebrity, so that he attracted the notice of many persons of
rank, and even of the emperor himself. And as it happened at that time
that the bishop of Ephesus died, John was obliged to go to Ephesus for
the purpose of ordaining a successor. On his arrival at that city, as
the people were divided in their choice, some proposing one person, and
some another, John perceiving that both parties were in a contentious
mood, and that they did not wish to adopt his counsel, he resolved
without much ado to end their dispute by preferring to the bishopric a
certain Heraclides, a deacon of his own, and a Cypriot by descent. And
thus both parties desisting from their strife with each other had
peace. <span id="fr_864"></span>[865](#fn_864) Now as this detention
\[at Ephesus\] was lengthened, Severian continued to preach at
Constantinople, and daily grew in favor with his hearers. Of this John
was not left ignorant, for he was promptly made acquainted with whatever
occurred, Serapion, of whom we have before spoken, <span
id="fr_865"></span>[866](#fn_865) communicating the news to him and
asserting that the church was being troubled by Severian; thus the
bishop was aroused to a feeling of jealousy. Having therefore among
other matters deprived many of the Novatians and Quartodecimans of their
churches, he returned to Constantinople. <span
id="fr_866"></span>[867](#fn_866) Here he resumed himself the care of
the churches under his own especial jurisdiction. But Serapion’s
arrogance no one could bear; for thus having won John’s unbounded
confidence and regard, he was so puffed up by it that he treated every
one with contempt. And on this account also animosity was inflamed the
more against the bishop. On one occasion when Severian passed by him,
Serapion neglected to pay him the homage due to a bishop, but continued
seated \[instead of rising\], indicating plainly how little he cared for
his presence. Severian, unable to endure patiently this \[supposed\]
rudeness and contempt, said with a loud voice to those present, ‘If
Serapion should die a Christian, Christ has not become incarnate.’
Serapion, taking occasion from this remark, publicly incited Chrysostom
to enmity against Severian: for suppressing the conditional clause of
the sentence, ‘If Serapion die a Christian,’ and saying that he had made
the assertion that ‘Christ has not become incarnate,’ he brought several
witnesses of his own party to sustain this charge. But on being informed
of this the Empress Eudoxia severely reprimanded John, and ordered that
Severian should be immediately recalled from Chalcedon in Bithynia. He
returned forthwith; but John would hold no intercourse whatever with
him, nor did he listen to any one urging <span id="page_147">p.
147</span> <span id="ii.ix.xii-Page_147"></span>him to do so, until at
length the Empress Eudoxia herself, in the church called *The Apostles,*
placed her son Theodosius, who now so happily reigns, but was then quite
an infant, before John’s knees, and adjuring <span
id="fr_867"></span>[868](#fn_867) him repeatedly by the young prince her
son, with difficulty prevailed upon him to be reconciled to Severian. In
this manner then these men were outwardly reconciled; but they
nevertheless continued cherishing a rancorous feeling toward each other.
Such was the origin of the animosity \[of John\] against Severian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_863"></span>[146:864](2020204.htm#fr_863) <span
id="ii.ix.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p3"></span>The offerings of the congregations seem
to have been divided usually among the officiating clergymen. Cf.
Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* V. 4. 1.

<span id="fn_864"></span>[146:865](2020204.htm#fr_864) <span
id="ii.ix.xii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p4"></span>In another version of this eleventh
chapter of the sixth book, appended at the end of the sixth book in the
Greek text of Bright, instead of the sentence beginning ‘And thus both
parties,’ &c. is found the following more consistent statement:
‘Inasmuch, however, as on this account a tumult arose at Ephesus, on the
ground that Heraclides was not worthy of the bishopric, it became
necessary for John to remain in Ephesus for a long time.’

<span id="fn_865"></span>[146:866](2020204.htm#fr_865) <span
id="ii.ix.xii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p5"></span>The alternative version inserts here the
following sentence: ‘And who was very much beloved by John and had been
intrusted with the whole care of the episcopal administration, on
account of his piety and faithfulness and watchfulness in respect to
details of every sort, and diligence in matters pertaining to the
interests of the bishop.’

<span id="fn_866"></span>[146:867](2020204.htm#fr_866) <span
id="ii.ix.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p6"></span>From this point to within one or two
sentences of the end of the chapter the parallel version is so different
at times that it will be well to insert it entire here for the purpose
of comparison. It runs thus: ‘Not long afterward John came to
Constantinople and assumed himself the churches which belonged to his
jurisdiction. But between Serapion, the deacon, and Severian there had
arisen a certain coolness; Serapion was opposed to Severian because the
latter seemed desirous of excelling John in public speaking, and
Severian was jealous of Serapion because the bishop John favored him,
and the care of the bishopric had been intrusted to him. They being thus
disposed toward one another, it happened that the evil of hatred was
increased from the following cause. As Severian was passing by on one
occasion Serapion did not render him the homage due to a bishop, but he
continued sitting; whether because he had not noticed him, as he
afterwards affirmed upon oath before a council, or because he cared
little for him, being himself the vicegerent of a bishop, as Severian
asserted, I am unable to say; God only knows. At the time, however,
Severian did not tolerate the contempt; but immediately, and in
anticipation of a public investigation before a council, he condemned
Serapion upon oath, and not only declared him deposed from the dignity
of the diaconate, but also put him out of the church. John upon learning
this was very much grieved. As the matter afterwards was investigated by
a council and Serapion defended himself declaring that he had not
perceived \[the approach of the bishop\], and summoned witnesses to the
fact, the common verdict of the assembled bishops was in favor of
acquitting him and urging Severian to accept the apology of Serapion.
The Bishop John, for his part, to satisfy Severian, suspended Serapion
from the diaconate for a week; although he used him in all his affairs
as his right hand, because he was very keen and diligent in
ecclesiastical disputation. Severian however was not satisfied with
these measures, but used all means to effect the permanent deposition of
Serapion from the diaconate and his excommunication. John was extremely
grieved at these words and arose from the council, leaving the
adjudication of the case to the bishops present, saying to them, “Do you
examine the matter in hand and render judgment according to your own
conclusions; as for me I resign my part in the arbitration between
them.” These things having been said by John as he arose, the council
likewise arose and left the case, as it stood, blaming Severian the more
for not yielding to the request of the Bishop John. After this John
never received Severian into a private interview; but advised him to
return to his own country, communicating to him the following message:
“It is not expedient, Severian,” said he, “that the parish intrusted to
you should remain for so long without care and bereft of a bishop;
wherefore hasten and take charge of your churches, and do not neglect
the gift which is in you.” As he now prepared for his journey and
started, the Empress Eudoxia, on being informed of the facts,’ &c. From
this point the variations are few, verbal, and unimportant.

<span id="fn_867"></span>[147:868](2020204.htm#fr_867) <span
id="ii.ix.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xii-p7"></span>The ancients often swore by their
children, especially when they wished to entreat others most earnestly.
Cf. Vergil, *Æneid,* VI. 364, ‘*Per caput hoc juro, per spem surgentis
Juli.*’ The form of abjuration used by Eudoxia was probably this: ‘By
this little child of mine, and your spiritual son, whom I brought forth
and whom you received out of the sacred font, be reconciled to
Severian.’ Valesius, however, doubts the reality of this affair.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epiphanius, in order to gratify Theophilus, performs Ordinations
at Constantinople without John's Permission.](2020205)
