[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020421)  [Next](2020423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Death of Jovian; The Life
of Valentinian, and his Confidence in God; how he was advanced to the
Throne and selected his Brother Valens to reign with him; the
Differences of Both*.

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.vi-p2.1"></span>After</span> Jovian had reigned about eight
months, he died suddenly at Dadastana, a town of Bithynia, while on his
road to Constantinople. <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1439](#fn_1438) Some
say that his death was occasioned by eating too plentiful a supper;
others attribute it to the dampness of the chamber in which he slept;
for it had been recently plastered with unslaked lime, and quantities of
coals had been burnt in it during the winter for a preventive; the walls
had become damp and were exceedingly moist.

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p4"></span>On the arrival of the troops at Nicæa in
Bithynia, they proclaimed Valentinian emperor. He was a good man and
capable of holding the reins of the empire. He had not long returned
from banishment; for it is said that Julian, immediately on his
accession to the empire, erased the name of Valentinian from the Jovian
legions, as they were called, and condemned him to perpetual banishment,
under the pretext that he had failed in his duty of leading out the
soldiers under his command against the enemy. The true reason of his
condemnation, however, was the following: When Julian was in Gaul, he
went one day to a temple to offer incense. Valentinian <span
id="fr_1439"></span>[1440](#fn_1439) accompanied him, according to an
ancient Roman law, which still prevails, and which enacted that the
leader of the Jovians and <span id="page_350">p. 350</span> <span
id="iii.xi.vi-Page_350"></span>the Herculeans (that is to say, the
legions of soldiers who have received this appellation in honor of
Jupiter and of Hercules) should always attend the emperor as his
body-guard. When they were about to enter the temple, the priest, in
accordance with the pagan custom, sprinkled water upon them with the
branch of a tree. A drop fell upon the robe of Valentinian; he scarcely
could restrain himself, for he was a Christian, and he rebuked his
asperser; it is even said that he cut off, in view of the emperor, the
portion of the garment on which the water had fallen, and flung it from
him. From that moment Julian entertained inimical feelings against him,
and soon after banished him to Melitine in Armenia, under the plea of
misconduct in military affairs; for he would not have religion regarded
as the cause of the decree, lest Valentinian should be accounted a
martyr or a confessor. Julian treated other Christians, as we have
already stated, in the same manner; for, as was said before, he
perceived that to subject them to hazards only added to their
reputation, and tended to the consolidation of their religion. As soon
as Jovian succeeded to the throne, Valentinian was recalled from
banishment to Nicæa; but the death of the emperor in the meantime took
place, and Valentinian, by the unanimous consent of the troops and those
who held the chief positions in the government, was appointed his
successor. When he was invested with the symbols of imperial power, the
soldiers cried out that it was necessary to elect some one to share the
burden of government. To this proposition, Valentinian made the
following reply: “It depended on you alone, O soldiers, to proclaim me
emperor; but now that you have elected me, it depends not upon you, but
upon me, to perform what you demand. Remain quiet, as subjects ought to
do, and leave me to act as an emperor in attending to the public
affairs.”

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p6"></span>Not long after this refusal to comply
with the demand of the soldiery, he repaired to Constantinople, and
proclaimed his brother emperor. He gave him the East as his share of the
empire, and reserved to himself the regions along the Western Ocean,
from Illyria to the furthest coasts of Libya. Both the brothers were
Christians, but they differed in opinion and disposition. For Valens,
when he was baptized, employed Eudoxius as his initiator, and was
zealously attached to the doctrines of Arius, and would readily have
compelled all mankind by force to yield to them. Valentinian, on the
other hand, maintained the faith of the council of Nicæa, and favored
those who upheld the same sentiments, without molesting those who
entertained other opinions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[349:1439](2020422.htm#fr_1438) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p3"></span>Philost. viii. 8; Soc. iii. 26; iv. 1;
Ruf. ii. 1, 2. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 5, 6; Eudox. *Brev. hist.
rom.* x. 18; Zos. iii. 35, 36; Am. Marcel. xxv. 10, 12–17; Jovian, xxvi.
1–4, accession of Valentinian and choice of Valens.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[349:1440](2020422.htm#fr_1439) <span
id="iii.xi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.vi-p5"></span>Philost. vii. 7; Theodoret, *H. E.* iii.
16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Troubles again arise in the Churches, and the Synod of Lampsacus
is held. The Arians who supported Eudoxius prevail and eject the
Orthodox from the Churches. Among the Ejected is Meletius of
Antioch.](2020423)
