[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020314)  [Next](2020316) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Martyrdom of St.
Acepsimas and of his Companions*.

<span id="iii.vii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xiii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period they arrested
Acepsimas the bishop, and many of his clergy. After having taken counsel
together, they satisfied themselves with the hunt after the leader only;
they dismissed the rest after they had taken away their property. James,
however, who was one of the presbyters, voluntarily followed Acepsimas,
obtained permission from the Magi to share his prison, and spiritedly
ministered to the old man, lightened his misfortunes as far as he was
able, and dressed his wounds; for not long after his apprehension, the
Magi had injuriously tortured him with raw thongs in forcing him to
worship the sun; and on his refusal to do so had retained him again in
bonds. Two presbyters named Aithalas and James, and two deacons, by name
Azadanes and Abdiesus, after being scourged most injuriously by the
Magi, were compelled to live in prison, on account of their opinions.
After a long time had elapsed, the great Arch-Magi communicated to the
king the facts about them to be punished; and having received permission
to deal with them as he pleased, unless they would consent to worship
the sun, he made known this decision of Sapor’s to the prisoners. They
replied openly, that they would never betray the cause of Christ nor
worship the sun; he tortured them unsparingly. Acepsimas persevered in
the manly confession of his faith, till death put an end to his
torments. Certain Armenians, whom the Persians retained as hostages,
secretly carried away his body and buried it. The other prisoners,
although not less scourged, lived as by a miracle, and as they would not
change their judgment, were again put in bonds. Among these was
Aithalas, who was stretched out while thus beaten, and his arms were
torn out of his shoulders by the very great wrench; and he carried his
hands about as dead and swinging loosely, so that others had to convey
food to his mouth. Under this rule, an innumerable multitude of
presbyters, deacons, monks, holy virgins, and others who served the
churches and were set apart for its dogma, terminated their lives by
martyrdom. The following are the names of the bishops, so far as I have
been able to ascertain: Barbasymes, Paulus, Gaddiabes, Sabinus, Mareas,
Mocius, John, Hormisdas, Papas, James, Romas, Maares, Agas, Bochres,
Abdas, Abdiesus, John, Abramins, Agdelas, Sapores, Isaac, and Dausas.
The latter had been made prisoner by the Persians, and brought from a
place named Zabdæus. <span id="fr_1161"></span>[1162](#fn_1161) He died
about this time in defense of the dogma; and Mareabdes, a chorepiscopus,
and about two hundred and fifty of his clergy, who had also been
captured by the Persians, suffered with him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1161"></span>[267:1162](2020315.htm#fr_1161) <span
id="iii.vii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xiii-p3"></span>Am. Marcell. 20. 7, 1, Zabdiceni; 25.
7, 9, Zabdicena.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Martyrdom of Bishop Milles and his Conduct. Sixteen Thousand
Distinguished Men in Persia suffer Martyrdom under Sapor, besides
Obscure Individuals.](2020316)
