[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020462)  [Next](2020464) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Concerning the Arians;
and Further, the Success of Eunomius. Boldness of St. Amphilochius
toward the Emperor*.

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.vi-p2.1"></span>The</span> Arians, who were still very
strong in point of numbers, <span id="fr_1525"></span>[1526](#fn_1525)
and who, through the protection formerly granted by Constantius and
Valens, were still convening without fear, and discoursing publicly
concerning God and the Divine nature, now determined upon making an
attempt to gain over the emperor to their party, through the
intervention of individuals of their sect who held appointments at
court; and they entertained hopes of succeeding in this project, as well
as they had succeeded in the case of Constantius. These machinations
excited great anxiety and fear among the members of the Catholic Church;
but the chief cause of their apprehension was the reasoning power of
Eunomius. It appears that, during the reign of Valens, Eunomius had some
dispute with his own clergy at Cyzicus, and had in consequence seceded
from the Arians, and retired to Bithynia, near Constantinople. Here
multitudes resorted to him; some also gathered from different quarters,
a few with the design of testing his principles, and others merely from
the desire of listening to his discourses. His reputation reached the
ears of the emperor, who would gladly have held a conference with him.
But the Empress Flacilla <span id="fr_1526"></span>[1527](#fn_1526)
studiously prevented an interview from taking place between them; for
she was the most faithful guard of the Nicene doctrines, and feared lest
Eunomius might, by his powers of disputation, induce a change in the
sentiments of the emperor.

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p5"></span>In the meantime, while these intrigues
were being carried on by each party, it is said that the bishops then
residing in Constantinople went to the emperor, to render him the
customary salutations. An old priest from a city of little note, <span
id="fr_1527"></span>[1528](#fn_1527) and who was simple and unworldly,
yet well instructed in Divine subjects, formed one of this party. The
rest saluted the emperor with uncovered head and very reverently. The
aged priest greeted him in the same form; but, instead of rendering
equal honor to the prince, who was seated beside his father, the old
priest approached him, patted him familiarly, and called him his dear
child. The emperor was incensed and enraged at the indignity offered to
his son, in that he had not been accorded like honor; and commanded that
the old man should be thrust from his presence with violence. While
being pushed away, hither and thither, however, the old priest turned
around and exclaimed, “Reflect, O emperor, on the wrath of the Heavenly
Father against those who do not honor His Son as Himself, and who have
the audacity to assert that the Son is inferior to the <span
id="page_380">p. 380</span> <span
id="iii.xii.vi-Page_380"></span>Father.” The emperor felt the force of
this observation, recalled the priest, apologized to him for what had
occurred, and confessed that he had spoken the truth. The emperor was
henceforward less disposed to hold intercourse with heretics, and he
prohibited contests and assemblies in the markets. He made it dangerous
to hold discussions of this kind about the substance and nature of God,
by enacting a law, and defining the punishments in this matter. <span
id="fr_1528"></span>[1529](#fn_1528)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1525"></span>[379:1526](2020463.htm#fr_1525) <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Philost. ix.
13, 14.

<span id="fn_1526"></span>[379:1527](2020463.htm#fr_1526) <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p4"></span>She was the first, and not the second,
wife of Theodosius, and the mother of Arcadius and Honorius. Her funeral
panegyric was delivered by Gregory of Nyssa (vol. iii. 877), as well as
that of her daughter Pulcheria, (*id.* 863). Cf. Philost. x. 7
(Placidia).

<span id="fn_1527"></span>[379:1528](2020463.htm#fr_1527) <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p6"></span>Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 16, refers this
incident to Amphilochius, bishop of Iconium and Nicephorus follows him,
xii. 9.

<span id="fn_1528"></span>[380:1529](2020463.htm#fr_1528) <span
id="iii.xii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.vi-p7"></span>*Cod. Theod.* xvi. iv. *De his, qui
super religione contendunt*, 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Second Holy General Council, and the Place and
Cause of its Convention. Abdication of Gregory the Theologian.](2020464)
