[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020079)  [Next](2020081) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxx"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXX</span>.—*Creeds published at
Sirmium in Presence of the Emperor Constantius.*

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p2.1"></span>As</span> if they would rescind their former
determinations respecting the faith, they published anew other
expositions of the creed, viz.: one which Mark of Arethusa composed in
Greek; and others in Latin, which harmonized neither in expression nor
in sentiment with one another, nor with that dictated by the bishop of
Arethusa. I shall here subjoin one of those drawn up in Latin, to that
prepared in Greek by Mark: the other, which was afterwards recited at
Sirmium, <span id="fr_357"></span>[358](#fn_357) will be given when we
describe what was done at Ariminum. It must be understood, however, that
both the Latin forms were translated into Greek. The declaration of
faith set forth by Mark, was as follows: <span
id="fr_358"></span>[359](#fn_358)

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p5"></span>‘We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, the Creator and Maker of all things, of whom the whole family
in heaven and on earth is named, <span id="fr_359"></span>[360](#fn_359)
and in his only begotten Son, our Lord Jesus Christ, who was begotten of
the Father before all ages, God of God, Light of Light, by whom all
things visible and invisible, which are in the heavens and upon the
earth, were made: who is the Word, and the Wisdom, and the true Light,
and the Life; who in the last days for our sake was made man and born of
the holy virgin, and was crucified and died, and was buried, and rose
again from the dead on the third day, and was received up into heaven,
and sat at the right hand of the Father, and is coming at the completion
of the age to judge the living and the dead, and to requite every one
according to his works: whose kingdom being everlasting, endures into
infinite ages; for he will be seated at the Father’s right hand, not
only in the present age, but also in that which is to come. \[We
believe\] also in the Holy Spirit, that is to say the Comforter, whom,
having promised to his apostles after his ascension into the heavens, to
teach them, and bring all things to their remembrance, he sent; by whom
also the souls of those who have sincerely believed in him are
sanctified. But those who affirm that the Son is of things which are
not, or of another substance, and not of God, and that there was a time
or an age when he was not, the holy and catholic Church recognizes to be
aliens. We therefore again say, if any one affirms that the Father and
Son are two Gods, let him be anathema. And if any one admits that Christ
is God and the Son of God before the ages, but does not confess that he
ministered to the Father in the formation of all things, let him be
anathema. If any one shall dare to assert that the Unbegotten, or a part
of him, was born of Mary, let him be anathema. If any one should say
that the Son was of Mary according to foreknowledge, and not that he was
with God, begotten of the Father before the ages, and that all things
were not made by him, let him be anathema. If any one affirms the
essence of God to be dilated or contracted, let him be anathema. If any
one says that the dilated essence of God makes the Son, or shall <span
id="page_57">p. 57</span> <span id="ii.v.xxx-Page_57"></span>term the
Son the dilatation of his essence, let him be anathema. If any one calls
the Son of God the internal or uttered word, let him be anathema. If any
one declares that the Son that was born of Mary was man only, let him be
anathema. If any man affirming him that was born of Mary to be God and
man, shall imply the unbegotten God himself, let him be anathema. If any
one shall understand the text, “I am the first, and I am the last, and
besides me there is no God,” <span id="fr_360"></span>[361](#fn_360)
which was spoken for the destruction of idols and false gods, in the
sense the Jews do, as if it were said for the subversion of the
only-begotten of God before the ages, let him be anathema. If any one
hearing “the Word was made flesh,” <span
id="fr_361"></span>[362](#fn_361) should imagine that the Word was
changed into flesh, or that he underwent any change in assuming flesh,
let him be anathema. If any one hearing that the only-begotten Son of
God was crucified, should say that his divinity underwent any
corruption, or suffering, or change, or diminution, or destruction, let
him be anathema. If any one should affirm that the Father said not to
the Son, “Let us make man,” <span id="fr_362"></span>[363](#fn_362) but
that God spoke to himself, let him be anathema. If any one says that it
was not the Son that was seen by Abraham, but the unbegotten God, or a
part of him, let him be anathema. If any one says that it was not the
Son that as man wrestled with Jacob, but the unbegotten God, or a part
of him, let him be anathema. If any one shall understand the words, “The
Lord rained from the Lord,” <span id="fr_363"></span>[364](#fn_363) not
in relation to the Father and the Son, but shall say that he rained from
himself, let him be anathema: for the Lord the Son rained from the Lord
the Father. If any one hearing “the Lord the Father, and the Lord the
Son,” shall term both the Father and the Son Lord, and saying “the Lord
from the Lord” shall assert that there are two Gods, let him be
anathema. For we do not co-ordinate the Son with the Father, but
\[conceive him to be\] subordinate to the Father. For he neither came
down to the body <span id="fr_364"></span>[365](#fn_364) without his
Father’s will; nor did he rain from himself, but from *the Lord* (i.e.
the Father) who exercises supreme authority: nor does he sit at the
Father’s right hand of himself, but in obedience to the Father saying,
“Sit thou at my right hand” <span id="fr_365"></span>[366](#fn_365)
\[let him be anathema\]. If any one should say that the Father, Son, and
Holy Spirit are one person, let him be anathema. If any one, speaking of
the Holy Spirit the Comforter, shall call him the unbegotten God, let
him be anathema. If any one, as he hath taught us, shall not say that
the Comforter is other than the Son, when he has himself said, “the
Father, whom I will ask, shall send you another Comforter,” <span
id="fr_366"></span>[367](#fn_366) let him be anathema. If any one affirm
that the Spirit is part of the Father and of the Son, let him be
anathema. If any one say that the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit are three
Gods, let him be anathema. If any one say that the Son of God was made
as one of the creatures by the will of God, let him be anathema. If any
one shall say that the Son was begotten without the Father’s will, let
him be anathema: for the Father did not, as compelled by any natural
necessity, beget the Son at a time when he was unwilling; but as soon as
it pleased him, he has declared that of himself without time and without
passion, he begot him. If any one should say that the Son is unbegotten,
and without beginning, intimating that there are two without beginning,
and unbegotten, so making two Gods, let him be anathema: for the Son is
the head and beginning of all things; but “the head of Christ is
God.” <span id="fr_367"></span>[368](#fn_367) Thus do we devoutly trace
up all things by the Son to one source of all things who is without
beginning. Moreover, to give an accurate conception of Christian
doctrine, we again say, that if any one shall not declare Christ Jesus
to have been the Son of God before all ages, and to have ministered to
the Father in the creation of all things; but shall affirm that from the
time only when he was born of Mary, was he called the Son and Christ,
and that he then received the commencement of his divinity, let him be
anathema, as the Samosatan.’ <span id="fr_368"></span>[369](#fn_368)

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p16"></span>Another Exposition of the Faith set forth
at Sirmium in Latin,

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p17"></span>*and afterwards translated into
Greek.* <span id="fr_369"></span>[370](#fn_369)

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p19"></span>Since it appeared good that some
deliberation respecting the faith should be undertaken, all points have
been carefully investigated and discussed at Sirmium, in presence of
Valens, Ursacius, Germinius, and others.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p20"></span>It is evident that there is one God, the
Father Almighty, according as it is declared over the whole world; and
his only-begotten Son Jesus Christ, our Lord, God, and Saviour, begotten
of him before the ages. But we ought not to say that there are two Gods,
since the Lord himself has said ‘I go unto my Father and your Father,
and unto my God and your God.’ <span id="fr_370"></span>[371](#fn_370)
Therefore he is God even of all, as the apostle also taught, ‘Is he the
God of the Jews only? Is he not <span id="page_58">p. 58</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxx-Page_58"></span>also of the Gentiles? Yea of the Gentiles
also; seeing that it is one God who shall justify the circumcision by
faith.’ <span id="fr_371"></span>[372](#fn_371) And in all other matters
there is agreement, nor is there any ambiguity. But since it troubles
very many to understand about that which is termed *substantia* in
Latin, and *ousia* in Greek; that is to say, in order to mark the sense
more accurately, the word *homoousion* <span
id="fr_372"></span>[373](#fn_372) or *homoiousion*, <span
id="fr_373"></span>[374](#fn_373) it is altogether desirable that none
of these terms should be mentioned: nor should they be preached on in
the church, for this reason, that nothing is recorded concerning them in
the holy Scriptures; and because these things are above the knowledge of
mankind and human capacity, and that no one can explain the Son’s
generation, of which it is written, ‘And who shall declare his
generation?’ <span id="fr_374"></span>[375](#fn_374) It is manifest that
the Father only knows in what way he begat the Son; and again the Son,
how he was begotten by the Father. But no one can doubt that the Father
is greater in honor, dignity, and divinity, and in the very name of
Father; the Son himself testifying ‘My Father who hath sent me is
greater than I.’ <span id="fr_375"></span>[376](#fn_375) And no one is
ignorant that this is also catholic doctrine, <span
id="fr_376"></span>[377](#fn_376) that there are two persons of the
Father and Son, and that the Father is the greater: but that the Son is
subject, together with all things which the Father has subjected to him.
That the Father had no beginning, and is invisible, immortal, and
impassible: but that the Son was begotten of the Father, God of God,
Light of Light; and that no one comprehends his generation, as was
before said, but the Father alone. That the Son himself, our Lord and
God, took flesh or a body, that is to say human nature, according as the
angel brought glad tidings: and as the whole Scriptures teaches, and
especially the apostle who was the great teacher of the Gentiles, Christ
assumed the human nature through which he suffered, from the Virgin
Mary. But the summary and confirmation of the entire faith is, that
\[the doctrine of\] the Trinity should be always maintained, according
as we have read in the gospel, ‘Go ye and disciple all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Spirit.’ <span id="fr_377"></span>[378](#fn_377) Thus the number of
the Trinity is complete and perfect. Now the Comforter, the Holy Spirit,
sent by the Son, came according to his promise, in order to sanctify and
instruct the apostles and all believers.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p29"></span>They endeavored to induce Photinus, even
after his deposition, to assent to and subscribe these things, promising
to restore him his bishopric, if by recantation he would anathematize
the dogma he had invented, and adopt their opinion. But he did not
accept their proposal, and on the other hand he challenged them to a
disputation: <span id="fr_378"></span>[379](#fn_378) and a day being
appointed by the emperor’s arrangement, the bishops who were there
present assembled, and not a few of the senators, whom the emperor had
directed to attend to the discussion. In their presence, Basil, who at
that time presided over the church at Ancyra, was appointed to oppose
Photinus, and short-hand writers took down their respective speeches.
The conflict of arguments on both sides was extremely severe; but
Photinus having been worsted, was condemned, and spent the rest of his
life in exile, during which time he composed treatises in both
languages—for he was not unskilled in Latin—against all heresies, and in
favor of his own views. Concerning Photinus let this suffice.

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p31"></span>Now the bishops who were convened at
Sirmium, were afterwards dissatisfied with that form of the creed which
had been promulgated by them in Latin; for after its publication, it
appeared to them to contain many contradictions. They therefore
endeavored to get it back again from the transcribers; but inasmuch as
many secreted it, the emperor by his edicts commanded that the version
should be sought for, threatening punishment to any one who should be
detected concealing it. These menaces, however, were incapable of
suppressing what had already fallen into the hands of many. Let this
suffice in regard to these affairs.&gt;

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_357"></span>[56:358](2020080.htm#fr_357) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p3"></span>There were three councils held at Sirmium:
one in 351, as already indicated in note 3, ch. 29; another in 357, in
which Hosius and Potamius composed their blasphemy; and one in 359. It
was in this last council that that creed was drawn up which was recited
in Ariminum. The confusion of Socrates on this point has been alluded to
in the Introd.

<span id="fn_358"></span>[56:359](2020080.htm#fr_358) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p4"></span>Athan. *de Synod.* 27.

<span id="fn_359"></span>[56:360](2020080.htm#fr_359) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p6"></span>[Eph. iii.
15](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#015)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_360"></span>[57:361](2020080.htm#fr_360) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p7"></span>[Isa. xliv.
6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_361"></span>[57:362](2020080.htm#fr_361) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p8"></span>[John i.
14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_362"></span>[57:363](2020080.htm#fr_362) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p9"></span>[Gen. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_363"></span>[57:364](2020080.htm#fr_363) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p10"></span>[Gen. xix.
24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p10.1"></span>:
‘Then the Lord…rained brimstone and fire from the <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p10.2"></span>Lord</span> out of heaven.’

<span id="fn_364"></span>[57:365](2020080.htm#fr_364) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p11"></span>Athanasius reads <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p11.1"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p11.2"></span>πὶ Σόδομα</span>, not
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxx-p11.3"></span>εἰς σῶμα</span>. If
this be the true reading, we should translate ‘came down to Sodom,’ &c.

<span id="fn_365"></span>[57:366](2020080.htm#fr_365) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p11.4"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p12"></span>[Psa.
110.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p12.1"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_366"></span>[57:367](2020080.htm#fr_366) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p13"></span>[John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016),
[26](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#026)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p13.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_367"></span>[57:368](2020080.htm#fr_367) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p13.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p14"></span>[1 Cor. xi.
3](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#003)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_368"></span>[57:369](2020080.htm#fr_368) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p15"></span>Paul of Samosata, see I. 36, note 3.

<span id="fn_369"></span>[57:370](2020080.htm#fr_369) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p18"></span>Athan. *de Synod.* 28, and Hilar. *de
Synod.* calls this creed ‘The blasphemy composed at Sirmium by Hosius
and Potamius.’

<span id="fn_370"></span>[57:371](2020080.htm#fr_370) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p21"></span>[John xx.
17](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_371"></span>[58:372](2020080.htm#fr_371) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p22"></span>[Rom.
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p22.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_372"></span>[58:373](2020080.htm#fr_372) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p22.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p23"></span>Of the same substance.

<span id="fn_373"></span>[58:374](2020080.htm#fr_373) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p24"></span>Of similar substance.

<span id="fn_374"></span>[58:375](2020080.htm#fr_374) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p25"></span>[Isa. liii.
5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_375"></span>[58:376](2020080.htm#fr_375) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p26"></span>[John xiv.
28](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#028)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_376"></span>[58:377](2020080.htm#fr_376) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p27"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxx-p27.1"></span>καθολικόν</span> , ‘universally accepted.’

<span id="fn_377"></span>[58:378](2020080.htm#fr_377) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p27.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p28"></span>[Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.v.xxx-p28.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_378"></span>[58:379](2020080.htm#fr_378) <span
id="ii.v.xxx-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxx-p30"></span>‘Epiphanius relates that Photinus, after
he had been condemned and deposed in the synod of Sirmium, went to
Constantius, and requested that he might dispute concerning the faith
before judges nominated by him; and that Constantius enjoined Basilius,
bishop of Ancyra, to undertake a disputation with Photinus, and gave
leave that Thalassiuss, Datianus, Cerealis, and Taurus should be
arbiters’ (Valesius).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Hosius, Bishop of Cordova.](2020081)
