[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020385)  [Next](2020387) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Formulary of the
Council of Ariminum approved by the Acacians. List of the Deposed
Chief-Priests, and the Causes of their Condemnation*.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2.1"></span>The</span> partisans of Acacius <span
id="fr_1343"></span>[1344](#fn_1343) remained some time at
Constantinople, and invited thither several bishops of Bithynia, among
whom were Maris, bishop of Chalcedon, and Ulfilas, bishop of the Goths.
These prelates having assembled together, in number about fifty, they
confirmed the formulary read at the council of Ariminum, adding this
provision, that the terms “substance ” <span id="page_320">p. 320</span>
<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-Page_320"></span>and “hypostasis” should never
again be used in reference to God. They also declared that all other
formularies set forth in times past, as likewise those that might be
compiled at any future period, should be condemned. They then deposed
Aëtius from his office of deacon, because he had written works full of
contention and of a species of vain knowledge opposed to the
ecclesiastical vocation; because he had used in writing and in
disputation several impious expressions; and because he had been the
occasion of troubles and seditions in the Church. It was alleged by many
that they did not depose him willingly, but merely because they wished
to remove all suspicion from the mind of the emperor which he had with
regard to them, for they had been accused of holding Aëtian views. Those
who held these sentiments took advantage of the resentment with which,
for reasons above mentioned, the emperor regarded Macedonius, and they
accordingly deposed him, and likewise Eleusius, bishop of Cyzicus;
Basil, bishop of Ancyra; Heortasius, bishop of Sardis; and Dracontius,
bishop of Pergamus. Although they differed about doctrine from those
bishops, yet in deposing them, no blame was thrown upon their faith, but
charges were alleged against them in common with all, that they had
disturbed the peace and violated the laws of the Church. They specified,
in particular, that when the presbyter Diogenes was traveling from
Alexandria to Ancyra, Basil seized his papers, and struck him; they also
deposed that Basil had, without trial, delivered over many of the clergy
from Antioch, from the banks of the Euphrates, and from Cilicia,
Galatia, and Asia, to the rulers of the provinces, to be exiled and
subjected to cruel punishments, so that many had been loaded with
chains, and had been compelled to bribe the soldiers, who were
conducting them away, not to ill-use them. They added that, on one
occasion, when the emperor had commanded Aëtius and some of his
followers to be led before Cecropius, that they might answer to him for
various accusations laid to their charge, Basil recommended the person
who was intrusted with the execution of this edict, to act according to
the dictates of his own judgment. They said that he wrote directions to
Hermogenes, <span id="fr_1344"></span>[1345](#fn_1344) the prefect and
governor of Syria, stating who were to be banished, and whither they
were to be sent; and that, when the exiles were recalled by the emperor,
he would not consent to their return, but opposed himself to the wishes
of the rulers and of the priests. They further deposed that Basil had
excited the clergy of Sirimium against Germanius; and that, although he
stated in writing that he had admitted Germanius, Valens, and Ursacius
into communion, he had placed them as criminals before the tribunal of
the African bishops; and that, when taxed with this deed, he had denied
it, and perjured himself; and that, when he was afterwards convicted, he
strove to justify his perjury by sophistical reasoning. They added, that
he had been the cause of contention and of sedition in Illyria, Italy,
Africa, and in the Roman church; that he had thrown a servant into
prison to compel her to bear false witness against her mistress; that he
had baptized a man of loose life, who lived in illicit intercourse with
a woman, and had promoted him to be a deacon; that he had neglected to
excommunicate a quack-doctor who had occasioned the death of several
persons; and that he and some of the clergy had bound themselves by oath
before the holy table, not to bring accusations against each other.
This, they said, was an artifice adopted by the president of the clergy
to shield himself from the accusations of his plaintiffs. In short, such
were the reasons they specified for the deposition of Basil. Eustathius,
they said, was deposed because, when a presbyter, he had been condemned,
and put away from the communion of prayers by Eulalius, his own father,
who was bishop of the church of Cæsarea, in Cappadocia; and also because
he had been excommunicated by a council held at Neocæsarea, a city of
Pontus, and deposed by Eusebius, bishop of Constantinople, for
unfaithfulness in the discharge of certain duties that had devolved upon
him. He had also been deprived of his bishopric by those who were
convened in Gangrœ, on account of his having taught, acted, and thought
contrary to sound doctrine. He had been convicted of perjury by the
council of Antioch. He had likewise endeavored to reverse the decrees of
those convened at Melitina; and, although he was guilty of many crimes,
he had the assurance to aspire to be judge over the others, and to
stigmatize them as heretics. They deposed Eleusius because he had raised
inconsiderately one Heraclius, a native of Tyre, to be a deacon; this
man had been a priest of Hercules at Tyre, had been accused of and tried
for sorcery, and, therefore, had retired to Cyzicus and feigned
conversion to Christianity; and moreover, Eleusius, after having been
apprised of these circumstances, had not driven him from the Church. He
had also, without inquiry, ordained certain individuals, who had come to
Cyzicus, after they had been condemned by Maris, bishop of Chalcedonia,
who participated in this council. Heortasius was deposed because he had
been ordained bishop of Sardis without the sanction of the bishops of
Lydia. They deposed Dracontius, bishop of Pergamus, because he had
previously held another bishopric in Galatia, and because, they stated,
he had on both occa<span id="page_321">p. 321</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-Page_321"></span>sions been unlawfully ordained. After
these transactions, a second assembly of the council was held, and
Silvanus, bishop of Tarsus, Sophronius, bishop of Pompeiopolis in
Paphlagonia, Elpidius, bishop of Satala, and Neonas, bishop of Seleucia
in Isauria, were deposed. The reason they assigned for the deposition of
Silvanus was, that he had constituted himself the leader of a foolish
party in Seleucia and Constantinople; he had, besides, constituted
Theophilus as president of the church of Castabala, who had been
previously ordained bishop of Eleutheropolis by the bishops of
Palestine, and who had promised upon oath that he would never accept any
other bishopric without their permission. Sophronius was deposed on
account of his avarice, and on account of his having sold some of the
offerings presented to the church, for his own profit; besides, after he
had received a first and second summons to appear before the council, he
could, at last, be scarcely induced to make his appearance, and then,
instead of replying to the accusations brought against him, he appealed
to other judges. Neonas was deposed for having resorted to violence in
his endeavors to procure the ordination in his own church, of Annianus,
who had been appointed bishop of Antioch, <span
id="fr_1345"></span>[1346](#fn_1345) and for having ordained as bishops
certain individuals who had previously been engaged in politics, and who
were utterly ignorant of the Holy Scriptures and of ecclesiastical
canons, and who, after their ordination, preferred the enjoyment of
their property to that of the priestly dignity, and declared in writing
that they would rather take charge of their own possessions than to
discharge the episcopal functions without them. Elpidius was deposed
because he had participated in the malpractices of Basil, and had
occasioned great disorders; and because he had, contrary to the decrees
of the council of Melitina, restored to his former rank in the
presbytery a man named Eusebius, who had been deposed for having created
Nectaria a deaconess, after she had been excommunicated on account of
violating agreements and oaths; and to confer this honor upon her was
clearly contrary to the laws of the Church.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1343"></span>[319:1344](2020386.htm#fr_1343) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p3"></span>The acts of this Synod of
Constantinople were written by Acacius. Cf. Philost. iv. 12. Further,
cf. Philost. iv. 12, v. 1; Athan. *de Synodis,* 30, the formulary; Soc.
ii. 41 (with the revised formulary), 42, 43; Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 27,
28. Soz. enlarges on the depositions, giving us much new material;
Theodoret gives a letter against Aetius (from Sabinus?).

<span id="fn_1344"></span>[320:1345](2020386.htm#fr_1344) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p4"></span>Further mention is made of this
Hermogenes by Am. Marcell. xix. 12, 6; xxi. 6, 9.

<span id="fn_1345"></span>[321:1346](2020386.htm#fr_1345) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiv-p5"></span>Cf. iv. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Causes of the Deposition of Cyril, Bishop of Jerusalem. Mutual
Dissensions among the Bishops. Melitius is ordained by the Arians, and
supplants Eustathius in the Bishopric of Sebaste.](2020387)
