[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020455)  [Next](2020457.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xl"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p1.1"></span>Chapter XL</span>.—*Saint Isaac, the Monk,
predicts the Death of Valens. Valens in his Flight enters a Chaff-House,
is consumed, and so yields up his Life*.

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.1"></span>When</span> Valens was on the point of
departing <span id="page_376">p. 376</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xl-Page_376"></span>from Constantinople, <span
id="fr_1514"></span>[1515](#fn_1514.md) Isaac, a monk of great virtue, who
feared no danger in the cause of God, presented himself before him, and
addressed him in the following words: “Give back, O emperor, to the
orthodox, and to those who maintain the Nicene doctrines, the churches
of which you have deprived them, and the victory will be yours.” The
emperor was offended at this act of boldness, and commanded that Isaac
should be arrested and kept in chains until his return, when he meant to
bring him to justice for his temerity. Isaac, however, replied, “You
will not return unless you restore the churches.” And so in fact it came
to pass. For when Valens marched out with his army, the Goths retreated
while pursued. In his advances he passed by Thrace, and came to
Adrianople. When at not great distance from the barbarians, he found
them encamped in a secure position; and yet he had the rashness to
attack them before he had arranged his own legions in proper order. His
cavalry was dispersed, his infantry compelled to retreat; and, pursued
by the enemy, he dismounted from his horse, and with a few attendants
entered into a small house or tower, where he secreted himself. The
barbarians were in full pursuit, and went beyond the tower, not
suspecting that he had selected it for his place of concealment. As the
last detachment of the barbarians was passing by the tower, the
attendants of the emperor let fly a volley of arrows from their covert,
which immediately led to the exclamation that Valens was concealed
within the building. Those who were a little in advance heard this
exclamation, and made known the news with a shout to those companions
who were in advance of them; and thus the news was conveyed till it
reached the detachments which were foremost in the pursuit. They
returned, and encompassed the tower. They collected vast quantities of
wood from the country around, which they piled up against the tower, and
finally set fire to the mass. A wind which had happened to arise favored
the progress of the conflagration; and in a short period the tower, with
all that it contained, including the emperor and his attendants, was
utterly destroyed. Valens was fifty years of age. He had reigned
thirteen years conjointly with his brother, and three by himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1514"></span>[376:1515](2020456.htm#fr_1514.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xl-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xl-p3"></span>Philost. ix. 17; Soc. iv. 38; Ruf. *H.
E.* ii. 13. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 31–36; Eunap. *Fr.* i. 6; ii. 40,
41; Am. Marcel. xxxi. 11–14; Zos. iv. 24. Soz. has wrought with some
other material as well.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book VII](2020457.md)
