[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020234)  [Next](2020236) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*Renewal of
Hostilities between the Romans and Persians after the Death of
Isdigerdes King of the Persians.*

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xviii-p2.1"></span>Isdigerdes</span> king of the Persians, who
had in no way molested the Christians in his domin<span id="page_162">p.
162</span> <span id="ii.x.xviii-Page_162"></span>ions, having
died, <span id="fr_952"></span>[953](#fn_952) his son Vararanes by name
succeeded him in the kingdom. This prince yielding to the influence of
the magi, persecuted the Christians there with rigor, by inflicting on
them a variety of Persian punishments and tortures. They were therefore
on account of the oppression obliged to desert their country and seek
refuge among the Romans, entreating them not to suffer them to be
completely extirpated. Atticus the bishop received these suppliants with
great benignity, and did his utmost to help them in whatsoever way it
was possible: accordingly he made the emperor Theodosius acquainted with
the facts. It happened at the same time that another grievance of the
Romans against Persians came to light. The Persians, that is to say,
would not send back the laborers in the gold mines who had been hired
from among the Romans; and they also plundered the Roman merchants. The
bad feeling which these things produced was greatly increased by the
flight of the Persian Christians into the Roman territories. For the
Persian king immediately sent an embassy to demand the fugitives. But
the Romans were by no means disposed to deliver them up; not only as
desirous of defending their suppliants, but also because they were ready
to do anything for the sake of the Christian religion. For which reason
they chose rather to renew the war with the Persians, than to suffer the
Christians to be miserably destroyed. The league was accordingly broken,
and a fierce war followed. <span id="fr_953"></span>[954](#fn_953) Of
which war I deem it not unseasonable to give some brief account. The
Roman emperor first sent a body of troops under the command of the
general Ardaburius; <span id="fr_954"></span>[955](#fn_954) who making
an irruption through Armenia into Persia, ravaged one of its provinces
called Azazene. Narsæus the Persian general marched against him with the
Persian army; but on coming to an engagement he was defeated, and
obliged to retreat. Afterwards he judged it advantageous to make an
unexpected irruption through Mesopotamia into the Roman territories
there unguarded, thinking by this means to be revenged on the enemy. But
this design of Narsæus did not escape the observation of the Roman
general. Having therefore plundered Azazene, he then himself also
hastily marched into Mesopotamia. Wherefore Narsæus, although furnished
with a large army, was prevented from invading the Roman provinces; but
arriving at Nisibis—a city in the possession of the Persians situated on
the frontiers of both empires—he sent Ardaburius desiring that they
might make mutual arrangements about carrying on the war, and appoint a
time and place for an engagement. But he said to the messengers, ‘Tell
Narsæus that the Roman emperors will not fight when it pleases him.’ The
emperor perceiving that the Persian was mustering his whole force, made
additional levies to his army, and put his whole trust in God for the
victory: and that the king was not without immediate benefit from this
pious confidence the following circumstance proves. As the
Constantinopolitans were in great consternation, and apprehensive
respecting the issue of the war, angels from God appeared to some
persons in Bithynia who were travelling to Constantinople on their own
affairs, and bade them tell the people not to be alarmed, but pray to
God and be assured that the Romans would be conquerors. For they said
that they themselves were appointed by God to defend them. When this
message was circulated it not only comforted the residents of the city,
but rendered the soldiers more courageous. The seat of war being
transferred, as we have said, from Armenia to Mesopotamia, the Romans
shut up the Persians in the city of Nisibis, which they besieged; and
having constructed wooden towers which they advanced by means of
machines to the walls, they slew great numbers of those who defended
them, as well as of those who ran to their assistance. When Vararanes
the Persian monarch learned that his province of Azazene on the one hand
had been desolated, and that on the other his army was closely besieged
in the city of Nisibis, he resolved to march in person with all his
forces against the Romans: but dreading the Roman valor, he implored the
aid of the Saracens, who were then governed by a warlike chief named
Alamundarus. This prince accordingly brought with him a large
reinforcement of Saracen auxiliaries, exhorted the king of the Persians
to fear nothing, for that he would soon reduce the Romans under his
power, and deliver Antioch in Syria into his hands. But the event did
not realize these promises; for God infused into the minds of the
Saracens a terrible panic; and imagining that the Roman army was falling
upon them, and finding no other way of escape, they precipitated
themselves, armed as they were, into the river Euphrates, wherein nearly
one hundred thousand of them were drowned. Such was the nature of the
panic.

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p6"></span>The Romans besieging Nisibis,
understanding that the king of Persia was bringing with him a great
number of elephants, became alarmed in their turn, burnt all the
machines they had used in carrying on the siege, and retired into their
own country. What engagements afterwards took place, and how Areobindus
another Roman general killed the bravest of the Persians in single
combat, and by what means Ardaburius destroyed seven Persian com<span
id="page_163">p. 163</span> <span
id="ii.x.xviii-Page_163"></span>manders in an ambuscade, and in what
manner Vitian another Roman general vanquished the remnant of the
Saracen forces, I believe I ought to pass by, lest I should digress too
far from my subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_952"></span>[162:953](2020235.htm#fr_952) <span
id="ii.x.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p3"></span>Having reigned between 399 and 420 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.x.xviii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> Cf. Clinton,
*Fasti Romani,* year 420.

<span id="fn_953"></span>[162:954](2020235.htm#fr_953) <span
id="ii.x.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p4"></span>There had been peace between the Persian
and the Roman powers since 381. Cf. Pagi, *Ant.* 420, note 14.

<span id="fn_954"></span>[162:955](2020235.htm#fr_954) <span
id="ii.x.xviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xviii-p5"></span>Mentioned in Theophanes’
*Chronographia,* p. 74.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Palladius the Courier.](2020236)
