[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020073)  [Next](2020075) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Athanasius, passing
through Jerusalem on his Return to Alexandria, is received into
Communion by Maximus: and a Synod of Bishops, convened in that City,
confirms the Nicene Creed.*

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p2.1"></span>Athanasius</span> the bishop being fortified
with such letters as these, passed through Syria, and came into
Palestine. On arriving at Jerusalem he acquainted Maximus the bishop
both with what had been done in the Council of Sardica, and also that
the Emperor Constantius had confirmed its decision: he then proposed
that a Synod of the bishops there should be held. Maximus, <span
id="fr_335"></span>[336](#fn_335) therefore, without delay sent for
certain of the bishops of Syria and Palestine, and having assembled a
council, he restored Athanasius to communion, and to his former dignity.
After which the Synod communicated by letter <span
id="fr_336"></span>[337](#fn_336) <span id="page_53">p. 53</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-Page_53"></span>to the Alexandrians, and to all the
bishops of Egypt and Libya, what had been determined respecting
Athanasius. Whereupon the adversaries of Athanasius exceedingly derided
Maximus, because having before assisted in his deposition, he had
suddenly changed his mind, and as if nothing had previously taken place,
had voted for his restoration to communion and rank. When Ursacius and
Valens, who had been fiery partisans of Arianism, ascertained these
things, condemning their former zeal, they proceeded to Rome, where they
presented their recantation to Julius the bishop, and gave their assent
to the doctrine of consubstantiality: they also wrote to Athanasius, and
expressed their readiness to hold communion with him in future. Thus
Ursacius and Valens were at that time subdued by the good fortune of
Athanasius and induced to recognize the orthodox faith. Athanasius
passed through Pelusium on his way to Alexandria, and admonished the
inhabitants of every city to beware of the Arians, and to receive those
only that professed the Homoousian faith. In some of the churches also
he performed ordination; which afforded another ground of accusation
against him, because of his undertaking to ordain in the dioceses of
others. <span id="fr_337"></span>[338](#fn_337) Such was the progress of
affairs at that period in reference to Athanasius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_335"></span>[52:336](2020074.htm#fr_335) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p3"></span>The bishop of Jerusalem was under the
jurisdiction of the metropolitan bishop of Cæsarea, and according to
later usage and canon, had no right to call a synod without the
permission of the metropolitan. Evidently usage had not yet become fixed
into uniformity in this respect.

<span id="fn_336"></span>[52:337](2020074.htm#fr_336) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p4"></span>Cf. Athan, *Apol. c. Arian.* 57.

<span id="fn_337"></span>[53:338](2020074.htm#fr_337) <span
id="ii.v.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxiv-p5"></span>Cf. *Apost. Cann.* XXXV. ‘Let not a
bishop dare to ordain beyond his limits, in cities and places not
subject to him.’ It follows, therefore, that the whole of Egypt was not
under the bishop of Alexandria; otherwise no such charge as is here
mentioned could have been made against Athanasius. That these
ordinations were made in Egypt is evident from the mention of Pelusium,
which Athanasius had already passed through.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Usurpers Magnentius and Vetranio.](2020075)
