[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020122)  [Next](2020124.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*The Macedonians and
Acacians meet at Antioch, and proclaim their Assent to the Nicene
Creed.*

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p2.1"></span>Meanwhile</span> the state of the church was
by no means tranquil; for the heads of the sects assiduously paid their
court to the emperor their king that protection for themselves meant
also power against their acknowledged opponents. And first the
Macedonians presented a petition to him, in which they begged that all
those who asserted the Son to be unlike the Father, might be expelled
from the churches, and themselves allowed to take their place. This
supplication was presented by Basil bishop of Ancyra, Silvanus of
Tarsus, Sophronius of Pompeiopolis, Pasinicus of Zelæ, <span
id="fr_560"></span>[561](#fn_560.md) Leontius of Comana, Callicrates of
Claudiopolis, and Theophilus of Castabala. The emperor having perused
it, dismissed them without any other answer than this: ‘I abominate
contentiousness; but I love and honor those who exert themselves to
promote unanimity.’ When this remark became generally known, it subdued
the violence of those who were desirous of altercation and thus was
realized in the design of the emperor. At this time the real spirit of
the Acacian sect, and their readiness to accommodate their opinions to
those invested with supreme authority, became more conspicuous than
ever. For assembling themselves at Antioch in Syria, they entered into a
conference with Melitius, who had separated from them a little before,
and embraced the ‘homoousian’ opinion. This they did because they saw
Melitius was in high estimation with the emperor, who then resided at
Antioch; and assenting therefore by common consent, they drew up a
declaration of their sentiments acknowledging the *homoousion* and
ratifying the Nicene Creed and presented it to the emperor. It was
expressed in the following terms.

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p4"></span>‘The Synod of bishops convened at Antioch
out of various provinces, to the most pious and beloved of God, our lord
Jovian Victor Augustus.

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p5"></span>‘That your piety has above all things
aimed at establishing the peace and harmony of the church, we ourselves,
most devout emperor, are fully aware. Nor are we insensible that you
have wisely judged an acknowledgment of the <span id="page_95">p.
95</span> <span id="ii.vi.xxv-Page_95"></span>orthodox faith to be the
sum and substance of this unity. Wherefore lest we should be included in
the number of those who adulterate the doctrine of the truth, we hereby
declare to your piety that we embrace and steadfastly hold the faith of
the holy Synod formerly convened at Nicæa. Especially since the term
*homoousios,* which to some seems novel <span
id="fr_561"></span>[562](#fn_561.md) and inappropriate, has been
judiciously explained by the fathers to denote that the Son was begotten
of the Father’s substance, and that he is like the Father as to
substance. Not indeed that any passion is to be understood in relation
to that ineffable generation. Nor is the term *ousia,* “substance,”
taken by the fathers in any usual signification of it among the Greeks;
but it has been employed for the subversion of what Arius impiously
dared to assert concerning Christ, viz.—that he was made of things “not
existing.” Which heresy the Anomœans, who have lately sprung up, still
more audaciously maintain, to the utter destruction of ecclesiastical
unity. We have therefore annexed to this our declaration, a copy of the
faith set forth by the bishops assembled at Nicæa, with which also we
are fully satisfied. It is this: “We believe in one God the Father
Almighty,” and all the rest of the Creed in full. We, the undersigned,
in presenting this statement, most cordially assent to its contents.
Melitius bishop of Antioch, Eusebius of Samosata, Evagrius of Sicily,
Uranius of Apamæa, Zoilus of Larissa, Acacius of Cæsarea, Antipater of
Rhosus, Abramius of Urimi, <span id="fr_562"></span>[563](#fn_562.md)
Aristonicus of Seleucia-upon-Belus, Barlamenus of Pergamus, Uranius of
Melitina, Magnus of Chalcedon, Eutychius of Eleutheropolis, Isacocis of
Armenia Major, Titus of Bostra, Peter of Sippi, <span
id="fr_563"></span>[564](#fn_563.md) Pelagius of Laodicæa, Arabian of
Antros, Piso of Adana through Lamydrion a presbyter, Sabinian bishop of
Zeugma, Athanasius of Ancyra through Orphitus and Aëtius presbyters,
Irenion bishop of Gaza, Piso of Augusta, Patricius of Paltus through
Lamyrion a presbyter, Anatolius bishop of Berœa, Theotimus of the Arabs,
and Lucian of Arca.’ <span id="fr_564"></span>[565](#fn_564.md)

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p10"></span>This declaration we found recorded in
that work of Sabinus, entitled *A Collection of the Acts of Synods.* Now
the emperor had resolved to allay if possible the contentious spirit of
the parties at variance, by bland manners and persuasive language toward
them all; declaring that he ‘would not molest any one on account of his
religious sentiments, and that he should love and highly esteem such as
would zealously promote the unity of the church.’ The philosopher
Themistius attests that such was his conduct, in the oration he composed
on his ‘consulate.’ For he extols the emperor for his overcoming the
wiles of flatterers by freely permitting every one to worship God
according to the dictates of his conscience. And in allusion to the
check which the sycophants received, he facetiously observes <span
id="fr_565"></span>[566](#fn_565.md) that experience has made it evident
that such persons ‘worship the purple and not God; and resemble the
changeful Euripus, <span id="fr_566"></span>[567](#fn_566.md) which
sometimes rolls its waves in one direction, and at others the very
opposite way.’

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_560"></span>[94:561](2020123.htm#fr_560.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p3"></span>The <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p3.1"></span>mss.</span> and all the Greek texts read
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xxv-p3.2"></span>Ζήνων</span>,
making the name ‘Pasinicus Zenon, or Zeno.’ The translation here given
assumes the alteration in the process of transcription of a single
letter making the original <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p3.3"></span>Ζηλῶν</span>, which probably means the city
of Zeleia, on the southeastern coast of the Euxine, famous for a victory
of Mithridates over Triarius, the lieutenant of Lucullus, in 67 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.vi.xxv-p3.4"></span>b.c.</span>

<span id="fn_561"></span>[95:562](2020123.htm#fr_561.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p6"></span>This word, whose original is <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xxv-p6.1"></span>ξένον</span>, is inserted
by Valesius. If it were omitted, the translation would be, ‘which to
some seems *acceptable.*’

<span id="fn_562"></span>[95:563](2020123.htm#fr_562.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p7"></span>On the present borders of Turkey and
Persia.

<span id="fn_563"></span>[95:564](2020123.htm#fr_563.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p8"></span>According to Valesius Hippi.

<span id="fn_564"></span>[95:565](2020123.htm#fr_564.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p9"></span>The name of this city is variously given
as Archis, Arca, Arcæ, Arcas, Arcæa, Arcena. It lies at the foot of
Mount Lebanon. See Joseph. *Antiq.* V. 1 and *de Bello,* XII. 13.

<span id="fn_565"></span>[95:566](2020123.htm#fr_565.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p11"></span>Themist. *Orat.* V. (p. 80, ed.
Harduin).

<span id="fn_566"></span>[95:567](2020123.htm#fr_566.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxv-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxv-p12"></span>Straits between Eubœa and the mainland.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of the Emperor Jovian.](2020124.md)
