[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020281)  [Next](2020283.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*The Father of Constantine
allows the Name of Christ to be Extended; Constantine the Great prepared
it to Penetrate Everywhere*.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p2.1"></span>Under</span> the government of Constantine
the churches flourished and increased in numbers daily, since they were
honored by the good deeds of a benevolent and well-disposed emperor, and
otherwise God preserved them from the persecutions and harassments which
they had previously encountered. When the churches were suffering from
persecution in other parts of the world, Constantius alone, the father
of Constantine, accorded the Christians the right of worshiping God
without fear. I know of an extraordinary thing done by him, which is
worthy of being recorded. He wished to test the fidelity of certain
Christians, excellent and good men, who were attached to his palaces. He
called them all together, and told them that if they would sacrifice to
idols as well as serve God, they should remain in his service and retain
their appointments; but that if they refused compliance with his wishes,
they should be sent from the palaces, and should scarcely escape his
vengeance. When difference of judgment had divided them into two
parties, separating those who consented to abandon their religion from
those who preferred the honor of God to their present welfare, the
emperor determined upon retaining those who had adhered to their faith
as his friends and counselors; but he turned away from the others, whom
he regarded as unmanly and impostors, and sent them from his presence,
judging that they who had so readily betrayed their God could never be
true to their king. Hence it is probable that while Constantius was
alive, it did not seem contrary to the laws for the inhabitants of the
countries beyond Italy to profess Christianity, that is to say, in Gaul,
in Britain, or in the region of the Pyrenean mountains as far as the
Western Ocean. When Constantine succeeded to the same government, the
affairs of the churches became still more brilliant; for when Maxentius,
the son of Herculius, was slain, his share also devolved upon
Constantine; and the nations who dwelt by the river Tiber and the
Eridanus, which the natives call Padus, those who dwelt by the Aquilis,
whither, it is said, the Argo was dragged, and the inhabitants of the
coasts of the Tyrrhenian sea were permitted the exercise of their
religion without molestation.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p3"></span>When the Argonauts fled from Æetes, they
returned homewards by a different route, crossed the sea of Scythia,
sailed through some of the rivers there, and so gained the shores of
Italy, where they passed the winter and built a city, which they called
Emona. The following summer, with the assistance of the people of the
country, they dragged the Argo, by means of machinery, the distance of
four hundred stadia, and so reached the Aquilis, a river which falls
into the Eridanus: the Eridanus itself falls into the Italian sea.

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p4"></span>After the battle of Cibalis <span
id="fr_1078"></span>[1079](#fn_1078.md) the Dardanians and the Macedonians,
the inhabitants of the banks of the Ister, of Hellas, and the whole
nation of Illyria, became subject to Constantine.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1078"></span>[243:1079](2020282.htm#fr_1078.md) <span
id="iii.vi.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.vi-p5"></span>One of the battles in which Licinius was
routed by Constantine, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vi.vi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 314. Eutrop. *Brev. hist. Rom.*
x. 5.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Dispute between Constantine and Licinius his
Brother-In-Law about the Christians, and how Licinius was conquered by
Force and put to Death.](2020283.md)
