[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020329)  [Next](2020331) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*Letter from the
Emperor Constantine to the Synod of Tyre, and Exile of St. Athanasius
through the Machination of the Arian Faction*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>Athanasius,</span> after having fled
from Tyre, repaired <span id="fr_1198"></span>[1199](#fn_1198) to
Constantinople, and on coming to the emperor Constantine, complained of
what he had suffered, in presence of the bishops who had condemned him,
and besought him to permit the decrees of the council of Tyre to be
submitted for examination before the emperor. Constantine regarded this
request as reasonable, and wrote in the following terms to the bishops
assembled at Tyre:—

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii-p4"></span>“I know not what has been enacted in
confusion and vehemence by your Synod; but it appears that, from some
disturbing disorder, decrees which are not in conformity with truth have
been enacted, and that your constant irritation of one another evidently
prevented you from considering what is pleasing to God. But it will be
the work of Divine Providence to scatter the evils which have been drawn
out of this contentiousness, and to manifest to us clearly whether you
have not been misled in your judgment by motives of private friendship
or aversion. I therefore command that you all come here to my piety
without delay, in order that we may receive an exact account of your
transactions. I will explain to you the cause of my writing to you in
this strain, and you will know from what follows, why I summon you
before myself through this document. As I was returning on horseback to
that city which bears my name, and which I regard as my much prospered
country, Athanasius, the bishop, presented himself so unexpectedly in
the middle of the highway, with certain individuals who accompanied him,
that I felt exceedingly surprised at beholding him. God, who sees all
things, is my witness, that at first I did not know who he was, but that
some of my attendants having ascertained this point, and the injustice
which he had suffered, gave me the necessary information. I did not on
this occasion grant him an interview. He, however, persevered in
requesting an audience; and although I refused him, and was on the point
of commanding that he should be removed from my presence, he told me
with more boldness, that he sought no other favor of me than that I
should summon you hither, in order that he might in your presence
complain of what he had suffered unnecessarily. As this request appears
reasonable and timely, I deemed it right to address you in this strain,
and to command all of you who were convened at the Synod of Tyre to
hasten to the court of our clemency, so that you may demonstrate by your
works, the purity and inflexibility of your decisions before me, whom
you cannot refuse to acknowledge as a genuine servant of God. By my zeal
in His service, peace has been established throughout the world, and the
name of God is genuinely praised among the barbarians, who till now were
in ignorance of the truth; and it is evident that whoever is ignorant of
the truth knows not God. Notwithstanding, as is above stated, the
barbarians have, through my instrumentality, learnt to know genuinely
and to worship God; for they perceived that everywhere, and on all
occasions, his protection rested on me; and they reverence God the more
deeply because they fear my power. But we who have to announce the
mysteries of forbearance (for I will not say that we keep them), we, I
say, ought not to do anything that can tend to dissension or hatred, or,
to speak plainly, to the destruction of the human race. Come, then, to
us, as I have said, with all diligence, and be assured that I shall do
everything in my power to preserve all the particularly infallible parts
of the law of God in a way that no fault or heterodoxy can be fabri<span
id="page_279">p. 279</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xxviii-Page_279"></span>cated; while those enemies of the
law who, under the guise of the Holy Name, endeavor to introduce variant
and differing blasphemies, have been openly scattered, utterly crushed,
and wholly suppressed.”

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii-p5"></span>This letter of the emperor so
excited the fears of some of the bishops that they set off on their
journey homewards. But Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, and his partisans,
went to the emperor, and represented that the Synod of Tyre had enacted
no decrees against Athanasius but what were founded on justice. They
brought forward as witnesses Theognis, Maris, Theodore, Valens, and
Ursacius, and deposed that he had broken the mystical cup, and after
uttering many other calumnies, they prevailed with their accusations.
The emperor, either believing their statements to be true, or imagining
that unanimity would be restored among the bishops if Athanasius were
removed, exiled him to Treves, in Western Gaul; and thither, therefore,
he was conducted.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1198"></span>[278:1199](2020330.htm#fr_1198) <span
id="iii.vii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxviii-p3"></span>This letter is given in Athan.
*Apol. cont. Arian.* 86; Soc. i. 33–35.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alexander, Bishop of Constantinople; his Refusal to receive Arius
into Communion; Arius is burst asunder while seeking Natural
Relief.](2020331)
