[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020117)  [Next](2020119.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*The Jews instigated by the
Emperor attempt to rebuild their Temple, and are frustrated in their
Attempt by Miraculous Interposition.*

<span id="ii.vi.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xx-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor in another attempt to
molest the Christians exposed his superstition. Being fond of
sacrificing, he not only himself delighted in the blood of victims, but
considered it an indignity offered to him, if others did not do
likewise. And as he found but few persons of this stamp, he sent for the
Jews and enquired of them why they abstained from sacrificing, since the
law of Moses enjoined it? On their replying that it was not permitted
them to do this in any other place than Jerusalem, he immediately
ordered them to rebuild Solomon’s temple. Meanwhile he himself proceeded
on his expedition against the Persians. The Jews who had been long
desirous of obtaining a favorable opportunity for rearing their temple
afresh in order that they might therein offer sacrifice, applied
themselves very vigorously to the work. Moreover, they conducted
themselves with great insolence toward the Christians, and threatened to
do them as much mischief, as they had themselves suffered from the
Romans. The emperor having ordered that the expenses of this structure
should be defrayed out of the public treasury, all things were soon
provided, such as timber and stone, burnt brick, clay, lime, and all
other materials necessary for building. On this occasion Cyril bishop of
Jerusalem, called to mind the prophecy of Daniel, which Christ also in
the holy gospels has confirmed, and predicted in the presence of many
persons, that the time had indeed come ‘in which one stone should not be
left upon another in that temple,’ but that the Saviour’s prophetic
declaration <span id="fr_539"></span>[540](#fn_539.md) should have its full
accomplishment. Such were the bishop’s words: and on the night
following, a mighty earthquake tore up the stones of the old foundations
of the temple and dispersed them all together with the adjacent
edifices. Terror consequently possessed the Jews on account of the
event; and the report of it brought many to the spot who resided at a
great distance: when therefore a vast multitude was assembled, another
prodigy took place. Fire came down from heaven and consumed all the
builders’ tools: so that the flames were seen preying upon mallets,
irons to smooth and polish stones, saws, hatchets, adzes, in short all
the various implements which the workmen had procured as necessary for
the undertaking; <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> <span
id="ii.vi.xx-Page_90"></span>and the fire continued burning among these
for a whole day. The Jews indeed were in the greatest possible alarm,
and unwillingly confessed Christ, calling him God: yet they did not do
his will; but influenced by inveterate prepossessions they still clung
to Judaism. Even a third miracle which afterwards happened failed to
lead them to a belief of the truth. For the next night luminous
impressions of a cross appeared imprinted on their garments, which at
daybreak they in vain attempted to rub or wash out. They were therefore
‘blinded’ as the apostle says, <span id="fr_540"></span>[541](#fn_540.md)
and cast away the good which they had in their hands: and thus was the
temple, instead of being rebuilt, at that time wholly overthrown.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_539"></span>[89:540](2020118.htm#fr_539.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xx-p3"></span>[Matt.
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002.md),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015.md)<span id="ii.vi.xx-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_540"></span>[90:541](2020118.htm#fr_540.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xx-p4"></span>[Rom.
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025.md), [2 Cor.
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.vi.xx-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor's Invasion of Persia, and Death.](2020119.md)
