[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020132)  [Next](2020134.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p1"></span><span id="page_99">p. 99</span> <span
id="ii.vii.viii-Page_99"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Of the Oracle found
inscribed an a Stone, when the Walls of Chalcedon were demolished by
Order of the Emperor Valens.*

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.viii-p2.1"></span>An</span> order was issued by the emperor
that the walls of Chalcedon, a city opposite to Byzantium, should be
demolished: for he had sworn to do this, after he should have conquered
the usurper, because the Chalcedonians had sided with the usurper, and
had used insulting language toward Valens, <span
id="fr_581"></span>[582](#fn_581.md) and shut their gates against him as he
passed by their city. In consequence of the imperial decree, therefore,
the walls were razed and the stones were conveyed to Constantinople to
serve for the formation of the public baths which are called
Constantianæ. <span id="fr_582"></span>[583](#fn_582.md) On one of these
stones an oracle was found engraven, which had lain concealed for a long
time, in which it was predicted that when the city should be supplied
with abundance of water, then should the wall serve for a bath; and that
innumerable hordes of barbarous nations having overrun the provinces of
the Roman empire, and done a great deal of mischief, should themselves
at length be destroyed. We shall here insert this oracle for the
gratification of the studious: <span id="fr_583"></span>[584](#fn_583.md)

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p6"></span>‘When nymphs their mystic dance with
wat’ry feet

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p7"></span>Shall tread through proud Byzantium’s
stately street;

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p8"></span>When rage the city wall shall
overthrow,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p9"></span>Whose stones to fence a bathing-place
shall go:

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p10"></span>Then savage lands shall send forth
myriad swarms,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p11"></span>Adorned with golden locks aud
burnished arms,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p12"></span>That having Ister’s silver streams
o’erpast,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p13"></span>Shall Scythian fields and Mœsia’s
meadows waste.

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p14"></span>But when with conquest flushed they
enter Thrace,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p15"></span>Fate shall assign them there a
burial-place.’

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p16"></span>Such was the prophecy. And indeed it
afterwards happened, that when Valens by building an aqueduct supplied
Constantinople with abundance of water, the barbarous nations made
various irruptions, as we shall hereafter see. But it happened that some
explained the prediction otherwise. For when that aqueduct was
completed, Clearchus the prefect of the city built a stately bath, to
which the name of ‘the Plentiful Water’ <span
id="fr_584"></span>[585](#fn_584.md) was given, in that which is now called
the Forum of Theodosius: on which account the people celebrated a
festival with great rejoicings, whereby there was, say they, an
accomplishment of those words of the oracle,

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p18"></span>‘their mystic dance with wat’ry feet

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p19"></span>Shall tread through proud Byzantium’s
stately street.’

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p20"></span>But the completion of the prophecy
took place afterwards. While the demolition was in progress the
Constantinopolitans besought the emperor to suspend the destruction of
the walls; and the inhabitants of Nicomedia and Nicæa sending from
Bithynia to Constantinople, made the same request. But the emperor being
exceedingly exasperated against the Chalcedonians, was with difficulty
prevailed upon to listen to these petitions in their favor: but that he
might perform his oath, he commanded that the walls should be pulled
down, while at the same time the breaches should be repaired by being
filled up with other small stones. Whence it is that in the present day
one may see in certain parts of the wall very inferior materials laid
upon prodigiously large stones, forming those unsightly patches which
were made on that occasion. So much will be sufficient on the walls of
Chalcedon.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_581"></span>[99:582](2020133.htm#fr_581.md) <span
id="ii.vii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p3"></span>Ammianus Marcellinus (*Rerum Gestarum*
XXVI. viii. 2 *seq.*) says, ‘From the walls of Chalcedon they uttered
reproaches to him and insultingly reviled him as Sabaiarius. For, sabaia
is a poor drink made of wheat or barley in Illyricum (whence Valens
came).’ On the Pannonian or Illyrian origin of Valens, see IV. I. It
appears also that the Pannonians were accustomed to live on poor diet in
general.

<span id="fn_582"></span>[99:583](2020133.htm#fr_582.md) <span
id="ii.vii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p4"></span>Sozom. VIII. 21, mentions these baths.
Am. Marcellinus (*Rerum. Gestarum,* XXXI. I. 4) relates that Valens
built a bath out of the stones of the walls of Chalcedon. So also
Themist. *Orat. Decen. ad Valentem,* and Gregory Nazianzen, *Orat.* 25;
the latter calls it a ‘subterraneous and aerial river.’ Zonaras and
Cedrenus, however, affirm that the structure built was not a bath, but
an aqueduct. Cf. Cedrenus, I. 543 (p. 310, B).

<span id="fn_583"></span>[99:584](2020133.htm#fr_583.md) <span
id="ii.vii.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p5"></span>Cedrenus, I. 543 (p. 310, B).

<span id="fn_584"></span>[99:585](2020133.htm#fr_584.md) <span
id="ii.vii.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.viii-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vii.viii-p17.1"></span>Δαψιλὲς ὕδωρ</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Valens persecutes the Novatians, because they accepted the
Orthodox Faith.](2020134.md)
