[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020405)  [Next](2020407.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Concerning Paulinus
and Meletius, Chief-Priests of Antioch; how Eusebius and Lucifer
antagonized One Another; Eusebius and Hilarius defend the Nicene Faith*.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.1"></span>On</span> the termination of the council,
Eusebius repaired to Antioch and found dissension prevailing among the
people. <span id="fr_1393"></span>[1394](#fn_1393.md) Those who were
attached to Meletius would not join Paulinus, but held their assemblies
apart. Eusebius was much grieved at the state of affairs; for the
ordination ought not to have taken place without the unanimous consent
of the people; yet, from respect towards Lucifer, he did not openly
express his dissatisfaction.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p4"></span>He refused to hold communion with either
party, but promised to redress their respective grievances by means of a
council. While he was thus striving to restore concord and unanimity,
Meletius returned from exile, and, finding that those who held his
sentiments had seceded from the other party, he held meetings with them
beyond the walls of the city. Paulinus, in the meantime, assembled his
own party within the city; for his mildness, his virtuous life, and his
advanced age had so far won the respect of Euzoïus, the Arian president,
that, instead of being expelled from the city, a church had been
assigned him for his own use. Eusebius, on finding all his endeavors for
the restoration of concord frustrated, quitted Antioch. Lucifer fancied
himself injured by him, because he had refused to approve the ordination
of Paulinus; and, in displeasure, seceded from communion with him. As if
purely from the desire of contention, Lucifer then began to cast
aspersions on the enactments of the council of Alexandria; and in this
way he seems to have originated the heresy which has been called after
him, Luciferian.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p5"></span>Those who espoused his cause seceded
from the church; but, although he was deeply chagrined at the aspect
affairs had taken, yet, because he had deputed a deacon to accompany
Eusebius in lieu of himself, he yielded to the decrees of the council of
Alexandria, and conformed to the doctrines of the Catholic Church. About
this period he repaired to Sardinia.

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p6"></span>In the meantime Eusebius traversed the
Eastern provinces, restored those who had declined from the faith, and
taught them what it was necessary to believe. After passing through
Illyria, he went to Italy, and there he met with Hilarius, bishop of
Poictiers <span id="fr_1394"></span>[1395](#fn_1394.md) in Aquitania.
Hilarius had returned from exile before Eusebius, and had taught the
Italians and the Gauls what doctrines they had to receive, and what to
reject; he expressed himself with great eloquence in the Latin tongue,
and wrote many <span id="page_336">p. 336</span> <span
id="iii.x.xiii-Page_336"></span>admirable works, it is said, in
refutation of the Arian dogmas. Thus did Hilarius and Eusebius maintain
the doctrines of the Nicæan council in the regions of the West.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[335:1394](2020406.htm#fr_1393.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 30, 31; Soc. iii. 9, 10.
Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 4, 5; Sulp. Sev. *H. S.* ii. 45.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[335:1395](2020406.htm#fr_1394.md) <span
id="iii.x.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xiii-p7"></span>Soc. iii. 10, who says his source is
Sabinus, <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p7.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.x.xiii-p7.2"></span>ν τῇ συναγωγῇ τῶν συνοδικῶν</span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Partisans of Macedonius disputed with the Arians concerning
Acacius.](2020407.md)
