[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020010)  [Next](2020012.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.ii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*By what Means the Emperor
Constantine became a Christian.*

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p2.1"></span>When</span> Diocletian and Maximian, <span
id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110.md) surnamed Herculius, had by mutual
consent laid aside the imperial dignity, and retired into private life,
Maximian, surnamed Galerius, who had been a sharer with them in the
government, came into Italy and appointed two Cæsars, Maximin in the
eastern division of the empire, and Severus in the Italian. In Britain,
however, Constantine was proclaimed emperor, instead of his father
Constantius, who died in the first year of the two hundred and
seventy-first <span id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111.md) Olympiad, on the
25th of July. And at Rome Maxentius, the son of Maximian Herculius, was
raised by the prætorian soldiers to be a tyrant rather than an emperor.
In this state of things Herculius, impelled by a desire to regain the
sovereignty, attempted to destroy his son Maxentius; but this he was
prevented by the soldiery from effecting, and he soon afterwards died at
Tarsus in Cilicia. At the same time Severus Cæsar being sent to Rome by
Galerius Maximian, in order to seize Maxentius, was slain, his own
soldiers having betrayed him. At length Galerius Maximian, who had
exercised the chief authority, <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112.md)
also died, having previously appointed as his successor, his old friend
and companion in arms, Licinius, a Dacian by birth. Meanwhile, Maxentius
sorely oppressed the Roman people, treating them as a tyrant rather than
as a king, shamelessly violating the wives of the nobles, putting many
innocent persons to death, and perpetrating other similar atrocities.
The emperor Constantine being informed of this, exerted himself to free
the Romans from the slavery under him (i.e. Maxentius), and began
immediately to consider by what means he might overthrow the tyrant. Now
while his mind was occupied with <span id="page_2">p. 2</span> <span
id="ii.iv.ii-Page_2"></span>this great subject, he debated as to what
divinity’s aid he should invoke in the conduct of the war. He began to
realize that Diocletian’s party had not profited at all by the pagan
deities, whom they had sought to propitiate; but that his own father
Constantius, who had renounced the various religions of the Greeks, had
passed through life far more prosperously. In this state of uncertainty,
as he was marching at the head of his troops, a preternatural vision,
which transcends all description, appeared to him. In fact, about that
part of the day when the sun after posing the meridian begins to decline
towards the west, he saw a pillar of light in the heavens, in the form
of a cross, on which were inscribed these words, <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p5.2"></span>By This Conquer</span>. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113.md) The appearance of this sign struck the
emperor with amazement and scarcely believing his own eyes, he asked
those around him if they beheld the same spectacle; and as they
unanimously declared that they did, the emperor’s mind was strengthened
by this divine and marvelous apparition. On the following night in his
slumbers he saw Christ who directed him to prepare a standard according
to the pattern of that which had been seen; and to use it against his
enemies as an assured trophy of victory. In obedience to this divine
oracle, he caused a standard in the form of a cross to be prepared,
which is preserved in the palace even to the present time: and
proceeding in his measures with greater earnestness, he attacked the
enemy and vanquished him before the gates of Rome, near the Mulvian
bridge, Maxentius himself being drowned in the river. This victory was
achieved in the seventh year of the conqueror’s reign. <span
id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114.md) After this, while Licinius, who shared
the government with him, and was his brother-in-law, having married his
sister Constantia, was residing in the East, the emperor Constantine, in
view of the great blessing he had received, offered grateful
thanksgivings to God as his benefactor; these consisted in his relieving
the Christians from persecution, recalling those who were in exile,
liberating such as were imprisoned, and causing the confiscated property
of the prescribed to be restored to them; he moreover rebuilt the
churches, and performed all these things with the greatest ardor. About
this time Diocletian, who had abdicated the imperial authority, died at
Salona in Dalmatia. <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_110"></span>[1:111](2020011.htm#fr_110.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p3"></span>‘Socrates is here in error; for Maximianus
Herculius, who was otherwise called Maximian the Elder, was, by
Constantine’s command, slain in Gallia in 310 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> But Maximius Cæsar, two years
after, being conquered by Licinius, died at Tarsus.’ (Valesius.) On the
confusion of Maximian and Maximin, see Introd. III.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[1:112](2020011.htm#fr_111.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p4"></span>305 or 306 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_112"></span>[1:113](2020011.htm#fr_112.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p5.1"></span>πάντα περιέπων</span>, not to be taken
literally, inasmuch as there were two other Augusti—Constantine and
Maxentius; and hence though senior Augustus, he was not sole ruler. On
the appointment of the Augusti under Diocletian, and meaning of the
title, see Gibbon, *Decline and Fall,* chap. xiii.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[2:114](2020011.htm#fr_113.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p6"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p6.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p6.2"></span>Εν τούτῳ νίκᾳ</span>. For an extensive and
satisfactory treatment of this famous passage in the life of
Constantine, see Richardson, *Prolegomena to the Life of Const.,* Vol.
I., Second Series, Post-Nicene Fathers.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[2:115](2020011.htm#fr_114.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p6.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p7"></span>312 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iv.ii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_115"></span>[2:116](2020011.htm#fr_115.md) <span
id="ii.iv.ii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.ii-p8"></span>Cf. an account of these events in Sozomen,
I. 3. See also on the persecution instituted by Diocletian Neander,
*Hist. of the Christ. Ch.* Vol. I. pp. 143–156; Schaff, *Hist. of the
Christ. Ch.* Vol. I. pp. 174–177; Euseb. *H. E.,* Books VIII.–X.
Lactantius, *de Mortibus persec.* c. 7 seq. Diocletian abdicated in 305
<span class="c13"><span id="ii.iv.ii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: While Constantine favors the Christians, Licinius, his Colleague,
persecutes them.](2020012.md)
