[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020113)  [Next](2020115) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xvi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*Of the Literary Labors
of the Two Apollinares and the Emperor’s Prohibition of Christians being
instructed in Greek Literature.*

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p2.1"></span>The</span> imperial law <span
id="fr_522"></span>[523](#fn_522) which forbade Christians to study
Greek literature, rendered the two Apolli<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>
<span id="ii.vi.xvi-Page_87"></span>nares of whom we have above spoken,
much more distinguished than before. For both being skilled in polite
learning, the father as a grammarian, and the son as a rhetorician, they
made themselves serviceable to the Christians at this crisis. For the
former, as a grammarian, composed a grammar consistent with the
Christian faith: he also translated the Books of Moses into heroic
verse; and paraphrased all the historical books of the Old Testament,
putting them partly into dactylic measure, and partly reducing them to
the form of dramatic tragedy. He purposely employed all kinds of verse,
that no form of expression peculiar to the Greek language might be
unknown or unheard of amongst Christians. The younger Apollinaris, who
was well trained in eloquence, expounded the gospels and apostolic
doctrines in the way of dialogue, as Plato among the Greeks had done.
Thus showing themselves useful to the Christian cause they overcame the
subtlety of the emperor through their own labors. But Divine Providence
was more potent than either their labors, or the craft of the emperor:
for not long afterwards, in the manner we shall hereafter explain, <span
id="fr_523"></span>[524](#fn_523) the law became wholly inoperative; and
the works of these men are now of no greater importance, than if they
had never been written. But perhaps some one will vigorously reply
saying: ‘On what grounds do you affirm that both these things were
effected by the providence of God? That the emperor’s sudden death was
very advantageous to Christianity is indeed evident: but surely the
rejection of the Christian compositions of the two Apollinares, and the
Christians beginning afresh to imbue their minds with the philosophy of
the heathens, this works out no benefit to Christianity, for pagan
philosophy teaches Polytheism, and is injurious to the promotion of true
religion.’ This objection I shall meet with such considerations as at
present occur to me. Greek literature certainly was never recognized
either by Christ or his Apostles as divinely inspired, nor on the other
hand was it wholly rejected as pernicious. And this they did, I
conceive, not inconsiderately. For there were many philosophers among
the Greeks who were not far from the knowledge of God; and in fact these
being disciplined by logical science, strenuously opposed the Epicureans
and other contentious Sophists who denied Divine Providence, confuting
their ignorance. And for these reasons they have become useful to all
lovers of real piety: nevertheless they themselves were not acquainted
with the Head of true religion, being ignorant of the mystery of Christ
which ‘had been hidden from generations and ages.’ <span
id="fr_524"></span>[525](#fn_524) And that this was so, the Apostle in
his epistle to the Romans thus declares: <span
id="fr_525"></span>[526](#fn_525) ‘For the wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men, who hold the
truth in unrighteousness. Because that which may be known of God is
manifest in them; for God has shown it unto them. For the invisible
things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being
understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and
Godhead, that they may be without excuse; because that when they knew
God, they glorified him not as God.’ From these words it appears that
they had the knowledge of truth, which God had manifested to them; but
were guilty on this account, that when they knew God, they glorified him
not as God. Wherefore by not forbidding the study of the learned works
of the Greeks, they left it to the discretion of those who wished to do
so. This is our first argument in defense of the position we took:
another may be thus put: The divinely inspired Scriptures undoubtedly
inculcate doctrines that are both admirable in themselves, and heavenly
in their character: they also eminently tend to produce piety and
integrity of life in those who are guided by their precepts, pointing
out a walk of faith which is highly approved of God. But they do not
instruct us in the art of reasoning, by means of which we may be enabled
successfully to resist those who oppose the truth. Besides adversaries
are most easily foiled, when we can use their own weapons against them.
But this power was not supplied to Christians by the writings of the
Apollinares. Julian had this in mind when he by law prohibited
Christians from being educated in Greek literature, for he knew very
well that the fables it contains would expose the whole pagan system, of
which he had become the champion to ridicule and contempt. Even
Socrates, the most celebrated of their philosophers, despised these
absurdities, and was condemned on account of it, as if he had attempted
to violate the sanctity of their deities. Moreover, both Christ and his
Apostle enjoin us ‘to become discriminating money-changers,’ <span
id="fr_526"></span>[527](#fn_526) so that we might ‘prove all things,
and hold fast that which is good’: <span
id="fr_527"></span>[528](#fn_527) directing us also to ‘beware lest any
one should spoil us through philosophy and vain deceit.’ <span
id="fr_528"></span>[529](#fn_528) But this we cannot do, unless we
possess ourselves of the weapons of our adversaries: taking care that in
making this acquisition we do not adopt their sentiments, but testing
them, reject the evil, but retain all that is good and true: for good
wher<span id="page_88">p. 88</span> <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-Page_88"></span>ever it is found, is a property of truth.
Should any one imagine that in making these assertions we wrest the
Scriptures from their legitimate construction, let it be remembered that
the Apostle not only does not forbid our being instructed in Greek
learning, but that he himself seems by no means to have neglected it,
inasmuch as he knows many of the sayings of the Greeks. Whence did he
get the saying, ‘The Cretans are always liars, evil beasts,
slow-bellies,’ <span id="fr_529"></span>[530](#fn_529) but from a
perusal of *The Oracles* of Epimenides, <span
id="fr_530"></span>[531](#fn_530) the Cretan Initiator? Or how would he
have known this, ‘For we are also his offspring,’ <span
id="fr_531"></span>[532](#fn_531) had he not been acquainted with *The
Phenomena* of Aratus <span id="fr_532"></span>[533](#fn_532) the
astronomer? Again this sentence, ‘Evil communications corrupt good
manners,’ <span id="fr_533"></span>[534](#fn_533) is a sufficient proof
that he was conversant with the tragedies of Euripides. <span
id="fr_534"></span>[535](#fn_534) But what need is there of enlarging on
this point? It is well known that in ancient times the doctors of the
church by unhindered usage were accustomed to exercise themselves in the
learning of the Greeks, until they had reached an advanced age: this
they did with a view to improve themselves in eloquence and to
strengthen and polish their mind, and at the same time to enable them to
refute the errors of the heathen. Let these remarks be sufficient in the
subject suggested by the two Apollinares.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_522"></span>[86:523](2020114.htm#fr_522) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p3"></span>Cf. Sozom. V. 18; also above, II. 46.

<span id="fn_523"></span>[87:524](2020114.htm#fr_523) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p4"></span>Chap. 21.

<span id="fn_524"></span>[87:525](2020114.htm#fr_524) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p5"></span>[Col. i.
26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_525"></span>[87:526](2020114.htm#fr_525) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p6"></span>[Rom. i.
18-21](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018)<span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_526"></span>[87:527](2020114.htm#fr_526) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p7"></span>On this extra-Scriptural saying
attributed to Jesus Christ, see n. 54, Introd, p. xi.

<span id="fn_527"></span>[87:528](2020114.htm#fr_527) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p8"></span>[1 Thess. v.
21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p8.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_528"></span>[87:529](2020114.htm#fr_528) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p9"></span>[Col. ii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#008)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p9.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_529"></span>[88:530](2020114.htm#fr_529) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p10"></span>[Tit. i.
12](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#012)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_530"></span>[88:531](2020114.htm#fr_530) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p11"></span>Cf. Theophrastus, VII. x. and Diogenes
Lærtius, I. x. The latter gives a list of Epimenides’ works, but makes
no mention of any ‘Oracles.’ Socrates must have used this term in a more
general sense therefore, and meant some collection of obscure and
mystical writings. He also calls Epimenides an ‘Initiator,’ because,
according to the testimony of Theophrastus, he was versed particularly
in lustration and coruscation.

<span id="fn_531"></span>[88:532](2020114.htm#fr_531) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p12"></span>[Acts xvii.
28](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#028)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_532"></span>[88:533](2020114.htm#fr_532) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p13"></span>Fabricius, *Bibl. Græc.* II. p. 451 seq.

<span id="fn_533"></span>[88:534](2020114.htm#fr_533) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p14"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033)<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_534"></span>[88:535](2020114.htm#fr_534) <span
id="ii.vi.xvi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xvi-p15"></span>Menander, and not Euripides, is the only
author to whom this line can be traced (see Tertull. *ad Uxor.* 1. 8,
and Meineke, *Fragm. Comic. Græc.* Vol. IV. p. 132), but it may have
been a popular proverb, or even originally a composition of Euripides,
which Menander simply used.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor preparing an Expedition against the Persians, arrives
at Antioch, and being ridiculed by the Inhabitants, he retorts on them
by a Satirical Publication entitled 'Misopogon, or the
Beard-Hater.'](2020115)
