[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020112)  [Next](2020114.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Martyrs at Merum in
Phrygia, under Julian.*

<span id="ii.vi.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xv-p2.1"></span>Amachius</span> governor of Phrygia ordered
that the temple at Merum, a city of that province, should be opened, and
cleared of the filth which had accumulated there by lapse of time: also
that the statues it contained should be polished fresh. This in being
put into operation grieved the Christians very much. Now a certain
Macedonius and Theodulus and Tatian, unable to endure the indignity thus
put upon their religion, and impelled by a fervent zeal for virtue,
rushed by night into the temple, and broke the images in pieces. The
governor infuriated at what had been done, would have put to death many
in that city who were altogether innocent, when the authors of the deed
voluntarily surrendered themselves, choosing rather to die themselves in
defense of the truth, than to see others put to death in their stead.
The governor seized and ordered them to expiate the crime they had
committed by sacrificing: on their refusal to do this, their judge
menaced them with tortures; but they despising his threats, being
endowed with great courage, declared their readiness to undergo any
sufferings, rather than pollute themselves by sacrificing. After
subjecting them to all possible tortures he at last laid them on
gridirons under which a fire was placed, and thus slew them. But even in
this last extremity they gave the most heroic proofs of fortitude,
addressing the ruthless governor thus: ‘If you wish to eat broiled
flesh, Amachius, turn us on the other side also, lest we should appear
but half cooked to your taste.’ Thus these martyrs ended their life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Literary Labors of the Two Apollinares and the Emperor's
Prohibition of Christians being instructed in Greek
Literature.](2020114.md)
