[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020413)  [Next](2020415) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.— *Of the Statue of Christ
in Paneas which Julian overthrew and made Valueless; he erected his own
Statue; this was overthrown by a Thunder-Bolt and destroyed. Fountain of
Emmaus in which Christ washed his Feet. Concerning the Tree Persis,
which worshiped Christ in Egypt, and the Wonders wrought through it*.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xxi-p2.1"></span>Among</span> so many remarkable events which
occurred during the reign of Julian, I must not omit to mention one
which affords a sign of the power of Christ, and proof of the Divine
wrath against the emperor. <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1419](#fn_1418)

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p4"></span>Having heard that at Cæsarea Philippi,
otherwise called Paneas, a city of Phœnicia, there was a celebrated
statue of Christ which had been erected by a woman whom the Lord had
<span id="page_343">p. 343</span> <span
id="iii.x.xxi-Page_343"></span>cured of a flow of blood, <span
id="fr_1419"></span>[1420](#fn_1419) Julian commanded it to be taken
down and a statue of himself erected in its place; but a violent fire
from heaven fell upon it and broke off the parts contiguous to the
breast; the head and neck were thrown prostrate, and it was transfixed
to the ground with the face downwards at the point where the fracture of
the bust was; and it has stood in that fashion from that day until now,
full of the rust of the lightning. The statue of Christ was dragged
around the city and mutilated by the pagans; but the Christians
recovered the fragments, and deposited the statue in the church in which
it is still preserved. Eusebius relates, that at the base of this statue
grew an herb which was unknown to the physicians and empirics, but was
efficacious in the cure of all disorders. It does not appear a matter of
astonishment to me, that, after God had vouchsafed to dwell with men, he
should condescend to bestow benefits upon them.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p6"></span>It appears that innumerable other
miracles were wrought in different cities and villages; accounts have
been accurately preserved by the inhabitants of these places only,
because they learned them from ancestral tradition; and how true this
is, I will at once show. There is a city now called Nicopolis, in
Palestine, which was formerly only a village, and which was mentioned by
the divine book of the Gospel under the name of Emmaus. <span
id="fr_1420"></span>[1421](#fn_1420) The name of Nicopolis was given to
this place by the Romans after the conquest of Jerusalem and the victory
over the Jews. Just beyond the city where three roads meet, is the spot
where Christ, after His resurrection, said farewell to Cleopas and his
companion, as if he were going to another village; and here is a healing
fountain in which men and other living creatures afflicted with
different diseases wash away their sufferings; for it is said that when
Christ together with His disciples came from a journey to this fountain,
they bathed their feet therein, and, from that time the water became a
cure for disorders.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p8"></span>At Hermopolis, in the Thebaïs, is a tree
called Persis, of which the branches, the leaves, and the least portion
of the bark, are said to heal diseases, when touched by the sick; for it
is related by the Egyptians that when Joseph fled with Christ and Mary,
the holy mother of God, from the wrath of Herod, they went to
Hermopolis; when entering at the gate, this largest tree, as if not
enduring the advent of Christ, inclined to the ground and worshiped Him.
I relate precisely what I have heard from many sources concerning this
tree. I think that this phenomenon was a sign of the presence of God in
the city; or perhaps, as seems most probable, the tree, which had been
worshiped by the inhabitants, after the pagan custom, was shaken,
because the demon, who had been an object of worship, started up at
sight of Him who was manifested for purification from such agencies. It
was moved of its own accord; for at the presence of Christ the idols of
Egypt were shaken, even as Isaiah <span
id="fr_1421"></span>[1422](#fn_1421) the prophet had foretold. On the
expulsion of the demon, the tree was permitted to remain as a monument
of what had occurred, and was endued with the property of healing those
who believed.

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p10"></span>The inhabitants of Egypt and of
Palestine testify to the truth of these events, which took place among
themselves.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[342:1419](2020414.htm#fr_1418) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p3"></span>Philost. vii. 3, who was eyewitness.

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[343:1420](2020414.htm#fr_1419) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p5"></span>Eus. *H. E.* vii. 18.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[343:1421](2020414.htm#fr_1420) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p7"></span>[Luke xxiv.
13](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#013)<span id="iii.x.xxi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[343:1422](2020414.htm#fr_1421) <span
id="iii.x.xxi-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xxi-p9"></span>[Isa.
19.1](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#001)<span id="iii.x.xxi-p9.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: From Aversion to the Christians, Julian granted Permission to the
Jews to rebuild the Temple at Jerusalem; in every Endeavor to put their
Hands to the Work, Fire sprang upward and killed Many. About the Sign of
the Cross which appeared on the Clothing of those who had exerted
themselves in this Work.](2020415)
