[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020344)  [Next](2020346.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Arrival of the
Eastern High Priests at Rome; Letter of Julius, Bishop of Rome,
concerning them; by means of the Letters of Julius, Paul and Athanasius
receive their own Sees; Contents of the Letter from the Archpriests of
the East to Julius*.

<span id="iii.viii.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.viii-p2.1"></span>Athanasius,</span> on leaving Alexandria,
had fled to Rome. <span id="fr_1238"></span>[1239](#fn_1238.md) Paul,
bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus, bishop of Ancyra, and Asclepas,
bishop of Gaza, repaired thither at the same time. Asclepas, who was
opposed to the Arians and had therefore been deposed, after having been
accused by some of the heterodox of having thrown down an altar;
Quintianus had been appointed in his stead over the Church of Gaza.
Lucius also, bishop of Adrianople, who had been deposed from the church
under his care on another charge, was dwelling at this period in Rome.
The Roman bishop, on learning the accusation against each individual,
and on finding that they held the same sentiments about the Nicæan
dogmas, admitted them to communion as of like orthodoxy; and as the care
for all was fitting to the dignity of his see, he restored them all to
their own churches. He wrote to the bishops of the East, and rebuked
them for having judged these bishops unjustly, and for harassing the
Churches by abandoning the Nicæan doctrines. He summoned a few among
them to appear before him on an appointed day, in order to account to
him for the sentence they had passed, and threatened to bear with them
no longer, unless they would cease to make innovations. This was the
tenor of his letters. Athanasius and Paul were reinstated in their
respective sees, and forwarded the letter of Julius to the bishops of
the East. The bishops could scarcely brook such documents, and they
assembled together at Antioch, <span
id="fr_1239"></span>[1240](#fn_1239.md) and framed a reply to Julius,
beautifully expressed and composed with great legal skill, yet filled
with considerable irony and indulging in the strongest threats. They
confessed in this epistle, that the Church of Rome was entitled to
universal honor, because it was the school of the apostles, and had
become the metropolis of <span id="page_288">p. 288</span> <span
id="iii.viii.viii-Page_288"></span>piety from the outset, although the
introducers of the doctrine had settled there from the East. They added
that the second place in point of honor ought not to be assigned to
them, because they did not have the advantage of size or number in their
churches; for they excelled the Romans in virtue and determination. They
called Julius to account for having admitted the followers of Athanasius
into communion, and expressed their indignation against him for having
insulted their Synod and abrogated their decrees, and they assailed his
transactions as unjust and discordant with ecclesiastical right. After
these censures and protestations against such grievances, they proceeded
to state, that if Julius would acknowledge the deposition of the bishops
whom they had expelled, and the substitution of those whom they had
ordained in their stead, they would promise peace and fellowship; but
that, unless he would accede to these terms, they would openly declare
their opposition. They added that the priests who had preceded them in
the government of the Eastern churches had offered no opposition to the
deposition of Novatian, by the Church of Rome. They made no allusion in
their letter to any deviations they had manifested from the doctrines of
the council of Nice, but merely stated they had various reasons to
allege in justification of the course they had pursued, and that they
considered it unnecessary to enter at that time upon any defense of
their conduct, as they were suspected of having violated justice in
every respect.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1238"></span>[287:1239](2020345.htm#fr_1238.md) <span
id="iii.viii.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.viii-p3"></span>*Apol. cont. Arian.* 20–35; Soc. ii.
15. Soz. is more extended than Soc.

<span id="fn_1239"></span>[287:1240](2020345.htm#fr_1239.md) <span
id="iii.viii.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.viii-p4"></span>From Sabinus? Cf. Soc. ii. 15.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ejection of Paul and Athanasius; Macedonius is invested with the
Government of the Church of Constantinople.](2020346.md)
