[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020442)  [Next](2020444) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Account Given, by
Gregory the Theologian, of Apolinarius and Eunomius, in a Letter to
Nectarius. Their Heresy was distinguished by the Philosophy of the Monks
who were then Living, for the Heresy of these two held Nearly the Entire
East*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p2.1"></span>It</span> is obvious that Eunomius and
Aëtius held the same opinions. In several passages of his writings,
Eunomius boasts and frequently testifies that Aëtius was his instructor.
Gregory, bishop of Nazianzen, speaks in the following terms of
Apolinarius in a letter addressed to Nectarius, the leader of the church
in Constantinople: <span id="fr_1483"></span>[1484](#fn_1483) “Eunomius,
who is a constant source of trouble among us, is not content with being
a burden to us himself, but would consider himself to blame if he did
not strive to drag every one with him to the destruction whither he is
hastening. Such conduct, however, may be tolerated in some degree. The
most grievous calamity against which the Church has now to struggle
arises from the audacity of the Apolinarians. I know not how your
Holiness could have agreed that they should be as free to hold meetings
as we ourselves. You have been fully instructed by the grace of God, in
the Divine mysteries, and not only understand the defense of the Word of
God, but also whatever innovations have been made by heretics against
the sound faith; yet it may not be amiss for your revered Excellency to
hear from our narrowness, that a book written by Apolinarius has fallen
into my hands, in which the proposition surpasses all forms of heretical
pravity. He affirms that the flesh assumed for the transformation of our
nature, under the dispensation of the only begotten Son of God was not
acquired for this end; but that this carnal nature existed in the Son
from the beginning. He substantiates this evil hypothesis by a
misapplication of the following words of Scripture: ‘No man hath
ascended up into heaven.’ <span id="fr_1484"></span>[1485](#fn_1484) He
alleges from this text, that Christ was the Son of man before He
descended from heaven, and that when He did descend, He brought with Him
His own flesh which He had already possessed in heaven which was before
the ages and essentially united. He also states another apostolic
saying: ‘The second man is from heaven.’ <span
id="fr_1485"></span>[1486](#fn_1485) He, moreover, maintains that the
man who came down from heaven was destitute of intellect (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p5.2"></span>νοῦς</span>), but that
the Deity of the only begotten Son fulfilled the nature of intellect,
and constituted the third part of the human compound. The body and soul
(<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p5.3"></span>ψυχὴ</span>)
formed two parts, as in other men, but there was no intellect, but the
Word of God filled the place of intellect. Nor does this end the awful
spectacle; for the most grievous point of the heresy is, that he asserts
that the only-begotten God, the Judge of all men, the Giver of life, and
the Destroyer of death, is Himself subject to death; that He suffered in
His own Godhead, and that in the resurrection of the body in the third
day, the Godhead also was raised from the dead with the body; and that
it was raised again from the dead by the Father. It would take too long
to recount all the other extravagant doctrines propounded by these
heretics.” What I have said may, I think, suffice to show the nature of
the sentiments maintained by Apolinarius and Eunomius. If any one desire
more detailed information, I can only refer him to the works on the
subject written either by them or by others concerning these men. I do
not profess easily to understand or to expound these matters, as it
seems to me the fact that these dogmas did not prevail and make further
advance is to be attributed, in addition to the causes mentioned,
especially to the monks of that period; for all those philosophers in
Syria, Cappadocia, and the neighboring provinces, were sincerely
attached to the Nicene faith. The eastern regions, however, from Cilicia
to Phœnicia, were endangered by the heresy of Apolinarius. The heresy of
Eunomius was spread from Cilicia and the mountains of Taurus as far as
the Hellespont and Constantinople. These two heretics found it easy to
attract to their respective parties the persons among whom they dwelt,
and those of the neighborhood. But the same fate awaited them that had
been experienced by the Arians; for the people admired the monks who
manifested their virtue by works and believed that they held right
opin<span id="page_365">p. 365</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-Page_365"></span>ions, while they turned away from
those who held other opinions, as impious and as holding spurious
doctrines. In the same way the Egyptians were led by the monks to oppose
the Arians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[364:1484](2020443.htm#fr_1483) <span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p3"></span>Greg. Naz. *Ep.* ccii., quoted in
part.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[364:1485](2020443.htm#fr_1484) <span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p4"></span>[John iii.
13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013)<span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[364:1486](2020443.htm#fr_1485) <span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxvii-p5"></span>[1 Cor. xv.
47](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#047)<span
id="iii.xi.xxvii-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Holy Men who flourished at this Period in Egypt. John, or
Amon, Benus, Theonas, Copres, Helles, Elias, Apelles, Isidore, Serapion,
Dioscorus, and Eulogius.](2020444)
