[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020316)  [Next](2020318) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Constantine writes to
Sapor to stay the Persecution of the Christians*.

<span id="iii.vii.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xv-p2.1"></span>Constantine</span> the Roman emperor was
angry, and bore it ill when he heard of the sufferings to which the
Christians were exposed in Persia. He desired most anxiously to render
them assistance, yet knew not in what way to effect this object. About
this time some ambassadors from the Persian king arrived at his court,
and after granting their requests and dismissing them, he thought it
would be a favorable opportunity to address Sapor in behalf of the
Christians in Persia, and wrote to him, <span
id="fr_1162"></span>[1163](#fn_1162) confessing that it would be a very
great and forever indescribable favor, if he would be humane to those
who admired the teaching of the Christians under him. “There is nothing
in their religion,” said he, “of a reprehensible nature; by bloodless
prayers alone do they offer supplication to God, for he delighteth not
in the outpouring of blood, but taketh pleasure only in a pure soul
devoted to virtue and to religion; so that they who believe these things
are worthy of commendation.” The emperor then assured Sapor that God
would be propitious to him if he treated the Christians with lenity, and
adduced the example of Valerian and of himself in proof thereof. He had
himself, by faith in Christ, and by the aid of Divine inclination, come
forth from the shores of the Western ocean, and reduced to obedience the
whole of the Roman world, and had terminated many wars against
foreigners and usurpers; and yet had never had recourse to sacrifices or
divinations, but had for victory used only the symbol of the Cross at
the head of his own armies, and prayer pure from blood and defilement.
The reign of Valerian was prosperous so long as he refrained from
persecuting the Church; but he afterwards commenced a persecution
against the Christians, and was delivered by Divine vengeance into the
hands of the Persians, who took him prisoner and put him to a cruel
death.”

<span id="iii.vii.xv-p4"></span>It was in this strain that Constantine
wrote to Sapor, urging him to be well-disposed to this religion; for the
emperor extended his watchful care over all the Christians of every
region, whether Roman or foreign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1162"></span>[268:1163](2020317.htm#fr_1162) <span
id="iii.vii.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xv-p3"></span>The Embassy is spoken of in Eus. *V. C.*
iv. 8; the letter of Constantine to Shapur, iv. 9–13. But Soz. is
mistaken about its date; for it was written before Sapor had commenced
his persecution of the Christians. As usual, Soz. quotes briefly, and
with no regard to the language and little to the thought. Theodoret, *H.
E.* i. 25 (24), is accurate. For further relations of Constantine with
Persia, cf. Eus. *V. C.* iv. 56, 57.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eusebius and Theognis who at the Council of Nice had assented to
the Writings of Arius restored to their own Sees.](2020318)
