[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020389)  [Next](2020391.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*The Arians, under
the Impression that the divine Meletius upheld their Sentiments,
translate him from Sebaste to Antioch. On his Bold Confession of the
Orthodox Doctrines, they were confounded, and after they had deposed him
they placed Euzoïus in the See. Meletius formed his own Church: but
those who held to Consubstantiality turned away from him because he had
been ordained by Arians*.

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxviii-p2.1"></span>At</span> the period that Eudoxius
obtained the government of the church of Constantinople, <span
id="fr_1353"></span>[1354](#fn_1353.md) there were many aspirants to the
see of Antioch; and as is frequently the case under such circumstances,
contentions and seditions divided the clergy and the people of that
church.

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii-p4"></span>Each party was anxious to commit the
government of the church to a bishop of its own persuasion; for
interminable disputes concerning doctrine were rampant among them, and
they could not agree as to the mode of singing psalms; and, as has been
before stated, psalms were sung by each individual, in conformity with
his own peculiar creed. Such being the state of the church at Antioch,
the partisans of Eudoxius thought it would be well to intrust the
bishopric of that city to Meletius, then bishop of Sebaste, he being
possessed of great and persuasive eloquence, of excellent life, and all,
as they imagined, being of like opinions with themselves. They believed
that his reputation would attract the inhabitants of Antioch and of the
neighboring cities to conform to their heresy, particularly those called
Eustathians, who had adhered invariably to the Nicene doctrines. But
their expectations were utterly frustrated. It is said that on his first
arrival in Antioch, an immense multitude, composed of Arians, and of
those who were in communion with Paulinus, flocked around him. Some
wished to see the man because his fame was great, even before his
coming; others were anxious to hear what he had to say, and to ascertain
the nature of his opinions; for a report had been spread abroad which
was afterwards proved to be true, that he maintained the doctrines of
those convened at Nicæa. In his first discourses he confined himself to
instructing the people in what we call ethics; afterwards, however, he
openly declared that the Son is of the same substance as the Father. It
is said that at these words, the arch deacon of the church, who was then
one of the clergy there, stretched out his hand, and covered the mouth
of the preacher; but that he continued to explain his sentiments more
clearly by means of his fingers than he could by language. He extended
three fingers only towards the people, closed them, and then allowed
only one finger to remain extended, and thus expressed by signs what he
was prevented from uttering. As the archdeacon, in his embarrassment,
seized the hand, he released the mouth; the tongue was free, and
Meletius declared his opinion still more clearly and with a loud voice,
and exhorted his auditors to adhere to the tenets of the council of
Nicæa, and he testified to his hearers that those who held other views
deviated from the truth. As he persisted in the enunciation of the same
sentiments, either by word of mouth or by means of signs, when the
archdeacon closed his mouth, a contention between both sides occurred,
not unlike that of the pancratium; the followers of Eustathius shouted
aloud and rejoiced and leaped, while the Arians were cast down. Eudoxius
and his partisans were transported with indignation at this discourse,
and contrived by their machinations to expel Meletius from Antioch. Soon
afterwards, however, they recalled him, for they fancied he had
renounced his former sentiments and had espoused theirs. As, however, it
soon became apparent that his devotion to the Nicene doctrines was firm
and unalterable, he was ejected from the church, and banished by order
of the emperor; and the see of Antioch was conferred on Euzoïus, who had
formerly been banished with Arius. The followers of Meletius separated
themselves from the Arians, and held their assemblies apart, for those
who had from the beginning maintained that the Son is consubstantial
with the Father refused to admit them into communion, because Meletius
had been ordained by Arian bishops, and because his followers had been
baptized by Arian priests. For this reason they were separated, although
holding the same views.

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii-p5"></span>The emperor having been informed that
an Insurrection was about to arise in Persia, repaired to Antioch.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1353"></span>[323:1354](2020390.htm#fr_1353.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxviii-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 44. The order is the same in
Soz., but with many new details. Philost. v. 1, 5; Ruf. *H. E.* i. 24.
Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Partisans of Acacius again do not remain Quiet, but strive to
abolish the Term “Consubstantial,” and to confirm the Heresy of
Arius.](2020391.md)
