[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020238)  [Next](2020240) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Virtues of the Emperor
Theodosius the Younger.*

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxii-p2.1"></span>But</span> although I am neither eager for
the notice of the emperor, nor wish to make an exhibition of my
oratorical powers, yet have I felt it my duty to record plainly the
singular virtues with which the emperor is endowed: for I am persuaded
that silence concerning them, as they are so excellent, would be
injustice to those who should come after us. In the first place then,
this prince though born and nurtured to empire, was neither stultified
nor effeminated by the circumstances of his birth and education. He
evinced so much prudence, that he appeared to those who conversed with
him to have acquired wisdom from experience. Such was his fortitude in
undergoing hardships, that he would courageously endure both heat and
cold; fasting very frequently, especially on Wednesdays and
Fridays; <span id="fr_960"></span>[961](#fn_960) and this he did from an
earnest endeavor to observe with accuracy all the prescribed forms of
the Christian religion. He rendered his palace little different from a
monastery: for he, together with his sisters, rose early in the morning,
and recited responsive hymns in praise of the Deity. By this training he
learnt the holy Scriptures by heart; and he would often discourse with
the bishops on scriptural subjects, as if he had been an ordained priest
of long standing. He was a more indefatigable collector of the sacred
books and of the expositions which had been written on them, than even
Ptolemy Philadelphus <span id="fr_961"></span>[962](#fn_961) had
formerly been. In clemency and humanity he far surpassed all others. For
the emperor Julian although he professed to be a <span id="page_165">p.
165</span> <span id="ii.x.xxii-Page_165"></span>philosopher, could not
moderate his rage against the Antiochians who derided him, but inflicted
upon Theodore the most agonizing tortures. <span
id="fr_962"></span>[963](#fn_962) Theodosius on the contrary, bidding
farewell to Aristotle’s syllogisms, exercised philosophy in deeds, by
getting the mastery over anger, grief, and pleasure. Never has he
revenged himself on any one by whom he has been injured; nor has any one
ever even seen him irritated. And when some of his most intimate friends
once asked him, why he never inflicted capital punishment upon
offenders, his answer was, ‘Would that it were even possible to restore
to life those that have died.’ To another making a similar inquiry he
replied, ‘It is neither a great nor a difficult thing for a mortal to be
put to death but it is God only that can resuscitate by repentance a
person that has once died.’ So habitually indeed did he practice mercy,
that if any one were guilty and sentence of death was passed upon him,
and he was conducted toward the place of execution, he was never
suffered to reach the gates of the city before a pardon was issued,
commanding his immediate return. Having once exhibited a show of hunting
wild beasts in the Amphitheatre at Constantinople, the people cried out,
‘Let one of the boldest bestiarii <span
id="fr_963"></span>[964](#fn_963) encounter the enraged animal.’ But he
said to them, ‘Do ye not know that we are wont to view these spectacles
with feelings of humanity?’ By this expression he instructed the people
to be satisfied in future with shows of a less cruel description. His
piety was such that he had a reverential regard for all who were
consecrated to the service of God; and honored in an especial manner
those whom he ascertained to be eminent for their sanctity of life. It
is said that the bishop of Chebron <span
id="fr_964"></span>[965](#fn_964) having died at Constantinople, the
emperor expressed a wish to have his cassock of sackcloth of hair;
which, although it was excessively filthy, he wore as a cloak, hoping
that thus he should become a partaker in some degree of the sanctity of
the deceased. In a certain year, during which the weather had been very
tempestuous, he was obliged by the eagerness of the people to exhibit
the usual sports in the Hippodrome; and when the circus was filled with
spectators, the violence of the storm increased, and there was a heavy
fall of snow. Then the emperor made it very evident how his mind was
affected towards God; for he caused the herald to make a proclamation to
the people to this effect: ‘It is far better and fitter to desist from
the show, and unite in common prayer to God, that we may be preserved
unhurt from the impending storm.’ Scarcely had the herald executed his
commission, when all the people, with the greatest joy, began with one
accord to offer supplication and sing praises to God, so that the whole
city became one vast congregation; and the emperor himself in official
garments, went into the midst of the multitude and commenced the hymns.
Nor was he disappointed in his expectation, for the atmosphere began to
resume its wonted serenity: and Divine benevolence bestowed on all an
abundant harvest, instead of an expected deficiency of corn. If at any
time war was raised, like David he had recourse to God, knowing that he
is the arbiter of battles, and by prayer brought them to a prosperous
issue. At this point therefore, I shall relate, how a little after the
war against the Persians, by placing his confidence in God he vanquished
the usurper John, after Honorius had died on the 15th of August, in the
consulate of Asclepiodotus and Marian. <span
id="fr_965"></span>[966](#fn_965) For I judge what then occurred worthy
of mention, inasmuch as there happened to the emperor’s generals who
were dispatched against the tyrant, something analogous to what took
place when the Israelites crossed the Red Sea under the guidance of
Moses. These things however, I shall set forth very briefly, leaving to
others the numerous details which would require a special treatise.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_960"></span>[164:961](2020239.htm#fr_960) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p3"></span>On the observance of these two days of
the week as fast days in the early Church see Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.*
XXI. 3.

<span id="fn_961"></span>[164:962](2020239.htm#fr_961) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxii-p4.1"></span>φιλάδελφος</span> = ‘lover of his brothers,’
but applied to him by the rhetorical figure of antiphrasis because he
killed his brothers. This Ptolemy Philadelphus reigned in Egypt from 285
to 247 <span class="c13"><span id="ii.x.xxii-p4.2"></span>b.c.</span>
and is famous for having the Old Testament translated from Hebrew into
Greek, according to the common tradition, by seventy learned men, whence
the translation has been known as the *Septuagint.*

<span id="fn_962"></span>[165:963](2020239.htm#fr_962) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p4.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p5"></span>Cf. III. 19.

<span id="fn_963"></span>[165:964](2020239.htm#fr_963) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p6"></span>Persons who fought with wild beasts in
the games of the circus. They were of two classes: (1) professionals,
those who fought for pay, and (2) criminals, allowed to use arms in
defending themselves against the wild beasts to which they had been
condemned. It is one of the first class that is here meant.

<span id="fn_964"></span>[165:965](2020239.htm#fr_964) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p7"></span>An altogether unknown and doubtful
diocese.

<span id="fn_965"></span>[165:966](2020239.htm#fr_965) <span
id="ii.x.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxii-p8"></span>423 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After the Death of the Emperor Honorius John usurps the
Sovereignty at Rome. He is destroyed through the Prayers of Theodosius
the Younger.](2020240)
