[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020452)  [Next](2020454) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p1"></span><span id="page_373">p. 373</span>
<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii-Page_373"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII</span>.—*Concerning the
Barbarians beyond the Danube, who were driven out by the Huns, and
advanced to the Romans, and their Conversion to Christianity; Ulphilas
and Athanarichus; Occurrences between them; whence the Goths received
Arianism*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>This</span> remarkable oration of
Themistius disposed the emperor to be somewhat more humane, and the
punishments became in consequence less severe than before. He would not
have wholly withdrawn his wrath from the priests unless the anxieties of
public affairs had supervened, and not permitted him to pursue them
further. <span id="fr_1509"></span>[1510](#fn_1509) For the Goths, who
inhabited the regions beyond the Ister, and had conquered other
barbarians, having been vanquished and driven from their country by the
Huns, had passed over into the Roman boundaries. The Huns, it is said,
were unknown to the Thracians of the Ister and the Goths before this
period; for though they were dwelling secretly near to one another, a
lake of vast extent was between them, and the inhabitants on each side
of the lake respectively imagined that their own country was situated at
the extremity of the earth, and that there was nothing beyond them but
the sea and water. It so happened, however, that an ox, tormented by
insects, plunged into the lake, and was pursued by the herdsman; who,
perceiving for the first time that the opposite bank was inhabited, made
known the circumstance to his fellow-tribesmen. Some, however, relate
that a stag was fleeing, and showed some of the hunters who were of the
race of the Huns the way which was concealed superficially by the water.
On arriving at the opposite bank, the hunters were struck with the
beauty of the country, the serenity of the air, and the adaptedness for
cultivation; and they reported what they had seen to their king. The
Huns then made an attempt to attack the Goths with a few soldiers; but
they afterwards raised a powerful army, conquered the Goths in battle,
and took possession of their whole country. The vanquished nation, being
pursued by their enemies, crossed over into the Roman territories. They
passed over the river, and dispatched an embassy to the emperor,
assuring him of their co-operation in any warfare in which he might
engage, provided that he would assign a portion of land for them to
inhabit. Ulphilas, the bishop of the nation, was the chief of the
embassy. The object of his embassy was fully accomplished, and the Goths
were permitted to take up their abode in Thrace. Soon after contentions
broke out among them, which led to their division into two parts, one of
which was headed by Athanaric, and the other by Phritigernes. They took
up arms against each other, and Phritigernes was vanquished, and
implored the assistance of the Romans. The emperor having commanded the
troops in Thrace to assist and to ally with him, a second battle was
fought, and Athanaric and his party were put to flight. In
acknowledgment of the timely succor afforded by Valens, and in proof of
his fidelity to the Romans, Phritigernes embraced the religion of the
emperor, and persuaded the barbarians over whom he ruled to follow his
example. It does not, however, appear to me that this is the only reason
that can be advanced to account for the Goths having retained, even to
the present day, the tenets of Arianism. For Ulphilas, their bishop,
originally held no opinions at variance with those of the Catholic
Church; for during the reign of Constantius, though he took part, as I
am convinced, from thoughtlessness, at the council of Constantinople, in
conjunction with Eudoxius and Acacius, yet he did not swerve from the
doctrines of the Nicæan council. He afterwards, it appears, returned to
Constantinople, and, it is said, entered into disputations on doctrinal
topics with the chiefs of the Arian faction; and they promised to lay
his requests before the emperor, and forward the object of his embassy,
if he would conform to their opinions. Compelled by the urgency of the
occasion, or, possibly, thinking that it was better to hold such views
concerning the Divine nature, Ulphilas entered into communion with the
Arians, and separated himself and his whole nation from all connection
with the Catholic Church. For as he had instructed the Goths in the
elements of religion, and through him they shared in a gentler mode of
life, they placed the most implicit confidence in his directions, and
were firmly convinced that he could neither do nor say anything that was
evil. He had, in fact, given many signal proofs of the greatness of his
virtue. He had exposed himself to innumerable perils in defense of the
faith, during the period that the aforesaid barbarians were given to
pagan worship. He taught them the use of letters, and translated the
Sacred Scriptures into their own language. It was on this account, that
the barbarians on the banks of the Ister followed the tenets of Arius.
At the same period, there were many of the subjects of Phritigernes who
testified to Christ, and were martyred. Athanaric resented that his
subjects had become Christian under the persuasion of Ulphilas; and
because they had abandoned the cult of their fathers, he subjected many
individuals to many punishments; some he put to death after they had
been dragged before tribunals and had nobly confessed the doctrine, and
<span id="page_374">p. 374</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvii-Page_374"></span>others were slain without being
permitted to utter a single word in their own defense. It is said that
the officers appointed by Athanaric to execute his cruel mandates,
caused a statue to be constructed, which they placed on a chariot, and
had it conveyed to the tents of those who were suspected of having
embraced Christianity, and who were therefore commanded to worship the
statue and offer sacrifice; if they refused to do so, the men and the
tents were burnt together. But I have heard that an outrage of still
greater atrocity was perpetrated at this period. Many refused to obey
those who were compelling them by force to sacrifice. Among them were
men and women; of the latter some were leading their little children,
others were nourishing their new-born infants at the breast; they fled
to their church, which was a tent. The pagans set fire to it, and all
were destroyed.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p4"></span>The Goths were not long in making
peace among themselves; and in unreasonable excitement, they then began
to ravage Thrace and to pillage the cities and villages. Valens, on
inquiry, learned by experiment how great a mistake he had made; for he
had calculated that the Goths would always be useful to the empire and
formidable to its enemies, and had therefore neglected the reinforcement
of the Roman ranks. He had taken gold from the cities and villages under
the Romans, instead of the usual complement of men for the military
service. On his expectation being thus frustrated, he quitted Antioch
and hastened to Constantinople. Hence the persecution which he had been
carrying on against Christians differing in opinion from himself, had a
truce. Euzoïus, president of the Arians, died, and Dorotheus was
proposed for his government.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1509"></span>[373:1510](2020453.htm#fr_1509) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxvii-p3"></span>Soc. iv. 32–35; Philost. ii. 5, ix.
16, 17. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 37; Eunap. *Fr.* i. 5, 6, ii. 34; Am.
Marcel. parts of xxvii., xxx., xxxi.; Zos. iv. 10 sqq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Mania, the Phylarch of the Saracens. When the Treaty
with the Romans was dissolved, Moses, their Bishop, who had been
ordained by the Christians, renewed it. Narrative concerning the
Ishmaelites and the Saracens, and their Goods; and how they began to be
Christianized through Zocomus, Their Phylarch.](2020454)
