[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020243)  [Next](2020245.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*Voluminous
Productions of Philip, a Presbyter of Side.*

<span id="ii.x.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p2.1"></span>Philip</span> was a native of Side; Side is
a city of Pamphylia. From this place also Troïlus the sophist came, to
whom Philip boasted himself to be nearly related. He was a deacon and
thus admitted to the privilege of familiar intercourse with John
Chrysostom, the bishop. He labored assiduously in literature, and
besides making very considerable literary attainments, formed an
extensive collection of books in every branch of knowledge. Affecting
the Asiatic style, <span id="fr_988"></span>[989](#fn_988.md) he became the
author of many treatises, attempting among others a refutation of the
Emperor Julian’s treatises against the Christians, and compiled a
*Christian History,* which he divided into thirty-six books; each of
these books occupied several volumes, so that they amounted altogether
to nearly one thousand, and the mere argument <span
id="fr_989"></span>[990](#fn_989.md) of each volume equalled in magnitude
the volume itself. This composition he has entitled not an
*Ecclesiastical,* but a *Christian History,* and has grouped together in
it abundance of very heterogeneous materials, wishing to show that he is
not ignorant of philosophical and scientific learning: for it contains a
medley of geometrical theorems, astronomical speculations, arithmetical
calculations, and musical principles, with geographical delineations of
islands, mountains, forests, and various other matters of little moment.
By forcing such irrelevant details into connection with his subject, he
has rendered his work a very loose production, useless alike, in my
opinion, to the ignorant and the learned; for the illiterate are
incapable of appreciating the loftiness of his diction, and such as are
really competent to form a just estimate, condemn his wearisome
tautology. But let every one exercise his own judgment concerning these
books according to his taste. All I have to add is, that he has
confounded the chronological order of the transactions he describes: for
after having related what took place in the reign of the Emperor
Theodosius, he immediately goes back to the times of the bishop
Athanasius; and this sort of thing he does frequently. But enough has
been said of Philip: we must now mention what happened under the
episcopate of Sisinnius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_988"></span>[168:989](2020244.htm#fr_988.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxvii-p3"></span>This was a heavy, redundant, and turgid
style deprecated by rhetoricians of the better class from the time of
Cicero onwards. Cf. Cicero, *Brut.* XIII. 51; Quinctilian, *Instit.
Orat.* XII. 10, and Jerome, *ad Rustic*. (125. 6).

<span id="fn_989"></span>[168:990](2020244.htm#fr_989.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxvii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p4.1"></span>ὑ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxvii-p4.2"></span>πόθεσις</span> = lit. ‘subject’ or
‘substance’; the contents, or as later, called the argument, or summary
of contents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proclus ordained Bishop of Cyzicus by Sisinnius, but rejected by
the People.](2020245.md)
