[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020417)  [Next](2020419.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.ii-p1.1"></span>Chapter II</span>.—*He perished under Divine
Wrath. Visions of the Emperor’s Death seen by Various Individuals. Reply
of the Carpenter’s Son; Julian tossed his Blood aloft to Christ.
Calamities which Julian entailed upon the Romans*.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.ii-p2.1"></span>In</span> the document above quoted, Libanius
clearly states that the emperor fell by the hand of a Christian; and
this, probably, was the truth. <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1427](#fn_1426.md) It is not unlikely that some of the
soldiers who then served in the Roman army might have conceived the
idea, since Greeks and all men until this day have praised tyrannicides
for exposing themselves to death in the cause of liberty, and spiritedly
standing by their country, their families, and their friends. Still less
is he deserving of blame, who, for the sake of God and of religion,
performed so bold a deed. Beyond this I know nothing accurately
concerning the men who committed this murder besides what I have
narrated. All men, however, concur in receiving the account which has
been handed down to us, and which evidences his death to have been the
result of Divine wrath. A proof of this is the Divine vision which one
of his friends had, which I will now proceed to describe. He had, it is
related, traveled into Persia, with the intention of joining the
emperor. While on the road, he found himself so far from any habitation
that he was obliged, on one night, to sleep in a church. He saw, during
that night, either in a dream or a vision, all the apostles and prophets
assembled together, and complaining of the injuries which the emperor
had inflicted on the Church, and consulting concerning the best measures
to be adopted. After much deliberation and embarrassment two individuals
arose in the midst of the assembly, desired the others to be of good
cheer, and left the company hastily, as if to deprive Julian of the
imperial power. He who was the spectator of this marvel did not attempt
to pursue his journey, but awaited, in horrible suspense, the conclusion
of this revelation. He laid himself down to sleep again, in the same
place, and again, he saw the same assembly; the two individuals who had
appeared to depart the preceding night to effect their purpose against
<span id="page_347">p. 347</span> <span
id="iii.xi.ii-Page_347"></span>Julian, suddenly returned and announced
his death to the others.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p4"></span>On the same day a vision was sent to
Didymus, an ecclesiastical philosopher, who dwelt at Alexandria; and,
who, being deeply grieved at the errors of Julian and his persecution of
the churches, fasted and offered up supplications to God continually on
this account. From the effects of anxiety and want of food during the
previous night, he fell asleep while sitting in his chair. Then being,
as it were, in an ecstasy, he beheld white horses traversing the air,
and heard a voice saying to those who were riding thereon, “Go and tell
Didymus that Julian has been slain just at this hour; let him
communicate this intelligence to Athanasius, the bishop, and let him
arise and eat.” I have been credibly informed that the friend of Julian
and the philosopher beheld those things. Results proved that neither of
them were far from having witnessed the truth. But if these instances do
not suffice to prove that the death of Julian was the effect of Divine
wrath on account of his persecution of the Church, let the prediction of
one of the ecclesiastics be called to mind. <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1428](#fn_1427.md) When Julian was preparing to enter
upon the war against the Persians, he threatened that on the termination
of the war he would treat the Christians with severity, and boasted that
the Son of the Carpenter would be unable to aid them; the ecclesiastic
above mentioned thereupon rejoined, that the Son of the Carpenter was
then preparing him a wooden coffin in view of his death.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p6"></span>Julian himself was well aware whence the
mortal stroke proceeded, and what was the cause of its infliction; for,
it is said, when he was wounded, he took some of the blood that flowed
from the wound, and threw it up into the air, as if he had seen Jesus
Christ appearing, and intended to throw it at him, in order to reproach
him with his slaughter. Others say that he was angry with the sun
because it had favored the Persians, and had not rescued him, although,
according to the doctrine of the astronomers, it had presided at his
birth; and that it was to express his indignation against this luminary
that he took blood in his hand and flung it upwards in the air. <span
id="fr_1428"></span>[1429](#fn_1428.md)

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p8"></span>I know not whether, on the approach of
death, as is wont to be the case when the soul is in the act of being
separated from the body and when it is enabled to behold diviner
spectacles than are allotted to men, and so Julian might have beheld
Christ. Few allusions have been made to this subject, and yet I dare not
reject this hypothesis as absolutely false; for God often suffers still
more improbable and astonishing events to take place in order to prove
that the religion named after Christ is not sustained by human energy.
It is, however, very obvious that, throughout the reign of this emperor,
God gave manifest tokens of His displeasure, and permitted many
calamities to befall several of the provinces of the Roman Empire. He
visited the earth with such fearful earthquakes, that the buildings were
shaken, and no more safety could be found within the houses than in the
open air. From what I have heard, I conjecture that it was during the
reign of this emperor, or, at least, when he occupied the second place
in the government, that a great calamity occurred near Alexandria in
Egypt, <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1430](#fn_1429.md) when the sea receded
and again passed beyond its boundaries from the reflux waves, and
deluged a great deal of the land, so that on the retreat of the waters,
the sea-skiffs were found lodged on the roofs of the houses. The
anniversary of this inundation, which they call the birthday of an
earthquake, is still commemorated at Alexandria by a yearly festival; a
general illumination is made throughout the city; they offer thankful
prayers to God, and celebrate the day very brilliantly and piously. An
excessive drought also occurred during this reign; the plants perished
and the air was corrupted; and for want of proper sustenance, men were
obliged to have recourse to the food usually eaten by other animals.

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p10"></span>The famine introduced peculiar diseases,
by which many lives were lost. Such was the state of the empire during
the administration of Julian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[346:1427](2020418.htm#fr_1426.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. *Ephr. Syr.
Carmina adv. Julianum,* ed. Overbeck.

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[347:1428](2020418.htm#fr_1427.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p5"></span>Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 23 (a pedagogue).

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[347:1429](2020418.htm#fr_1428.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p7"></span>Cf. version by Philost. vii. 15.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[347:1430](2020418.htm#fr_1429.md) <span
id="iii.xi.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.ii-p9"></span>A mistake; it occurred under Valentian
and Valens. Am. Marcel. xxvi. 10. 15–19. Idatius: *Descr. Consulum,*
under <span class="c13"><span id="iii.xi.ii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span> 385
(July 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Reign of Jovian; he introduced Many Laws which he carried out
in his Government.](2020419.md)
