[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020324)  [Next](2020326) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Calumny respecting
St. Athanasius and the Hand of Arsenius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxiii-p2.1"></span>The</span> Melitians, on the failure of
their first attempt, secretly concocted other indictments against
Athanasius. <span id="fr_1181"></span>[1182](#fn_1181) On the one hand
they charged him with breaking a sacred chalice, and on the other with
having slain one Arsenius, and with having cut off his arm and retained
it for magical purposes. It is said that this Arsenius was one of the
clergy, <span id="fr_1182"></span>[1183](#fn_1182) but that, having
committed some crime, he fled to a place of concealment for fear of
being convicted and punished by his bishop. The enemies of Athanasius
devised the most serious attack for this occurrence. They sought
Arsenius with great diligence, and found him; they showed him great
kindness, promised to secure for him every goodwill and safety, and
conducted him secretly to Patrines, <span
id="fr_1183"></span>[1184](#fn_1183) a presbyter of a monastery, who was
one of their confederates, and of the same interest as themselves. After
having thus carefully concealed him, they diligently spread the report
in the market-places and public assemblies that he had been slain by
Athanasius. They also bribed John, a monk, to corroborate the
accusation. As this evil report was universally circulated, and had even
reached the ears of the emperor, Athanasius, being apprehensive that it
would be difficult to defend his cause before judges whose minds were
prejudiced by such false rumors, resorted to stratagems akin to those of
his adversaries. He did everything in his power to prevent truth from
being obscured by their attacks; but the multitude could not be
convinced, on account of the non-appearance of Arsenius. Reflecting,
therefore, that the suspicion which rested upon him could not be removed
except by proving that Arsenius, who was said to be dead, was still
alive, he sent a most trustworthy deacon in quest of him. The deacon
went to Thebes, and ascertained from the declaration of some monks where
he was living. And when he came to Patrines, with whom he had been
concealed, he found that Arsenius was not there; for on the first
intelligence of the arrival of the deacon he had been conveyed to Lower
Egypt. The deacon arrested Patrines, and conducted him to Alexandria, as
also Elias, one of his associates, who was said to have been the person
who conveyed Arsenius elsewhere. He delivered them both to the commander
of the Egyptian forces, and they confessed that Arsenius was still
alive, that he had been secretly concealed in their house, and that he
was now living in Egypt. Athanasius took care that all these facts
should be reported to Constantine. The emperor wrote back to him,
desiring him to attend to the due performance of the priestly functions,
and the maintenance of order and piety among the people, and not to be
disquieted by the machinations of the Melitians, it being evident that
envy alone was the cause of the false indictments which were circulated
against him and the disturbance in the churches. The emperor added that,
for the future, he should not give place to such reports; and that,
unless the calumniators preserved the peace, he should certainly subject
them to the rigor of the state laws, and let justice have its course, as
they had not only unjustly plotted against the innocent, but had also
shamefully abused the good order and piety of the Church. Such was the
strain of the emperor’s letter to Athanasius; and he further commanded
that it should be read aloud before the public, in order that they might
all be made acquainted with his intentions. The Melitians were alarmed
at these menaces, and became more quiet for a while, because they viewed
with anxiety the threat of the ruler. The churches throughout Egypt
enjoyed profound peace, and, directed by the presidency of this great
priest, it daily increased in numbers by the conversion of multitudes of
pagans and other heretics.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1181"></span>[273:1182](2020325.htm#fr_1181) <span
id="iii.vii.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii-p3"></span>Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 63; Ruf.
*H. E.* i. 15–17; Soc. i. 27. Independent workers of the same and other
material.

<span id="fn_1182"></span>[273:1183](2020325.htm#fr_1182) <span
id="iii.vii.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii-p4"></span>He was bishop of the city of
Hypselitæ, according to the caption of his letter to Athan. See *Apol.
cont. Arian.* 69.

<span id="fn_1183"></span>[273:1184](2020325.htm#fr_1183) <span
id="iii.vii.xxiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiii-p5"></span>Athan. calls him Pinnes, presbyter of
a mansio (not monastery) of Ptemencyrceus. See his letter to John in the
*Apol. cont. Arian.* 67. How did Soz. change this name to Patrines?

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Some Indian Nations received Christianity at that Time through
the Instrumentality of Two Captives, Frumentius and Edesius.](2020326)
