[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020469)  [Next](2020471) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Maximus the Tyrant.
Concerning the Occurrences between the Empress Justina and St. Ambrose.
The Emperor Gratian was killed by Guile. Valentinian and his Mother fled
to Theodosius in Thessalonica*.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p2.1"></span>As</span> the Emperor Gratian was at this
period <span id="page_384">p. 384</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xiii-Page_384"></span>occupied with a war against the
Alamanni, <span id="fr_1539"></span>[1540](#fn_1539) Maximus quitted
Britain, with the design of usurping the imperial power. Valentinian was
then residing in Italy, but as he was a minor, the affairs of state were
transacted by Probus, a prætorian prefect, who had formerly been consul.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p4"></span>Justina, the mother of the emperor,
having espoused the Arian heresy, persecuted Ambrose, bishop of Milan,
and disquieted the churches by her efforts to introduce alterations in
the Nicene doctrines, and to obtain the predominance of the form of
belief set forth at Ariminum. She was incensed against Ambrose because
he strenuously opposed her attempts at innovation, and she represented
to her son that he had insulted her. Valentinian believed this calumny,
and, determined to avenge the supposed wrongs of his mother, he sent a
party of soldiers against the church. On their reaching the temple, they
forced their way into the interior, arrested Ambrose, and were about to
lead him into exile at that very moment, when the people assembled in
crowds at the church, and evinced a resolution to die rather than submit
to the banishment of their priest. Justina was still further incensed at
this occurrence; and with a view of enforcing her project by law, she
sent for Menivolus, <span id="fr_1540"></span>[1541](#fn_1540) one of
the legal secretaries, and commanded him to draw up, as quickly as
possible, an edict confirmatory of the decrees of Ariminum. Menivolus,
being firmly attached to the Catholic Church, refused to write the
document, and the empress tried to bribe him by promises of greater
honors. He still, however, refused compliance, and, tearing off his
belt, he threw it at the feet of Justina, and declared that he would
neither retain his present office, nor accept of promotion, as the
reward of impiety. As he remained firm in his refusal, others were
intrusted with the compilation of the law. By this law, all who
conformed to the doctrines set forth at Ariminum and ratified at
Constantinople were exhorted to convene boldly; and it was enacted that
death should be the punishment of those who should hinder or be running
counter to this law of the emperor.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p6"></span>While the mother of the emperor was
planning the means of carrying this cruel law into execution,
intelligence was brought of the murder of Gratian, through the treachery
of Andragathius, the general of Maximus. Andragathius obtained
possession of the imperial chariot, and sent word to the emperor that
his consort was traveling towards his camp. Gratian, who was but
recently married and youthful, as well as passionately attached to his
wife, hastened incautiously across the river, and in his anxiety to meet
her fell without forethought into the hands of Andragathius; he was
seized, and, in a little while, put to death. He was in the
twenty-fourth year of his age, and had reigned fifteen years. This
calamity quieted Justina’s wrath against Ambrose.

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p7"></span>Maximus, in the meantime, raised a
large army of Britons, neighboring Gauls, Celts, and other nations, and
marched into Italy. The pretext which he advanced for this measure was,
that he desired to prevent the introduction of innovations in the
ancient form of religion and of ecclesiastical order; but he was in
reality actuated by the desire of dispelling any suspicion that might
have been excited as to his aspirations after tyranny. He was watching
and intriguing for the imperial rule in such a way that it might appear
as if he had acquired the Roman government by law, and not by force.
Valentinian was compelled by the exigencies of the times to recognize
the symbols of his rule; but soon after, in fear of suffering, fled with
his mother Justina, and Probus, the prætorian prefect in Italy, to
Thessalonica.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1539"></span>[384:1540](2020470.htm#fr_1539) <span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 14–16; Philost. x. 5,
7; Soc. v. 11. Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 12, 13; Eunap. *Fragm.* ii. 48;
Zos. iv. 42, 43.

<span id="fn_1540"></span>[384:1541](2020470.htm#fr_1540) <span
id="iii.xii.xiii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xiii-p5"></span>In Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 16, Benevolus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Birth of Honorius. Theodosius leaves Arcadius at Constantinople,
and proceeds to Italy. Succession of the Novatian and other Patriarchs.
Audacity of the Arians. Theodosius, after destroying the Tyrant,
celebrates a Magnificent Triumph in Rome.](2020471)
