[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020335)  [Next](2020337) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV</span>.—*Death of
Constantine the Great; he died after Baptism and was buried in the
Temple of the Holy Apostles*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor had already divided
the empire among his sons, who were styled Cæsars. <span
id="fr_1206"></span>[1207](#fn_1206) To Constantine and Constans he
awarded the western regions; and to Constantius, the eastern; and as he
was indisposed, and required to have recourse to bathing, he repaired
for that purpose to Helenopolis, a city of Bithynia. His malady,
however, increased, and he went to Nicomedia, and was initiated into
holy baptism in one of the suburbs of that city. After the ceremony he
was filled with joy, and returned thanks to God. He then confirmed the
division of the empire among his sons, according to his former
allotment, and bestowed certain privileges on old Rome and on the city
named after himself. He placed his testament in the hands of the
presbyter who constantly extolled Arius, and who had been recommended to
him as a man of virtuous life by his sister Constantia in her last
moments, and commanded him with an added oath to deliver it to
Constantius on his return, for neither Constantius nor the other Cæsars
were with their dying father. After making these arrangements,
Constantine survived but a few days; he died in the sixty-fifth year of
his age, and the thirty-first of his reign. He was a powerful protector
of the Christian religion, and was the first of the emperors who began
to be zealous for the Church, and to bestow upon her high benefactions.
He was more successful than any other sovereign in all his undertakings;
for he formed no design, I am convinced, without God. He was victorious
in his wars against the Goths and Sarmatians, and, indeed, in all his
military enterprises; and he changed the form of government according to
his own mind with so much ease, that he created another senate and
another imperial city, to which he gave his own name. He assailed the
pagan religion, and in a little while subverted it, although it had
prevailed for ages among the princes and the people.

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p4"></span>After the death of Constantine, his
body was placed in a golden coffin, conveyed to Constantinople, and
deposited on a certain platform in the palace; the same honor and
ceremonial were observed, by those who were in the palace, as were
accorded to him while living. On hearing of his father’s death,
Constantius, who was then in the East, hastened to Constantinople, and
interred the royal remains with the utmost magnificence, and deposited
them in the tomb which had been constructed by order of the deceased in
the Church of the Apostles. From this period it became the custom to
deposit the remains of subsequent Christian emperors in the same place
of interment; and here bishops, likewise, were buried, for the
hierarchical dignity is not only equal in honor to imperial power, but,
in sacred places, even takes the ascendancy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[282:1207](2020336.htm#fr_1206) <span
id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiv-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iv. 61–75; Ruf. *H. E.*
i. 11; Soc. i. 38–40; cf. Philost. ii. 16, 17. Cf. Eutrop. *Brev. hist.
Rom.* x. 7, 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Book III](2020337)
