[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020014)  [Next](2020016) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Division begins in the
Church from this Controversy; and Alexander Bishop of Alexandria
excommunicates Arius and his Adherents.*

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p2.1"></span>Having</span> drawn this inference from his
novel train of reasoning, he excited many to a consideration of the
question; and thus from a little spark a large fire was kindled: for the
evil which began in the Church at Alexandria, ran throughout all Egypt,
Libya, and the upper Thebes, and at length diffused itself over the rest
of the provinces and cities. Many others also adopted the opinion of
Arius; but Eusebius in particular was a zealous defender of it: not he
of Cæsarea, but the one who had before been bishop of the church at
Berytus, and was then somehow in possession of the bishopric of
Nicomedia in Bithynia. When Alexander became conscious of these things,
both from his own observation and from report, being exasperated to the
highest degree, he convened a council of many prelates; and
excommunicated Arius and the abettors of his heresy; at the same time he
wrote as follows to the bishops constituted in the several cities:—

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p3"></span>The Epistle of Alexander Bishop of
Alexandria.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p4"></span>To our beloved and most honored
fellow-Ministers of the Catholic Church everywhere, Alexander sends
greeting in the Lord.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p5"></span>Inasmuch as the Catholic Church is one
body, and we are commanded in the holy Scriptures to maintain ‘the bond
of unity and peace,’ <span id="fr_120"></span>[121](#fn_120) it becomes
us to write, and mutually acquaint one another with the condition of
things among each of us, in order that ‘if one member suffers or
rejoices, we may either sympathize with each other, or rejoice
together.’ <span id="fr_121"></span>[122](#fn_121) Know therefore that
there have recently arisen in our diocese lawless and anti-christian
men, teaching apostasy such as one may justly consider and denominate
the forerunner of Antichrist. I wished indeed to consign this disorder
to silence, that if possible the evil might be confined to the apostates
alone, and not go forth into other districts and contaminate the ears of
some of the simple. But since Eusebius, now in Nicomedia, thinks that
the affairs of the Church are under his control because, forsooth, he
deserted his charge at Berytus and assumed authority over the Church at
Nicomedia with impunity, and has put himself at the head of these
apostates, daring even to send commendatory letters in all directions
concerning them, if by any means he might inveigle some of the ignorant
into this most impious and anti-christian heresy, I felt imperatively
called <span id="page_4">p. 4</span> <span
id="ii.iv.vi-Page_4"></span>on to be silent no longer, knowing what is
written in the law, but to inform you of all of these things, that ye
might understand both who the apostates are, and also the contemptible
character of their heresy, and pay no attention to anything that
Eusebius should write to you. For now wishing to renew his former
malevolence, which seemed to have been buried in oblivion by time, he
affects to write in their behalf; while the fact itself plainly shows
that he does this for the promotion of his own purposes. These then are
those who have become apostates: Arius, Achillas, Aithales, and
Carpones, another Arius, Sarmates, Euzoïus, Lucius, Julian, Menas,
Helladis, and Gaius; with these also must be reckoned Secundus and
Theonas, who once were called bishops. The dogmas they have invented and
assert, contrary to the Scriptures, are these: That God was not always
the Father, but that there was a period when he was not the Father; that
the Word of God was not from eternity, but was made out of
nothing; <span id="fr_122"></span>[123](#fn_122) for that the
ever-existing God (‘the I AM’—the eternal One) made him who did not
previously exist, out of nothing; wherefore there was a time when he did
not exist, inasmuch as the Son is a creature and a work. That he is
neither like the Father as it regards his essence, nor is by nature
either the Father’s true Word, or true Wisdom, but indeed one of his
works and creatures, being erroneously called Word and Wisdom, since he
was himself made of God’s own Word and the Wisdom which is in God,
whereby God both made all things and him also. Wherefore he is as to his
nature mutable and susceptible of change, as all other rational
creatures are: hence the Word is alien to and other than the essence of
God; and the Father is inexplicable by the Son, and invisible to him,
for neither does the Word perfectly and accurately know the Father,
neither can he distinctly see him. The Son knows not the nature of his
own essence: for he was made on our account, in order that God might
create us by him, as by an instrument; nor would he ever have existed,
unless God had wished to create us.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p9"></span>Some one accordingly asked them whether
the Word of God could be changed, as the devil has been? and they feared
not to say, ‘Yes, he could; for being begotten, he is susceptible of
change.’ We then, with the bishops of Egypt and Libya, being assembled
together to the number of nearly a hundred, have anathematized Arius for
his shameless avowal of these heresies, together with all such as have
countenanced them. Yet the partisans of Eusebius have received them;
endeavoring to blend falsehood with truth, and that which is impious
with what is sacred. But they shall not prevail, for the truth must
triumph; and ‘light has no fellowship with darkness, nor has Christ any
concord with Belial.’ <span id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) Who ever
heard such blasphemies? or what man of any piety is there now hearing
them that is not horror-struck, and stops his ears, lest the filth of
these expressions should pollute his sense of hearing? Who that hears
John saying, ‘In the beginning was the Word,’ <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) does not condemn those that say,
‘There was a period when the Word was not’? or who, hearing in the
Gospel of ‘the only-begotten Son,’ and that ‘all things were made by
him,’ will not abhor those that pronounce the Son to be one of the
things made? How can he be one of the things which were made by himself?
Or how can he be the only-begotten, if he is reckoned among created
things? And how could he have had his existence from nonentities, since
the Father has said, ‘My heart has indited a good matter’; <span
id="fr_125"></span>[126](#fn_125) and ‘I begat thee out of my bosom
before the dawn’? <span id="fr_126"></span>[127](#fn_126) Or how is he
unlike the Father’s essence, who is ‘his perfect image,’ <span
id="fr_127"></span>[128](#fn_127) and ‘the brightness of his
glory’ <span id="fr_128"></span>[129](#fn_128) and says: ‘He that hath
seen me, hath seen the Father’? Again how if the Son is the Word and
Wisdom of God, was there a period when he did not exist? for that is
equivalent to their saying that God was once destitute both of Word and
Wisdom. How can he be mutable and susceptible of change, who says of
himself, ‘I am in the Father, and the Father in me’; <span
id="fr_129"></span>[130](#fn_129) and ‘I and the Father are one’; <span
id="fr_130"></span>[131](#fn_130) and again by the Prophet, <span
id="fr_131"></span>[132](#fn_131) ‘Behold me because I am, and have not
changed’? But if any one may also apply the expression to the Father
himself, yet would it now be even more fitly said of the Word; because
he was not changed by having become man, but as the Apostle says, <span
id="fr_132"></span>[133](#fn_132) ‘Jesus Christ, the same yesterday,
to-day, and forever.’ But what could persuade them to say that he was
made on our account, when Paul has expressly declared <span
id="fr_133"></span>[134](#fn_133) that ‘all things are for him, and by
him’? One need not wonder indeed at their blasphemous assertion that the
Son does not perfectly know the Father; for having once determined to
fight against Christ, they reject even the words of the Lord himself,
when he says, <span id="fr_134"></span>[135](#fn_134) ‘As the Father
knows me, even so know I the Father.’ If therefore the Father but
partially knows the Son, it is manifest that the Son also knows the
Father but in part. But if it would be improper to affirm this, and it
be admitted that the Father perfectly knows the <span id="page_5">p.
5</span> <span id="ii.iv.vi-Page_5"></span>Son, it is evident that as
the Father knows his own Word, so also does the Word know his own
Father, whose Word he is. And we, by stating these things, and unfolding
the divine Scriptures, have often confuted them: but again as chameleons
they were changed, striving to apply to themselves that which is
written, ‘When the ungodly has reached the depths of iniquity, he
becomes contemptuous.’ <span id="fr_135"></span>[136](#fn_135) Many
heresies have arisen before these, which exceeding all bounds in daring,
have lapsed into complete infatuation: but these persons, by attempting
in all their discourses to subvert the Divinity of <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.iv.vi-p22.2"></span>The Word</span>, as having
made a nearer approach to Antichrist, have comparatively lessened the
odium of former ones. Wherefore they have been publicly repudiated by
the Church, and anathematized. We are indeed grieved on account of the
perdition of these persons, and especially so because, after having been
previously instructed in the doctrines of the Church, they have now
apostatized from them. Nevertheless we are not greatly surprised at
this, for Hymenæus and Philetus <span id="fr_136"></span>[137](#fn_136)
fell in like manner; and before them Judas, who had been a follower of
the Saviour, but afterwards deserted him and became his betrayer. Nor
were we without forewarning respecting these very persons: for the Lord
himself said: ‘Take heed that no man deceive you: for many shall come in
my name, saying, I am Christ: and shall many deceive many’; <span
id="fr_137"></span>[138](#fn_137) and ‘the time is at hand; Go ye not
therefore after them.’ <span id="fr_138"></span>[139](#fn_138) And Paul,
having learned these things from the Saviour, wrote, ‘That in the latter
times some should apostatize from the faith, giving heed to deceiving
spirits, and doctrines of devils,’ <span
id="fr_139"></span>[140](#fn_139) who pervert the truth. Seeing then
that our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ has himself enjoined this, and
has also by the apostle given us intimation respecting such men, we
having ourselves heard their impiety have in consequence anathematized
them, as we before said, and declared them to be alienated from the
Catholic Church and faith. Moreover we have intimated this to your
piety, beloved and most honored fellow-ministers, in order that ye might
neither receive any of them, if they should presume to come to you, nor
be induced to put confidence in Eusebius, or any other who may write to
you about them. For it is incumbent on us who are Christians, to turn
away from all those who speak or entertain a thought against Christ, as
from those who are resisting God, and are destroyers of the souls of
men: neither does it become us even ‘to salute such men,’ <span
id="fr_140"></span>[141](#fn_140) as the blessed John has prohibited,
‘lest we should at any time be made partakers of their sins.’ Greet the
brethren which are with you; those who are with me salute you.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p28"></span>Upon Alexander’s thus addressing the
bishops in every city, the evil only became worse, inasmuch as those to
whom he made this communication were thereby excited to contention. And
some indeed fully concurred in and subscribed to the sentiments
expressed in this letter, while others did the reverse. But Eusebius,
bishop of Nicomedia, was beyond all others moved to controversy,
inasmuch as Alexander in his letter had made a personal and censorious
allusion to him. Now at this juncture Eusebius possessed great
influence, because the emperor resided at Nicomedia. For in fact
Diocletian had a short time previously built a palace there. On this
account therefore many of the bishops paid their court to Eusebius. And
he repeatedly wrote both to Alexander, that he might set aside the
discussion which had been excited, and again receive Arius and his
adherents into communion; and also to the bishops in each city, that
they might not concur in the proceedings of Alexander. By these means
confusion everywhere prevailed: for one saw not only the prelates of the
churches engaged in disputing, but the people also divided, some siding
with one party, and some with the other. To so disgraceful an extent was
this affair carried, that Christianity became a subject of popular
ridicule, even in the very theatres. Those who were at Alexandria
sharply disputed about the highest points of doctrine, and sent
deputations to the bishops of the several dioceses; while those who were
of the opposite faction created a similar disturbance.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p29"></span>With the Arians the Melitians mingled
themselves, who a little while before had been separated from the
Church: but who these \[Melitians\] are must now be stated.

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p30"></span>By Peter, bishop of Alexandria, who in
the reign of Diocletian suffered martyrdom, a certain Melitius, bishop
of one of the cities in Egypt, in consequence of many other charges, and
more especially because during the persecution he had denied the faith
and sacrificed, was deposed. This person, being stripped of his dignity,
and having nevertheless many followers, became the leader of the heresy
of those who are to this day called from him Melitians throughout Egypt.
And as he had no rational excuse for his separation from the Church, he
pretended that he had simply been wronged and loaded Peter with
calumnious reproaches. Now Peter died the death of a martyr during the
persecution, and so Melitius transferred his abuse first to Achillas,
who succeeded Peter in the bishopric, and afterwards again to
Alexan<span id="page_6">p. 6</span> <span
id="ii.iv.vi-Page_6"></span>der, the successor of Achillas. In this
state of things among them, the discussion in relation to Arius arose;
and Melitius with his adherents took part with Arius, <span
id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) entering into a conspiracy with him
against the bishop. But as many as regarded the opinion of Arius as
untenable, justified Alexander’s decision against him, and thought that
those who favored his views were justly condemned. Meanwhile Eusebius of
Nicomedia and his partisans, with such as favored the sentiments of
Arius, demanded by letter that the sentence of excommunication which had
been pronounced against him should be rescinded; and that those who had
been excluded should be readmitted into the Church, as they held no
unsound doctrine. Thus letters from the opposite parties were sent to
the bishop of Alexandria; and Arius made a collection of those which
were favorable to himself while Alexander did the same with those which
were adverse. This therefore afforded a plausible opportunity of defense
to the sects, which are now prevalent, of the Arians, Eunomians, and
such as receive their name from Macedonius; for these severally make use
of these epistles in vindication of their heresies.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_120"></span>[3:121](2020015.htm#fr_120) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p6"></span>[Eph. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p6.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[3:122](2020015.htm#fr_121) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p7"></span>[1 Cor. xii.
26](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#026)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[4:123](2020015.htm#fr_122) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p8"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p8.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p8.2"></span>ξ οὐκ ὄντων γέγονεν</span>, lit. ‘came into
existence from nothing.’

<span id="fn_123"></span>[4:124](2020015.htm#fr_123) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p10"></span>[2 Cor. vi.
14](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_124"></span>[4:125](2020015.htm#fr_124) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p11"></span>[John
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p11.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[4:126](2020015.htm#fr_125) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p12"></span>[Psa.
45.1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p12.1"></span>,
according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[4:127](2020015.htm#fr_126) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p12.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p13.1"></span>῾</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.vi-p13.2"></span>Εωσφόρον</span>, the morning-star; taken from
[Psa. 110.3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003)<span
id="ii.iv.vi-p13.3"></span>. Cf. the LXX, quoted from [Ps.
lxxii](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#000)<span
id="ii.iv.vi-p13.4"></span>.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[4:128](2020015.htm#fr_127) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p13.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p14"></span>[Col. i.
15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p14.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[4:129](2020015.htm#fr_128) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p14.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p15"></span>[Heb. i.
3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p15.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[4:130](2020015.htm#fr_129) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p15.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p16"></span>[John xiv.
10](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p16.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[4:131](2020015.htm#fr_130) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p16.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p17"></span>[John x.
30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[4:132](2020015.htm#fr_131) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p18"></span>[Mal. iii.
6](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#006)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[4:133](2020015.htm#fr_132) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p19"></span>[Heb. xiii.
8](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[4:134](2020015.htm#fr_133) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p19.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p20"></span>[Heb. ii.
10](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#010)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p20.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_134"></span>[4:135](2020015.htm#fr_134) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p20.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p21"></span>[John x.
15](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#015)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p21.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_135"></span>[5:136](2020015.htm#fr_135) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p21.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p22"></span>[Prov. xviii.
3](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#003)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p22.1"></span>,
according to the LXX.

<span id="fn_136"></span>[5:137](2020015.htm#fr_136) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p22.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p23"></span>[2 Tim.
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017),
[18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#018)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p23.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_137"></span>[5:138](2020015.htm#fr_137) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p23.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p24"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p24.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[5:139](2020015.htm#fr_138) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p24.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p25"></span>[Luke xxi.
8](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#008)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p25.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[5:140](2020015.htm#fr_139) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p25.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p26"></span>[1 Tim.
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001), [Titus
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p26.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_140"></span>[5:141](2020015.htm#fr_140) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p27"></span>[2 John.
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#010),
[11](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#011)<span id="ii.iv.vi-p27.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_141"></span>[6:142](2020015.htm#fr_141) <span
id="ii.iv.vi-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.vi-p31"></span>Valesius makes the assertion that
Socrates is mistaken here, that the Melitians joined themselves to the
Arians after the council of Nicæa, and were induced by Eusebius, bishop
of Nicomedia, to cast slanderous aspersion upon Athanasius, as he
himself testifies in his second apology against the Arians. It appears
unlikely that the Fathers of the Nicene Council would have treated the
Melitians as leniently as they did had they sided with Arius before the
council.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Constantine being grieved at the Disturbance of the
Churches, sends Hosius the Spaniard to Alexandria, exhorting the Bishop
and Arius to Reconciliation and Unity.](2020016)
