[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020294)  [Next](2020296.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*When the Council was
assembled, the Emperor delivered a Public Address.*

<span id="iii.vi.xix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xix-p2.1"></span>The</span> bishops held long consultations;
and after summoning Arius before them, they made an accurate test of his
propositions; they were intently on their guard, not to come to a vote
on either side. When at length the appointed day arrived on which it had
been decided to settle the doubtful points, they assembled
together <span id="fr_1120"></span>[1121](#fn_1120.md) in the palace,
because the emperor had signified his intention of taking part in the
deliberations. When he was in the same place with the priests, he passed
through to the head of the conference, and seated himself on the throne
which had been prepared for him, and the synod was then commanded to be
seated; for seats had been arranged on either side along the walls of
the palatial rooms, for it was the largest, and excelled the other
chambers.

<span id="iii.vi.xix-p4"></span>After they were seated, Eusebius
Pamphilus arose and delivered an oration <span
id="fr_1121"></span>[1122](#fn_1121.md) in honor of the emperor, returning
thanks to God on his account. When he had ceased speaking, and silence
was restored, the emperor delivered himself in the following words: “I
give thanks to God for all things, but particularly, O friends, for
being permitted to see your conference. And the event has exceeded my
prayer, in that so many priests of Christ have been conducted into the
same place; now, it is my desire that you should be of one mind and be
partakers of a consentient judgment, for I deem dissension in the Church
of God as more dangerous than any other evil. Therefore when it was
announced, and I understood you were in discord, an unwholesome thing to
hear, I was deeply pained in soul; and least of all does it profit you,
since you are the conductors of divine worship and arbiters of peace.
<span id="page_255">p. 255</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xix-Page_255"></span>On this account it is, that I have
called you together in a holy Synod, and being both your emperor and
your fellow-physician, I seek for you a favor which is acceptable to our
common Lord, and as honorable for me to receive, as for you to grant.
The favor which I seek is, that you examine the causes of the strife,
and put a consentient and peaceful end thereto so that I may triumph
with you over the envious demon, who excited this internal revolt
because he was provoked to see our external enemies and tyrants under
our feet, and envied our good estate.” The emperor pronounced this
discourse in Latin, and the interpretation was supplied by one at his
side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1120"></span>[254:1121](2020295.htm#fr_1120.md) <span
id="iii.vi.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xix-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 10–12.

<span id="fn_1121"></span>[254:1122](2020295.htm#fr_1121.md) <span
id="iii.vi.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xix-p5"></span>Theodoret, *H. E.* i. 7, places this
oration in the mouth of Eustathius, bishop of Antioch. The variations in
the speech as recorded by Sozomen, show his classic view of reporting.
Theodoret’s report of Constantine’s address is equally divergent.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After having given Audience to both Parties, the Emperor
condemned the Followers of Arius and banished them.](2020296.md)
