[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020046)  [Next](2020048.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVIII</span>.—*The Death of
Arius.* <span id="fr_256"></span>[257](#fn_256.md)

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p3.1"></span>Such</span> was the supplication of
Alexander. Meanwhile the emperor, being desirous of personally examining
Arius, sent for him to the palace, and asked him whether he would assent
to the determinations of the Synod at Nicæa. He without hesitation
replied in the affirmative, and subscribed the declaration of the faith
in the emperor’s presence, acting with duplicity. The emperor, surprised
at his ready compliance, obliged him to confirm his signature by an
oath. This also he did with equal dissimulation. The way he evaded, as I
have heard, was this: he wrote his own opinion on paper, and carried it
under his arm, so that he then swore truly that he really held the
sentiments he had written. That this is so, however, I have written from
hearsay, but that he added an oath to his subscription, I have myself
ascertained, from an examination of the emperor’s own letters. The
emperor being thus convinced, ordered that he should be received into
communion by Alexander, bishop of Constantinople. It was then Saturday,
and Arius was expecting to assemble with the church on the day
following: but divine retribution overtook his daring criminalities. For
going out of the imperial palace, attended by a crowd of Eusebian
partisans like guards, he paraded proudly through the midst of the city,
attracting the notice of all the people. As he <span id="page_35">p.
35</span> <span id="ii.iv.xxxviii-Page_35"></span>approached the place
called Constantine’s Forum, where the column of porphyry is erected, a
terror arising from the remorse of conscience seized Arius, and with the
terror a violent relaxation of the bowels: he therefore enquired whether
there was a convenient place near, and being directed to the back of
Constantine’s Forum, he hastened thither. Soon after a faintness came
over him, and together with the evacuations his bowels protruded,
followed by a copious hemorrhage, and the descent of the smaller
intestines: moreover portions of his spleen and liver were brought off
in the effusion of blood, so that he almost immediately died. The scene
of this catastrophe still is shown at Constantinople, as I have said,
behind the shambles in the colonnade: and by persons going by pointing
the finger at the place, there is a perpetual remembrance preserved of
this extraordinary kind of death. So disastrous an occurrence filled
with dread and alarm the party of Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia; and the
report of it quickly spread itself over the city and throughout the
whole world. As the king grew more earnest in Christianity and confessed
that the confession at Nicæa was attested by God, he rejoiced at the
occurrences. He was also glad because of his three sons whom he had
already proclaimed Cæsars; one of each of them having been created at
every successive decennial anniversary of his reign. To the eldest, whom
he called Constantine, after his own name, he assigned the government of
the western parts of the empire, on the completion of his first decade.
His second son Constantius, who bore his grandfather’s name, he
constituted Cæsar in the eastern division, when the second decade had
been completed. And Constans, the youngest, he invested with a similar
dignity, in the thirtieth year of his own reign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_256"></span>[34:257](2020047.htm#fr_256.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxxviii-p2"></span>For a reproduction of the
circumstances related in this chapter, together with a historical
estimate of them based on additional evidence, see Neander, *Hist. of
the Christ. Ch.* Vol. II. p. 384–388.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor falls sick and dies.](2020048.md)
