[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020206)  [Next](2020208.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Epiphanius is asked to
meet John; on refusing he is admonished concerning his Anticanonical
Proceedings; alarmed at this he leaves Constantinople.*

<span id="ii.ix.xv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.xv-p2.1"></span>John</span> was not offended because
Epiphanius, contrary to the ecclesiastical canon, had made an ordination
in his church; <span id="fr_872"></span>[873](#fn_872.md) but invited him
to remain with him at the episcopal palace. He, however, replied that he
would neither stay nor pray with him, unless he would expel Dioscorus
and his brethren from the city, and with his own hand subscribe the
condemnation of Origen’s books. Now as John deferred the performance of
these things, saying that nothing ought to be done rashly before
investigation by a general council, John’s adversaries led Epiphanius to
adopt another course. For they contrived it so that as a meeting was in
the church named *The Apostles,* Epiphanius came forth and before all
the people condemned the books of Origen, excommunicated Dioscorus with
his followers, and charged John with countenancing them. These things
were reported to John; whereupon on the following day he sent the
appended message to Epiphanius just as he entered the church:

<span id="ii.ix.xv-p4"></span>‘You do many things contrary to the
canons, Epiphanius. In the first place you have made an ordination in
the churches under my jurisdiction: then without my appointment, you
have on your own authority officiated in them. Moreover, when heretofore
I invited you hither, you refused to come, and now you take that liberty
yourself. Beware therefore, lest a tumult being excited among the
people, you yourself should also incur danger therefrom.’

<span id="ii.ix.xv-p5"></span>Epiphanius becoming alarmed on hearing
these admonitions, left the church; and after accusing John of many
things, he set out on his return to Cyprus. Some say that when he was
about to depart, he said to John, ‘I hope that you will not die a
bishop’: to which John replied, ‘Expect not to arrive at your own
country.’ I cannot be sure that those who reported these things to me
spoke the truth; but nevertheless the event was in the case of both as
prophesied above. For Epiphanius did not reach Cyprus, having died on
board the ship during his voyage; and John a short time afterwards was
driven from his see, as we shall show in proceeding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_872"></span>[148:873](2020207.htm#fr_872.md) <span
id="ii.ix.xv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.xv-p3"></span>See above, chap. 12 and note 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John is expelled from his Church by a Synod held at Chalcedon on
account of his Dispraise of Women.](2020208.md)
