[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020055)  [Next](2020057) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p1"></span><span id="page_38">p. 38</span> <span
id="ii.v.vi-Page_38"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Alexander, Bishop of
Constantinople, when at the Point of Death proposes the Election either
of Paul or of Macedonius as his Successor.*

<span id="ii.v.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.vi-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same time another disturbance
in addition to those we have recorded, was raised at Constantinople on
the following account. Alexander, who had presided over the churches in
that city, and had strenuously opposed Arius, departed this life, <span
id="fr_264"></span>[265](#fn_264) having occupied the bishopric for
twenty-three years and lived ninety-eight years in all, without having
ordained any one to succeed him. But he had enjoined the proper persons
to choose one of the two whom he named; that is to say, if they desired
one who was competent to teach, and of eminent piety, they should elect
Paul, whom he had himself ordained presbyter, a man young indeed in
years, but of advanced intelligence and prudence; but if they wished a
man of venerable aspect, and external show only of sanctity, they might
appoint Macedonius, who had long been a deacon among them and was aged.
Hence there arose a great contest respecting the choice of a bishop
which troubled the church exceedingly; for ever since the people were
divided into two parties, one of which favored the tenets of Arius,
while the other held what the Nicene Synod had defined, those who held
the doctrine of consubstantiality always had the advantage during the
life of Alexander, the Arians disagreeing among themselves and
perpetually conflicting in opinion. But after the death of that prelate,
the issue of the struggle became doubtful, the defenders of the orthodox
faith insisting on the ordination of Paul, and all the Arian party
espousing the cause of Macedonius. Paul therefore was ordained bishop in
the church called *Irene,* <span id="fr_265"></span>[266](#fn_265) which
is situated near the great church of *Sophia;* whose election appeared
to be more in accordance with the suffrage of the deceased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_264"></span>[38:265](2020056.htm#fr_264) <span
id="ii.v.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p3"></span>Socrates is undoubtedly mistaken in setting
the date of Alexander’s death as late as 340 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.vi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> The council convened to examine and
confute the charges against Athanasius met in 339 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.v.vi-p3.2"></span>a.d.</span>, and the record
at that date has it (see chap. 7) that Eusebius had taken possession of
the see of Constantinople. Alexander must therefore have died before
339.

<span id="fn_265"></span>[38:266](2020056.htm#fr_265) <span
id="ii.v.vi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.vi-p4"></span>So called, not because there was a saint or
eminent person of that name, but on the same principle as the church
called Sophia. For the history of the latter church, see Dehio and
Bezold, *Die Kirchliche Baukuns des Abendlandes,* I. p. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Constantius ejects Paul after his Election to the
Bishopric, and sending for Eusebius of Nicomedia, invests him with the
Bishopric of Constantinople.](2020057)
