[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020403)  [Next](2020405.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*Concerning Macedonius,
Theodulus, Gratian, Busiris, Basil, and Eupsychius, who suffered
Martyrdom in those Times*.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.xi-p2.1"></span>About</span> the same period, Macedonius,
Theodulus, and Tatian, who were Phrygians by birth, courageously endured
martyrdom. <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1388](#fn_1387.md) A temple of Misos,
a city of Phrygia, having been reopened by the governor of the province,
after it had been closed many years, these martyrs entered therein by
night, and destroyed the images. As other individuals were arrested, and
were on the point of being punished for the deed, they avowed themselves
the actors in the transaction. They might have escaped all further
punishment by offering sacrifices to idols; but the governor could not
persuade them to accept acquittal on these terms. His persuasions being
ineffectual, he maltreated them in a variety of forms, and finally
extended them on a gridiron, beneath which a fire had been lighted.
While they were being consumed, they said to the governor, “Amachus (for
that was his name), “if you desire cooked flesh, give orders that our
bodies may be turned with the other side to the fire, in order that we
may not seem, to your taste, half cooked.” Thus did these men nobly
endure and lay down their life amid the punishments.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p4"></span>It is said that Busiris also obtained
renown at Ancyra, a city of Galatia, by his brilliant and most manly
confession of religion. He belonged to the heresy denominated
Eucratites; the governor of the province apprehended and designed to
maltreat him for ridiculing the pagans. He led him forth publicly to the
torture chamber and commanded that he should be elevated. Busiris raised
both hands to his head so as to leave his sides exposed, and told the
governor that it would be useless for the executioners to lift him up to
the instrument of torture and afterwards to lower him, as he was ready
without this to yield to the tortures as much as might be desired. The
governor was surprised at this proposition; but his astonishment was
increased by what followed, for Busiris remained firm, holding up both
hands and receiving the blows while his sides were being torn with
hooks, according to the governor’s direction. Immediately afterwards,
Busiris was consigned to prison, but was released not long subsequently,
on the announcement of the death of Julian. He lived till the reign of
Theodosius, renounced his former heresy, and joined the Catholic Church.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p5"></span>It is said that about this period,
Basil, <span id="fr_1388"></span>[1389](#fn_1388.md) presbyter of the
church of Ancyra, and Eupsychius, <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1390](#fn_1389.md) a noble of Cæsarea in Cappadocia,
who had but just taken to himself a wife and was still a bridegroom,
terminated their lives by martyrdom. I believe that Eupsychius was
condemned in consequence of the demolition of the temple of Fortune,
which, as I have already stated, excited the anger of the emperor
against all the inhabitants of Cæsarea. Indeed, all the actors in this
transaction were condemned, some to death, and others to banishment.
Basil had long manifested great zeal in defense of the faith, and had
opposed the Arians during the reign of Constantius; hence the partisans
of Eudoxius had prohibited him from holding public assemblies. On the
accession of Julian, however, he traveled hither and thither, publicly
and openly exhorting the Christians to cleave to their own doctrines,
and to refrain from defiling themselves with pagan sacrifices and
libations. He urged them to account as nothing the honors which the
emperor might bestow upon them, such honors being but of short duration,
and leading to eternal infamy. His zeal had already rendered him an
object of suspicion and of hatred to the pagans, when one day he chanced
to pass by and see them offering sacrifice. He sighed deeply, and
uttered a prayer to the effect that no Christian might be suffered to
fall into similar delusion. He was seized on the spot, and conveyed to
the governor of the province. Many tortures were inflicted on him; and
in the manly endurance of this anguish he received the crown of
martyrdom.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p8"></span>Even if these cruelties were perpetrated
contrary to the will of the emperor, yet they serve to prove that his
reign was signalized by martyrs neither ignoble nor few.

<span id="iii.x.xi-p9"></span>For the sake of clearness, I have related
all these occurrences collectively, although the martyrdoms really
occurred at different periods.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[334:1388](2020404.htm#fr_1387.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p3"></span>For the Phrygians, Soc. iii. 15.

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[334:1389](2020404.htm#fr_1388.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p6"></span>Independent with Soz.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[334:1390](2020404.htm#fr_1389.md) <span
id="iii.x.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.xi-p7"></span>Basil, M. *Ep.* c.; Greg. Naz. *Ep.*
lviii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Lucifer and Eusebius, Bishops of the West. Eusebius
with Athanasius the Great and Other Bishops collect a Council at
Alexandria, and confirm the Nicene Faith by defining the
Consubstantiality of the Spirit with the Father and the Son. Their
Decree concerning Substance and Hypostasis.](2020405.md)
