[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020475)  [Next](2020477.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*A List Worthy of
Study, Given by the Historian, of Customs among Different Nations and
Churches*.

<span id="iii.xii.xix-p2"></span><span id="page_390">p. 390</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xix-Page_390"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xix-p2.1"></span>We</span> have now described the various
usages that prevailed in the celebration of the Passover. <span
id="fr_1556"></span>[1557](#fn_1556.md) It appears to me that Victor,
bishop of Rome, and Polycarp, bishop of Smyrna, came to a very wise
decision on the controversy that had arisen between them. <span
id="fr_1557"></span>[1558](#fn_1557.md) For as the bishops of the West did
not deem it necessary to dishonor the tradition handed down to them by
Peter and by Paul, and as, on the other hand, the Asiatic bishops
persisted in following the rules laid down by John the evangelist, they
unanimously agreed to continue in the observance of the festival
according to their respective customs, without separation from communion
with each other. They faithfully and justly assumed, that those who
accorded in the essentials of worship ought not to separate from one
another on account of customs. For exactly similar traditions on every
point are to be found in all the churches, even though they hold the
same opinions. There are, for instance, many cities in Scythia, and yet
they all have but one bishop; whereas, in other nations a bishop serves
as priest even over a village, as I have myself observed in Arabia, and
in Cyprus, and among the Novatians and Montanists of Phrygia. Again,
there are even now but seven deacons at Rome, answering precisely to the
number ordained by the apostles, of whom Stephen was the first martyr;
whereas, in other churches, the number of deacons is a matter of
indifference. At Rome hallelujah is sung once annually, namely, on the
first day of the festival of the Passover; so that it is a common thing
among the Romans to swear by the fact of hearing or singing this hymn.
In that city the people are not taught by the bishop, nor by any one in
the Church. At Alexandria the bishop of the city alone teaches the
people, and it is said that this custom has prevailed there ever since
the days of Arius, who, though but a presbyter, broached a new doctrine.
Another strange custom also prevails at Alexandria which I have never
witnessed nor heard of elsewhere, and this is, that when the Gospel is
read the bishop does not rise from his seat. The archdeacon alone reads
the Gospel in this city, whereas in some places it is read by the
deacons, and in many churches only by the priests; while on noted days
it is read by the bishops, as, for instance, at Constantinople, on the
first day of the festival of the resurrection. <span
id="fr_1558"></span>[1559](#fn_1558.md) In some churches the interval
called Quadragesima, which occurs before this festival, and is devoted
by the people to fasting, is made to consist of six weeks; and this is
the case in Illyria and the Western regions, in Libya, throughout Egypt,
and in Palestine; whereas it is made to comprise seven weeks at
Constantinople, and in the neighboring provinces as far as Phœnicia. In
some churches the people fast three alternate weeks, during the space of
six or seven weeks, whereas in others they fast continuously during the
three weeks immediately preceding the festival. Some people, as the
Montanists, only fast two weeks. Assemblies are not held in all churches
on the same time or manner. The people of Constantinople, and almost
everywhere, assemble together on the Sabbath, as well as on the first
day of the week, which custom is never observed at Rome or at
Alexandria. There are several cities and villages in Egypt where,
contrary to the usage established elsewhere, the people meet together on
Sabbath evenings, and, although they have dined previously, partake of
the mysteries. The same prayers and psalms are not recited nor the same
lections read on the same occasions in all churches. Thus the book
entitled “The Apocalypse of Peter,” which was considered altogether
spurious by the ancients, is still read in some of the churches of
Palestine, on the day of preparation, when the people observe a fast in
memory of the passion of the Saviour. So the work entitled “The
Apocalypse of the Apostle Paul,” though unrecognized by the ancients, is
still esteemed by most of the monks. Some persons affirm that the book
was found during this reign, by Divine revelation, in a marble box,
buried beneath the soil in the house of Paul at Tarsus in Cilicia. I
have been informed that this report is false by Cilix, a presbyter of
the church in Tarsus, a man of very advanced age, as is indicated by his
gray hairs, who says that no such occurrence is known among them, and
wonders if the heretics did not invent the story. What I have said upon
this subject must now suffice. Many other customs are still to be
observed in cities and villages; and those who have been brought up in
their observance would, from respect to the great men who instituted and
perpetuated these customs, consider it wrong to abolish them. Similar
motives must be attributed to those who observe different practices in
the celebration of the feast which has led us into this long digression.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1556"></span>[390:1557](2020476.htm#fr_1556.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xix-p3"></span>Soc. v. 22. Soz. has much new matter of
his own.

<span id="fn_1557"></span>[390:1558](2020476.htm#fr_1557.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xix-p4"></span>Eus. *H. E.* iv. 14 (from Irenæus). Not
Victor, but Anicetus; the conflict of Victor was with Polycrates, bishop
of Ephesus. Eus. *H. E.* v. 24.

<span id="fn_1558"></span>[390:1559](2020476.htm#fr_1558.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xix-p5"></span>Nicephorus (xii. 34) declares that this
custom lasted down to his own day; and that it was practiced also on the
1st of January, as well as at Easter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Extension of our Doctrines, and Complete Demolition of Idolatrous
Temples. Inundation of the Nile.](2020477.md)
