[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020472)  [Next](2020474) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI</span>.—*In What Manner, and
from What Cause, the Functions of the Presbyter, Appointed to Preside
over the Imposition of Penance, were abolished. Dissertation on the Mode
of Imposing Penance*.

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p2.1"></span>Nectarius</span>, about this period,
abolished the office of the presbyter whose duty it was to preside over
the imposition of penance; and this is the first instance of the
suppression of this office in the Church. <span
id="fr_1546"></span>[1547](#fn_1546) This example was followed by the
bishops of every region. Various accounts have been given of the nature,
the origin, and the cause of the abolition of this office. I shall state
my own views on the subject. Impeccability is a Divine attribute, and
belongs not to human nature; therefore God has decreed that pardon
should be extended to the penitent, even after many transgressions. As
in supplicating for pardon, it is requisite to confess the sin, it seems
probable that the priests, from the beginning, considered it irksome to
make this confession in public, before the whole assembly of the people.
They therefore appointed a presbyter, of the utmost sanctity, and the
most undoubted prudence, to act on these occasions; the penitents went
to him, and confessed their transgressions; and it was his office to
indicate the kind of penance adapted to each sin, and then when
satisfaction had been made, to pronounce absolution. As the custom of
doing penance never gained ground among the Novatians, regulations of
this nature were of course unnecessary among them; but the custom
prevailed among all other heretics, and prevails even to the present
day. It is observed with great rigor by the Western churches, <span
id="fr_1547"></span>[1548](#fn_1547) particularly at Rome, where there
is a place appropriated to the reception of penitents, in which spot
they stand and mourn until the completion of the services, for it is not
lawful for them to take part in the mysteries; then they cast
themselves, with groans and lamentations, prostrate on the ground. The
bishop conducts the ceremony, sheds tears, and prostrates himself in
like manner; and all the people burst into tears, and groan aloud.
Afterwards, the bishop rises first from the ground, and raises up the
others; he offers up prayer on be<span id="page_387">p. 387</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xvi-Page_387"></span>half of the penitents, and then
dismisses them. Each of the penitents subjects himself in private to
voluntary suffering, either by fastings, by abstaining from the bath or
from divers kinds of meats, or by other prescribed means, until a
certain period appointed by the bishop. When the time arrives, he is
made free from the consequences of his sin, and assembles at the church
with the people. The Roman priests have carefully observed this custom
from the beginning to the present time. In the church at Constantinople,
a presbyter was always appointed to preside over the penitents, until a
lady of the nobility made a deposition to the effect, that when she
resorted as a penitent to the presbyter, to fast and offer supplications
to God, and tarried for that purpose, in the church, a rape had been
committed on her person by the deacon. Great displeasure was manifested
by the people when this occurrence was made known to them, on account of
the discredit that would result to the church; and the priests, in
particular, were thereby greatly scandalized. Nectarius, after much
hesitation as to what means ought to be adopted, deposed the deacon;
and, at the advice of certain persons, who urged the necessity of
leaving each individual to examine himself before participating in the
sacred mysteries, he abolished the office of the presbyter presiding
over penance. From that period, therefore, the performance of penance
fell into disuse; and it seems to me, that extreme laxity of principle
was thus substituted for the severity and rigor of antiquity. Under the
ancient system, I think, offences were of rarer occurrence; for people
were deterred from their commission, by the dread of confessing them,
and of exposing them to the scrutiny of a severe judge. I believe it was
from similar considerations, that the Emperor Theodosius, who was always
zealous in promoting the glory of the Church, issued a law, <span
id="fr_1548"></span>[1549](#fn_1548) enacting that women should not be
admitted into the ministry, unless they had had children, and were
upwards of sixty years of age, according to the precept of the Apostle
Paul. <span id="fr_1549"></span>[1550](#fn_1549) By this law it was also
decreed, that women who had shaved their heads should be ejected from
the churches; and that the bishop by whom such women were admitted
should be deposed from the bishopric.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1546"></span>[386:1547](2020473.htm#fr_1546) <span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p3"></span>Soc. v. 19; yet Soz.’s account and
setting is different.

<span id="fn_1547"></span>[386:1548](2020473.htm#fr_1547) <span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p4"></span>The Western Church preserved the
earlier discipline.

<span id="fn_1548"></span>[387:1549](2020473.htm#fr_1548) <span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p5"></span>*Cod. Theod.* xvi. 2. 27.

<span id="fn_1549"></span>[387:1550](2020473.htm#fr_1549) <span
id="iii.xii.xvi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p6"></span>[1 Tim. v.
9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#009)<span id="iii.xii.xvi-p6.1"></span>.
Cf. change in Justinian, *Novell.* 123. 13.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Banishment of Eunomius by Theodosius the Great. Theophronius, his
Successor; of Eutychus, and of Dorotheus, and their Heresies; of those
called Psathyrians; Division of the Arians into Different Parties; those
in Constantinople were more Limited.](2020474)
