[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020477)  [Next](2020479.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Discovery of the
Honored Head of the Forerunner of our Lord, and the Events about it*.

<span id="iii.xii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxi-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time the head of John the
Baptist, which Herodias had asked of Herod the tetrarch, was removed to
Constantinople. <span id="fr_1561"></span>[1562](#fn_1561.md) It is said
that it was discovered by some monks of the Macedonian heresy, who
originally dwelt at Constantinople, and afterwards fixed their abode in
Cilicia. Mardonius, the first eunuch of the palace, made known this
discovery at court, during the preceding reign; and Valens commanded
that the relic should be removed to Constantinople. The officers
appointed to carry it thither, placed it in a public chariot, and
proceeded with it as far as Pantichium, a district in the territory of
Chalcedon. Here the mules of the chariot suddenly stopped; and neither
the application of the lash, nor the threats of the hostlers, could
induce them to advance further. So extraordinary an event was considered
by all, and even by the emperor himself, to be of God; and the holy head
was therefore deposited at Cosilaos, a village in the neighborhood,
which belonged to Mardonius. Soon after, the Emperor Theodosius,
impelled by an impulse from God, or from the prophet, repaired to the
village. He determined upon removing the remains of the Baptist, and it
is said met with no opposition, except from a holy virgin, Matrona, who
had been the servant and guardian of the relic. He laid aside all
authority and force, and after many entreaties, extorted a reluctant
consent from her to remove the head; for she bore in mind what had
occurred at the period when Valens commanded its removal. The emperor
placed it, with the box in which it was encased, in his purple robe, and
conveyed it to a place called Hebdomos, in the suburbs of
Constantinople, where he erected a spacious and magnificent temple. The
woman who had been appointed to the charge of the relic could not be
persuaded by the emperor to renounce her religious sentiments, although
he had recourse to entreaty and promises; for she was, it appears, of
the Macedonian heresy. A presbyter of the same tendency, named Vincent,
who also took charge of the coffin of the prophet, and performed the
sacerdotal functions over it, followed the religious opinions of the
emperor, and entered into communion with the Catholic Church. He had
taken an oath, as the Macedonians affirm, never to swerve from their
doctrines; but he afterwards openly declared that, if the Baptist would
follow the emperor, he also would enter into communion with him and be
separated. He was a Persian, and had left his country in company with a
relative named Addas, during the reign of Constantius, in order to avoid
the persecution which the Christians were then suffering in Persia. On
his arrival in the Roman territories, he was placed in the ranks of the
clergy, and advanced to the office of presbyter. Addas married and
rendered great service to the Church. He left a son named Auxentius, who
was noted for his very faithful piety, his zeal for his friends, the
moderation of his life, his love of letters, and the greatness of his
attainments <span id="page_392">p. 392</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xxi-Page_392"></span>in pagan and ecclesiastical literature.
He was modest and retiring in deportment, although admitted to
familiarity with the emperor and the courtiers, and possessed of a very
illustrious appointment. His memory is still revered by the monks and
zealous men, who were all acquainted with him. The woman who had been
entrusted with the relic remained during the rest of her life at
Cosilaos. She was greatly distinguished by her piety and wisdom, and
instructed many holy virgins; and I have been assured that many still
survive who reflect the honorable character which was the result of
training under Matrona.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1561"></span>[391:1562](2020478.htm#fr_1561.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxi-p3"></span>An independent chapter. Cf. Philost.
vii. 4; Theodoret, *H. E.* iii. 7; Marcell. *Chron.* <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.xxi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 453; Ruf. *H.
E.* ii. 28.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of Valentinian the Younger, Emperor in Rome, through
Strangling. The Tyrant Eugenius. Prophecy of John, the Monk of
Thebaïs.](2020479.md)
