[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020357)  [Next](2020359) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xxi"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Letter of Constantius
to the Egyptians in behalf of Athanasius. Synod of Jerusalem*.

<span id="iii.viii.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xxi-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor, on sending back <span
id="fr_1276"></span>[1277](#fn_1276) Athanasius to Egypt, wrote in his
favor to the bishops and presbyters of that country, and to the people
of the church of Alexandria; he testified to the integrity of his
conduct and the virtue of his manners, and exhorted them to be of one
mind, and to unite in prayer and service to God under his guidance. He
added that, if any evil-disposed persons should excite disturbances,
they should receive the punishment awarded by the laws for such
offenses. He also commanded that the former decrees he had enacted
against Athanasius, and those who were in communion with him, should be
effaced from the public registers, and that his clergy should be
admitted to the same exemptions they had previously enjoyed; and edicts
to this effect were dispatched to the governors of Egypt and Libya.

<span id="iii.viii.xxi-p4"></span>Immediately on his arrival in Egypt,
Athanasius displaced those whom he knew to be attached to Arianism, and
placed the government of the Church and the confession of the Nicæan
council in the hands of those whom he approved, and he exhorted them to
hold to this with earnestness. It was said at that time, that, when he
was traveling through other countries, he effected the same change, if
he happened to visit churches which were under the Arians. He was
certainly accused of having dared to perform the ceremony of ordination
in cities where he had no right to do so. But because he had effected
his return, although his enemies were unwilling, and it did not seem
that he could be easily cast under suspicion, in that he was honored
with the friendship of the Emperor Constans, he was regarded with
greater consideration than before. Many bishops, who had previously been
at enmity with him, received him into communion, particularly those of
Palestine. When he at that time visited these latter, they received him
kindly. They held a Synod at Jerusalem, and Maximus and the others wrote
the following letter in his favor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1276"></span>[299:1277](2020358.htm#fr_1276) <span
id="iii.viii.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xxi-p3"></span>Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 54–56;
*Hist. Arian.* 23; these are given in Soc. ii. 23; and for the Synod of
Jerusalem, ii. 24; Ruf. i. 19.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Epistle written by the Synod of Jerusalem in Favor of
Athanasius.](2020359)
