[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020461)  [Next](2020463) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*Gregory, the Theologian,
receives from Theodosius the Government of the Churches. Expulsion of
Demophilus, and of all who deny that the Son is “Consubstantial” with
the Father*.

<span id="iii.xii.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.v-p2.1"></span>Soon</span> after the enactment of this law,
Theodosius went to Constantinople. <span
id="fr_1523"></span>[1524](#fn_1523) The Arians, under the guidance of
Demophilus, still retained possession of the churches. Gregory of
Nazianzen presided over those who maintain the “consubstantiality” of
the Holy Trinity, and <span id="page_379">p. 379</span> <span
id="iii.xii.v-Page_379"></span>assembled them together in a little
dwelling, which had been altered into the form of a house of prayer, by
those who held the same opinions and had a like form of worship. It
subsequently became one of the most conspicuous in the city, and is so
now, not only for the beauty and number of its structures, but also for
the advantages accruing to it from the visible manifestations of God.
For the power of God was there manifested, and was helpful both in
waking visions and in dreams, often for the relief of many diseases and
for those afflicted by some sudden transmutation in their affairs. The
power was accredited to Mary, the Mother of God, the holy virgin, for
she does manifest herself in this way. The name of Anastasia was given
to this church, because, as I believe, the Nicene doctrines which were
fallen into disuse in Constantinople, and, so to speak, buried by reason
of the power of the heterodox, arose from the dead and were again
quickened through the discourses of Gregory; or, as I have heard, some
affirm with assurance that one day, when the people were met together
for worship in this edifice, a pregnant woman fell from the highest
gallery, and was found dead on the spot; but that, at the prayer of the
whole congregation, she was restored to life, and she and the infant
were saved. On account of the occurrence of this divine marvel, the
place, as some assert, obtained its name.

<span id="iii.xii.v-p4"></span>The emperor sent to command Demophilus to
conform to the doctrines of Nicæa, and to lead the people to embrace the
same sentiments, or else to vacate the churches. Demophilus assembled
the people, acquainted them with the imperial edict, and informed them
that it was his intention to hold a church the next day without the
walls of the city, in accordance, he said, with the Divine law, which
commands us when we are persecuted in one city to “flee unto
another.” <span id="fr_1524"></span>[1525](#fn_1524) From that day he
always held church without the city with Lucius, who was formerly the
bishop of the Arians at Alexandria; and who, after having been expelled,
as above related, from that city, fled to Constantinople and fixed his
residence there. When Demophilus and his followers had quitted the
church, the emperor entered therein and engaged in prayer; and from that
period those who maintained the consubstantiality of the Holy Trinity
held possession of the houses of prayer. These events occurred in the
fifth year of the consulate of Gratian, and in the first of that of
Theodosius, and after the churches had been during forty years in the
hands of the Arians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1523"></span>[378:1524](2020462.htm#fr_1523) <span
id="iii.xii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.v-p3"></span>Soc. v. 6; Philost. ix. 19; Theodoret,
*H. E.* v. 8; Marcellinus Comes, *Chronicon,* s. <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xii.v-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 380.

<span id="fn_1524"></span>[379:1525](2020462.htm#fr_1524) <span
id="iii.xii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.v-p5"></span>[Matt. x.
23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023)<span id="iii.xii.v-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Arians; and Further, the Success of Eunomius.
Boldness of St. Amphilochius toward the Emperor.](2020463)
