[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020033)  [Next](2020035) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXV</span>.—*Of the Presbyter who
exerted himself for the Recall of Arius.* <span
id="fr_236"></span>[237](#fn_236)

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p3.1"></span>The</span> Emperor Constantine had a sister
named Constantia, the widow of Licinius, who had for some time shared
the imperial dignity with Constantine, but had assumed tyrannical powers
and had been put to death in consequence. This princess maintained in
her household establishment a certain confidential presbyter, tinctured
with the dogmas of Arianism; Eusebius and others having prompted him, he
took occasion in his familiar conversations with Constantia, to
insinuate that the Synod had done Arius injustice, and that the common
report concerning him was not true. Constantia gave full credence to the
presbyter’s assertions, but durst not report them to the emperor. Now it
happened that she became dangerously ill, and her brother visited her
daily. As the disease became aggravated and she expected to die, she
commended this presbyter to the emperor, testifying to his diligence and
piety, as well as his devoted loyalty to his sovereign. She died soon
after, whereupon the presbyter became one of the most confidential
persons about the emperor; and having gradually increased in freedom of
speech, he repeated to the emperor what he had before stated to his
sister, affirming that Arius had no other views than the sentiments
avowed by the Synod; and that if he were admitted to the imperial
presence, he would give his full assent to what the Synod had decreed:
he added, moreover, that he had been unreasonably slandered. The
presbyter’s words appeared strange to the emperor, and he said, ‘If
Arius subscribes with the Synod and holds its views, I will both give
him an audience, and send him back to Alexandria with honor.’ Having
thus said, he immediately wrote to him in these words:

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p4"></span>‘*Victor Constantine Maximus Augustus, to
Arius.*’

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p5"></span>It was intimated to your reverence some
time since, that you might come to my court, in order to obtain an
interview with us. We are not a little surprised that you did not do
this immediately. Wherefore having at once mounted a public vehicle,
hasten to arrive at our court; that when you have experienced our
clemency and regard for you, you may return to your own country. May God
protect you, beloved. Dated the twenty-fifth of November.

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p6"></span>This was the letter of the emperor to
Arius. And I cannot but admire the ardent zeal which the prince
manifested for religion: for it appears from this document that he had
often before exhorted Arius to change his views, inasmuch as he censures
his delaying to return to the truth, although he had himself written
frequently to him. Now on the receipt of this letter, Arius came to
Constantinople accompanied by Euzoïus, whom Alexander had divested of
his deaconship when he excommunicated Arius and his partisans. The
emperor accordingly admitted them to his presence, and asked them
whether they would agree to the creed. And when they readily gave their
assent, he ordered them to deliver to him a written statement of their
faith.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_236"></span>[28:237](2020034.htm#fr_236) <span
id="ii.iv.xxv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxv-p2"></span>Cf. Rufinus, *H. E.* I. 11. The fact that
the name of this presbyter is not mentioned, and Athanasius’ apparent
ignorance of the story, together with the untrustworthiness of Rufinus,
throw suspicion on the authenticity of this account. Cf. also ch. 39,
note 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Arius, on being recalled, presents a Recantation to the Emperor,
and pretends to accept the Nicene Creed.](2020035)
