[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020353)  [Next](2020355.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Transactions of
that Period, and Progress of Christian Doctrine through the Joint
Efforts of Emperors and Arch-Priests*.

<span id="iii.viii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Those</span> who presided over the
churches at this period were noted for personal conduct, and, as might
be expected, the people whom they governed were earnestly attached to
the worship of Christ. <span id="fr_1267"></span>[1268](#fn_1267.md)
Religion daily progressed, by the zeal, virtue, and wonderful works of
the priests, and of the ecclesiastical philosophers, who attracted the
attention of the pagans, and led them to renounce their superstitions.
The emperors who then occupied the throne were as zealous as was their
father in protecting the churches, and they granted honors and tax
exemptions to the clergy, their children, and their slaves. They
confirmed the laws enacted by their father, and enforced new ones
prohibiting the offering of sacrifice, the worship of images, or any
other pagan observance. They commanded that all temples, whether in
cities or in the country, should be closed. Some of these temples were
presented to the churches, when either the ground they stood on or the
materials for building were required. The greatest possible care was
bestowed upon the houses of prayer, those which had been defaced by time
were repaired, and others were erected from the foundations in a style
of extraordinary magnificence. The church of Emesa is one most worthy to
see and famous for its beauty. The Jews were strictly forbidden to
purchase a slave belonging to any other heresy than their own. If they
transgressed this law, the slave was confiscated <span
id="fr_1268"></span>[1269](#fn_1268.md) to the public; but if they
administered to him the Jewish rite of circumcision, the penalties were
death and total confiscation of property. For, as the emperors were
desirous of promoting by every means the spread of Christianity, they
deemed it necessary to prevent the Jews from proselyting those whose
ancestors were of another religion, and those who were holding the hope
of professing Christianity were carefully reserved for the Church; for
it was from the pagan multitudes that the Christian religion increased.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1267"></span>[297:1268](2020354.htm#fr_1267.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvii-p3"></span>This chapter is an independent view,
and also groups the laws under Constantius. Cf. *Cod. Theod*.

<span id="fn_1268"></span>[297:1269](2020354.htm#fr_1268.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xvii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.viii.xvii-p4.1"></span>δημόσιον οἰκέτην εἶναὶ</span>. The early
interpreters understood these words as referring to the Jewish offender,
and not to the slave. But the law itself is extant in *Cod. Theod.* xvi.
91, 2, and is entitled *Ne Christianum Mancipium Judæus habeat.* The
second law begins: Si aliquis Judæorum, mancipium sectæ alterius seu
nationis crediderit comparandum, *mancipium* fisco protenus vindicetur.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Doctrines held by the Sons of Constantine.
Distinction between the Terms “Homoousios” and “Homoiousios.” Whence it
came that Constantius quickly abandoned the Correct Faith.](2020355.md)
