[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020478)  [Next](2020480) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xxii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Death of Valentinian
the Younger, Emperor in Rome, through Strangling. The Tyrant Eugenius.
Prophecy of John, the Monk of Thebaïs*.

<span id="iii.xii.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xxii-p2.1"></span>While</span> Theodosius was thus occupied
in the wise and peaceful government of his subjects in the East, and in
the service of God, intelligence was brought that Valentinian had been
strangled. <span id="fr_1562"></span>[1563](#fn_1562) Some say that he
was put to death by the eunuchs of the bedchamber, at the solicitation
of Arbogastes, a military chief, and of certain courtiers, who were
displeased because the young prince had begun to walk in the footsteps
of his father, concerning the government, and contrary to the opinions
approved by them. Others assert, however, that Valentinian committed the
fatal deed with his own hands, because he found himself impeded in
attempting deeds which are not lawful in one of his years; and on this
account he did not deem it worth while to live; for although an emperor,
he was not allowed to do what he wished. It is said that the boy was
noble in person, and excellent in royal manners; and that, had he lived
to the age of manhood, he would have shown himself worthy of holding the
reins of empire, and would have surpassed his father in magnanimity and
justice. But though endowed with these promising qualities, he died in
the manner above related.

<span id="iii.xii.xxii-p4"></span>A certain man named Eugenius, who was
by no means sincere in his professions of Christianity, aspired to
sovereignty, and assumed the symbols of imperial power. He was hoping to
succeed in the attempt safely; for he was led by the predictions of
individuals who professed to foresee the future, by the examination of
the entrails and livers of animals and the course of the stars. Men of
the highest rank among the Romans were addicted to these superstitions.
Flavian, then a prætorian prefect, a learned man, and one who appeared
to have an aptitude for politics, was noted for being conversant with
every means of foretelling the future. He persuaded Eugenius to take up
arms by assuring him that he was destined for the throne, that his
warlike undertakings would be crowned with victory, and that the
Christian religion would be abolished. Deceived by these flattering
representations, Eugenius raised an army and took possession of the
gates into Italy, as the Romans call the Julian Alps, an elevated and
precipitous range of mountains; these he seized beforehand and
fortified, for they had but one path in the narrows, and were shut in on
each side by precipices and the loftiest mountains. Theodosius was
perplexed as to whether he ought to await the issue of the war, or
whether it would be better in the first place to attack Eugenius; and in
this dilemma, he determined to consult John, a monk of Thebaïs, who, as
I have before stated, was celebrated for his knowledge of the future. He
therefore sent Eutropius, a eunuch of the palace, and of tried fidelity,
to Egypt, with orders to bring John, if possible, to court; but, in case
of his refusal, to learn what ought to be done. When he came to John,
the monk could not be persuaded to go to the emperor, but he sent word
by Eutropius that the war would terminate in favor of Theodosius, and
that the tyrant would be slain; but that, after the victory, Theodosius
himself would die in Italy. The truth of both of these predictions was
confirmed by events.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1562"></span>[392:1563](2020479.htm#fr_1562) <span
id="iii.xii.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xxii-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* ii. 31–33, the source;
Philost. xi. 1, 2; Theodoret, *H. E.* v. 24; Soc. v. 25; Zos. iv. 53,
54; Oros. vii. 35.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exaction of Tribute in Antioch, and Demolition of the Statues of
the Emperor. Embassy headed by Flavian the Chief Priest.](2020480)
