[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020529)  [Next](2020531) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*Constantine. The Army
of Honorius and Edovicus his General. Defeat of Edovicus by Ulphilas,
the General of Constantine. Death of Edovicus*.

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p2.1"></span>Although</span> the city of Arles was
closely besieged by the army of Honorius, Constantine still resisted the
siege, because Edovicus was announced as at hand with many allies. <span
id="fr_1637"></span>[1638](#fn_1637) This frightened the generals of
Honorius beyond measure. Then they determined to return to Italy, and to
carry on the war there. When they had united on this plan, Edovicus was
announced as in the neighborhood, so they crossed the river Rhone.
Constantius, who commanded the infantry, quietly awaited the approach of
the enemy, while Ulphilas, the fellow-general of Constantius, remained
not far off in ambush with his cavalry. The enemy passed by the army of
Ulphilas, and were about to engage with the troops of Constantius, when
a signal was given, and Ulphilas suddenly appeared and assaulted the
enemy from the rear. Their flight was immediate. Some escaped, some were
slain, while others threw down their arms and asked for pardon, and were
spared. Edovicus mounted his horse and fled to the lands of one
Ecdicius, a landed proprietor, to whom he had formerly rendered some
important service, and whom he therefore imagined to be his friend.
Ecdicius, however, struck off his head, and presented it to the generals
of Honorius, in hope of receiving some great reward and honor.
Constantius, on receiving the head, proclaimed that the public thanks
were due to Ecdicius for the deed of Ulphilas; but when Ecdicius was
eager to accompany him he commanded him to depart, for he did not
consider the companionship of a malicious host to be good for himself or
the army. And the man who had dared to commit the most unholy murder of
a friend and a guest who was in an unfortunate situation,—this man went
away, as the proverb says, gaping with emptiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1637"></span>[426:1638](2020530.htm#fr_1637) <span
id="iii.xiv.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xiv-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Cf. Olymp.
*Fragm.* 16.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constantine throws aside the Emblems of Imperial Power, and is
ordained as Presbyter; his Subsequent Death. Death of the other Tyrants
who had conspired against Honorius.](2020531)
