[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020288)  [Next](2020290.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*About Antony the
Great and St. Paul the Simple*.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>Whether</span> the Egyptians or others are
to be regarded as the founders of this philosophy, it is <span
id="page_249">p. 249</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-Page_249"></span>universally admitted that Antony, <span
id="fr_1101"></span>[1102](#fn_1101.md) the great monk, developed this
course of life, by morals and befitting exercises, to the summit of
exactness and perfection. His fame was so widely spread throughout the
deserts of Egypt, that the emperor Constantine, for the reputation of
the man’s virtue, sought his friendship, honored him with
correspondence, and urged him to write about what he might need. He was
an Egyptian by race, and belonged to an illustrious family of Coma,
which was situated near the Heraclea which is on the Egyptian
borders. <span id="fr_1102"></span>[1103](#fn_1102.md) He was but a youth
when he lost his parents; he bestowed his paternal inheritance upon his
fellow-villagers, sold the rest of his possessions and distributed the
proceeds among the needy; for he was aware that philosophy does not
merely consist in the relinquishment of property, but in the proper
distribution of it. He obtained the acquaintance of the devoted men of
his time, and emulated the virtues of all. Believing that the practice
of goodness would become delightful by habit, though arduous at the
outset, he reflected on more intense methods of asceticism, and day by
day he augmented it by self-control just as if he were always
recommencing his undertaking. He subdued the voluptuousness of the body
by labor, and restrained the passions of the soul by the aid of the
Divine wisdom. His food was bread and salt, his drink water, and he
never broke his fast till after sunset. He often remained two or more
days without eating. He watched, so to speak, throughout the night, and
continued in prayer till daybreak. If at any time he indulged in sleep,
it was but for a little while on a short mat; but generally the bare
earth was his couch. He rejected the practice of anointing with oil, and
the use of baths and of similar luxuries likely to relax the tension of
the body by moisture; and it is said that he never at any time saw
himself naked. He neither possessed nor admired learning, but he valued
a good understanding, as being prior to letters and as being the very
discoverer of it. He was exceedingly meek and philanthropic, prudent and
manly; cheerful in conversation and friendly in disputations, even when
others used the controverted topics as occasion for strife. By his own
habit and a kind of intelligence he quieted contentiousness when on the
increase, and restored them to moderation; he also tempered the ardor of
those who conversed with him, and regulated their manners. Although on
account of his extraordinary virtues, he had become filled with the
Divine foreknowledge, he did not regard foreknowledge of the future as a
virtue, nor did he counsel others to seek this gift rashly, for he
considered that no one would be punished or rewarded according to his
ignorance or knowledge of futurity; for true blessedness consists in the
service of God, and in keeping his laws. “But,” said he, “if any man
would know the future, let him continually be purified in soul, for then
he will have power to walk in the light, and to understand things that
are to happen, for God will reveal the future to him.” He never suffered
himself to be idle, but exhorted all those who seemed disposed to lead a
good life, to diligence in labor, to self-examination and confession of
sin before Him who created the day and the night; and when they erred,
he urged them to record the transgression in writing, that so they might
be ashamed of their sins, and be fearful lest any one should find the
many things recorded; for he would be fearful, lest if the document were
traced to him he should become disclosed to other people as a depraved
character. He above all others came forward spiritedly and most
zealously for the defense of the injured, and in their cause often
resorted to the cities; for many came out to him, and compelled him to
intercede for them with the rulers and men in power. All the people felt
honored in seeing him, listened with avidity to his discourses, and
yielded assent to his arguments; but he preferred to remain unknown and
concealed in the deserts. When compelled to visit a city, he never
failed to return to the deserts as soon as he had accomplished the work
he had undertaken; for, he said, that as fishes are nourished in the
water, so the desert is the world prepared for monks; and as fishes die
when thrown upon dry land, so monastics lose their gravity when they go
into cities. He carried himself obediently and graciously towards all
who saw him, and he was careful not to have, nor seem to have, a
supercilious nature. I have given this concise account of the manners of
Antony, in order that an idea of his philosophy may be formed, by
analogy, from the description of his conduct in the desert.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p5"></span>He had many renowned disciples, of whom
some flourished in Egypt and Libya, others in Palestine, Syria, and
Arabia; not less than their master, did each disciple pass his life with
those among whom he dwelt, and regulate his conduct, and instruct many,
and wed them unto kindred virtues and philosophy. But it would be
difficult for any one to find the companions of Antony or their
successors by going carefully through cities and villages to discover
them, for they sought concealment more earnestly than many ambitious
men, by means of pomp and show, now seek popularity and renown.

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p6"></span>We must relate, in chronological order,
the <span id="page_250">p. 250</span> <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-Page_250"></span>history of the most celebrated
disciples of Antony, and particularly that of Paul, surnamed the
Simple. <span id="fr_1103"></span>[1104](#fn_1103.md) It is said that he
dwelt in the country, and was married to a beautiful woman, and that
having surprised her in the act of adultery, he laughed placidly and
affirmed with an oath, that he would live with her no longer; that he
left her with the adulterer, and went immediately to join Antony in the
desert. It is further related that he was exceedingly meek and patient:
and that, being aged and unaccustomed to monastic severity, Antony put
his strength to the proof by various trials, for he was newly come, and
detected nothing ignoble; and that, having given evidence of perfect
philosophy, he was sent to live alone, as no longer requiring a teacher.
And God himself confirmed the testimony of Antony; and demonstrated the
man to be most illustrious through his deeds, and as greater than even
his teacher in vexing and expelling demons.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1101"></span>[249:1102](2020289.htm#fr_1101.md) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p3"></span>Cf. Soc. i. 21, and his reference to
the life attributed to Athanasius.

<span id="fn_1102"></span>[249:1103](2020289.htm#fr_1102.md) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p4"></span>There were two cities of this name,
Heraclea the greater and Heraclea the less.

<span id="fn_1103"></span>[250:1104](2020289.htm#fr_1103.md) <span
id="iii.vi.xiii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xiii-p7"></span>Ruf. *H. M.* 31; Pall. *H. L.* 27.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Account of St. Ammon and Eutychius of Olympus.](2020290.md)
