[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020269)  [Next](2020271.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p1.1"></span>Part II.—Sozomen as Author.</span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p2.1"></span>When</span> seized with a desire to write
history, Sozomen says: “I at first felt strongly inclined to trace the
course of events from the very commencement, but on reflecting that
similar records of the past, up to their own time, had been compiled by
those wisest of men, Clemens and Hegesippus, successors of the Apostles,
by Africanus, the historian, and by Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, a man
intimately acquainted with Sacred Scriptures and the writings of the
Greek <span id="page_200">p. 200</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_200"></span>poets and historians, I merely drew up an
epitome in two books, of all that is recorded to have happened to the
churches, from the ascension of Christ to the deposition of Licinius.”
This work is unfortunately lost. It was not a simple chronicle, but an
abbreviated account of these events; the abridgment was probably from
the authors mentioned above. The habit of succinct narration is quite in
his later vein. He doubtless commingled secular with the sacred detail.
It may be suggestingly asked, whether his words in ix. 1 do not give a
hint of another work: “But I willingly for awhile pass over the many
separate manifestations of divine favor, that were granted to the sister
of the emperor, as proofs that she was loved of God, lest anybody should
blame me, for having set out to do other things, and yet had turned to
the use of encomiums.” This sudden arrest could not be owing to an
intended resumption of such matters at a later portion of the history;
for the method was already regarded as irrelevant, and the very reason
for citing no more in that vein; is it not likely that he at least
purposed an encomium of Pulcheria?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p3"></span>The attempt of Hieronymus, Wolf, Lambec,
and Fenzel to ascribe Hermias’ <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p3.1"></span>Διασυρμὸς τῶν ἔξω φιλοσόφων</span> (*Irrisio
gentilium philosophorum*) to Sozomen, because of identity of name, is
now held by none. <span id="fr_1047"></span>[1048](#fn_1047.md) The work by
which we know him, is the Ecclesiastical History in nine Books. When did
he write it? In trying to determine the time of its production, let us
look at the data suggested in his work.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p5"></span>(1) In the dedication, the delineation of
the emperor’s culture and character discloses a man of fixity and
repose; these qualities could not be ascribed to the time of his
imperial majority, in his fifteenth year, nor to the time of his
marriage (421); they are rather the features of settled experience;
hence we would expect in general a period nearer the end of his reign,
than one in the beginning or middle; certainly somewhere beyond his
thirtieth year, and therefore beyond <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 438.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p6"></span>(2) Sozomen says that poets and authors,
even those of prefectural dignity, as well as other subjects, celebrated
the emperor. The usual literary incense was burned. Olympiodorus
dedicated his history to him. Socrates was magniloquent; and more
particularly did Cyrus, the friend of Eudocia, who attained the highest
offices of the state from 439–441, write epigrams in praise of his
monarch. <span id="fr_1048"></span>[1049](#fn_1048.md) This would make a
date after 441. <span id="fr_1049"></span>[1050](#fn_1049.md)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p9"></span>(3) In illustration of the practiced
self-control of his sovereign, he narrates an incident of the royal
journey in the summer heat, through Bithynia, to the fallen city of
Heraclea, in Pontus, <span id="fr_1050"></span>[1051](#fn_1050.md) with the
view of restoring it. This journey took place in June of <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span> 443. <span
id="fr_1051"></span>[1052](#fn_1051.md) This incident is introduced with
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p11.1"></span>πρώην</span>,
which would place the writing quite definitely as not very soon after
June 443.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p12"></span>(4) The reign of Theodosius is described
as above all others bloodless and pure from slaughter. This could only
be moderately just, before the judicial murders connected with the
jealous fits of Theodosius, from 442 on, and the united movement of
outlying nations upon the East and West, as projected by the political
sagacity of Attila.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p13"></span>(5) The professed terminus of his
history is the seventeenth consulate of Theodosius: this was the year
439; hence the whole work was written after that time.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p14"></span>(6) The prayer at the conclusion of the
proëmium may have in it a point of light; he hopes that through the
favor of Christ, the imperium may be transmitted to Theodosius’ sons and
grandsons. The only child born to Eudocia was a daughter, Eudoxia, who
was married to Valentinian III. It was because of the lack of
succession, that Pulcheria married General Marcianus. Eudocia withdrew
from the court somewhere between 441–443, but that would not have had to
impede the succession, had Theodosius chosen to be divorced; and this
prayer rather intimates the desirability of another marriage. This,
therefore, must have been written <span id="page_201">p. 201</span>
<span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_201"></span>before the hope of sons was
removed; certainly, therefore, before the closing years of the emperor’s
reign.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p15"></span>(7) In Book ix, Pulcheria’s inclination
to virginity is spoken of as expressed in the most solemn way, and with
the consecrated gift of a table to signalize it. There is no hint in the
work of the marriage with Marcian, suggested by Theodosius on his
death-bed, and carried out after his demise. This would indicate that
the work was completed before 450.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p16"></span>(8) In ix. 1, he affirms: “That new
heresies have not prevailed in our times, we shall find to be due
especially to her, as we shall subsequently see.” The heresies are those
connected with Nestorianism, 428–444, and possibly the return of the
Johannists to full communion by the triumphal restoration of
Chrysostom’s remains in 438; these were to fall within the limits of his
work. The Eutychean heresy in its first stage was hostile to Pulcheria’s
views, while its overthrow was not effected until a year after the death
of Theodosius. The close of the Nestorian controversy through the
compromise was in 444, and that date would suit well with the fact of
mastering the heresy at the very time he was writing this account of
Pulcheria.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p17"></span>(9) In ix. 2, he recounts the transfer
of the forty martyrs, after a public festival had been appropriately
celebrated with fitting honor and pomp, with psalms, “at which I myself
was present; and others who were present can also bear testimony that
these things were done in the way described, for almost all of them
still survive. And the event occurred much later, when Proclus governed
the church of Constantinople.” Proclus was elected 434, and continued in
office until his death in 447. This transfer must have taken place
before 439, the proposed terminus of the history, and very likely a
little while after the accession of this long-tried candidate. The time
of the writing was at some considerable remove from the event itself,
because of his appeal to the survivors as witnesses to the truth of his
portrayal, and yet not so far, but that the most of the participants and
spectators could still be appealed to. This would correspond very well
with the date connected with 443, suggested by the incident in Bithynia,
if we allow some interval between the writing of the dedication and Book
ix.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p18"></span>(10) In ix. 6, the overthrow of Uldis,
406, is narrated. The settlement of the conquered Sciri as slaves and
colonists is enlarged upon. Sozomen himself saw these imperial farmers
at their tilling in Bithynia. This may connect itself, possibly, as to
the time of the year, and place, with the emperor’s progress to Heraclea
Pontica. There is evidently an interval between the capture of the
Sciri, and their settled work as colonists, when Sozomen visited that
region, and between that visit and the writing of the fact. If it
corresponded with the imperial progress, it would of course be 443.
Taking all these points together, it would seem that the work was begun
about the latter part of 443; and that the dedication was written first,
because that states the plan of the whole work, including the ninth
book, whose record does not meet the intention, there expressed;
moreover, some of the events in Book ix. indicate a considerable
interval between the fact and the account of it. When he finished what
he wrote, it is not so easy to tell; it would certainly take him a few
years, and the end was reached before any considerable outbreak of the
Eutychean heresy; therefore probably in 447, or 448, for the reason that
Pulcheria did not conquer that heresy until after her marriage with
Marcian; this date is supported by the fact that the breaking of her vow
was unknown to the writer of ix. 1, 3; also because the Emperor
Theodosius was still alive. The work was the fruit and employment of old
age; the style is certainly that of an elderly man, and not that of
youth or early maturity.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p19"></span>What were the main objects he had in
view in his history?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p20"></span>1. He desired to present the truth with
regard to the facts and their results. In i. 1, he affirms: “I will
readily transcribe fully from any work that may tend to the elucidation
of truth.” “Still, as it is requisite, in order to maintain historical
accuracy, to pay the strictest attention to the means of eliciting
truth, I felt myself bound to examine all writings of this class,
according to my ability.” This is his professed purpose; however
subjective or churchly his view of truth may be, we must give him the
credit for the intention. In i. 1, he appeals <span id="page_202">p.
202</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_202"></span>to his readers in this
wise: “Let not an impertinent or malignant spirit be imputed to me, for
having dwelt upon the disputes of ecclesiastics among themselves,
concerning the primacy and pre-eminence of their own heresy. In the
first place, as I have already said, a historian ought to regard
everything as secondary in importance to truth.” And we shall see
evidences of his fairness.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p21"></span>2. His history is designed to be a
demonstration of Christianity as from God. The vastness of the change
wrought by God in the introduction and success of Christianity and the
insignificant and mythical themes upon which literature had been wont to
exercise itself, prompted him, with his confessed inefficiency, to
undertake this line of evidence, in the conviction that God would help
his believing incapacity. Hence his work is a record of immediate divine
interventions, and extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit; it abounds in
visions, miracles, and prophecy. The celestial agents visibly direct
affairs; the flow of vaticination does not cease; the power to reverse
the expected order of events is not suspended. Thus, as to epiphanies of
divine, angelic, or sainted beings: In i. 3, is recounted the appearance
of the cross unto Constantine; and in the night during sleep, the
manifestation of Christ with a cross, and the instructions given to the
emperor. In ii. 1, we have a series of divine interpositions to discover
the true cross, and Sozomen remarks in refutation of one explanation, “I
do not think that human information is requisite, when God thinks it
best to make manifest the same.” In ii. 3, the old name, Hestiæ, is
changed to Michaelium, because of the reported appearance of the
archangel there. The monks are favored with such direct counselors;
Pachomius obeys an angel, who directs him to assemble young men for
instruction; “he was frequently admitted to intercourse with the holy
angels.” Apollonius yielded to direct divine advice, and withdrew from
the desert to a populous region. The cross reappeared in the days of
Constantius (iv. 5); Julian’s life is filled with portents (v. 1, 20,
22; vi. 2). A curious bit of speculation occurs in vi. 2; in
interpreting Julian’s alleged use of his blood, he says: “I know not
whether the approach of death, as is wont to be the case, when the soul
is in the act of being separated from the body, and when it is enabled
to behold diviner spectacles than is allotted to men, that Julian might
then have beheld Christ. Few allusions have been made to this subject;
and yet I dare not reject this hypothesis as absolutely false, for God
often suffers still more improbable and astonishing events to take
place, in order to prove that the religion named after Christ is not
sustained by human energy.” Of Theodore’s confession (v. 20) he remarks:
“It is said that he was afterwards asked whether he had been sensible of
any pain on the rack; and that he replied he had not been entirely free
from suffering, but had his pain assuaged by the attentions of a young
man who had stood by him, and had wiped off the perspiration with the
finest linen cloth, and supplied him with coolest water, by which he
eased the inflammation and refreshed his labors. I am convinced that no
man, whatever magnanimity he may possess, is capable without the special
assistance of divine Power, of manifesting such entire indifference
about the body.” In vi. 29, Piammon sees an angel standing near the holy
table, and writing down in a book the names of the monks who were
present, while he erased the names of those who were absent. Mark had
the elements of the holy table administered to him by an angel (vii.
29). Malachion, while journeying with his brothers, was made invisible,
and then reappeared, and pursued his way with them (vi. 32). So the
portent at Hebdomas was a sign of divine favor to Theodosius the Great
(vii. 24); the heavenly hosts were the real overthrowers of Gaïnas
(viii. 4); Basiliscus the martyr appears to Chrysostom (viii. 28).
Pulcheria’s celestial directors helps her to find the forty martyrs (ix.
2). The appearance of Zechariah to the serf pointed out the way to the
discovery of the prophet’s remains (ix. 17). The demoniacal agencies are
equally operant, some of which are alluded to in the above passages, but
readily yield to prayer and exorcism, if not immediately overthrown by
God.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p22"></span>For a demonstration of the same truth,
miracles are wrought to effect physical cures, mental troubles,
threatened dangers, casting out of demons, silencing philosophers and
wordy ecclesiastics, vindicating orthodoxy, reading the thoughts of
hypocrites defeating enemies, sanctifying <span id="page_203">p.
203</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_203"></span>the sacraments’ raising
the dead; and they are the mighty agents for converting philosophers,
Jews, pagans, and heretics. They are wrought by the hands of the
eminently excellent only; the gift is associated with a high measure of
grace; for example the bishops Paphnutius (i. 10) and Spyridion (i. 11)
are so endowed; Alexander of Constantinople (i. 14), Eusebius of Emesa
(iii. 6), Martin of Tours (iii. 14), Arsacius of Nicomedia (iv. 16),
Donatus (vii. 26), Gregory of Neocæsarea (vii. 26), Theotimus of Scythia
(vii. 26), Epiphanius of Salamis (vii. 27). In like manner, the monks
Antony (i. 13), Amun (i. 14), Eutychianus (i. 14), Macarius the
Egyptian, Apollonius, Hilarion, Julian (iii. 14), John, Copres, Helles,
Apelles, Eulogius (vi. 28); Apollos, John of Diolchus, Benjamin and Pior
(vi. 29). The united prayer of a congregation could effect them (vii.
5). The statue of Christ at Paneas, the fountain at Emmaus, the tree at
Hermopolis (v. 21), were all miraculous centers. The spot where the
Archangel Michael appeared (ii. 3), the places where the head of John
the Baptist reposed (vii. 21), the tombs of monks, martyrs, and
bishops,—as of Hilarion (iii. 14), Martyrius and Marcianus (iv. 3),
Epiphanius (vii. 27),—were replete with restorative virtues. Sozomen had
such a miracle wrought upon himself; he believed thoroughly in an
uninterrupted stream of charismata; he deemed it necessary for the
maintenance of the faith. He was no more credulous than Socrates, or
Theodoret, or Evagrius, or Theodore. To criticise him for his belief in
this respect is to forget the Christian consciousness of the age. And
the historic school which seeks to eliminate the volume of testimony, in
the assumption that miracles do not fall within the province of history,
ignores the first law of that science, which requires the reproduction
of all facts, in time and place, whatever they may be, that are
affiliated with the evolution of the human will; that other older school
which dismisses all ecclesiastical miracles on the *a priori*assumption
that these energies ceased at a time co-ordinate with the death of the
Apostles, or at a point not far removed from their age, violates the
spirit of induction. These miracles must be tested by evidence, and the
laws of supernatural energy, and in no other way. To Sozomen and all his
contemporaries the miracle appeared essential both to the proof of the
divine origin of Christianity, and to offset and withstand the influence
of the theurgic arts of the philosophers, such as Julianus and many of
the Neoplatonists. As he remarks concerning the reply made by Alexander,
bishop of Constantinople, when he silenced the philosopher by the simple
authority of Christ, “It is then right to consider whether it is a
greater miracle, that a man, and he a philosopher, should so easily be
silenced by a word, or that a stone wall should be cleft by the power of
a word, which miracle I have heard some attribute with pride to Julian,
surnamed the Chaldean” (i. 18). The gift of prophecy is also represented
as sustained throughout this period, and with the same logical aims in
view. The monks are especially thus endowed: Antony (i. 13, vi. 5, 6),
the two Macarii, Pachomius (iii. 14), Arsacius (iv. 16), John (vi. 28,
vii. 22, vii. 28), Theon (vi. 28), Isaac (vi. 40); so the bishops
Athanasius (iv. 10), Chrysostom and Epiphanius, rather abusively (viii.
15); so royal persons, such as the wife of Valens, passively (vi. 16),
Pulcheria, directly and passively (ix. 3). The perpetuation of this
charism was deemed inherently necessary for the sake of historical
continuity, and to prove as well that the faith he loved had been
established by God; equally was it requisite as a holy parallel whereby
to gainsay the mantic spirit of Paganism; as is best illustrated in the
silencing of the oracle at Daphne (v. 19), and by his reflections upon
the philosopher’s tripod devised for finding the successor of Valens
(vi. 35). Nor are Socrates, Theodoret, Evagrius, and others any more
moderate than Sozomen in this respect.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p23"></span>3. Another aim of his history is to
prove that Providence or the divine government is promoting the
Christian faith directly. The universal order must be interpreting
itself distinctly through the Church. The Father must be vindicating the
good and punishing the wicked, according to the orthodox category.
Sozomen’s history is as insistent in this regard as Eliphaz and his
philosophic confreres. One must be able to decide infallibly in each
case as to cause and effect; it is a very realistic pragmatism, and is
not the exclusive property of Sozomen; it is a characteristic of all
these Church historians.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p24"></span><span id="page_204">p. 204</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_204"></span>There is properly enough a recognition of
God in history; the sovereign will and the human will are jointly
working out the world’s order, but it is the attempt to trace the cause
and effect immediately and in each case, which is so repulsive and
absurd. Some illustrations will show how he brings out this view. In i.
7 the comment made on Constantine’s overthrow of Licinius: “From many
facts it has often appeared to me that the teaching of the Christians is
supported, and its advancement secured, by the Providence of God, and
not the least from what then occurred; for at the very moment that
Licinius was about to persecute all the churches under him, the war in
Bithynia broke out, which ended in a war between him and Constantine,
and in which Constantine was so strengthened by Divine assistance, that
he was victorious over his enemies by land and by sea.” More of detail
comes out in the life of Athanasius. Thus in ii. 17, of his election he
says: “Alexander, bishop of Alexandria, when about to depart this life,
left Athanasius as his successor, in accordance, I am convinced, with
the Divine will, directing the vote upon him.” And again: “He fled to
escape the honor, but he was discovered in his place of concealment by
the help of God, who had forecast by Divine manifestations to his
blessed predecessors, that the succession was to devolve upon him.” His
whole career is so viewed in v. 6. There is a large discussion of this
subject in vi. 35, where he argues against the plan of pagan
philosophers to foretell the future of the empire: “The philosophers, on
the other hand, acted as if the deposition and restoration of emperors
had depended solely on them; for if the imperial succession was to be
considered dependent on the arrangement of the stars, what was requisite
but to await the accession of the future emperor, whoever he might be?
Or, if the succession was regarded as dependent on the will of God, what
right had man to meddle? For it is not the function of human
foreknowledge or zeal to understand God’s thought; nor if it were right,
would it be well for men, even if they be the wisest of all, to think
that they can plan better than God.” He persists in tracing a connection
between God and every event in favor of mechanical goodness or
orthodoxy. He follows many opponents, whether heretical or pagan, with
the Divine wrath; all these historians do this,—Philostorgius, as well
as Evagrius. Sozomen is not nearly so bitter or uncharitable as either
of these. He is most atrabilious in the case of Julian, under whom his
own family had suffered. As a consequence of this arbitrary pious
pragmatism, the most deplorable incompetents are treated as the express
favorites of heaven, while the larger-minded pagan or Arian is loaded
with contempt. Under this law, too, the evil sides of the orthodox, and
the excellences of the pagan, or Arians, are suppressed. The defeats of
the Nicene emperors are not mentioned; the victories of the Anti-Nicene
are passed by or belittled, while their humiliations are evidence of the
impending anger of heaven. In the survey of Helena’s life (ii. 2) he
says: “It seems to me that so many holy actions demanded a recompense,
and indeed even in this life she was raised to the summit of
magnificence.” As to Constantine, in ii. 34 he dares say: “He was more
successful than any other sovereign in all his undertakings; for he
formed no design, I am convinced, without God.” When Bishop Felix of
Rome died, and Liberius became sole occupant of the see, he construes
the fact thus: “This event was no doubt ordained by God, that the seat
of Peter might not be dishonored by the occupancy of two bishops; for
such an arrangement is a sign of discord, and is foreign to
ecclesiastical law” (iv. 15). In all the features of Julian’s life, God
is visiting him with his unappeasable anger (vi. 35, v. 21, 22, vi. 1,
2). The election of Nectarius, though it was in violation of
ecclesiastical order and an accumulation of ignorant blunders, did not
take place without the interposition of Divine strength (vii. 8).
Theodosius is portrayed as the prime delight of heaven; thus his simple
reliance upon God wins him a hopeless battle with Eugenius (vii. 24). It
is so with the whole Theodosian line (viii. 1, ix. 1). Pulcheria has
Divine love manifested to her in manifold ways, as does her brother,
Theodosius the Younger (ix. 1, 3, 16). Even Alaric is driven by an
inexplicable impulse to rebuke the luxury, debauchery, and injustice of
the Romans (ix. 6). In ix. 1, he says of his own sovereign: “It appears
to me that it was the design of God to show by the events of this
period, that piety alone suffices for the salvation of <span
id="page_205">p. 205</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_205"></span>princes; and that without piety, armies,
a powerful empire, and every other resource, are of no avail. The Divine
power, which is the guardian of the universe, foresaw that the emperor
would be distinguished by his piety, and determined that Pulcheria, his
sister, should be the protector of him and of the government.” In ix.
16, he explains his secular details in the paragraph: “This is not the
proper place to enter into details concerning the deaths of the tyrants;
but I considered it necessary to allude to the circumstance in order to
show, that to insure the stability of imperial power, it is sufficient
for an emperor to serve God with reverence, which was the course pursued
by Honorius.” While of his patron he says: “It seems as if God openly
manifested His favor towards the present emperor, not only by disposing
of warlike affairs in an unexpected way, but also by revealing the
sacred bodies of many persons who were of old most distinguished for
piety.” The whole history is full of this sort of philosophy of its
personages. Similarly all natural calamities and the irruption of
barbarians are ethically explained, which is correct enough as a general
principle; but these phenomena are punitive or vindicatory of particular
deeds. Constantius’ course toward Athanasius was heralded by an invasion
of the Franks, and by an earthquake in the East (iii. 6). Of Julian he
says: “It is, however, very obvious that throughout the reign of this
emperor, God gave manifest tokens of His displeasure and permitted many
calamities to befall several of the provinces of the Roman Empire. He
visited the earth with such fearful earthquakes, that the buildings were
shaken, and no more safety could be found within houses than in the open
air.” Then follow the inundations of the Nile; the drought and the
famine in the empire, and on their heels the pestilences (vi. 2). Under
Valens we read: “In the meantime although hail-storms of extraordinary
magnitude fell in various places, and although many cities, particularly
Nicæa in Bithynia, were shaken by earthquakes, yet Valens the emperor
and Eudoxius the bishop paused not in their career, but continued to
persecute all Christians who differed from them in opinion” (vi. 10). He
does not make the same reflection upon Constantius, when the earthquake
at Nicomedia intercepted the meeting of a council (iv. 16); Gaïnas’
attempted revolution is “pre-announced by the appearance of a comet
directly over the city; this comet was of extraordinary magnitude,
larger, it is said, than any that had previously been seen” (viii. 3).
After Chrysostom’s exile, “hailstones of extraordinary magnitude fell at
Constantinople and in the suburbs of the city. Four days afterwards, the
wife of the emperor died. These occurrences were regarded by many as
indications of Divine wrath, on account of the persecutions that had
been carried on against John” (viii. 27).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p25"></span>But the earthquakes and famines and
invasions that happened under Theodosius the Great and Theodosius Junior
are not mentioned directly. By such unfair pragmatism Sozomen, as all
his fellow-historians, sought to answer the allegations, now more
directly affirmed, in the period of barbarian irruption, that the
calamities were due to the desertion of the gods. Sulpicius Severus,
Augustine, and Orosius built up a somewhat better apology.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p26"></span>4. Another object he kept before him, we
will let him state in his own words: “The doctrine of the Catholic
Church is shown to be especially the most genuine, since it has been
tested frequently by the plots of opposing thinkers; yet, the disposal
of the lot being of God, the Catholic Church has maintained its own
ascendancy, has re-assumed its own power, and has led all the churches
and the people to the reception of its own truth” (i. 1). Catholicity
and Orthodoxy, as defined at Nicæa, are synonymous. The creed of the
fathers is final. The Church which spoke in 325 and 381 is the historic
and Catholic Church, and the Theodosian line is the Divinely appointed
instrument for laying its foundations immovably, the others having
failed. Church and State are to be indissolubly wedded. This faith is
made mechanically the test of goodness and badness, and this expresses
his personal belief.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p27"></span>He speaks of the Scriptures with uniform
reverence, and holds to the <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p27.1"></span>θεωρία</span> as the method of
interpretation, as we see in v. 22, where he says of the Jews: “They
were only acquainted with the mere letter of Scripture, and could not,
like the Christians and a few of the wisest among the Hebrews, discover
the hidden meaning (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p27.2"></span>πρὸς θεωρίαν</span>)”; yet he speaks with
respect (viii. 2) <span id="page_206">p. 206</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_206"></span>of Chrysostom’s way of expounding the
sacred records and of his “teacher Diodorus’ method, employed in the
many books of that bishop,” in which he explained the significance of
the sacred words and avoided allegory (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p27.3"></span>θεωρία</span>). But when bishops and monks
are declared to be skilled in the Scriptures, it is in this mystical
sense. His own grandfather was a solver of the amphibolies of the Word,
doubtless by this convenient key (v. 5).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p28"></span>The dogmatic standpoint, as we have
seen, was traditionalism, toward which the Church gravitated under the
dictation of the councils, the influence of bishops like Athanasius, the
almost uniform ictus of the Roman see, Ambrose, the Gregories, Basil the
Great, Ephraim, Eusebius, and Epiphanius, the majority of monks, and
finally the whole force of the State. He opposes all shades of Arianism,
as also Apolinarianism; had he completed his work, from what he says of
Pulcheria’s conquest over heresies, he would have opposed the Nestorian
views of the Theotokos. But of Donatism and Cyprianism he has not a
word. Of the anthropological struggles of the West there is not a
syllable. Here is the place, also, to consider his attitude toward
heresies. Sozomen does not assail any phase of Arianism with the
intemperate epithets which Eusebius employed to condemn the earlier
innovators, or such as abound in Theodoret and Evagrius and later
historians. Indeed, he sometimes calls them Christians and members of
the Catholic Church. His treatment of the Novatians, while a little
offish, is yet generous as compared with other writers, except Socrates,
from whom he obtains almost all their history; he devotes much space; he
is generally courteous in tone; and when he speaks of the proposed union
(iv. 2) between the Catholic Church and that body of believers, he omits
the cause of the failure; viz., the reluctance of some legalistic
Novatians to acquiesce,—a point which Socrates does not fail to expose.
He mentions Montanism (Phrygianism) several times, but with no new
facts, save that they were numerous in Phrygia in his day, and had
peculiar Paschal usages (i. 6, ii. 18, 32, vii. 18, 19). Of the Gnostic
sects, he alludes to the Valentinians only, whose conventicles were
repressed by an edict of Constantius (ii. 32). The Manichæans are
mentioned only as they are one of the three sects excepted from
Gratian’s law of toleration (vii. 1). Of the Pricillianists, whose
attempt at a world religion falls so wholly within his time, he says
nothing. The Quartodecimanians are still numerous and tenacious (vii.
18). He has a bare allusion to the Encratites (v. 11). Of the
Origenistic controversy, he has no more to say than he is compelled to,
in order to state correctly the conflict between Theophilus and
Chrysostom. Over against the Origenists he places the Anthropomorphists
(viii. 12). Of Lucifer’s separatism, he gives only the rise (iii. 15).
With all his emphatic adherence to the current orthodoxy, he must be
regarded as the most charitable of historians next to Socrates. Mention
has already been made of his kindly disposition toward the Novatians.
When writing fully and favorably, as was his duty, about Aëtius (iii.
15), he is constrained to make an apology: “Let it not be accounted
strange if I have bestowed commendations upon the leaders or enthusiasts
of the above-mentioned heresies. I admire their eloquence and their
impressiveness in discourse: I leave their doctrines to be judged by
those whose prerogative it is.”

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p29"></span>On the one hand, we find him insisting
on the right of private judgment, as when he discusses the overruling
Providence in Julian’s life, and especially on the infatuation which led
the emperor to Persia in spite of Sallust (vi. 1): “This observation,
however, is only inserted lest I should be blamed for omitting it. I
leave every one to form his own opinion.” So, after discussing the use
of penance, he remarks in the following chapter (vii. 17): “Such
subjects as the above, however, are best left to the decision of
individual judgment.” He would also allow latitude in ceremonials (vii.
19), as we shall see. On the other hand, he dreads the progressive and
unsettling outcome of the private judgment in exercise. He expresses
this fear in iv. 27: “The spirit of innovation is self-laudatory; hence
it advanced farther and farther, and crept along to greater novelties.
With increasing self-conceit, and in scorn of the fathers, it enacted
laws of its own. Nor does it honor the doctrine of the ancients
concerning God, but is always excogitating strange dogmas and restlessly
adds novelty to novelty, as the events now show.”

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p30"></span><span id="page_207">p. 207</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_207"></span>Of the threatening strategies of free
thought in his own day, he devoutly exclaimed: “That new heresies have
not prevailed in our times, we shall find to be due especially to her”
(Pulcheria) (ix. 1). Consequently he deprecates the deleterious
influence of polemics. On the accession of Jovian, he says: “The
presidents of the churches now resumed the agitation of doctrinal
questions and discussions. They had remained quiet during the reign of
Julian, when Christianity itself was endangered, and had unanimously
offered up their supplications for the mercy of God. It is thus that
men, when attacked by foreign enemies, remain in accord among
themselves; but when external troubles are removed, then internal
dissensions creep in” (vi. 4 and in vi. 25).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p31"></span>“Thus do the private animosities of the
clergy from time to time greatly injure the Church and divide religion
into many heresies! And this is a proof; for had George, like Theodotus,
received Apolinarius, on his repentance, into communion, I believe that
we should never have heard of the heresy that bears his name. Men are
prone, when loaded with opprobrium and contempt, to resort to rivalries
and innovations; whereas, when treated with justice, they become
moderate and remain in the same position.” More emphatic still is his
protest in vi. 26: “Those varying dogmas are the source of innumerable
troubles to religion, and many are deterred from embracing Christianity
by the diversity of opinion which prevails in matters of doctrine.” In
the beginning of this same chapter, in speaking of the Eunomians, he
delineates them thus: “They do not applaud a good course of life or
manner of conduct, or mercy towards the needy, unless exhibited by
persons of their own sect, so much as skill in disputation and the power
of triumphing in debates.” This is a great blow at the *sectores
cymini*, and at pride in polemics; the whole tone is much more liberal
than that of the ecclesiastic Theodoret, or even the lawyer Evagrius.
Sozomen, like Socrates, represents a generous feeling current among the
laymen of Constantinople in court and among the trades and professions.
The attitude of the Catholic Church with regard to baptism he sets forth
adequately as trivial, and argues against the Eunomian innovation of one
baptism and a change in the formula (vi. 21): “But whether it was
Eunomius or any other person who first made these innovations upon the
tradition of baptism, it seems to me that such innovators, whoever they
may have been, were alone in danger, according to their own
representation, of quitting this life without having received Divine
baptism.” The argument here is an unusually long one; with his
generation he held to the magical efficacy of the rite. The theory of
the sacraments as mysteries or arcane, was one which controlled him
throughout, and even limited his fidelity as a historian. Thus in i. 20:
“I thought it necessary to reproduce the very document (the Nicene
Creed) concerning these matters, as an example of the truth, in order
that posterity might possess in a fixed and clear form, the symbol of
that faith which proved pacifying at the time; but since some pious
friends who understood such matters, recommended that these truths ought
to be spoken of and heard by the initiated and their initiators only, I
agreed with their counsel: for it is not unlikely that some of the
uninitiated may read this book: while I have concealed such of the
prohibited material as I ought to keep silent about, I have not
altogether left the reader ignorant of the opinions held by the Synod.”
Nor will he repeat the symbol as subjoined to the letter of the council
of Antioch (vi. 4); and when the Macedonian commission to Liberius make
their statement, and the text is given to show their entire acceptance
of the Nicene view, Sozomen will not reproduce it. Again in vi. 29, Mark
was a monk of “such eminent piety, that Macarius himself, the presbyter
of Celliæ, declared that he had never given to him what priests present
to the initiated at the holy table; but that an angel, administering it
to him, whose hand up to the forearm, he declared himself to have seen.”
In viii. 5, in giving the account of a marvelous judgment wrought on a
Macedonian wife, who pretended to be a convert to the Nicene views, and
thus frequented the orthodox ceremony of the Supper, he remarks, “At the
time of the celebration of the mysteries (the initiated will understand
what I mean), this woman kept what was given her, and held down her head
as if engaged in prayer.” In reciting the disturbances at the Easter
celebration over the decree of exile against Chrysostom (viii. 21), he
says: “They <span id="page_208">p. 208</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_208"></span>were charged with the commission of such
disorderly acts as can be readily conceived by those who have been
admitted to the mysteries, but which I consider it requisite to pass
over in silence, lest my work should fall into the hands of the
uninitiated.” Here we have a glimpse of the scope of the arcane as well
as the weakness of the historian in submitting to the advice of narrow
friends; no other historian felt bound to restrict himself in such
matters. Sozomen here joined the most extreme sacramentarians of his
day. On the weighty matter of discipline, he believes with the Catholic
Church in receiving back the penitent into the Church, against Novatian
and Donatistic practices. He expresses his opinion at some length,
though not so fully as Socrates, in the chapter which relates to the
abolition of the penitential presbyter (vii. 16): “Impeccability is a
Divine attribute, and belongs not to human nature; therefore God has
decreed that pardon should be extended to the penitent even after many
transgressions. As in supplicating for pardon, it is requisite to
confess the sin, it seems probable that the priests, from the beginning,
considered it irksome to make this confession in public, before the
whole assembly of the people. They appointed a presbyter of the utmost
sanctity and the most undoubted prudence, to act on those occasions: the
penitents went to him and confessed their transgressions; and it was his
office to indicate the kind of penance adapted to each sin, and then
when satisfaction had been made, to pronounce absolution.” He deplores
the abolition of the office as the occasion of laxity. The deterrent
force of public confession was now lost, and that to the danger of
Christian conduct. He sympathizes also with that form of martyrdom which
wantonly and ruthlessly assails paganism and is slain in the attempt.
The system of relic-worship, so characteristic of any decline of
opportunity for heroic action, had set in overwhelmingly, and he
believed in it vigorously. Our own age reproduces the same tendency not
only in religious, but in secular forms, and among Protestants as well.
Thus he commemorates: of Old Testament prophets, Micah and Habakkuk
(vii. 29), Zechariah (ix. 17); of the preparatory period, the head of
John the Baptist (vii. 21); of the Apostolic Church, St. Stephen (vii.
29, ix. 16); of the martyrs, Babylas (v. 19), Forty Soldiers (ix. 2); of
the monks, Hilarion (iii. 14), the four brothers (vii. 9). The most
prominent of secondary relics is the cross with its inscriptions and
nails (ii. 1). The discovery of these is mainly through prayer and
heavenly signs; their possession is an object of imperial ambition; the
removal and transportation of them are effected with most gorgeous and
reverent pomp; and the sacred treasures become the agents of endless
miracles.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p32"></span>Sozomen, like Socrates and Chrysostom,
believes in freedom as to old-time ceremonials. He has a chapter on the
varieties of religious usage (vii. 19); and the record is largely the
result of his own inquiry. He remarks in conclusion: “Many other customs
are still to be observed in cities and villages; and those who have been
brought up in their observance would, from respect to the great men who
instituted and perpetuated these customs, consider it wrong to abolish
them. Similar motives must be attributed to those who observe different
practices in the celebration of the fast, which has led us into this
long digression.” From his point of view, uniformity may not encroach
upon individualism beyond a certain point. He is certainly quietly and
with dignity attacking a party of narrow uniformitarians, who are
already pressing for a harmony of all ceremonials in Christendom.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p33"></span>Another feature of the Catholic system
that he traces carefully, is the relation between Church and Empire. He
devotes more attention to this aspect of polity than to its internal
development; this latter he touches upon incidentally, and not at all
carefully. We have seen how painstakingly he cites the imperial edicts
with regard to the Church. The state laws, which at first expressed
conciliar decisions, were followed by independent imperial enactments.
These, indeed, are at first sporadic, but become more and more the rule.
The personal views of Sozomen appear in the narrative, but they are
fluctuating. He acquiesces in the imperial convocation of councils, as
do all his cotemporaries. On the death of Constantine, in commenting
upon the hereafter fixed Christian character of the state, he says: “The
sacerdotal dignity <span id="page_209">p. 209</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_209"></span>is not only equal in honor to imperial
power, but in sacred places even takes the ascendancy” (ii. 34). With
the plan of producing uniformity of religion in the empire, he seems to
sympathize (iv. 11). He is indignant at Julian’s indifference to the
murder of Zeno by the inhabitants of Gaza, and at the deprivations of
the Christians, when all their political and personal rights were taken
from them (v. 9). To the charge of Libanius, that the man who aimed the
dart at Julian was a Christian, and belonged to the race of habitual
transgressors of the law, Sozomen replies by defending the regicide: “In
the documents above quoted, Libanius clearly states that the emperor
fell by the hand of a Christian; and this probably was the truth. It is
not unlikely that some of the soldiers who then served in the Roman army
might have conceived the idea, since Greeks and all men until this day
have praised tyrannicides, for exposing themselves to death in the cause
of liberty, and spiritedly standing by their country, their families,
and their friends. Still less is he deserving of blame, who for the sake
of God and of religion, performed so bold a deed” (vi. 2). This is the
highest stand that a lawyer could take in support of individualism. In
his view of the exalted prerogatives of the Church, the reply of
Valentinian to the bishops, who desired to hold a council, would seem
happy. “I am but one of the laity, and have, therefore, no right to
interfere in these transactions; let the priests, to whom such matters
appertain, assemble where they please” (vi. 7). Theodosius’ compulsory
course with regard to paganism and orthodoxy, and the choice of
Nectarius, are approved. On the other hand, he selected two instances
out of many from the life of Ambrose, for the purpose of illustrating
how, in God’s behalf, that bishop conducted himself towards those in
power (vii. 25).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p34"></span>Throughout we find him recognizing the
practical headship of Rome; he expresses himself unconsciously in vi.
22, “The question having been thus decided by the Roman Church, peace
was restored and the inquiry ended.” This ignores the action of the
Synod of Alexandria and that of Constantinople itself, for both had
decreed the consubstantiality of the Holy Spirit and opposed the
christology of Apolinarius, prior to the action of the Roman Synod. The
power delegated to Julius by the council of Sardica (iii. 8), the
conflict between the East and the West conducted in mutually arrogant
epistles (iii. 10), the subordination of new to old Rome (vii. 9), show
the drift toward concentration. Sozomen does not seem to understand the
rival movements of Alexandria under Athanasius and Theophilus; nor the
Eastern imperial attempts to elevate Constantinople to the supremacy,
nor the mutterings of Antiochan jealousy.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p35"></span>The Church’s servility toward the
orthodox rulers is fairly expressed, and yet with comparative
moderation, by Sozomen. He is an apologist for Constantine, and
reflects, as do all the historians, and especially Evagrius in his
criticism of Zosimus, the adulations and subterfuges of Eusebius. The
religious fluctuation of that emperor is masked; his crimes are
suppressed; he is made to appear orthodox, even when at his worst
Eusebian stage. No wonder that Philostorgius charged the Homoöusians
with worshiping Constantine as a god in the ceremonies connected with
his image! Constantius, a vacillating, cruel, incompetent, is also
apologized for, but to the damage of his intelligence. Julian, for his
years in some respects, one of the most promising and earnest rulers of
ancient times, is loaded with obloquy, his highest motives and ideals
ridiculed, his victories belittled, his death savagely exulted in.
Jovian’s and Valentinian’s toleration are not understood, but their
personal orthodoxy is in so far praised. Valens is looked at through the
eyes of his two fierce Cappadocian assailants. His excellences are
entirely ignored; the most inconsequent views are imputed to him while
attempting to glorify Basil; in the sad story of the emperor’s dying
son, that bishop appears as a brute in his treatment of the agonized
father. The stories of heroism attributed to the orthodox are only
examples of insufferable insolence; one must marvel at the patience of
Valens, if there be any truth in them. Gratian, that beau-ideal of
Western orthodoxy, was really a nose of wax in the hands of Ambrose; he
was esteemed more moderately by the East, and that rather for having
called Theodosius to a share in the throne, than for any quality in
himself; but his utter moral collapse, after the magnificent promise of
his youth, is wholly veiled from sight. Theodosius the Great is
glorified, not for his superior statecraft and <span id="page_210">p.
210</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_210"></span>generalship, but for his
efforts to suppress paganism and heresy. The charges against his private
life such as Eunapius and Zosimus suggest, are not hinted at. He is a
man of prayer and visions, a relic-worshiper, and a persecutor of pagans
and Arians. Great as he certainly was, his distinguishing and
conspicuous qualities are passed by. His pitiful children, Arcadius and
Honorius, the sorriest quidnuncs of those stormy times, are heroes of
piety. Pulcheria, excellent as she was, was not worthy of the excessive
flattery poured out upon her; while Anthemius, Troïlus, Valerianus, and
other noble figures of the day are passed by. The younger Theodosius,
with his good training and generally fair endeavor, is delineated in the
dedication as the consummate man of all time, while he is a very
third-rate soul at best. The eulogies by Socrates (vii. 22 and 42) are
just as fulsome. This was the grave sin of the State Church; the Arian
State Church did the same for Constantius and Valens; more and more as
history reveals the truth concerning many of those idols, does the
revulsion increase against a union of two functions which could so
degrade both.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p36"></span>The relation of Church and State
involves the question of persecution. It is not the history of the
endeavor to enforce uniformity, with which we shall concern ourselves,
but rather the views Sozomen sets forth, as to the policy of repression.
The laws of Constantine suppressing heretics did not affect the
Novatians (ii. 32), concerning which justice, he remarks: “The emperor,
I believe, willingly relaxed the rigor of the enactment in their favor,
for he only desired to strike terror into the minds of his subjects, and
had no intention of persecuting them.” The punishments inflicted in
Constantius’ time on the orthodox in Constantinople, both by Macedonius
(iv. 23) and Eudoxius (iv. 26), call forth this reflection: “For, if the
persecution did not occasion such tortures to the body as preceding
ones, it appeared more grievous to all who reflected aright, on account
of its disgraceful nature, for both the persecutors and the persecuted
belonged to the Church; and the one was all the more disgraceful in that
men of the same religion treated their fellows with a degree of cruelty
which the ecclesiastical laws prohibit to be manifested towards enemies
and strangers.” He spares himself the pain of registering all who were
ejected from their sees (iv. 27), for no province was without its list
of sufferers. The cruelties inflicted by George on pagan and orthodox,
furnish a mournful narrative (iv. 30). On the elevation of Julian, a
great dread fell upon the Christian world, intensified by the portents
which befell him. The series of edicts soon wrought mutual dissension in
the Christian ranks, as well as suffering from without. But while
Sozomen attributes the refinements of cruelty to Julian, and lays the
miseries of the saints at his door as parts of a subtle plan, he
nevertheless cannot conceal from himself the absence of direct
interference on the part of the State; these calamities were the results
of a restoration of the old religion to its ancient union with the
State; it was an imperial act; and he is compelled to confess the
seeming magnanimity of Julian in certain cases, but even then maligns
his motives. The imperial clemency did not arise from any feeling of
compassion, but because persecution would only increase the number of
Galilean adherents; because he was envious of their glory, did he resort
to argument instead of cruelty, and manifest an unexpected benevolence
instead of proceeding to rigorous measures (v. 4, 5). “It may be
concluded from what has been said, that if Julian shed less blood than
preceding persecutors of the Church, and that if he devised fewer
punishments for the torture of the body, yet that he was severer in
other respects.” Nevertheless, this statement is followed by a record of
suffering in all quarters of the empire and the impression of purposed
directness is given, as if the State had inflicted them, especially when
we read that the emperor would not listen to the cautions of Sallust (v.
20). He does not comment on Jovian’s toleration, but only rejoices in
the return of the Church to ascendancy. Unsparing is his picture of the
dastardly measures of Valens against the professors of the faith; he
regards that persecutor as the special victim of Divine wrath; while, on
the other hand, he does not hesitate to call the Arian Goths, who fell
under the anger of Athanaric, martyrs (vi. 37). He does not express an
opinion as to the partial toleration of Gratian’s edict (vii. 1); but in
explanation of Theodosius’ law forbidding heretics, i.e. all
anti-Nicenists, from holding churches and from exercising any clerical
function, he says: “Great as were the punishments <span id="page_211">p.
211</span> <span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_211"></span>adjudged by the laws
against heretics, they were not always carried into execution; for the
emperor had no desire to persecute his subjects; he only desired to
enforce uniformity of view about God’ through the medium of
intimidation. Those who voluntarily renounced heretical opinions,
received commendation from him.” And it is true that the court practice
of persecuting emperors, orthodox or Arian, was utterly in the teeth of
their own edicts, and their most intimate counselors were elected
without regard to religion. When Justina sought to revive the Arian
standard in the West, her treatment of Ambrose is called persecution
(vii. 13); but Ambrose’s intolerant procedures against the Arians are
not even noticed. No quizzical wrinkle disturbs the flow of his
narrative in vii. 15, when Theodosius I. gives a heathen temple to the
Christians, and the pagans resolve to defend their rights, and do so
effectually; but the Christians who perish in that hateful conflict are
crowned as martyrs by an imperial edict! For the religious tyranny of
Theodosius the Great he is a warm apologist, and disguises the
perversion of that principle of freedom for which he pleads most
earnestly, when the Arians hold the reins of power, and abuse their
opportunity. The contradictions are perfectly apparent and
irreconcilable, because uniformity by force has always been impossible.
Yet logical men will state the most contradictory reasons, which no
quidnunc can refrain from laughing at. Themistius’ plea for toleration
(vi. 36) in matters of intellectual belief, on the ground of secular
diversities in philosophy and from the incomprehensible nature of God,
shows the existence of a party who believed in this principle. While
Sozomen gives it place, and hailed the Gothic Arians who compelled
Valens to cease his oppressions, he has no word of approbation for the
proposition or the argument.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p37"></span>5. Another design of his history is
stated in i. 1: “I have had to deliberate whether I ought to confine
myself to the recital of events connected with the Church under the
Roman government; but it seemed more advisable to include, as far as
possible, the record of transactions relative to religion among the
Persians and barbarians.” He regards Christianity as the universal and
sole religion, and would trace its extension in all directions. Hence he
is the first historian to give us a larger account of religion in Syria
and Palestine, introducing us especially to some aspects of Christian
life and suffering in Edessa; we are all the more surprised to have no
mention of the Church in Africa, and so very little of the Church in the
West, except when it comes into close relations with the East, as in the
larger controversies, and especially after Arianism threatened to keep
its hold upon the Byzantine section of the empire; and the Orient had to
cry to the cold and unsympathetic Occident for help, and often in vain.
He is also careful to give us some, if not a very original, account of
the work of missions. He repeats the story of the Iberians, Armenians,
Indians, Saracens, and Goths. He gives us a larger insight into Persia;
the errors with which he is charged as swarming, are no more numerous
than those of his cotemporaries. Of the large work of Theophilus of Dhu,
or the extension of Arianism among the Germanic tribes, he says nothing.
Chrysostom’s real missionary enterprises are passed by, excepting his
expenditure of the funds furnished by Olympias for the redemption and
restoration of Isaurian captives (viii. 27). His reflections on the
methods of Church extension are more interesting and numerous. Thus, in
ii. 5, of the attempt of Constantine to abolish idolatry and introduce
the faith, Sozomen says, “Soldiers were not necessary; the courtiers
effected it”; he does not consider it advisable to give all the details
as to all the lands then won to the state religion. The barbarians he
notices as converted through the instrumentality of Christian captives
(ii. 6, 7). Armenian influence carried Christianity into Persia (ii. 8).
Prodigies, too, are helpful agents (vi. 5, v. 22). The hieroglyphs and
crux-symbols discovered in the Egyptian temples led to the repentance of
pagans (vii. 15). Sometimes a kingdom will solicit the instruction of an
orthodox monk, as in the case of the Saracens (vi. 38). The legal
suppressions of paganism facilitate a change of sentiment on the part of
many (vii. 15). The very ambitions of their clergy led numbers of the
Arians to embrace Nicene views (vii. 17); and the doctrinal discussions
among heretics constrain others to embrace a more uniform system of
belief (viii. 1). The <span id="page_212">p. 212</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_212"></span>efficiency of the monks as evangelists is
found in nearly all the biographies of them. On the other hand, he makes
confession to the baleful effects of incessant indulgence in polemics.
“These varying dogmas are the sources of innumerable troubles to
religion; and many are deterred from embracing Christianity by the
diversity of opinion which prevails in matters of doctrine” (vi. 26).
This thought of universality, then, is a feature of his history.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p38"></span>6. Another design is to dignify
monasticism as the true ethical ideal and goal of Christianity,—as the
philosophy which is to supplant all the ancient intellectual strivings
of reason,—and he announces this purpose as follows: “Nor is it foreign
to ecclesiastical history to introduce in this work an account of those
who were the fathers and originators of what is denominated monachism,
and of their immediate successors, whose celebrity is well known to us
either by observation or report. For I would neither be considered
ungracious towards them, nor willing to consign their virtue to
oblivion, nor yet be thought ignorant of their history; but would wish
to leave behind me such a record of their manner of life that others,
led by their example, might attain to a blessed and happy end” (i. 1).
He is here quietly resisting a school of Christians and politicians who
were opposed to the absorbing and destructive qualities of this manner
of life; Athanasius, Basil the Great, Jerome, Chrysostom, had to write
in its defense for the same reason, and he sided with these supporters
of its virtues, very naturally. He is a full believer in the Divine
philosophy which nurtured him; monasticism with its practical strivings
after conformity to the Divine-human Pattern, and its attempt to
enthrone the spiritual over the material has a zealous defender in him,
of all its rapt and grotesque forms. He determined therefore to make it
a unique portion of his history. The discussion of its aims in i. 12
will give us a clue to his own desire to represent it as almost the
resultant force in the progress of the Divine kingdom; one reads the
historian’s responsive feeling between the lines. This philosophy was
the most useful thing received by man from God; it was superior to all
other knowledge, and warranted the neglect of all worldly science; it
strove to eliminate the *<span id="iii.ii.ii-p38.1"></span>adiaphora*
from ethics, and to make everything have a moral complexion; one must be
doing good, or else he is doing evil. Its great duties are the
discipline of self, the worship of the Creator, and the cultivation of a
spirit of other-worldness. These canons and goals are the life of the
system. It is the philosophy which is to take the place of the old
theoretical schemes; and it is the great school to fill up the gap made
by the decay of the Hellenic universities. The Christian university
founded by Theodosius in Sozomen’s day, was indeed a blow to this
educational ideal. While we may have no accord with his view of this
ethical phenomenon, we must concede him the merit of discerning its
significance and intent, and allow that he was wise to give us so full
an account of its elaboration, and so much detail and scrap of
biography; for it was a dominant element in the history of this time. It
formed men and measures. The reproach of Sozomen on this score is wholly
a mistake; he has done us capital service in not neglecting this
element, otherwise we could have but little conception of its historical
setting, of its patience, its tireless devotion, and we would have to
resort to Palladius or Rufinus and the individual biographies. Moreover,
it is an uncritical spirit which recoils from dissecting the awful and
often repulsive details of legalistic self-denial. After discoursing on
the local origin of monasticism and the forms it assumed, we have
chapters containing brief sketches of hermits, laurists, and cœnobites
(i. 12, 13, 14, iii. 14). The people looked to the monks for the color
of their theology (iv. 10). Arianism felt its weakness without them and
ineffectually sought their suppression (vi. 20). The Nicene faith
uniformly received the support of these communities (vi. 27), to which
they remained devoted under all persecutions. Another series of
biographies follows in vi. 28–34: Theophilus (viii. 12) has a
preliminary struggle with them to carry forward his plots against John.
The royal court itself under Pulcheria’s leadership reflected its severe
discipline (ix. 13). Sozomen seems also to have studied the rules of
various bodies, some of whose details he gives, and indulges in a sort
of comparative study of their regulations (vi. 30). Yet with all his
implied admiration of the heroes of this system, who went to the almost
extreme of abstinence, he remarks in reviewing the <span
id="page_213">p. 213</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_213"></span>discipline of Theotimus (vii. 26): “I
consider it to be the part of the philosopher to yield to the demand of
these appetites from necessity, and not from the love of sensual
gratification.” It is to be noted that he omits for the most part the
immoral forms of monasticism, such as Evagrius gives us a highly
rhetorical account of.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p39"></span>7. A more subordinate aim is to present
selected secular matters so-called; he does not consider these to be
wholly foreign to the scope of his work. He handles such with
considerable largeness in Constantine’s life, and keeps up a thread
under Constantius and Julian. He is more sparing until he reaches
Arcadius and Honorius, and the chapters 3–15 of Book ix. are largely
devoted to the Western struggles with usurpers.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p40"></span>8. A final and subordinate aim is the
development of imperial law with regard to the Church; he gives little
of purely synodical canons, but remarks, “I consider it necessary,
however, to mention the laws enacted for the honor and consolidation of
religion, as they constitute a considerable portion of ecclesiastical
history.” And in the next chapter, “Having arrived at this point of my
history, it would not be right to omit all mention of the laws passed in
favor of those individuals in the churches, who had received their
freedom” (i. 9). We have already seen how continuously this plan is
sustained.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p41"></span>His Method. 1. He is conscious of
certain limitations, and expresses them frankly. (*a*) A modest estimate
of his own powers (Proemium, i. 1). (*b*) The excess of material compels
him to a constant process of selection (ii. 3, 5, 14, iii. 14, 15, 16,
iv. 4, 27, vii. 17, 28, ix. 1. (*c*) A sense of incapacity to handle
some aspects of doctrine (vii. 17). (*d*) An occasional insufficiency of
data to state a positive conclusion (iv. 2, viii. 16).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p42"></span>2. He acknowledges the need of research,
and presents his ideal purpose in i. 7: “I shall record the transactions
with which I have been connected, and also those concerning which I have
heard from persons who knew or saw the affairs in our own day, or before
our own generation. But I have sought for records of events of earlier
date amongst the established laws appertaining to religion, amongst the
proceedings of the Synods of the period, amongst the innovations that
arose, and in the epistles of kings and priests.” His recurring
intention was to reproduce the documents just as they were, but he
finally decided to epitomize their contents and to present the entire
instrument, only when the state of controversy compelled it in order to
fairness. The difficulty in the way of consulting these sources lay in
the fact of their dispersion in palaces, churches, and the private
libraries of the erudite. He anticipates criticism by acknowledging that
contradictions are likely to appear in his work, not from any fault of
his own, but because of the partisan and arbitrary nature of the
documents; he ingenuously confesses that men’s passions and conceptions
have shaped many of these writings, and that the factious spirit has
often been guilty of the willful omission of material, which was not of
its side. He distinctly avers that he felt it his duty to examine all
writings of this class according to his ability. Such was his intention.
If now we turn to his actual methods, we can group his ways of
accumulating material, somewhat as follows:—

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p43"></span>(*a*) His own observation by hearing or
sight, and hence knowing, as in ii. 3; vii. 19, 28.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p44"></span>(*b*) By obtaining a personally clear
knowledge, the medium being undefined, as in the election of Maximus to
be bishop of Jerusalem, and Macarius’ sympathy therewith; here his
better information was probably due to his Palestinian origin. <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p44.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p44.2"></span>Ιστέον μέντοι ὡς οἱ τάδε
ἠκριβωκότες, κατὰ γνώμην Μακαρίου γενέσθαί τε καὶ σπουδασθῆναι τῷ πλήθει
ταῦτα, ἰσχυρίζονται</span> (ii. 20). As to Serapion and Severianus <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p44.3"></span>τὰ μὲν ὧδε ἔγνων</span>
(viii. 10). As to Zechariah, where the same phrase occurs (ix. 17). At
the close of a universal review of monasticism <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p44.4"></span>τάδε ἔγνων ὡς συνέγραψα</span> (iii. 14). As
to the Syrian and Persian monks <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p44.5"></span>εἰς γνῶσιν ἐμὴν ἦλθον</span> (vi. 34). <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p44.6"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p44.7"></span>Αλλὰ τὰ μὲν ἀφηγησάμην
ἐφ᾽ ὅσον μοι μαθεῖν ἐξεγένετο, περὶ τῶν τότε ἐκκλησιαστικῶν
φιλοσόφων</span> (vi. 35).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p45"></span>(*c*) By hearing from those who knew the
facts <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p45.1"></span>ἅ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p45.2"></span>περ παρὰ ἀκριβῶς ἐπισταμένων ἀκήκοα</span>
(ii. 21). As to Arsacius: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p45.3"></span>οἳ παρὰ τῶν ᾽Αρσάκιον αὐτὸν θεασαμένων
ἀκηκοέναι ἔφασαν</span> (iv. 16). As to the mutual prophecies of
Epiphanius and John <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p45.4"></span>κἀκεῖνον δὲ εἰσέτι νῦν πολλῶν ὄντα τὸν λόγον
ἐπυθόμην</span> (viii. 15). As to Atticus: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p45.5"></span>καὶ τὸν μὲν τοιόνδε γενέσθαι φασὶν, οἵ γε
τὸν ἄνδρα ἔγνωσαν</span> (viii. 27).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p46"></span><span id="page_214">p. 214</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_214"></span>(*d*) The correction of a false story by
inquiring of trustworthy persons. Thus as to the origin of the
Apocalypse of Paul. <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p46.1"></span>᾽</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p46.2"></span>Ερομένῳ δέ μοι περὶ τούτου, ψεῦδος ἔφησεν
εἶναι Κίλιξ</span> (vii. 19). As to an accusation against John: <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p46.3"></span>τούτου δὲ πρόφασιν
ἑτέραν λέγειν οὐκ ἔχω, πλὴν ὅτι ἀψευδής τις οἶμαι πυθανομένῳ περὶ τούτου
ἔφη, κ.τ.λ</span>. (viii. 9). The true and twofold causes of difficulty
between Theophilus and Isadore: <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p46.4"></span>τῶν γε μὴν συγγενομένων τούτοις τότε τοῖς
μοναχοῖς ἀνδρὸς οἵου πιστεύεσθαι ἐπυθόμην, κ.τ.λ</span> (viii. 12).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p47"></span>(*e*) To these may be added the very
frequent usage of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p47.1"></span>πυνθάνομαι</span> as a means of expressing
his knowledge acquired in any form whatsoever, by hearing, by inquiry,
by tradition (i. 21, ii. 8, iii. 14, iv. 25, v. 2, 9, vi. 2 bis, 17, 34
bis, 37, vii. 8, 15, 17, 20, 21, 25, viii. 2, 7, 9, 19).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p48"></span>(*f*) Also his use of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p48.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p48.2"></span>κριβόω</span>, showing
his effort to attain accurate information, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p48.3"></span>ἰ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p48.4"></span>σχυρίζομαι</span> less frequently, to
indicate the strongest confirmation. Both these are used with reserve,
and not lightly. Several times he acknowledges his resort to tradition,
when he uses the word <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p48.5"></span>παρειλήφαμεν</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p48.6"></span>,</span> but we cannot always be sure of the
form of transmission (iii. 15, 30, vi. 38).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p49"></span>(*g*) Also his reference to those who
had more accurate information, or to works whose detail he could not
reproduce, or which lay without the province of history (iv. 3).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p50"></span>We see then an ideal and actual plan of
research, and a real effort at personal investigation; to deny his
frequently iterated language, is to accuse him of deliberate falsehood;
and this is palpably unfair; this his honest purpose and work must be
borne in mind, in the discussion of his relation to Socrates.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p51"></span>3. As to method in textual criticism,
there is none; we find variations in the texts quoted from those of
Socrates, Athanasius, and Theodoret, but no more in him than in the rest
from one another. When he reports Constantine’s speech, he treats it as
Thucydides did the orations of his worthies, and as the high-flying
Eusebius and the indiscriminating Theodoret do. When he copies a
translation from the Greek, he simply says that he gives it just as he
found it. On the whole, one is surprised at so fair an agreement in the
readings of the documents.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p52"></span>4. There is an entire lack of genuine
analytical criticism; the love of allegory (i. 1, ii. 1), the credence
given to the Christic sections of Josephus (i. 1), the unquestioning
acceptance of Eusebius’ turgid statements about Constantine’s life, are
proofs enough of its absence; and yet Sozomen was careful to present the
variety of accounts, so that one might have all points of view, if he
did not carefully sift the evidence. This is indeed quite a marked
feature of his method. Thus concerning the death of Arius, he gives five
different views (ii. 29, 30). He states carefully the varying shades of
opinion concerning Marcellus (ii. 33). The two classes of views of the
election of Macedonius are recorded and skillfully weighed (iii. 3). The
divisions of sentiment after the Synods of Sardica and Philippopolis are
accurately grouped (iii. 13). Other instances occur in iii. 14, 18, 23,
v. 2, 22, vi. 2, 12, 26, vii. 5, 22. These are but a selection of what
is habitual with him, and show a desire to present all sides of a
question, and to reflect the divergent convictions of his time about men
and measures; but he does not always try to find the just opinion and
weigh the testimony; he never tests the validity of his documents, and
only a few times tries to decide between clashing judgments, as to which
of them rests on a solid foundation of testimony. It is, however, to his
credit, when he confesses that his research is baffled, as in iv. 2,
with respect to the manner of Paul’s death, or suspends his judgment,
because the data are insufficient, as in the application to the empress,
of Chrysostom’s homily on female peccadilloes (viii. 6). Such language
shows that he not only sought to ascertain the truth, but to elicit the
facts out of conflicting testimony. We may not always think the game
worth the powder, but the temper and intent are commendable.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p53"></span>5. Sozomen has a marked zeal for
interpreting the events of history; and we can gather these hints of
histories, although they do not seem to have been defined as principles
in his own mind.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p54"></span>(*a*) He criticises by the rules of
traditionalism and monasticism; we find small men given undue
prominence, and large ones put far below their proper place (iv. 6, 9,
28, v. 7, 12, vi. 17, 26, vii. 12).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p55"></span><span id="page_215">p. 215</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_215"></span>(*b*) He seems to have regarded it his
occasional duty to explain the moral intent of a period, of the lives of
men, of a special incident; in other words, he used history reflectively
and ethically (viii. 4, 12, 17).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p56"></span>(*c*) He is fertile in suggesting
motives for which he has no documentary warrant. The entire history of
Julian is replete with the insinuation of mean motives (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p56.1"></span>ὥ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p56.2"></span>ς</span> <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p56.3"></span>συμβάλλω</span>). The
solitary commendation of him for lowering the price of provisions in
Antioch (v. 19) is only a ground for holding him up to ridicule for want
of judgment (iii. 5, 15, v. 2, 4, 5, 11, 19, 15, 22, vi. 12).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p57"></span>(*d*) He deems it necessary to apologize
for his favorites if they are in a questionable position (iii. 18, v. 6,
viii. 1).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p58"></span>(*e*) He thinks it right to give
recognition to men or measures who have enlisted his admiration (vii.
10).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p59"></span>(*f*) He traces cause and effect in a
pragmatic way (vi. 16, 38).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p60"></span>(*g*) He delights in taking prominent
figures of a period as the remarkable men who have created a remarkable
time, and are Divine instruments, or as objects of Divine protection on
account of their piety (iii. 13, 19, iv. 16, v. 13, vi. 17, 26, 27,
viii. 3, 4, 6).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p61"></span>(*h*) He dwells at times on
characteristics of human nature at play (vi. 4, 26).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p62"></span>(*i*) He gives a favorable explanation
of the bad actions of the orthodox (iv. 16).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p63"></span>(*j*) He sometimes introduces
speculative explanations or reflections (vi. 2, 4, 37, viii. 5).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p64"></span>6. Chronological method. (1) The
imperial reigns are taken as the great periods for the books, and the
material is distributed under them; no dates are given, only the names
of the emperors. This is stated in the proëmium, and is carried out in
the history. (2) He uses the consulates—

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p65"></span>(*a*) To mark the beginning and the end
of the entire history.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p66"></span>(*b*) Also occasionally to indicate the
synchronous occupants of the apostolic sees (i. 2); the convocation of a
council (iii. 12, 19, iv. 6, 17, vii. 12); the enthronement of a bishop
(iv. 26); the death of an emperor (vii. 29, ix. 1); some general but
important event (vii. 5, viii. 4).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p67"></span>(*c*) With this the corresponding year
of the emperor is sometimes but rarely given.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p68"></span>(*d*) Another conspicuous chronological
system with Sozomen, as in Eusebius, Socrates, and the church historians
in general, is to keep up the roll of succession in the greater sees.
This had become an essential note of the visible and Catholic Church.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p69"></span>(*e*) Occasionally intervals are
indicated as so many years after such and such an event (iii. 5, 11, 12,
iv. 1, ix. 1).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p70"></span>(*f*) The length of a reign or of an
episcopate, the duration of the life of an emperor or bishop, and of a
tendential period are stated, but not often, and without uniformity (iv.
11, v. 1, vii. 5).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p71"></span>(*g*) An unusual number of particles for
indefinite time occur as substitutes for an exact method. Nevertheless,
one of his main purposes was to narrate his history in strict
chronological order, so as to contain the virtue of a chronicle together
with a more developed presentation of events. This is almost entirely
forgotten, except that the sequence of occurrences is fairly kept up.
Yet he does not hesitate to break through even this sequence, when he
thinks the collocation of later facts, under the head that he is writing
of, may contribute to clearness and completeness, as he directly avers
in iii. 3, 14, iv. 10, 11, 12, v. 11, ix. 2. It is no easy task to make
a Regesta of Sozomen’s history; moreover, he often blunders in the very
few dates he gives, as well as in the arrangement of the events
themselves; these errors are due to the lack of a fixed system.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p72"></span>7. The contributions to geography are
mainly confined to Palestine. Passing more familiar ones, we have a list
as follows: Helenopolis (ii. 2), Majuma (ii. 5, v. 3, vii. 28),
Anthedon, Bethagathon, Asalea, Thabatha (iii. 14), Diocæsarea (iv. 17),
Bethelia (v. 15, vi. 32), Besan<span id="page_216">p. 216</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_216"></span>duca, Capharchobia, Gerara (vi. 32),
Botolium (vii. 28), Ceila, Berathsabia with its tomb, Nephsameena (vii.
29), Chaphar Zacharia (ix. 17). Most of these terms are Hebraic or
Syrian. Scythopolis is mentioned as abundant in palms (viii. 13). There
is no direct, and very little indirect light on the political or
ecclesiastical geography of the time; of course the seats of the bishops
and of the monks that are enumerated yield a few new names of places.
There are equally few hints in the physical features of the empire; the
great rains, or hail-storms, or earthquakes are recorded chiefly with
regard to their special ethical bearing. The topography of
Constantinople has been indicated previously; outside of these, details
of Alexandria, Antioch, Cæsarea, Cappadocia are given, but none of them
new.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p73"></span>8. Statistics. There is of course no
method in the presentation of statistics; there are general proportions,
as in ii. 6, iv. 27, v. 15, vi. 20; and special detail, as in the
enumeration of monks, iii. 14, vi. 29–34. The best illustration one
finds in the account of the Persian martyrs, where there was a distinct
effort at registration by Persian, Syrian, and Edessan authorities (ii.
13, 14).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p74"></span>9. Biography is one of the chief
constituents of his history. He gives us an account of most of the
distinguished Christian masters in theology, in monasticism, martyrdom,
oratory, scholarship, administration; and he is refreshingly fair in
giving a place to those who were not friendly to his view of the faith.
Athanasius may be a chief hero, but Arius is not neglected. Here we may
observe that Sozomen makes Aëtius the second head of rationalism, and
the man who gave it breadth of culture by building the system on the
basis of Aristotle (iii. 15, iv. 12); he regards Eunomius as but a
reflection of Aëtius (vi. 29). This position accorded to Aëtius is one
deserving special note and study. Philostorgius exalted Eunomius both in
his special encomium and in the history. Of course the two Cappadocians,
as well as Epiphanius and Chrysostom, are liberally sketched. The
imperial biography is fairly full, and a large space is accorded Julian.
In every book parts are devoted to the vitæ sanctorum, as the best way
to set before us the inner life of the Church and the fairest exhibition
of Christian character; these monastic sketches are, for the most part,
mere glimpses of individuals (a line or two suffices); whereas the more
conspicuous founders and organizers, such as Antony, Hilarion,
Pachomius, the Macarii, Evagrius, receive a larger recognition. He feels
the need of selection in the multiplicity of illustrious characters, and
after a sketch of Acacius, Zeno, and Ajax, he says: “I have mentioned
these as examples of those who served as priests at this period. It
would be a task to enumerate all, when the major part of them were good,
and God bore testimony to their lives by readily hearing their prayers
and by working many miracles” (vii. 28). Prominent as is the
biographical element, and earnestly as he endeavors to substantiate its
claims, he confesses, as to Ephraim (iii. 16), “it would require a more
experienced hand than mine to furnish a full description of his
character and that of the other illustrious men, who, about the same
period, had devoted themselves to a life of philosophy; and it is to be
regretted that Ephraim did not enter upon this undertaking. The attempt
is beyond my powers, for I possess but little knowledge of those great
men, or of their exploits.”

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p75"></span>10. In ecclesiastical culture we have
many and important incidental hints, but no direct general chapter
except vii. 19; and on special topics, those on the Easter controversy
(i. 16, 21, vi. 24, vii. 18, viii. 17) on the penitential presbyter
(vii. 16), and on relic worship, are the most significant.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p76"></span>11. Nor is there any methodical
statement of growth in the acquisition and exposition of truth; his
traditionalism in a measure precluded that, and his acknowledged
incapacity to go deeply into the differentiation of these discussions
prevented any system; there is no real history of dogma and ethics,
except on the external side. He is frank to say: “I leave their
doctrines to be judged by those whose right it is. For I have not set
forth to record such matters, nor is it befitting in history” (iii. 15);
that he does “not profess easily to understand or to expound these
matters” (vi. 27); and again, “I should be prolix were I to enter into
further particulars, <span id="page_217">p. 217</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_217"></span>and under the subject would be by no
means an easy one to me, since I have no such dialectic skill” (vii.
17). He furnishes us only with such a statement of doctrine, as sprang
out of polemics and councils and the variety of creeds.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p77"></span>12. And so with the history of
literature there is no such sustained account of Christian writers and
works as in Eusebius; the second stage of historians did not see fit to
be as complete and accurate as their exemplar in this particular, and
Photius was left to gather up the fragments for us. What strikes us as
peculiar is his confessed ignorance of the works of the greatest
theologians. He passes by all the technical writings of Athanasius; he
has no direct knowledge of the works of Hilary, though that might be
excused. Of the purely theological works of Basil and Gregory Nazianzen,
whom he regards as the pillars of the Nicene faith, he makes no mention;
and indeed makes but the slightest use of their letters and special
orations. Of the Arian theologians of all shades, he has no closer
knowledge; he confesses at the outset that he had not read the Thalia
(i. 21), but condemns it on Socrates’ authority; and he speaks of
Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, in language that displays unfamiliarity with
his treatises (viii. 2).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p78"></span>13. There are no conceptions of the
philosophy of history or of histories in general, other than those which
have been discussed before.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p79"></span>14. If we pass to the stylistics of
Sozomen, we find the quality of the Greek to be excellent; the
dedication is especially studied and rhetorical; the first chapter of
the first book is scarcely inferior in these traits, after which the
form becomes more abrupt, after the fashion of an epitomizer, and it is
obviously affected by his authorities. The likeness to Xenophon is not
continuous, any more than Socrates sustainedly imitates Thucydides,
although in elevated conception, Socrates is more in the vein of that
philosophic master of history, than Sozomen is a reflection of the
writer of the Hellenics. The vocabulary, too, is quite meager; the same
forms of expression occur again and again, yet Photius considers him
superior in diction to Socrates, <span
id="fr_1052"></span>[1053](#fn_1052.md) which only one who admires mere
form above spirit, can affirm. Certainly it would not be the view of
this more subjective age. Of course he reflects the decline of meaning
in particles and prepositional prefixes and participial constructions.
He does not begin his books with formal prefaces, such as Socrates
indulges in; chapter 1 of Book i. may, however, be regarded as
introductory; and it serves to link Christianity with Judaism. In the
distribution of his material there is no system agreeing with his own
outline of aims or any other order that is discoverable. The main topics
are: Secular affairs, relations of the emperor to Christianity, laws and
privileges, missions and persecutions, polemics and irenics, biographies
; but there is no regular discussion of these, either under the reigns
or in the books. None of the historians are any better in this regard.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p81"></span>A characteristic of our historian is the
admirable generalization and the summaries he pauses to make here and
there. The most notable are in iii. 17, a generalized description of the
period of the Constantines. iii. 18, a doctrinal summary. iv. 17–19,
conciliar movement in the West. iv. 20–22, conciliar movement in the
East. iv. 23–25, united results. vi. 6, a succinct comparison of Valens
with Valentinian. vi. 10, geographical centers of Nicenism. vi. 21,
geographical centers of Arianism and Orthodoxy. vi. 22, geographical
distribution of Macedonianism. vi. 26, genesis of Aëtianism
(Eunomianism). vi. 27, geographical distribution of beliefs. vi. 28–34,
geographical grouping of the monks. vii. 2, geographical supremacy of
Arianism in the East. vii. 4, geographical survey of religion. vii. 17,
divisions of Arianism. viii. 1, summary of Apostolic succession. The
selective process is often alluded to (ii. 3, iii. 14, 15, iv. 3, 23,
27, vii. 25, 28, ix. 1); and we must confess that he has kept a very
just proportion in this way among the subjects he has elected for his
narrative.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p82"></span>The Period described.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p83"></span>The work was to have covered the time
from 323 to 439, a period of 116 years; whereas, in fact, he writes
continuously only to the death of Honorius as the latest event, 423, and
the <span id="page_218">p. 218</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_218"></span>accession of Valentinian III. in 425;
beyond that in time, but mentioned anticipatively in the narrative (ix.
2), is the transfer of the forty martyrs, which happened certainly after
434, the year of the election of Proclus, therefore probably not far
from the proposed limit of his work, say 437 or 438; this would give a
period of about 114 or 115 years. He divides the record of this time
into nine books, distributed among the emperors.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p84"></span>i. and ii. To Constantine, 323–337=14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p85"></span>iii. and iv. His sons, 337–361=24.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p86"></span>v. and vi. Julian, Jovian, Valentinian
I., Valens, 361–375=17.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p87"></span>vii. and viii. Gratian and Valentinian
II., Theodosius I., Arcadius (and Honorius), 375–408=33.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p88"></span>ix. (Honorius) and Theodosius II.,
408–437=25.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p89"></span>A noticeable feature, save in the case
of Book ix., is the grouping of books by twos, in which the intervals
discussed vary from fourteen to thirty-three years. This grouping seems
entirely arbitrary.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p90"></span>For whom he wrote.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p91"></span>The question for whom he wrote has been
somewhat obscured by those who regard him simply as a plagiarist. He
evidently turned himself to this task under the conviction that there
was need of some such work as his. He addressed himself chiefly to
Christians and not only to monks, because he defers to the narrow views
of some friends about the mysteries,—and represses creeds and
sacraments, for fear the book might fall into the hands of the
uninitiated. He moreover designed his record, not for the more learned
classes, but for the instruction of ordinary believers, since he
professes uniformly a great modesty in treating the profounder themes of
theology and the characters of the more eminent men. Yet he did not
hesitate to submit it to the criticism of his emperor and invited the
most erasive and final judgment. This is probably as far as we may go in
the absence of any direct address to specific readers.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p92"></span>The Sources

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p93"></span>I. Those enumerated in his ideal plan
(i. 1).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p94"></span>1. The transactions in which he was
engaged.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p95"></span>2. The transactions in which others were
engaged, who either knew or saw the events in his day, or in prior
generations.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p96"></span>3. Laws established concerning religion.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p97"></span>4. Acts of Synods.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p98"></span>5. Record of innovations.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p99"></span>6. Imperial letters.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p100"></span>7. Clerical letters.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p101"></span>II. The sources actually mentioned. (1)
Documents.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p102"></span>a. Documents actually quoted with text.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p103"></span>The retractation, by Eusebius and
Theognis (ii. 16).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p104"></span>The confession of Arius and Euzoïus to
Constantine (ii. 27).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p105"></span>The Epistle of Constantine to the Synod
of Tyre (ii. 28).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p106"></span>Constantine Cæsar to the people of the
Catholic Church of the city of Alexandria (iii. 2).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p107"></span>Epistle of the Synod of Jerusalem in
behalf of Athanasius (iii. 22).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p108"></span>Ursacius and Valens to Julius (iii.
23).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p109"></span>Ursacius and Valens to Athanasius (iii.
24).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p110"></span>George of Laodicea to Macedonius,
Basilius, Cecropius, and Eugenius (iv. 13); new.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p111"></span>Epistle of Constantius to the church at
Antioch (iv. 14); new.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p112"></span>Epistle of the Synod of Ariminum to the
Emperor Constantius (iv. 18).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p113"></span>Epistle of Julian to Arsacius, the
high-priest of Galatia (v. 16).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p114"></span>Epistle of Julian to the bishops, only
a phrase quoted (v. 18); new.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p115"></span>Synod at Antioch, to Jovian (vi. 4).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p116"></span><span id="page_219">p. 219</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_219"></span>Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus to
Liberius (vi. 11).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p117"></span>Synod of Rome to bishops of Illyricum
(vi. 23); first with Sozomen; repeated by Theodoret (*H. E*. ii. 22).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p118"></span>Innocent to John (viii. 26); also in
Palladius’ Dial.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p119"></span>Innocent to the presbyters, deacons,
all the clergy, and the people of the church of Constantinople (viii.
26); also in Palladius’ Dial.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p120"></span>There are five imperial letters, four
synodical letters, seven episcopal letters, one presbyterial letter,
making seventeen in all. This is not nearly so large a number as is
given by Socrates, but we must remember the expressed purpose of
Sozomen, that, as a rule, he would give abstracts only, and text when in
his judgment fairness made it necessary. Of these documents, there are
at least three found in no earlier author. In them all, there is only
one symbol transcribed, and that is from Arius and Euzoïus!

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p121"></span>b. Documentary acts of Synods which are
mentioned by name.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p122"></span>Acts of the Synod of Tyre (ii. 25).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p123"></span>Acts of the Synod of Seleucia, taken
down by tachygraphists (iv. 22).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p124"></span>c. Acts of those Synods only, of which
an abstract is recorded.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p125"></span>Alexandria............................... i.
15.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p126"></span>Seleucia.....................................
iv. 22, 23.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p127"></span>Bithynia...................................
i. 15.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p128"></span>Constantinople........................... iv.
24, 25.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p129"></span>Palestine..................................
i. 15.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p130"></span>Alexandria.................................
v. 12.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p131"></span>Egyptian.................................. i.
16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p132"></span>Macedonian Council, s.l............. v.
14.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p133"></span>Nicæa..................................... i.
17–23.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p134"></span>Antioch......................................
vi. 4.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p135"></span>Antioch...................................
ii. 19.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p136"></span>Lampsacus.................................
vi. 7.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p137"></span>Tyre........................................
ii. 25.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p138"></span>Nicæa........................................
vi. 8.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p139"></span>Jerusalem................................ ii.
27.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p140"></span>Macedonian,
s.l.......................... vi. 10, 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p141"></span>Constantinople.........................
ii. 29, 33.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p142"></span>Sicily..........................................
vi. 12.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p143"></span>Constantinople.........................
iii. 3.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p144"></span>Tyana........................................
vi. 12.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p145"></span>Antioch...................................
iii. 2.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p146"></span>In
Caria..................................... vi. 12.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p147"></span>Antioch...................................
iii. 8.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p148"></span>Rome.........................................
vi. 23.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p149"></span>Philippopolis............................
iii. 11.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p150"></span>Pazucomen................................ vi.
24.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p151"></span>Sardica....................................
iii. 11, 12.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p152"></span>Rome.........................................
vi. 25.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p153"></span>Jerusalem................................
iii. 21, 22.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p154"></span>Antioch
(Caria).......................... vii. 2.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p155"></span>Alexandria............................... iv.
1.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p156"></span>Constantinople...........................
vii. 7–9.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p157"></span>Sirmium...................................
iv. 6.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p158"></span>Sangurum...................................
vii. 18.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p159"></span>Antioch...................................
iv. 8.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p160"></span>Constantinople...........................
viii. 2.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p161"></span>Milan.......................................
iv. 9.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p162"></span>Cyprus.......................................
viii. 14.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p163"></span>Antioch...................................
iv. 12.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p164"></span>Of the Oak at Chalcedon...........
viii. 17.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p165"></span>Ancyra....................................
iv. 13.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p166"></span>Constantinople...........................
viii. 19.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p167"></span>Ariminum................................. iv.
16–19, 23.

<span
id="iii.ii.ii-p168"></span>Constantinople...........................
viii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p169"></span>d. Letters of which an abstract is
given, or the general object is stated.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p170"></span>Constantine’s Letter to Alexander and
Arius.............................................................. i.
16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p171"></span>Imperial Letters about the Nicene
Council.................................................................
i. 21, 25.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p172"></span>Constantine to
Sapor................................................................................................
ii. 15.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p173"></span>Constantine to the people of
Alexandria....................................................................
ii. 22.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p174"></span>Constantine to
Athanasius.........................................................................................
ii. 23.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p175"></span>Synod of Tyre to the
bishops....................................................................................
ii. 25.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p176"></span>Antony’s letters to the
Emperor.................................................................................
ii. 31.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p177"></span>Constantine’s letter to the
Alexandrians.....................................................................
ii. 31.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p178"></span>Eusebius to
Julius......................................................................................................
iii. 7.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p179"></span>Julius, bishop of Rome, to the bishops
of the East...................................................... iii.
8.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p180"></span>Synod of Antioch to
Julius.........................................................................................
iii. 8.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p181"></span>Constantius to Philip, prefect of
Constantinople.........................................................
iii. 9.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p182"></span>Bishops of Egypt in favor of
Athanasius.....................................................................
iii. 10.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p183"></span>Julius to the bishops of
Antioch.................................................................................
iii. 10.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p184"></span>Constans to
Constantius............................................................................................
iii. 10.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p185"></span>Constans to
Constantius............................................................................................
iii. 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p186"></span>Athanasius to
Constans.............................................................................................
iii. 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p187"></span>Paul, bishop of
Constantinople..................................................................................
iii. 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p188"></span>The bishops of Philippopolis to the
bishops of the West............................................. iii.
11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p189"></span>Constans to
Constantius............................................................................................
iii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p190"></span>Constantius to
Athanasius.........................................................................................
iii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p191"></span>Constantius to the
Alexandrians.................................................................................
iii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p192"></span>Julius to clergy and people of
Alexandria...................................................................
iii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p193"></span>Constantius to the bishops, presbyters,
and to the people of the

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p194"></span>church of
Alexandria...........................................................................................
iii. 21.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p195"></span>Cyril of Jerusalem to
Constantius...............................................................................
iv. 5.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p196"></span>Constantius to
Athanasius.........................................................................................
iv. 9.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p197"></span>Constantius to Basil of
Ancyra..................................................................................
iv. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p198"></span>Basil of Ancyra to
Constantius..................................................................................
iv. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p199"></span>Constantius to
Basil..................................................................................................
iv. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p200"></span>Basil to all the
bishops...............................................................................................
iv. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p201"></span>Athanasius to a
friend................................................................................................
iv. 17.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p202"></span>Constantius to the Synod of
Ariminum.......................................................................
iv. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p203"></span>Reply of the
bishops.................................................................................................
iv. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p204"></span><span id="page_220">p. 220</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_220"></span>Julian to the
Alexandrians..........................................................................................
v. 7.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p205"></span>Titus of Bostra to
Julian.............................................................................................
v. 15.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p206"></span>Julian to Jewish patriarchs, leaders,
and people.......................................................... v.
22.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p207"></span>Reply of the
Jews.....................................................................................................
v. 22.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p208"></span>Julius to Arsacius, king of
Armenia............................................................................
vi. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p209"></span>Jovian to the governors of the
provinces....................................................................
vi. 3.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p210"></span>Basil of Ancyra, Silvanus of Tarsus,
Sophronius of Pompeiopolis

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p211"></span>*et al*., to
Jovian...................................................................................................
vi. 4.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p212"></span>Liberius and the Western bishop to the
East.............................................................. vi.
12.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p213"></span>Memorial of grievances presented by
eighty ecclesiastics to Valens............................ vi. 13.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p214"></span>Damasus in behalf of Peter of
Alexandria...................................................................
vi. 39.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p215"></span>Synodical epistles of Rome to Paulinus,
bishop of Antioch......................................... vii. 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p216"></span>Western bishops and Gratian to the
Eastern bishops.................................................. vii.
11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p217"></span>Irenic letters to the adherents of
Flavian from the priests of Egypt and the West.......... viii. 3.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p218"></span>Theophilus of Alexandria, paschal
letter.....................................................................
viii. 11.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p219"></span>Theophilus of Alexandria to
Epiphanius.....................................................................
viii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p220"></span>Epiphanius to the bishops and the
bishop of Constantinople against Origenism............ viii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p221"></span>2. Authors.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p222"></span>(*a*) Authors from whose works a
textual quotation appears.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p223"></span>Apolinarius, the Syrian, on the
succession of Athanasius.......................................... ii.
17, new.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p224"></span>Extract from Athanasius’ *Epistola ad
Episcopos Ægypti et Libyæ*........................ ii. 30.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p225"></span>Extract from Libanius, the Sophist; *in
oratione funebri de laudibus Juliani*........... vi. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p226"></span>Gregory Nazianzen to Nectarius, on
Apolinarius; *Ep*. ccii....................................... vi. 27.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p227"></span>The first extract alone is known
through no other source.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p228"></span>(*b*) Authors and works directly
referred to as used.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p229"></span>The
Sibyl.........................................................................................................
i. 1, ii. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p230"></span>
Josephus.........................................................................................................
i. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p231"></span>Clemens
(Romanus).........................................................................................
i. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p232"></span>
Hegesippus......................................................................................................
i. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p233"></span>Julius
Africanus................................................................................................
i. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p234"></span>Eusebius Pamphili, *Historia
Ecclesiastica*....................................................... i.
1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p235"></span>*Vita
Constantini*.............................................................................................
i. 3, extract.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p236"></span>Philo
(Pythagorean).........................................................................................
i. 12.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p237"></span>Biographies of
Monks......................................................................................
i. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p238"></span>Eusebius’
Oration............................................................................................
i. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p239"></span>Address of
Constantine....................................................................................
i. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p240"></span>Collection of Nicene
Canons............................................................................
i. 22.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p241"></span>Syrians’ Account of the actions and
life of Bishop Milles................................... ii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p242"></span>Persian, Syrian, Edessan, martyrology
of Persians............................................. ii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p243"></span>Discourse of Eudoxius, extract
from.................................................................
iv. 26.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p244"></span>Meletius’ first discourses at
Antioch.................................................................
iv. 28.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p245"></span>Athanasius, on his
flight....................................................................................
v. 12.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p246"></span>(*c*) Authors and their works
mentioned, but not used.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p247"></span>Arius, the Thalia, not
read................................................................................
i. 21.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p248"></span>Eustathius, bishop of
Antioch...........................................................................
ii. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p249"></span>Marcellus (*de Subjectione Filii
Dei*)............................................................... ii.
33.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p250"></span>Asterius, a treatise on the defense of
the Arian doctrine..................................... ii. 33.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p251"></span>Acacius, bishop of Cæsarea,
works.................................................................
iii. 2.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p252"></span>Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste, an
ascetic treatise, also attributed

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p253"></span>to Basil the
Great.......................................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p254"></span>Eusebius, bishop of Emesa,
works...................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p255"></span>Titus, bishop of Bostra,
works.........................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p256"></span>Serapion, bishop of Ancyra,
works..................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p257"></span>Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia,
works............................................................ iii.
14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p258"></span>Acacius, bishop of Cæsarea,
works.................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p259"></span>Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem,
works.....................................................................
iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p260"></span>Didymus,
works..............................................................................................
iii. 15.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p261"></span>Lucifer, bishop of Calaris,
works......................................................................
iii. 15.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p262"></span>Hilary, bishop of Pictavium,
works...................................................................
iii. 15, v. 13.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p263"></span>Aëtius,
works..................................................................................................
iii. 15.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p264"></span>Ephraim Syrus, works and
translations.............................................................
iii. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p265"></span>Bardasanes,
poems..........................................................................................
iii. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p266"></span>Harmonius,
poems...........................................................................................
iii. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p267"></span>Photinus, a work before Constantius,
and many works..................................... iv. 6.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p268"></span>Acacius, literary
works....................................................................................
iv. 23.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p269"></span>Apolinarius, works, with those against
him........................................................ v. 18, vi.
27.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p270"></span>Julian,
Misopogon............................................................................................
v. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p271"></span>Eunomius, works, especially Exercises
for the Mind,

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p272"></span>with those against
him................................................................................
vi. 27, vii. 17.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p273"></span>Evagrius,
works...............................................................................................
vi. 30.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p274"></span>Themistius, oration,
outline...............................................................................
vi. 36.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p275"></span>Ulfilas, translation of Bible into
Gothic.............................................................. vi.
37.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p276"></span>Sisinnius, bishop of the Novatians in
Constantinople, works.............................. viii. 1.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p277"></span>Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus,
works...................................................................
viii. 2.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p278"></span>Theodore, bishop of Mopsuestia,
works.......................................................... viii. 2.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p279"></span>Chrysostom, *Ep*. to
Theodore..........................................................................
viii. 2.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p280"></span>——on
Eutropius............................................................................................
viii. 7.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p281"></span>——Vices of
females......................................................................................
viii. 16.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p282"></span>——Extempore discourse after his
return......................................................... viii.
18.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p283"></span>——About the Silver
Statue............................................................................
viii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p284"></span>Origen, works; especially the one from
which Bishop Theotimus read............... viii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p285"></span>An unecclesiastic but ancient Hebrew
document............................................... ix. 17.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p286"></span>(*d*) Hymns of which a line or thought
is given.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p287"></span>Refrain of the odes at
Antioch..........................................................................
iii. 20.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p288"></span>At procession of Babylas,
Antioch...................................................................
v. 19.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p289"></span>To Dionysos, by Epiphanius the
Sophist........................................................... vi.
25.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p290"></span>Arian
hymns....................................................................................................
viii. 8.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p291"></span><span id="page_221">p. 221</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_221"></span>Unmentioned Authorities.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p292"></span>Sozomen has refrained in large measure
from indicating directly his chief authorities for political or
ecclesiastical affairs; he has indicated, indeed, some minor springs, as
we have seen, but the major ones are passed by. He imitated neither
Eusebius, nor Socrates, nor Evagrius in this omission. He does abound in
phrases indicative of authorities; thus of the forms of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.1"></span>λέγω, λέγουσι,
λέγονται, ἔλεγον, ἐλέγετο</span> are used somewhat sparingly, while
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.2"></span>λέγεται</span>
occurs over eighty times, and <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p292.3"></span>λόγος</span> about twenty; of <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.4"></span>φήμι, ἔφησεν</span> and
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.5"></span>φήμη</span>
occasionally, while <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p292.6"></span>φησί</span> or <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p292.7"></span>φασί</span> introduces about thirty
statements; <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p292.8"></span>εἰρήσθω</span> and <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.9"></span>εἰρήται</span> also
appear in a few cases. One has no assurance of either the method or the
validity of the sources from such vague terms, and it is this uncertain
and incautious manner that has so often led critics to impeach his
general worth, and it must be conceded with some degree of justice; the
endless iteration of such words savors of gossip rather than history;
this obscurity is not diminished by his persistent <span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p292.10"></span>οἶμαι</span> and less
frequent <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p292.11"></span>εἰκάζω</span>.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p293"></span>1. In the discussion of his unmentioned
authorities, the first to be considered is Socrates. He is nowhere
hinted at, unless under an indefinite “some say,” when Sozomen presents
a group of opinions.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p294"></span>Socrates preceded Sozomen by a few
years, writing his history not long after 439. <span
id="fr_1053"></span>[1054](#fn_1053.md) Sozomen undoubtedly produced his
record later, as we have already seen, and it would be just as likely
that Socrates should be in the hands of Sozomen as that Philip of Side’s
contemporary Christian History should have been open to the criticism of
Socrates; indeed, the predecessor’s work was quite probably an incentive
to the task proposed by Sozomen to himself. The internal evidence makes
the use sure. We have only to note how Socrates derived his statements
about the Novatians from members connected with that body of believers;
these very facts are reproduced by Sozomen as Socrates gives them, with
the slightest of differences; there is no refutation of this possible.
Socrates, therefore, manifestly preceded, and Sozomen employed the
material thus amassed.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p296"></span>There are three views of the
connection: (1) that Sozomen, excepting a few and not very valuable
additions of his own, plagiarized Socrates; (2) that he used the same
authorities as Socrates independently, and the points of identity arose
from the language of the original in the hands of both; (3) that
Socrates was his guide to the chief writers from whom he drew directly
with more or less freedom; and when no other light presented itself or
was to be found, he would use his path-finder. There is scarcely a more
fascinating and genuine field for analytical criticism than this. It
should be remarked at the outset that we cannot justly apply this term
plagiarism, in its modern sense, to the use of material current in these
earlier days of history. There was no more intention to appropriate the
work of another in Sozomen, than there was in Socrates, when he fails to
note his authority, and yet very evidently has followed him closely; or
when Theodoret has taken his stuff from Sozomen, and says nothing about
the original. To assail Sozomen as if he were a deliberate thief, and
stigmatize him as a feeble reviser of Socrates, is wholly unfair and
unwarranted by the general usage of his day and by the facts of the
case. In no way can it be proved that Sozomen was a general plagiarist
in the opprobrium and iniquity conveyed by the modern use of that term.
That Socrates was the finer mind, that he had larger sympathies, that he
was concerned to reproduce documents in an ampler degree, that he
follows the development of the Church with a sharper and brighter
criticism, no one can doubt; he is conspicuously superior in almost
every quality of a historian, and confined himself more nearly to the
modern idea of which the science should aim to do; but that does not set
aside the distinct and supplemental value of Sozomen and his fullness in
lines, however zigzag, which had been neglected by others. The
acknowledged precedence of Socrates does not warrant us in assailing the
fidelity of the lesser light. Since the notes are designed to indicate
the relationship between <span id="page_222">p. 222</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_222"></span>the two, the passages need not be
anticipated here. (2) The second view, that Sozomen made an independent
use of the same source which Holzhausen revived, Stäudlin supported,
Hefele and Nolte have espoused, seems less tenable than the first. The
Novatian material cannot, under any possible conditions, be so
explained; the arrangement of the details in eight of the books will not
permit view. The very corrections of that arrangement require us to be
convinced that Socrates was in the corrector’s eye; the close
resemblance of language in many places where he might easily have
expanded from the originals, but preferred to confine himself to the
equally meagre tracings of his predecessor, leave no basis for this
solution. (3) The third explanation of the interrelation seems thus far
the most accurate. <span id="fr_1054"></span>[1055](#fn_1054.md) Sozomen
took Socrates for a guide in the main, (*a*) as to consecution of
events, (*b*) as to sources, much as students would use a Church history
to base their own studies upon. Socrates was a director to the
authorities; these Sozomen would use freely; when they failed him, he
would take the facts given by Socrates, precisely as he did those which
Eusebius or Sabinus furnished, because he had nothing better, and in
spite probably of his own inquiries; for let us remember how he insists
that he has investigated the originals, and that he had been
conscientious in his researches. Now it must be said in further
modification of this statement:

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p298"></span>(*a*) That some of the sources
obviously consulted by both were doubtless known to Sozomen without
Socrates to point them out. Rufinus and Eusebius and Sabinus were known
to everybody. In all such cases we may concede an independent reading of
those authors, and yet the order in which the subject-matter is arranged
is at times more that of his guide-book than of his original.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p299"></span>(*b*) Moreover, he introduces many new
outlines and abstracts, particularly in the transactions of the synods.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p300"></span>(*c*) He also has independent sources
of biography.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p301"></span>(*d*) His ninth book is wholly unique
and entirely out of the leading-strings of the master, for unexplained
reasons.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p302"></span>The notes also try to indicate in a
measure these more independent traits.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p303"></span>2. The next unmentioned source is
Rufinus, in his continuation of Eusebius in two books; this Sozomen
certainly read independently of Socrates, very likely in a Greek
translation. That author’s *Historia Monachorum* also was sifted for a
few of the monastic biographies; in these cases there is a closer
resemblance to Rufinus than to the parallel sketches of Palladius.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p304"></span>3. Eusebius’ Life of Constantine is a
primary source for Books i. and ii. In all the events pertaining to that
emperor, it is drawn upon freely, just as freely as Socrates employs it,
or as Sozomen handles Socrates.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p305"></span>4. Athanasius is also used
independently, although in collocating the events, Socrates is followed.
There is direct reference to one work only (v. 12), as we have seen. The
unmentioned are as follows:—

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p306"></span>The Life of St. Antony: *Antonii Vita*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p307"></span>*Epistola de Synodis Arimini in Italia
et Seleuciæ in Isauria celebratis*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p308"></span>*Epistola ad Serapionem, de morte
Arii*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p309"></span>*Synodicon*; lost.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p310"></span>*Tomus ad Antiochenses*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p311"></span>*Epistola ad Episcopos Ægypti et Libyæ;
ep. encyclica contra Arianos*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p312"></span>*Epistola Encyclica ad Episcopos*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p313"></span>*Historia Arianorum ad Monachos*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p314"></span>*Apologia contra Arianos*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p315"></span>*Apologia ad Constantium imperatorem*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p316"></span>*Epistolæ heortasticæ*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p317"></span>5. Philostorgius: *Historia
Ecclesiastica*, also furnished occasional material, as even the excerpts
remaining to us indicate.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p318"></span><span id="page_223">p. 223</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_223"></span>6. Sabinus: Collection of Synods (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.ii-p318.1"></span>Συναγώγη τῶν
συνόδων</span>), which is lost; this book was written in the Macedonian
and Arian interest; the author is mentioned by Socrates and criticised
for his partiality. We can observe how Sozomen used it, where he adds to
the statements of Socrates, which the latter had borrowed from that
work. These additions are quite frequent in the transactions of the
synods; and again a few records of councils, otherwise unknown, are thus
preserved for us. We have here a proof of how Sozomen improved on his
guide in the details.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p319"></span>7. Philippus of Side; the Christian
History (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p319.1"></span>χριστιανικὴ ἱστορία</span>); a few
fragments are preserved; Socrates criticises him severely. <span
id="fr_1055"></span>[1056](#fn_1055.md)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p321"></span>8. For the laws, outside of the records
alluded to, he probably used the *Codex Gregorianus* and the *Codex
Hermogenianus*, his old text-books, and not unlikely the *Codex
Theodosianus* (438).

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p322"></span>9. Basil the Great: the limited use is
indicated by the notes.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p323"></span>10. Gregory Nazianzen: *Orationes
contra Julianum*. Other occasional citations are indicated in the notes.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p324"></span>11. Sulpicius Severus: *vita S.
Martini*was undoubtedly the source, possibly through a Greek translation
of the same, for the summary of that saint’s life in iii. 14.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p325"></span>*Historia sacra*: sometimes there is a
hint as if this work had been before him.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p326"></span>12. Palladius: *Historia Lausica* was
not so constant a companion as some have suggested; Sozomen has rather
borrowed from the sources out of which the bishop of Helenopolis
gathered his sketches of the monks.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p327"></span>*Dialogus de vita S. Joannis
Chrysostomi* was used in narrating the incidents of John’s life in Book
viii. There is no indication of any large draught of Chrysostom’s own
writings: they may have been used for a few suggestions, contained in
the orations before mentioned.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p328"></span>One does not feel sure that Hieronymus
or Orosius came under his eye.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p329"></span>He does not seem to have made any
direct use of Ammianus Marcellinus (*Res gestæ*), nor of the earlier
Latin chroniclers. The points of resemblance with Eutropius (*Breviarium
Historiæ Romanæ*) are very doubtful in my judgment; Eunapius (*ex
historia excerpta et fragmenta*) seems to have been used in his full
form; Zosimus (*Historia*) pretty surely; and for the ninth book, hardly
with a doubt the full Olympiodorus, of whom fragments only remain, and
yet in that same ninth book there are entirely independent political
chapters whose source cannot yet be determined.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p330"></span>The Ninth Book.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p331"></span>The most curious feature of all is Book
ix., in the entire change of its method; even were the ecclesiastical
affairs to have been presented, he has given here in remarkable excess
the events affecting the Western state; he has done it nowhere else; to
be sure, he proposes it as a demonstration of the value of imperial
piety, and of the ever-present Divine grace, but nowhere else has he
done this in so cumulative a form. Some wonderful change came over his
purpose, whether that were a fuller view of the relation between state
and church, or the desire to deepen the impression of his philosophy of
history; or did some imperial domestic catastrophe make him reluctant to
dwell upon the sad events which darkened the court he had so glorified?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p332"></span>The grave question arises, Is anything
of Book ix. lost?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p333"></span>That it is unfinished cannot be
doubted; for (a) In the Proëmium he announces his purpose to carry it to
the year <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ii.ii-p333.1"></span>a.d.</span> 439, or the seventeenth
consulate of Theodosius; but this is not done with any of his ordinary
fullness, although his hints reach beyond, as we have seen. (b) In
lauding Pulcheria (ix. 1) he remarks, “That new heresies have not
prevailed in our time, we shall find to be due especially to her, as we
shall subsequently see.” Here is the declared purpose of delineating the
history of Nestorianism and its overthrow, but there is no appearance of
the struggle in the record itself; he altogether passes by Nestorius, as
bishop of Constantinople. (c) The <span id="page_224">p. 224</span>
<span id="iii.ii.ii-Page_224"></span>record of the forty martyrs he
purposely took out of its normal order, to illustrate the excellence of
Pulcheria; a late event is anticipated, but the whole of what would have
been its normal setting is not there. (d) One would naturally expect
that a book which had thus far treated mainly of state difficulties
would have the usual balance, at least, and that ecclesiastical affairs
would have preponderated in the remaining chapters; but there is only an
initial chapter. Seventeen chapters are not his usual tale for a book;
there is an evident break; the discussion of Nestorianism is not
written. Most of all would one expect some allusion to the restoration
of Chrysostom under Proclus. (e) In ix. 16, he says, “Among other
relics, those of Zechariah, the very ancient prophet, and of Stephen,
who was ordained deacon by the Apostles, were discovered; and it seems
incumbent upon me to describe the mode, since the discovery of each was
marvelous and divine;” but he gives only the invention of Zechariah (c.
17). The story of Stephen fails us, and would doubtless have followed
immediately. It was his purpose to narrate the story,—this story which
Theophanes and Marcellinus mention and Lucianus wrote a book about. (f)
In c. ix. 17, this is confirmed; for he says, “I shall first speak of
the relics of the prophet”; to his second he does not come. (g) The
close is abrupt; one feels instinctively that something is amiss. Hence
the work, as we have it, is obviously not complete.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p334"></span>Did he finish it, and is the conclusion
lost?

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p335"></span>The mistake into which Gregory I. fell
in ascribing to Sozomen the commendation of Theodore of Mopsuestia, with
which Theodoret really closes his history, led Baronius to maintain that
we did not have the whole of Sozomen; and others have asserted the same
for reasons which are indeed sufficient to prove that the history is
unfinished, but not that anything is lost. That we have all that Sozomen
wrote is more likely, because the Tripartite History at x. 24 makes the
last use of Sozomen at viii. 25; it would surely have gone further in
its dependence upon him had the later controversy been treated of, since
he had been already a chief authority. Nicephorus Callistus, *Historia
Ecclesiastica*, xiv. 8, gives the account of the finding of Zechariah in
c. 9; the story of Stephen in c. 10; then the story of the forty
martyrs. His source beyond is Socrates, until Evagrius takes up the
thread of affairs. If Sozomen had written the more recent events
parallel with Socrates, Nicephorus would undoubtedly have followed him
as before. Of Theophanes, one cannot speak so confidently. Moreover, we
cannot help asking, since we have Socrates, Theodoret, and Evagrius
complete, why should Sozomen, who was so admired an author, have
suffered any loss? Now, if we have Sozomen entire so far as he wrote,
why did he stop where he did? There are no sufficient subjective reasons
to be offered. It could scarcely have been in any unfavorable criticism
of his prince, for the work seems to have been accepted by his imperial
patron; and there was certainly nothing as objectionable in Sozomen, as
in Socrates or in Olympiodorus. Nor is it likely that the unhappiness
which invaded the court, the domestic jealousies, which rent its
religious as well as connubial peace, or the quarrels over Cyrus or
Paulinus or Chrysaphius, in any way restrained him; for he was beyond
some, if not all of these agitations, at the time of his writing, and he
had deliberately chosen to ignore such noble personages as Anthemius,
Troïlus, Synesius, Aurelianus, and Eudocia, so that we can argue little
from his silence, save his manifest jealousy for Pulcheria, and his
hostility to certain more liberal tendencies developed under Eudocia.
The Nestorian controversy would have been a choice field wherein to
exalt the influence of Pulcheria, as he himself suggested. On the whole,
one is constrained to believe that Sozomen died before he had completed
the record which he had proposed to himself. He must have been nearing
his seventieth year when thus suddenly arrested in his chosen study.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p336"></span>The Major uses made of his Work.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p337"></span>The major uses of him subsequently were
by:

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p338"></span>(a) Epiphanius Scholasticus, who made a
translation into Latin, which Cassiodorus abbreviated, polished, and
incorporated in the *Historia Tripartita*. <span
id="fr_1056"></span>[1057](#fn_1056.md)

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p340"></span><span id="page_225">p. 225</span> <span
id="iii.ii.ii-Page_225"></span>(b) The deacon Liberatus, in his
*Historia Nestorianorum*, used the *Tripartita*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p341"></span>(c) Theophanes, in his *Chronographia*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p342"></span>(d) Theodorus Lector in his *Historia
Tripartita*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p343"></span>(e) Nicephorus Callistus, in his
*Historia Ecclesiastica* incorporating Theodorus’ *Tripartita*.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p344"></span>The Errors.

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p345"></span>The errors are numerous, as already
suggested by Possevin, on dogmatic grounds; Du Pin, and more recently by
Harnack, for historic reasons. They are due to the lack of a systematic
chronology, and the blind copying of his authority, especially Socrates,
and occasionally to his attempts to correct the order given by his
authority.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1047"></span>[200:1048](2020270.htm#fr_1047.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p4"></span>Otto, *Corp. App*. Vol. ix. (Migne, *P.
G.* vi.).

<span id="fn_1048"></span>[200:1049](2020270.htm#fr_1048.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p7"></span>See his epigrams in *Anth. Gr*.

<span id="fn_1049"></span>[200:1050](2020270.htm#fr_1049.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p8"></span>Güldenpinning thinks there may be a
suggestion of the fatal apple in Sozomen’s praise of his sovereign’s
abstemiousness. I would like to agree, but cannot. *Die Kirchengesch.
des Theodoret von Kyrrhos*, pp. 12, 13.

<span id="fn_1050"></span>[200:1051](2020270.htm#fr_1050.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p10"></span>Heraclea Pontica of the maps.

<span id="fn_1051"></span>[200:1052](2020270.htm#fr_1051.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p11"></span>Marcell. *Am. Chron. s. d*.; *Chron.
Pasch. s. d*.; *Novell. Theod*. xxiii. 5, 21.

<span id="fn_1052"></span>[217:1053](2020270.htm#fr_1052.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p79.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p80"></span>Myrobib. cod. XXX.

<span id="fn_1053"></span>[221:1054](2020270.htm#fr_1053.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p294.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p295"></span>*H. E*. vii. 48.

<span id="fn_1054"></span>[222:1055](2020270.htm#fr_1054.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p296.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p297"></span>Jeep: *Quellenuntersuchungen zu den
griechischen Kirchenhistorikern*, pp. 137–147.

<span id="fn_1055"></span>[223:1056](2020270.htm#fr_1055.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p319.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p320"></span>*H. E*. vii. 27.

<span id="fn_1056"></span>[224:1057](2020270.htm#fr_1056.md) <span
id="iii.ii.ii-p338.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.ii-p339"></span>See preface of that work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliography.](2020271.md)
