[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020200)  [Next](2020202.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*The Arians and the
Supporters of the ‘Homoousion’ hold Nocturnal Assemblies and sing
Antiphonal Hymns, a Species of Composition ascribed to Ignatius,
surnamed Theophorus.* <span id="fr_854"></span>[855](#fn_854.md) *Conflict
between the Two Parties.*

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.ix-p3.1"></span>The</span> Arians, as we have said, held their
meetings without the city. As often therefore as the festal days
occurred—I mean Saturday <span id="fr_855"></span>[856](#fn_855.md) and
Lord’s day—in each week, on which assemblies are usually held in the
churches, they congregated within the city gates about the public
squares, and sang responsive verses adapted to the Arian heresy. This
they did during the greater part of the night: and again in the morning,
chanting the same songs which they called responsive, they paraded
through the midst of the city, and so passed out of the gates to go to
their places of assembly. But since they did not desist from making use
of insulting expressions in relation to the Homoousians, often singing
such words as these: ‘Where are they that say three things are but one
power?’—John fearing lest any of the more simple should be drawn away
from the church by such kind of hymns, opposed to them some of his own
people, that they also employing themselves in chanting nocturnal hymns,
might obscure the effort of the Arians, and confirm his own party in the
profession of their faith. John’s design indeed seemed to be good, but
it issued in tumult and dangers. For as the Homoousians performed their
nocturnal hymns with greater display,—for there were invented by John
silver crosses for them on which lighted wax-tapers were carried,
provided at the expense of the empress Eudoxia,—the Arians who were very
numerous, and fired with envy, resolved to revenge themselves by a
desperate and riotous attack upon their rivals. For from the remembrance
of their own recent domination, they were full of confidence in their
ability to overcome, and of contempt for their adversaries. Without
delay therefore, on one of these nights, they engaged in a conflict; and
Briso, one of the eunuchs of the empress, who was at that time leading
the chanters of these hymns, was wounded by a stone in the forehead, and
also some of the people on both sides were killed. Whereupon the emperor
being angered, forbade the Arians to chant their hymns any more in
public. Such were the events of this occasion.

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p5"></span>We must now however make some allusion to
the origin of this custom in the church of responsive singing.
Ignatius <span id="fr_856"></span>[857](#fn_856.md) third bishop of Antioch
in Syria from the apostle Peter, who also had held intercourse with the
apostles themselves, saw a vision of angels hymning in alternate chants
the Holy Trinity. Accordingly he introduced the mode of singing he had
observed in the vision into the Antiochian church; whence it was
transmitted by tradition to all the other churches. Such is the account
\[we have received\] in relation to these responsive hymns.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_854"></span>[144:855](2020201.htm#fr_854.md) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p2"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix.ix-p2.1"></span>Θεόφορος</span> = ‘borne by God,’ used in the
sense of being ‘possessed by a god,’ ‘inspired,’ by Æsch. *Agam.* 1150;
but here ‘borne in the arms of God’ or ‘carried by God,’ and applied to
Ignatius because tradition made him the very child whom the Saviour
‘took up in his arms,’ and set in the midst of his disciples. Cf. [Mark
ix. 36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036.md)<span
id="ii.ix.ix-p2.2"></span>; to be distinguished therefore from <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.ix.ix-p2.3"></span>Θεοφόρος</span>, ‘bearing’
or ‘carrying a god.’

<span id="fn_855"></span>[144:856](2020201.htm#fr_855.md) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p4"></span>The ancient Christians observed the Lord’s
day as the greatest day of the week, and also in the second place the
Jewish Sabbath or Saturday. See Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* XX. 2, on the
Lord’s day, and 3, on the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_856"></span>[144:857](2020201.htm#fr_856.md) <span
id="ii.ix.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.ix-p6"></span>There has been some difference of opinion
as to whether Socrates is correct in here ascribing the institution of
responsive chants to Ignatius. Valesius doubts Socrates’ accuracy, but
other authorities are inclined to the view that Ignatius did introduce
these chants, and Flavian and Diodorus, during the reign of Constantine,
to whom Valesius ascribes their origin, simply developed them. Cf.
Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* XIV. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dispute between Theophilus and Peter leading to an Attempt on the
Part of the Former to depose John Bishop of Constantinople.](2020202.md)
