[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020058)  [Next](2020060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Of Eusebius of Emisa.*

<span id="ii.v.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p2.1"></span>On</span> the ground of such charges as these,
they proposed another bishop for the Alexandrian church, and first
indeed Eusebius surnamed Emisenus. Who this person was, George, bishop
of Laodicea, who was present on this occasion, informs us. For he says
in the book which he has composed on his life, that Eusebius was
descended from the nobility of Edessa in Mesopotamia, and that from a
child he had studied the holy Scriptures; <span
id="fr_269"></span>[270](#fn_269) that he was afterwards instructed in
Greek literature by a master resident at Edessa; and finally that the
sacred books were expounded to him by Patrophilus and Eusebius, of whom
the latter presided over the church at Cæsarea, and the former over that
at Scythopolis. Afterwards when he dwelt in Antioch, it happened that
Eustathius was deposed on the accusation of Cyrus of Berœa for holding
the tenets of Sabellius. Then again he associated with Euphronius,
successor of Eustathius, and avoiding a bishopric, he retired to
Alexandria, and there devoted himself to the study of philosophy. On his
return to Antioch he formed an intimate acquaintance with Placitus \[or
Flaccillus\], the successor of Euphronius. At length he was ordained
bishop of Alexandria, by Eusebius, bishop of Constantinople; but did not
go thither in consequence of the attachment of the people of that city
to Athanasius, and was therefore sent to Emisa. As the inhabitants of
Emisa excited a sedition on account of his appointment,—for he was
commonly charged with the study and practice of judicial
astrology, <span id="fr_270"></span>[271](#fn_270) —he fled and came to
Laodicea, to George, who has given so many historical details of him.
George having taken him to Antioch, procured his being again brought
back to Emisa by Placitus and Narcissus; but he was afterwards charged
with holding the Sabellian views. George more elaborately describes the
circumstances of his ordination and adds at the close that the emperor
took him with him in his expedition against the barbarians, and that
miracles were wrought by his hand. The information given by George
concerning Eusebius of Emisa may be considered reproduced at sufficient
length by me here.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_269"></span>[39:270](2020059.htm#fr_269) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p3"></span>Sozom. *H. E.* III. 6. From the passage in
Sozomen it appears that it was customary in Edessa to teach the
Scriptures to boys, and that many of them thus became quite familiar
with the Bible, knowing many passages by heart.

<span id="fn_270"></span>[39:271](2020059.htm#fr_270) <span
id="ii.v.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.ix-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.ix-p4.1"></span>μαθηματικήν</span> . From its use in astronomy
the science of mathematics soon came to be identified with that
counterfeit of astronomy,—astrology. It is so used by Sextus Empiricus
(616. 20; 728. 20) and by Iamblichus, *Myrt.* 277. 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bishops assembled at Antioch, on the Refusal of Eusebius of
Emisa to accept the Bishopric of Alexandria, ordain Gregory, and change
the Language of the Nicene Creed.](2020060)
