[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020155)  [Next](2020157) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXI</span>.—*Death of
Valentinian.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p2.1"></span>The</span> Sarmatæ after this having made
incursions into the Roman territories, the emperor marched against them
with a numerous army but when the barbarians understood the formidable
nature of this expedition, they sent an embassy to him to sue for peace
on certain conditions. As the ambassadors were introduced to the
emperor’s presence, and appeared to him to be not very dignified
fellows, he enquired whether all the Sarmatæ were such as these? As they
replied that the noblest personages of their whole nation had come to
him, Valentinian became excessively enraged, and exclaimed with great
vehemence, that ‘the Roman empire was indeed most wretched in devolving
upon him at a time when a nation of such despicable barbarians, not
content with being permitted to exist in safety within their own limits,
dared to take up arms, invade the Roman territories, and break forth
into open war.’ The violence of his manner and utterance of these words
was so great, that all his veins were opened by the effort, and all the
arteries ruptured; and from the quantity of blood which thereupon gushed
forth he died. This occurred at Bergition Castle, after Gratian’s third
consulate <span id="fr_663"></span>[664](#fn_663) in conjunction with
Equitius, on the seventeenth day of November, Valentinian having lived
fifty-four years and reigned thirteen. Upon the decease of Valentinian,
six days after his death the army in Italy proclaimed his son
Valentinian, then a young child, emperor, at Acincum, a city of
Italy. <span id="fr_664"></span>[665](#fn_664) When this was announced
to the other two emperors, they were displeased, not because the brother
of the one and the nephew of the other had been declared emperor, but
because the military presumed to proclaim him without consulting them,
whom they themselves wished to have proclaimed. They both, however,
ratified the transaction, and thus was Valentinian the younger seated on
his father’s throne. Now this Valentinian was born of Justina, whom
Valentinian the elder married while Severa his former wife was alive,
under the following circumstances. Justus the father of Justina, who had
been governor of Picenum under the reign of Constantius, had a dream in
which he seemed to himself to bring forth the imperial purple out of his
right side. When this dream had been told to many persons, it at length
came to the knowledge of Constantius, who conjecturing it to be a
presage that a descendant of Justus would become emperor, caused him to
be assassinated. Justina being thus bereft of her father, still
continued a virgin. Some time after she became known to Severa, wife of
the emperor Valentinian, and had frequent intercourse with the empress,
until their intimacy at length grew to such an extent that they were
accustomed to bathe together. When Severa saw Justina in the bath she
was greatly struck with the beauty of the virgin, and spoke of her to
the emperor; saying that the daughter of Justus was so lovely a
creature, and possessed of such symmetry of form, that she herself,
though a woman, was altogether charmed with her. The emperor, treasuring
this description by his wife in his own mind, considered with himself
how he could espouse Justina, without repudiating Severa, as she had
borne him Gratian, whom he had created Augustus a little while before.
He accordingly framed a law, and caused it to be published throughout
all the cities, by which any man was permitted to have two lawful
wives. <span id="fr_665"></span>[666](#fn_665) The law was promulgated
and he married Justina, by whom he had Valentinian the younger, and
three daughters, Justa, Grata, and Galla; the two former of these
remained virgins: but Calla was afterwards married to the emperor
Theodosius the Great, who had by her a daughter named Placidia. For that
prince had Arcadius and Honorius by Flaccilla his former wife: we shall
however enter into particulars respecting Theodosius and his sons in the
proper place. <span id="fr_666"></span>[667](#fn_666)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_663"></span>[114:664](2020156.htm#fr_663) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p3"></span>375 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_664"></span>[114:665](2020156.htm#fr_664) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p4"></span>Rather Pannonia.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[114:666](2020156.htm#fr_665) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p5"></span>Baronius (*Am.* IV. 272) and Valesius
in this passage agree in looking upon this whole story as a groundless
fiction which some pretended eyewitness palmed off on Socrates. The law
mentioned here is never mentioned by any other historian; no vestige of
it is found in any of the codes; on the contrary, according to Bingham
(*Christ. Antiq.* XVI. 11), bigamy and polygamy were treated with the
utmost severity in the ancient Church, and the Roman law was very much
against them; furthermore, Am. Marcellinus (XXX.) says that Valentinian
was remarkable for his chastity, both at home and abroad, and Zosimus
(IV. 19) that his second wife had been married to Magnentius previously
\[and hence was not a virgin as here stated\] and that he married her
after the death of his first wife; all of which considerations taken
together render it historically certain that the story is not true.

<span id="fn_666"></span>[114:667](2020156.htm#fr_666) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxi-p6"></span>Cf. V. 2; VI. 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Valens, appeased by the Oration of Themistius the
Philosopher, abates his Persecution of the Christians.](2020157)
