[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020037)  [Next](2020039.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xxix"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—*Of Arsenius, and his
Hand which was said to have been cut off.*

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p2.1"></span>The</span> special providence of God drove
Arsenius also to Tyre; for, disregarding the injunctions he had received
from the accusers who had bribed him, he went thither disguised to see
what would be done. It by some means happened that the servants of
Archelaus, the governor of the province, heard some persons at an inn
affirm that Arsenius, who was reported to have been murdered, was
concealed in the house of one of the citizens. Having heard this and
marked the individuals by whom this statement was made, they
communicated the information to their master, who causing strict search
to be made for the man immediately, <span id="page_31">p. 31</span>
<span id="ii.iv.xxix-Page_31"></span>discovered and properly secured
him; after which he gave notice to Athanasius that he need not be under
any alarm, inasmuch as Arsenius was alive and there present. Arsenius on
being apprehended, at first denied that he was the person; but Paul,
bishop of Tyre, who had formerly known him, established his identity.
Divine providence having thus disposed matters, Athanasius was shortly
after summoned by the Synod; and as soon as he presented himself, his
traducers exhibited the hand, and pressed their charge. He managed the
affair with great prudence, for he enquired of those present, as well as
of his accusers, who were the persons who knew Arsenius? and several
having answered that they knew him, he caused Arsenius to be introduced,
having his hands covered by his cloak. Then he again asked them, ‘Is
this the person who has lost a hand?’ All were astonished at the
unexpectedness of this procedure, except those who knew whence the hand
had been cut off; for the rest thought that Arsenius was really
deficient of a hand, and expected that the accused would make his
defense in some other way. But Athanasius turning back the cloak of
Arsenius on one side showed one of the man’s hands; again, while some
were supposing that the other hand was wanting, permitting them to
remain a short time in doubt afterward he turned back the cloak on the
other side and exposed the other hand. Then addressing himself to those
present, he said, ‘Arsenius, as you see, is found to have two hands: let
my accusers show the place whence the third was cut off.’ <span
id="fr_244"></span>[245](#fn_244.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_244"></span>[31:245](2020038.htm#fr_244.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xxix-p3"></span>A full account of the circumstances
narrated in this and the following chapters is given by Athanasius in
his *Apol. contra Arianos,* 65, 71 and 72. Parallel accounts may also be
found in Sozom. II. 25; Theodoret, *H. E.* I. 28; Rufinus, *H. E.* X.
17; Philostorgius, II. 11.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Athanasius is found Innocent of what he was accused; his Accusers
take to Flight.](2020039.md)
