[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020292)  [Next](2020294) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Of the Council
convened at Nicæa on Account of Arius*.

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p2.1"></span>When</span> it was found that the event did
not answer the expectations of the emperor, but that on the contrary,
the contention was too great for reconciliation, so that he who had been
sent to make peace returned without having accomplished his mission,
Constantine convened a synod at Nicæa, in Bithynia, and wrote <span
id="fr_1114"></span>[1115](#fn_1114) to the most eminent men of the
churches in every country, directing them to be there on an appointed
day. <span id="fr_1115"></span>[1116](#fn_1115) Of those who occupied
the apostolic sees, the following participated in this conference:
Macarius of Jerusalem, Eustathius, who already presided over the church
of Antioch on the Orontes; and Alexander of Alexandria near Lake
Mareotis. Julius, <span id="fr_1116"></span>[1117](#fn_1116) bishop of
Rome, was unable to attend on account of extreme old age; but his place
was supplied by Vito and Vicentius, presbyters of his church. Many other
excellent and good men from different nations were congregated together,
of whom some were celebrated for their learning, their eloquence, and
their knowledge of the sacred books, and other discipline; some for the
virtuous tenor of their life, and others for the combination of all
these qualifications. About three hundred and twenty bishops were
present, accompanied by a multitude of presbyters and deacons. There
were, likewise, men present who were skilled in dialectics, and ready to
assist in the discussions. And as was usually the case on such
occasions, many priests resorted to the council for the purpose of
transacting their own private affairs; <span
id="fr_1117"></span>[1118](#fn_1117) for they considered this a
favorable opportunity for rectifying their grievances, and in what
points each found fault with the rest, he presented a document to the
emperor, wherein he noted the offenses committed against himself. As
this course was pursued day after day, the emperor set apart one certain
day on which all complaints were to be brought before him. When the
appointed time arrived, he took the memorials which had been presented
to him, and said, “All these accusations will be brought forward in
their own season at the great day of judgment, and will there be judged
by the Great Judge of all men; as to me, I am but a man, and it would be
evil in me to take cognizance of such matters, seeing that the accuser
and the accused are priests; and the priests ought so to act as never to
become amenable to the judgment of others. Imitate, therefore, the
divine love and mercy of God, and be ye reconciled to one another;
withdraw your accusations against each other; let us be persuaded, and
let us devote our attention to those subjects connected with the faith
on account of which we are assembled.” After this address, in order to
make the document of each man nugatory, the emperor commanded the
memorials to be burnt, and then appointed a day for solving the doubtful
points. But before the appointed time arrived, the bishops assembled
together, and having summoned Arius to attend, began to examine the
disputed topics, each one amongst them advancing his own opinion. As
might have been expected, however, many different questions started out
of the investigation: some of the bishops spoke against the introduction
of novelties contrary to the faith which had been delivered to them from
the beginning. And those especially who had adhered to simplicity of
doctrine argued that the faith of God ought to be received without
curious inquiries; others, however, contended that ancient opinions
ought not to be followed without examination. Many of the bishops who
were then assembled, and of the clergy who accompanied them, being
remarkable for their dialectic skill, and practiced in such rhetorical
methods, became conspicuous, and attracted the notice of the emperor and
the court. Of that number Athanasius, who was then a deacon of
Alexandria, and had accompanied his bishop Alexander, seemed to have the
largest share in the counsel concerning these subjects.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1114"></span>[253:1115](2020293.htm#fr_1114) <span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 6.

<span id="fn_1115"></span>[253:1116](2020293.htm#fr_1115) <span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p4"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 7–11; Soc. i. 8; Ruf.
*H. E.* i. 2. The variations and additions of Theodoret are very
noteworthy. *H. E.* i. 7.

<span id="fn_1116"></span>[253:1117](2020293.htm#fr_1116) <span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p5"></span>Mistake for Silvester. Cf. ii. 20.

<span id="fn_1117"></span>[253:1118](2020293.htm#fr_1117) <span
id="iii.vi.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.xvii-p6"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 2; Soc. i. 8. Soz. here
makes, as usual, a free use of the speech as reported by Rufinus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Two Philosophers are converted to the Faith by the Simplicity of
Two Old Men with whom they hold a Disputation.](2020294)
