[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020110)  [Next](2020112) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xiii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Of the Outrages
committed by the Pagans against the Christians.*

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p2.1"></span>He</span> moreover interdicted such as would
not abjure Christianity, and offer sacrifice to idols, from holding any
office at court: nor would he allow Christians to be governors of
provinces; ‘for,’ said he, ‘their law forbids them to use the sword
against offenders worthy of capital punishment.’ <span
id="fr_518"></span>[519](#fn_518) He also induced many to sacrifice,
partly by flatteries, and partly by gifts. Immediately, as if tried in a
furnace, it at once became evident to all, who were the real Christians,
and who were merely nominal ones. Such as were Christians in integrity
of heart, very readily resigned their commission, <span
id="fr_519"></span>[520](#fn_519) choosing to endure anything rather
than deny Christ. Of this number were Jovian, Valentinian, and Valens,
each of whom afterwards became emperor. But others of unsound
principles, who preferred the riches and honor of this world to the true
felicity, sacrificed without hesitation. Of these was Ecebolius, a
sophist <span id="fr_520"></span>[521](#fn_520) of Constantinople who,
accommodating himself to the dispositions of the emperors, pretended in
the reign of Constantius to be an ardent Christian; while in Julian’s
time he appeared an equally vigorous pagan: and after Julian’s death, he
again made a profession of Christianity. For he prostrated himself
before the church doors, and called out, ‘Trample on me, for I am as
salt that has lost its savor.’ Of so fickle and inconstant a character
was this person, throughout the whole period of his history. About this
time the emperor wishing to make reprisals on the Persians, for the
frequent incursions they had made on the Roman territories in the reign
of Constantius, marched with great expedition through Asia into the
East. But as he well knew what a train of calamities attend a war, and
what immense resources are needful to carry it on successfully and that
without it cannot be carried on, he craftily devised a plan for
collecting money by extorting it from the Christians. On all those who
refused to sacrifice he imposed <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> <span
id="ii.vi.xiii-Page_86"></span>a heavy fine, which was exacted with
great rigor from such as were true Christians, every one being compelled
to pay in proportion to what he possessed. By these unjust means the
emperor soon amassed immense wealth; for this law was put in execution,
both where Julian was personally present, and where he was not. The
pagans at the same time assailed the Christians; and there was a great
concourse of those who styled themselves ‘philosophers.’ They then
proceeded to institute certain abominable mysteries; <span
id="fr_521"></span>[522](#fn_521) and sacrificing pure children both
male and female, they inspected their entrails, and even tasted their
flesh. These infamous rites were practiced in other cities, but more
particularly at Athens and Alexandria; in which latter place, a
calumnious accusation was made against Athanasius the bishop, the
emperor being assured that he was intent on desolating not that city
only, but all Egypt, and that nothing but his expulsion out of the
country could save it. The governor of Alexandria was therefore
instructed by an imperial edict to apprehend him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_518"></span>[85:519](2020111.htm#fr_518) <span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p3"></span>Based, probably, on [Matt.
26:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#052), [John
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)<span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_519"></span>[85:520](2020111.htm#fr_519) <span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p4"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p4.1"></span>ζώνην ἀπετίθεντο</span> ; literally, ‘put
off their girdle,’ as the badge of office.

<span id="fn_520"></span>[85:521](2020111.htm#fr_520) <span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p5"></span>The term was used first by traveling
teachers of rhetoric at the time of the philosopher Socrates as
descriptive of their profession; and although it later acquired an
unfavorable significance, it continued to be used also as a professional
name given to teachers of rhetoric, as here.

<span id="fn_521"></span>[86:522](2020111.htm#fr_521) <span
id="ii.vi.xiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xiii-p6"></span>Cf. Tertull. *Apol.* IX. ‘In the bosom
of Africa infants were publicly sacrificed to Saturn, even to the days
of a proconsul under Tiberius,’ &c.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Flight of Athanasius.](2020112)
