[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020378)  [Next](2020380.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Proceedings of the
Council of Ariminum*.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor <span
id="fr_1324"></span>[1325](#fn_1324.md) was persuaded that it would not be
desirable for the public, on account of the expense, nor advantageous to
the bishops, on account of the length of the journey, to convene them
all to the same place for the purpose of holding a council. He therefore
writes to the bishops who were then at Ariminum, as well as to those who
were then at Seleucia, and directed them to enter upon an investigation
of contested points concerning the faith, and then to turn their
attention to the complaints of Cyril, bishop of Jerusalem, and of other
bishops who had remonstrated against the injustice of the decrees of
deposition and banishment which had been issued against them, and to
examine the legality of various sentences which had been enacted against
other bishops. There were, in fact, several accusations pending against
different bishops. George was accused by the Egyptians of rapine and
violence. Finally, the emperor commanded that ten deputies should be
sent to him from each council, to inform him of their respective
proceedings.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p4"></span>In accordance with this edict, the
bishops assembled at the appointed cities. The Synod at Ariminum first
commenced proceedings; <span id="fr_1325"></span>[1326](#fn_1325.md) it
consisted of about four hundred members. Those who regarded Athanasius
with the greatest enmity, were of opinion that there was nothing further
to be decreed against him. When they had entered upon the investigation
of doctrinal questions, Valens and Ursacius, supported by Germenius,
Auxentius, Caius, and Demophilus, advanced into the middle of the
assembly, and demanded that all the formularies of the faith which had
been previously compiled should be suppressed, and that the formulary
which they had but a short time previously set forth in the Latin
language at Sirmium should be alone retained. In this formulary it was
taught, according to Scripture, that the Son is like unto the Father;
but no mention was made of the substance of God. They declared that this
formulary had been approved by the emperor, and that it was incumbent
upon the council to adopt it, instead of consulting too scrupulously the
individual opinions of every member of the council, so that disputes and
divisions might not spring up, were the terms to be delivered up to
debate and accurate proof. They added that it would better enable those
who were more ignorant of the art of discourse to have a right
conception of God, than were they to introduce novelties in terms, so
akin to disputatious jugglery. By these representations, they designed
to denounce the use of the term “consubstantial,” because they said it
was not found in the Holy Scriptures, and was obscure to the multitude;
and, instead of this term, they wished to substitute the expression that
“the Son is like unto the Father in all things,” which is borne out by
the Holy Scriptures. After they had read their formulary containing the
above representations, many of the bishops told them that no new
formulary of the faith ought to be set forth, that those which had been
previously compiled were quite sufficient for all purposes, and that
they were met together for the express purpose of preventing all
innovations. These bishops then urged those who had compiled and read
the formulary to declare publicly their condemnation of the Arian
doctrine, as the cause of all the troubles which had agitated the
churches of every region. Ursacius and Valens, Germenius and Auxentius,
Demophilus and Caius, having protested against this protestation, the
council commanded that the expositions of the other heresies should be
read, and likewise that set forth at Nicæa; so that those formularies
which favored divers heresies might be condemned, and those which were
in accordance with the Nicene doctrines might be approved; in order that
there might be no further ground for dispute, and no future necessity
for councils, but that an efficient decision might be formed. <span
id="fr_1326"></span>[1327](#fn_1326.md) They remarked that it was absurd to
compose so many formularies, as if they had but just commenced to become
acquainted with the faith, and as if <span id="page_313">p. 313</span>
<span id="iii.ix.xvii-Page_313"></span>they wished to slight the ancient
traditions of the Church, by which the churches had been governed by
themselves, and by their predecessors, many of whom had witnessed a good
confession, and had received the crown of martyrdom. Such were the
arguments adduced by these bishops, to prove that no innovations ought
to be attempted. As Valens and Ursacius and their partisans refused to
be convinced by these arguments, but persisted in advocating the
adoption of their own formulary, they were deposed, and it was decided
that their formulary should be rejected. It was remarked that the
declaration at the commencement of this formulary, of its having been
compiled at Sirmium, in the presence of Constantius, “the eternal
Augustus,” and during the consulate of Eusebius and Hypatius, was an
absurdity. Athanasius made the same remark, in a letter addressed to one
of his friends, <span id="fr_1327"></span>[1328](#fn_1327.md) and said that
it was ridiculous to term Constantius the eternal emperor, and yet to
shrink from acknowledging the Son of God to be eternal; he also
ridiculed the date affixed to the formulary, as though condemnation were
meant to be thrown on the faith of former ages, as well as on those who
had, before that period, been initiated into the faith.

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p8"></span>After these events had transpired at
Ariminum, Valens and Ursacius, together with their adherents, irritated
at their deposition, repaired with all haste to the emperor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1324"></span>[312:1325](2020379.htm#fr_1324.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p3"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* 8–11; Soc. ii. 37;
Ruf. i. 21; Philost. *H. E.* iv. 10; Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 18.

<span id="fn_1325"></span>[312:1326](2020379.htm#fr_1325.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span> 359.

<span id="fn_1326"></span>[312:1327](2020379.htm#fr_1326.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p6"></span>This speech is quoted directly in Soc.
ii. 37.

<span id="fn_1327"></span>[313:1328](2020379.htm#fr_1327.md) <span
id="iii.ix.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xvii-p7"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* 3; quoted by Soc.
ii. 37.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter from the Council at Ariminum to the Emperor
Constantius.](2020380.md)
