[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020395)  [Next](2020397) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p1"></span><span id="page_328">p. 328</span> <span
id="iii.x.iii-Page_328"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.iii-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Julian, on his
Settlement in the Empire, began quietly to stir up Opposition to
Christianity, and to introduce Paganism artfully*.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.iii-p2.1"></span>When</span> Julian found himself sole
possessor of the empire, <span id="fr_1367"></span>[1368](#fn_1367) he
commanded that all the pagan temples should be reopened throughout the
East; that those which had been neglected should be repaired; that those
which had fallen into ruins should be rebuilt, and that the altars
should be restored. He assigned considerable money for this purpose; he
restored the customs of antiquity and the ancestral ceremonies in the
cities, and the practice of offering sacrifice.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p4"></span>He himself offered libations openly and
publicly sacrificed; bestowed honors on those who were zealous in the
performance of these ceremonies; restored the initiators and the
priests, the hierophants and the servants of the images, to their old
privileges; and confirmed the legislation of former emperors in their
behalf; he conceded exemption from duties and from other burdens as was
their previous right; he restored the provisions, which had been
abolished, to the temple guardians, and commanded them to be pure from
meats, and to abstain from whatever according to pagan saying was
befitting him who had announced his purpose of leading a pure life.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p5"></span>He also ordered that the nilometer and
the symbols and the former ancestral tablets should be cared for in the
temple of Serapis, instead of being deposited, according to the
regulation, established by Constantine, in the church. He wrote
frequently to the inhabitants of those cities in which he knew paganism
was nourished, and urged them to ask what gifts they might desire.
Towards the Christians, on the contrary, he openly manifested his
aversion, refusing to honor them with his presence, or to receive their
deputies who were delegated to report about grievances.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p6"></span>When the inhabitants of Nisibis sent to
implore his aid against the Persians, who were on the point of invading
the Roman territories, he refused to assist them because they were
wholly Christianized, and would neither reopen their temples nor resort
to the sacred places; he threatened that he would not help them, nor
receive their embassy, nor approach to enter their city before he should
hear that they had returned to paganism.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p7"></span>He likewise accused the inhabitants of
Constantia in Palestine, of attachment to Christianity, and rendered
their city tributary to that of Gaza. Constantia, as we stated before,
was formerly called Majuma, and was used as a harbor for the vessels of
Gaza; but on hearing that the majority of its inhabitants were
Christians, Constantine elevated it to the dignity of a city, and
conferred upon it the name of his own son, and a separate form of
government; for he considered that it ought not to be dependent on Gaza,
a city addicted to pagan rites. On the accession of Julian, the citizens
of Gaza went to law against those of Constantia. The emperor himself sat
as judge, and decided in favor of Gaza, and commanded that Constantia
should be an appendage to that city, although it was situated at a
distance of twenty stadia.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p8"></span>Its former name having been abolished by
him, it has since been denominated the maritime region of Gaza. They
have now the same city magistrates, military officers, and public
regulations. With respect to ecclesiastical concerns, however, they may
still be regarded as two cities. They have each their own bishop and
their own clergy; they celebrate festivals in honor of their respective
martyrs, and in memory of the priests who successively ruled them; and
the boundaries of the adjacent fields by which the altars belonging to
the bishops are divided, are still preserved.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p9"></span>It happened within our own remembrance
that an attempt was made by the bishop of Gaza, on the death of the
president of the church at Majuma, to unite the clergy of that town with
those under his own jurisdiction; and the plea he advanced was, that it
was not lawful for two bishops to preside over one city. The inhabitants
of Majuma opposed this scheme, and the council of the province took
cognizance of the dispute, and ordained another bishop. The council
decided that it was altogether right for those who had been deemed
worthy of the honors of a city on account of their piety, not to be
deprived of the privilege conferred upon the priesthood and rank of
their churches, through the decision of a pagan emperor, who had taken a
different ground of action.

<span id="iii.x.iii-p10"></span>But these events occurred at a later
period than that now under review.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1367"></span>[328:1368](2020396.htm#fr_1367) <span
id="iii.x.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.iii-p3"></span>An independent chapter; cf. Theodoret,
*H. E.* iii. 6, 7.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Julian inflicted Evils upon the Inhabitants of Cæsarea. Bold
Fidelity of Maris, Bishop of Chalcedon.](2020397)
