[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020092)  [Next](2020094.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xliii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XLIII</span>.—*Of Eustathius Bishop
of Sebastia.*

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p2.1"></span>But</span> Eustathius bishop of Sebastia in
Armenia was not even permitted to make his defense; because he had been
long before deposed by Eulalius, his own father, who was bishop of
Cæsarea in Cappadocia, for dressing in a style unbecoming the sacerdotal
office. <span id="fr_439"></span>[440](#fn_439.md) Let it be noted that
Meletius was appointed his successor, of whom we shall hereafter speak.
Eustathius indeed was subsequently condemned by a Synod convened on his
account at Gangra in Paphlagonia; he having, after his deposition by the
council at Cæsarea, done many things repugnant to the ecclesiastical
canons. For he had ‘forbidden marriage,’ <span
id="fr_440"></span>[441](#fn_440.md) and maintained that meats were to be
abstained from: he even separated many from their wives, and persuaded
those who disliked to assemble in the churches to commune at home. Under
the pretext of piety, he also seduced servants from their masters. He
himself wore the habit of a philosopher, and induced his followers to
adopt a new and extraordinary garb, directing that the hair of women
should be cropped. He permitted the prescribed fasts to be neglected,
but recommended fasting on Sundays. In short, he forbade prayers to be
offered in the houses of married persons: and declared that both the
benediction and the communion of a presbyter who continued to live with
a wife whom he might have lawfully married, while still a layman, ought
to be shunned as an abomination. For doing and teaching these things and
many others of a similar nature, a Synod convened, as we have said, at
Gangra <span id="fr_441"></span>[442](#fn_441.md) in Paphlagonia de<span
id="page_73">p. 73</span> <span id="ii.v.xliii-Page_73"></span>posed
him, and anathematized his opinions. This, however, was done afterwards.
But on Macedonius being ejected from the see of Constantinople,
Eudoxius, who now looked upon the see of Antioch as secondary in
importance, was promoted to the vacant bishopric; being consecrated by
the Acacians, who in this instance cared not to consider that it was
inconsistent with their former proceedings. For they who had deposed
Dracontius because of his translation from Galatia to Pergamos, were
clearly acting in contrariety to their own principles and decisions, in
ordaining Eudoxius, who then made a second change. After this they sent
their own exposition of the faith, in its corrected and supplementary
form, to Arminium, ordering that all those who refused to sign it should
be exiled on the authority of the emperor’s edict. They also informed
such other prelates in the East as coincided with them in opinion of
what they had done; and more especially Patrophilus bishop of
Scythopolis, who on leaving Seleucia had proceeded directly to his own
city. Eudoxius having been constituted bishop of the imperial city, the
great church named *Sophia* was at that time consecrated, <span
id="fr_442"></span>[443](#fn_442.md) in the tenth consulate <span
id="fr_443"></span>[444](#fn_443.md) of Constantius, and the third of
Julian Cæsar, on the 15th day of February. It was while Eudoxius
occupied this see, that he first uttered that sentence which is still
everywhere current, ‘The Father is impious, the Son is pious.’ When the
people seemed startled by this expression, and a disturbance began to be
made, ‘Be not troubled,’ said he, ‘on account of what I have just said:
for the Father is impious, because he worships no person; but the Son is
pious because he worships the Father.’ Eudoxius having said this, the
tumult was appeased, and great laughter was excited in the church: and
this saying of his continues to be a jest, even in the present day. The
heresiarchs indeed frequently devised such subtle phrases as these, and
by them rent the church asunder. Thus was the Synod at Constantinople
terminated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_439"></span>[72:440](2020093.htm#fr_439.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p3"></span>On the prescribed dress of the clergy,
and the punishment of those who did not constantly adopt it, see
Bingham, *Eccl. Antiq.* VI. 4. 15.

<span id="fn_440"></span>[72:441](2020093.htm#fr_440.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p4"></span>[1 Tim. iv.
3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md)<span id="ii.v.xliii-p4.1"></span>.
Cf. Euseb. *H. E.* IV. 29, on the earliest forms of expression against
marriage in the Christian Church; also *Apost. Canon,* LI. and
Augustine, *Hærr.* XXV., XL., XLVI. See Bingham, *Eccl. Antiq.* XXII. 1.

<span id="fn_441"></span>[72:442](2020093.htm#fr_441.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p5"></span>On Synod of Gangra, see Hefele, *Hist.
of the Ch. Councils,* Vol. II. p. 325–339. Almost all the canons of the
synod seem to be addressed against the teachings of Eustathius. The
fourth canon is expressly on the celibacy of the clergy, as follows: ‘If
any one maintains that, when a married priest offer the sacrifice, no
one should take part in the service, let him be anathema.’

<span id="fn_442"></span>[73:443](2020093.htm#fr_442.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p6"></span>This was evidently the second
consecration of the earlier church of St. Sophia (cf. I. 16, II. 6); the
first consecration was celebrated in 326 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span> Later, the structure was
destroyed in a fire, in connection with a popular uprising; and the
great church of St. Sophia, at present a Mohammedan mosque, was erected
by Justinian, with Isidore of Miletus and Anthimius of Tralles as
architects.

<span id="fn_443"></span>[73:444](2020093.htm#fr_443.md) <span
id="ii.v.xliii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xliii-p7"></span>360 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xliii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Meletius Bishop of Antioch.](2020094.md)
