[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020435)  [Next](2020437.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*Persecution of the
Egyptian Monks, and of the Disciples of St. Antony. They were enclosed
in a Certain Island on Account of their Orthodoxy; the Miracles which
they Wrought*.

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xx-p2.1"></span>Lucius</span> went with the general of the
soldiers in Egypt, against the monks in the desert; <span
id="fr_1462"></span>[1463](#fn_1462.md) for he imagined that if he could
overcome their opposition by interrupting the tranquillity which <span
id="page_358">p. 358</span> <span id="iii.xi.xx-Page_358"></span>they
loved, he would meet with fewer obstacles in drawing over to his party
the Christians who inhabited the cities. The monasteries of this country
were governed by several individuals of eminent sanctity, who were
strenuously opposed to the heresy of Arius. The people, who were neither
willing nor competent to enter upon the investigation of doctrinal
questions, received their opinions from them, and thought with them; for
they were persuaded that men whose virtue was manifested by their deeds
were in possession of truth. We have heard that the leaders of these
Egyptian ascetics were two men of the name of Macarius, of whom mention
has already been made, <span id="fr_1463"></span>[1464](#fn_1463.md) Pambo
and Heraclides, and other disciples of Antony.

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p5"></span>On reflecting that the Arians could never
succeed in establishing an ascendency over the Catholic Church, unless
the monks could be drawn over to their party, Lucius determined to have
recourse to force to compel the monks to side with him, since he was
unable to persuade them. But here again his scheme failed; for the monks
were prepared to subject their necks to the sword rather than to swerve
from the Nicene doctrines. It is related that, at the very time that the
soldiers were about to attack them, a man whose limbs were withered and
who was unable to stand on his feet was carried to them; and that when
they had anointed him with oil, and commanded him in the name of Christ,
whom Lucius persecuted, to arise and go to his house, he suddenly became
whole. This miraculous cure openly manifested the necessity of adopting
the sentiments of those to whom God himself had testified as possessing
the truth, while Lucius was condemned, in that God heard their prayers
and had healed the sick.

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p6"></span>But the plotters against the monks were
not led to repentance by this miracle; on the contrary, they arrested
these holy men by night, and conveyed them to an island of Egypt,
concealed in the swamps. The inhabitants of this island had never heard
of the Christian faith, and were devoted to the service of demons: the
island contained a temple of great antiquity which was held in great
reverence. It is said that when the monks landed on the island, the
daughter of the priest, who was possessed of a devil, went to them. The
girl ran screaming towards them; and the people of the island,
astonished at her sudden and strange conduct, followed. When she drew
near the ship in which were the holy messengers, she flung herself
pleadingly upon the ground, and exclaimed supplicatingly in a loud
voice, “Wherefore are you come to us, O servants of the great God? for
we have long dwelt in this island as our residence; we have troubled no
one. Unknown to men, we have concealed ourselves here, and are
everywhere surrounded by these marshes. If, however, it please you,
accept our possessions, and fix your abode here; we will quit the
island.”

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p7"></span>Such were her utterances. Macarius and
his companions rebuked the demon, and the girl became sane. Her father
and all her house, with the inhabitants of the island, immediately
embraced Christianity, and after demolishing their temple, they
transformed it into a church. On these occurrences being reported at
Alexandria, Lucius was overcome with immoderate grief; and, fearing lest
he should incur the hatred of his own partisans, and be accused of
warring against God, and not against man, he sent secret orders for
Macarius and his companions to be re-conveyed to their own dwellings in
the wilderness. Thus did Lucius occasion troubles and commotions in
Egypt.

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p8"></span>About the same period, Didymus the
philosopher and several other illustrious men acquired great renown.
Struck by their virtue, and by that of the monks, the people followed
their doctrines and opposed those of the partisans of Lucius.

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p9"></span>The Arians, though not so strong in point
of numbers as the other party, grievously persecuted the church of
Egypt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1462"></span>[357:1463](2020436.htm#fr_1462.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p3"></span>Ruf. ii. 3, 4; Soc. iv. 22, 24;
Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 21, 22; *Chronicon prævium* to the Vestal
letters, from <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.xi.xx-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 367 to 373, and *Chronicon
acephalum,* 15–19; Greg. Naz. *Or.* xxv. 11–14, xxxiv. 3; *Cod. Theod.*
xvi. 1, 2; *Pœmata,* 12, *de seipso et de episcopis.*

<span id="fn_1463"></span>[358:1464](2020436.htm#fr_1463.md) <span
id="iii.xi.xx-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xx-p4"></span>In iii. 14; Pallad. *H. L.* xix., xx.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: List of the Places in which the Nicene Doctrines were
Represented; Faith manifested by the Scythians; Vetranio, the Leader of
this Race.](2020437.md)
