[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020172)  [Next](2020174) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.ix"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*A Synod consisting of
One Hundred and Fifty Bishops meets at Constantinople. The Decrees
passed. Ordination of Nectarius.*

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.ix-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor making no delay summoned
a Synod <span id="fr_702"></span>[703](#fn_702) of the prelates of his
own faith, in order that he might establish the Nicene Creed, and
appoint a bishop of Constantinople: and inasmuch as he was not without
hope that he might win the Macedonians over to his own views, he invited
those who presided over that sect to be present also. There met
therefore on this occasion of the Homoousian party, Timothy from
Alexandria, Cyril from Jerusalem, who at that time recognized the
doctrine of *homoousion*, <span id="fr_703"></span>[704](#fn_703) having
retracted his former opinion; Melitius from Antioch, he having arrived
there previously to assist at the installation of Gregory; Ascholius
also from Thessalonica, and many others, amounting in all to one hundred
and fifty. Of the Macedonians, the leaders were Eleusius of Cyzicus, and
Marcian of Lampsacus; these with the rest, most of whom came from the
cities of the Hellespont, were thirty-six in number. Accordingly they
were assembled in the month of May, under the consulate <span
id="fr_704"></span>[705](#fn_704) of Eucharius and Evagrius, and the
emperor used his utmost exertions, in conjunction with the bishops who
entertained similar sentiments to his own, to bring over Eleusius and
his adherents to his own side. They were reminded of the deputation they
had sent by Eustathius to Liberius <span
id="fr_705"></span>[706](#fn_705) then bishop of Rome; that they had of
their own accord not long before entered into promiscuous communion with
the orthodox; and the inconsistency and fickleness of their conduct was
represented to them, in now attempting to subvert the faith which they
once acknowledged, and professed agreement with the catholics in. But
they paying little heed alike to admonitions and reproofs, chose rather
to maintain the Arian dogma, than to assent to the ‘homoousian’
doctrine. Having made this declaration, they departed from
Constantinople; moreover they wrote to their partisans in every city,
and charged them by no means to harmonize with the creed of the Nicene
Synod. The bishops of the other party remaining at Constantinople,
entered into a consultation about the ordination of a bishop; for
Gregory, as we have before said, <span id="fr_706"></span>[707](#fn_706)
had resigned that see, and was preparing to return to Nazianzus. Now
there was a person named Nectarius, of a senatorial family, mild and
gentle in his manners, and admirable in his whole course of life,
although he at that time bore the office of proctor. This man was seized
upon by the people, and elected <span id="fr_707"></span>[708](#fn_707)
to the episcopate, and was ordained accordingly by one hundred and fifty
bishops then present. The same prelates moreover published a
decree, <span id="fr_708"></span>[709](#fn_708) prescribing ‘that the
bishop of Constantinople should have the next prerogative of honor after
the bishop of Rome, because that city was New Rome.’ They also again
confirmed the Nicene Creed. Then too patriarchs were constituted, and
the provinces distributed, so that no bishop might exercise any
jurisdiction over other churches <span id="fr_709"></span>[710](#fn_709)
out of his own diocese: for this had been often indiscriminately done
before, in consequence of the persecutions. To Nectarius therefore was
allotted the great city and Thrace. Helladius, the successor of <span
id="page_122">p. 122</span> <span id="ii.viii.ix-Page_122"></span>Basil
in the bishopric of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, obtained the patriarchate of
the diocese of Pontus in conjunction with Gregory Basil’s brother,
bishop of Nyssa <span id="fr_710"></span>[711](#fn_710) in Cappadocia,
and Otreïus bishop of Melitina in Armenia. To Amphilochius of Iconium
and Optimus of Antioch in Pisidia, was the Asiatic diocese assigned. The
superintendence of the churches throughout Egypt was committed to
Timothy of Alexandria. On Pelagius of Laodicea, and Diodorus of Tarsus,
devolved the administration of the churches of the East; without
infringement however on the prerogatives of honor reserved to the
Antiochian church, and conferred on Melitius then present. They further
decreed that as necessity required it, the ecclesiastical affairs of
each province should be managed by a Synod of the province. These
arrangements were confirmed by the emperor’s approbation. Such was the
result of this Synod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_702"></span>[121:703](2020173.htm#fr_702) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p3"></span>Cf. parallel account in Sozom. VII. 7–9;
Theodoret, *H. E.* V. 8. The Synod of Constantinople was the second
great œcumenical or general council. Its title as an œcumenical council
has not been disputed, although no Western bishop attended. Baronius,
however (*Annal.* 381, notes 19, 20), attempts to prove, but
unsuccessfully, that Pope Damasus summoned the council. For a full
account of the council, see Hefele, *History of the Councils,* Vol. II.
p. 340–374.

<span id="fn_703"></span>[121:704](2020173.htm#fr_703) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p4"></span>Sozomen adds that Cyril was previously a
follower of Macedonius, and had changed his mind at this time. Cf.
Sozom. VII. 7.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[121:705](2020173.htm#fr_704) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p5"></span>381 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.viii.ix-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_705"></span>[121:706](2020173.htm#fr_705) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p6"></span>Cf. IV. 12.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[121:707](2020173.htm#fr_706) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p7"></span>See above, chap. 7.

<span id="fn_707"></span>[121:708](2020173.htm#fr_707) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p8"></span>See Bingham, *Christ. Antiq.* IV. 2. 8
for other examples illustrating this method of electing bishops.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[121:709](2020173.htm#fr_708) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p9"></span>Canon 3 of the Synod; see Hefele,
*History of the Councils,* Vol. II. p. 357. The canon is given by
Socrates entire and in the original words. Valesius holds that the
primacy conferred by this canon on the Constantinopolitan see was one of
honor merely, and involved no prerogatives of patriarchal or
metropolitan jurisdiction. For a full discussion of its significance,
see Hefele, as above. The Council of Chalcedon in 451 confirmed the
above action in the following words: ‘We following in all things the
decision of the Holy Fathers, and acknowledging the canon of the one
hundred and fifty bishops…do also determine and decree the same things
respecting the privileges of the most holy city of Constantinople, New
Rome. For the Fathers properly gave the primacy to the throne of the
elder Rome.’ Canon 28.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[121:710](2020173.htm#fr_709) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p10"></span>Canon 2. The words ‘patriarch,’
however, and ‘patriarchate’ are not used in the canon. According to
Sophocles (*Greek Lexicon*) the modern sense of these words was
introduced at the close of the fourth century. Valesius holds that the
sixth canon of the Nicene Council had given sanction to the principle of
patriarchal authority; but Beveridge is of opinion that patriarchs were
first constituted by the second general council. Hefele takes
substantially the same position as Valesius. See discussion of the
subject in Hefele, *Hist. of the Councils,* Vol. I. p. 389 *seq.*

<span id="fn_710"></span>[122:711](2020173.htm#fr_710) <span
id="ii.viii.ix-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.ix-p11"></span>Cf. IV. 27. On Gregory of Nyssa, one of
the most prominent of the ancient Fathers, see Smith & Wace, *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.*; Schaff, *Hist. of the Christ. Church,* Vol. III. p. 903
*et seq.*, and sources mentioned in the work.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Body of Paul, Bishop of Constantinople, is honorably
transferred from his Place of Exile. Death of Meletius.](2020174)
