[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020118)  [Next](2020120.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*The Emperor’s Invasion
of Persia, and Death.*

<span id="ii.vi.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor meanwhile invaded the
country of the Persians a little before spring, having learnt that the
races of Persia were greatly enfeebled and totally spiritless in winter.
For from their inability to endure cold, they abstain from military
service at that season, and it has become a proverb that ‘a Mede will
not then draw his hand from underneath his cloak.’ And well knowing that
the Romans were inured to brave all the rigors of the atmosphere he let
them loose on the country. After devastating a considerable tract of
country, including numerous villages and fortresses, they next assailed
the cities; and having invested the great city Ctesiphon, he reduced the
king of the Persians to such straits that the latter sent repeated
embassies to the emperor, offering to surrender a portion of his
dominions, on condition of his quitting the country, and putting an end
to the war. But Julian was unaffected by these submissions, and showed
no compassion to a suppliant foe: nor did he think of the adage, ‘To
conquer is honorable, but to be more than conqueror gives occasion for
envy.’ Giving credit to the divinations of the philosopher Maximus, with
whom he was in continual intercourse, he was deluded into the belief
that his exploits would not only equal, but exceed those of Alexander of
Macedon; so that he spurned with contempt the entreaties of the Persian
monarch. He even supposed in accordance with the teachings of Pythagoras
and Plato on ‘the transmigration of souls,’ <span
id="fr_541"></span>[542](#fn_541.md) that he was possessed of Alexander’s
soul, or rather that he himself was Alexander in another body. This
ridiculous fancy deluded and caused him to reject the negotiations for
peace proposed by the king of the Persians. Wherefore the latter
convinced of the uselessness of them was constrained to prepare for
conflict, and therefore on the next day after the rejection of his
embassy, he drew out in order of battle all the forces he had. The
Romans indeed censured their prince, for not avoiding an engagement when
he might have done so with advantage: nevertheless they attacked those
who opposed them, and again put the enemy to flight. The emperor was
present on horseback, and encouraged his soldiers in battle; but
confiding simply in his hope of success, he wore no armor. In this
defenceless state, a dart cast by some one unknown, pierced through his
arm and entered his side, making a wound. In consequence of this wound
he died. Some say that a certain Persian hurled the javelin, and then
fled; others assert that one of his own men was the author of the deed,
which indeed is the best corroborated and most current report. But
Callistus, one of his body-guards, who celebrated this emperor’s deeds
in heroic verse, says in narrating the particulars of this war, that the
wound of which he died was inflicted by a demon. This is possibly a mere
poetical fiction, or perhaps it was really the fact; for vengeful furies
have undoubtedly destroyed many persons. Be the case however as it may,
this is certain, that the ardor of his natural temperament rendered him
incautious, his learning made him vain, and his affectation of clemency
exposed him to contempt. Thus Julian ended his life in Persia, <span
id="fr_542"></span>[543](#fn_542.md) as we have said, in his fourth
consulate, <span id="fr_543"></span>[544](#fn_543.md) which he bore with
Sallust his colleague. This event occurred on the 26th of June, in the
third year of his reign, and the seventh from his having been created
Cæsar by Constantius, he being at that time in the thirty-first year of
his age.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_541"></span>[90:542](2020119.htm#fr_541.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxi-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p3.1"></span>μετενσωματώσεως</span> , lit. ‘exchange of
bodies,’ formed in analogy with <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p3.2"></span>μετεμψύχωσις</span> and logically inseparable
from that doctrine.

<span id="fn_542"></span>[90:543](2020119.htm#fr_542.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxi-p4"></span>Theodoret, *H. E.* III. 25, gives the
familiar version of the death of Julian, according to which, on
perceiving the character of his wound, the dying emperor filled his hand
with blood and threw it up into the air, crying, ‘Galilean, thou hast
overcome!’

<span id="fn_543"></span>[90:544](2020119.htm#fr_543.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxi-p5"></span>363 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vi.xxi-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jovian is proclaimed Emperor.](2020120.md)
