[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020197)  [Next](2020199) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*John draws down upon
Himself the Displeasure of Many Persons of Rank and Power. Of the Eunuch
Eutropius.*

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.vi-p2.1"></span>As</span> long as John was in conflict with
the clergy only, machinations against him were utterly powerless; but
when he proceeded to rebuke many of those in public office also with
immoderate vehemence, the tide of unpopularity began to set against him
with far greater impetus. Hence many stories were told to his
disparagement. And most of these found attentive and believing
listeners. This growing prejudice was not a little increased by an
oration which he pronounced at that time against Eutropius. For
Eutropius was the chief eunuch of the imperial bed-chamber, and the
first of all eunuchs that was admitted to the dignity of consul. He,
desiring to inflict vengeance on certain persons who had taken refuge in
the churches, induced the emperors to make a law <span
id="fr_840"></span>[841](#fn_840) excluding delinquents from the
privilege of sanctuary, and authorizing the seizure of those who had
sought the shelter of the sacred edifices. But its author was punished
for this almost immediately; for scarcely had the law been promulgated,
before Eutropius himself, having incurred the displeasure of the
emperor, fled for protection to the church. <span
id="fr_841"></span>[842](#fn_841) The bishop therefore, while Eutropius
trembling with fear lay under the table of the altar, mounting the
pulpit <span id="fr_842"></span>[843](#fn_842) from which he was
accustomed to address the people in order to be the more distinctly
heard, uttered an invective against him: wherefore he seemed to create
greater displeasure in some, as he not only denied compassion to the
unfortunate, but added insult to cruelty. By the emperor’s order
however, for certain offences committed by him, Eutropius, though
bearing the consulate, was decapitated, and his name effaced from the
list of consuls, that of Theodore his colleague being alone suffered to
remain as in office for that year. <span
id="fr_843"></span>[844](#fn_843) It is said that John afterwards used
the same license towards Gaïnas also, who was then commander-in-chief of
the army; treating him with characteristic rudeness, because he had
presumed to request the emperor to assign the Arians, with whom he
agreed in sentiment, one of the churches within the city. Many others
also of the higher orders, for a variety of causes, he censured with the
same unceremonious freedom, so that by these means he created many
powerful adversaries. Wherefore Theophilus bishop of Alexandria,
immediately after his ordination, was plotting his overthrow; and
concerted measures for this purpose in secret, both with the friends who
were around him, and by letter with such as were at a distance. For it
was not so much the boldness with which John lashed whatever was
obnoxious to him, that affected Theophilus, as his own failure to place
his favorite presbyter Isidore in the episcopal chair of Constantinople.
In such a state were the affairs of John the bishop at that time;
mischief thus threatened him at the very commencement of his episcopate.
But we shall enter into these things more at large as we proceed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_840"></span>[140:841](2020198.htm#fr_840) <span
id="ii.ix.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p3"></span>Sozomen (VIII. 7) says that this law was
rescinded very soon afterwards.

<span id="fn_841"></span>[140:842](2020198.htm#fr_841) <span
id="ii.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p4"></span>See also Chrysostom, *Orat. in Eutropium,*
1. 3 (*Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. IX. p. 251). From these
statements it appears that Zosimus is in error when he says (V. 18) that
Eutropius was seized in violation of the law of sanctuary and taken out
of the church. Chrysostom assigns his seizure to a time when he had left
the church for some purpose or other.

<span id="fn_842"></span>[140:843](2020198.htm#fr_842) <span
id="ii.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix.vi-p5.1"></span>ἄ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix.vi-p5.2"></span>μβων</span>, high reading-desk from which the
Scriptures were recited, situated toward the middle of the church and
distinguished from the altar, where the main service of worship was
chanted. Bishops were accustomed to preach from the steps of the altar
(cf. Bingham *Christ. Antiq.* VIII. 4. 5); but Chrysostom, on account of
his little stature, as some say, used the ‘ambôn’ as a pulpit.

<span id="fn_843"></span>[140:844](2020198.htm#fr_843) <span
id="ii.ix.vi-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vi-p6"></span>399 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.vi-p6.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Gaïnas the Goth attempts to usurp the Sovereign Power; after
filling Constantinople with Disorder, he is slain.](2020199)
