[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020188)  [Next](2020190) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.xxv"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xxv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*The Eunomians divide
into Several Factions.*

<span id="ii.viii.xxv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xxv-p2.1"></span>But</span> neither did the followers of
Eunomius remain without dissensions: for Eunomius <span
id="fr_806"></span>[807](#fn_806) himself had long before this separated
from Eudoxius who ordained him bishop of Cyzicus, taking occasion from
that bishop’s refusal to restore to communion his master Aëtius who had
been ejected. But those who derived their name from him were
subsequently divided into several factions. For first Theophronius a
Cappadocian, who had been instructed in the art of disputation by
Eunomius, and had acquired a smat<span id="page_135">p. 135</span> <span
id="ii.viii.xxv-Page_135"></span>tering of Aristotle’s *Categories,* and
his *Book of Interpretation,* composed some treatises which he entitled,
*On the Exercise of the Mind.* Having, however, drawn down upon himself
the reprobation of his own sect, he was ejected as an apostate. He
afterwards held assemblies apart from them, and left behind him a heresy
which bore his own name. Furthermore at Constantinople a certain
Eutychius from some absurd dispute, withdrew from the Eunomians, and
still continues to hold separate meetings. The followers of Theophronius
are denominated ‘Eunomiotheophronians’; and those of Eutychius have the
appellation of ‘Eunomieutychians.’ What those nonsensical terms were
about which they differed I consider unworthy of being recorded in this
history, lest I should go into matters foreign to my purpose. I shall
merely observe that they adulterated baptism: for they do not baptize in
the name of the Trinity, but into the death of Christ. <span
id="fr_807"></span>[808](#fn_807) Among the Macedonians also there was
for some time a division, when Eutropius a presbyter held separate
assemblies, and Carterius did not agree with him. There are possibly in
other cities sects which have emanated from these: but living at
Constantinople, where I was born and educated, I describe more
particularly what has taken place in that city; both because I have
myself witnessed some of these transactions, and also because the events
which have there occurred are of pre-eminent importance, and are
therefore more worth of commemoration. Let it however be understood that
what I have here related happened at different periods, and not at the
same time. But if any one should be desirous of knowing the names of the
various sects, he may easily satisfy himself, by reading a book entitled
*Ancoratus*, <span id="fr_808"></span>[809](#fn_808) composed by
Epiphanius, bishop of Cyprus: but I shall content myself with what I
have already stated. The public affairs were again thrown into agitation
from a cause I shall now refer to.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_806"></span>[134:807](2020189.htm#fr_806) <span
id="ii.viii.xxv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxv-p3"></span>Cf. IV. 7 and 13.

<span id="fn_807"></span>[135:808](2020189.htm#fr_807) <span
id="ii.viii.xxv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxv-p4"></span>*Apost. Can.*50 reads: ‘If any bishop
or presbyter does not perform the one initiation with three immersions,
but with one immersion only into the death of the Lord, let him be
deposed.’ Also the Second General Synod (that of Constantinople, 381) in
its 7th Canon passed the following: ‘But the Eunomians, *who only
baptize with one immersion,* and the Montanists, who are here called
Phrygians, and the Sabellians, who teach the doctrine of the Fatherhood
of the Son…(if they wish to be joined to the Orthodox faith) we receive
as heathen; on the first day we make them Christians, on the second,
catechumens, &c.’ See Hefele, *Hist. of the Church Councils,* Vol. II.
p. 367, 368.

<span id="fn_808"></span>[135:809](2020189.htm#fr_808) <span
id="ii.viii.xxv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxv-p5"></span>Epiphan. *Ancoratus,* 13. Photius calls
the *Ancoratus* a synopsis of the treatise of Epiphanius on *Heresies*
(*Biblioth.* 123). The subject here referred to was treated by
Epiphanius in *Hær.* LXVI. and LXVIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Usurper Eugenius compasses the Death of Valentinian the
Younger. Theodosius obtains a Victory over him.](2020190)
