[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020152)  [Next](2020154.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*Of Novatus and
his Followers. The Novatians of Phrygia alter the Time of keeping
Easter, following Jewish Usage.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time the
Novatians <span id="fr_648"></span>[649](#fn_648.md) inhabiting Phrygia
changed the day for celebrating the Feast of Easter. How this happened I
shall state, after first explaining the reason of the strict discipline
which is maintained in their church, even to the present day, in the
provinces of Phrygia and Paphlagonia. Novatus, <span
id="fr_649"></span>[650](#fn_649.md) a presbyter of the Roman Church,
separated from it, because Cornelius the bishop received into communion
believers who had sacrificed during the persecution which the Emperor
Decius <span id="fr_650"></span>[651](#fn_650.md) had raised against the
Church. Having seceded on this account, on being afterwards elevated to
the episcopacy by such bishops as entertained similar sentiments, he
wrote to all the churches <span id="fr_651"></span>[652](#fn_651.md) that
‘they should not admit to the sacred mysteries those who had sacrificed;
but exhorting them to repentance, leave the pardoning of their offense
to God, who has the power to forgive all sin.’ Receiving such letters,
the parties in the various provinces, to whom they were addressed, acted
according to their several dispositions and judgments. As he asked that
they should not receive to the sacraments those who after baptism had
committed any deadly sin <span id="fr_652"></span>[653](#fn_652.md) this
appeared to some a cruel and merciless course: but others received the
rule as just and conducive to the maintenance of discipline, and the
promotion of greater devotedness of life. In the midst of the agitation
of this question, letters arrived from Cornelius the bishop, promising
indulgence to delinquents after baptism. Thus as these two persons wrote
contrary to one another, and each confirmed his own procedure by the
testimony of the Divine word, as it usually happens, every one
identified himself with that view which favored his previous habits and
inclinations. Those who had pleasure in sin, encouraged by the license
then granted them, took occasion from it to revel in every species of
criminality. Now the Phrygians appear to be more temperate than other
nations, and are seldom guilty of swearing. The Scythians, on the other
hand, and the Thracians, are naturally of a very irritable disposition:
while the inhabitants of the East are addicted to sensual pleasures. But
the Paphlagonians and Phrygians are prone to neither of these vices; nor
are the sports of the circus and theatrical exhibitions in much
estimation among them even to the present day. And for this reason, it
seems to me, these people, as well as others of the same character, so
readily assented to the letters then written by Novatus. Fornication and
adultery are regarded among them as the grossest enormities: and it is
well known that there is no race of men on the face of the earth who
more rigidly govern their passions in this respect than the Phrygians
and Paphlagonians. The same reason I think had force with those who
dwelt in the West and followed Novatus. Yet although for the sake of
stricter discipline Novatus became a separatist, <span id="page_113">p.
113</span> <span id="ii.vii.xxviii-Page_113"></span>he made no change in
the time of keeping Easter, <span id="fr_653"></span>[654](#fn_653.md) but
invariably observed the practice that obtained in the Western churches.
For they celebrate this feast after the equinox, according to the usage
which had of old been delivered to them when first they embraced
Christianity. He himself indeed afterwards suffered martyrdom in the
reign of Valerian, <span id="fr_654"></span>[655](#fn_654.md) during the
persecution which was then raised against the Christians. But those in
Phrygia <span id="fr_655"></span>[656](#fn_655.md) who are named after him
Novatians, about this period changed the day of celebrating Easter,
being averse to communion with other Christians even on this occasion.
This was effected by means of a few obscure bishops of that sect
convening a Synod at the village of Pazum, which is situated near the
sources of the river Sangarius; for there they framed a canon appointing
its observance on the same day as that on which the Jews annually keep
the feast of Unleavened Bread. An aged man, who was the son of a
presbyter, and had been present with his father at this Synod, gave us
our information on this matter. But both Agelius, bishop of the
Novatians at Constantinople, and Maximus of Nicæa, as also the bishops
of Nicomedia and Cotyæum, were absent, although the ecclesiastical
affairs of the Novatians were for the most part under the control of
these bishops. How the church of the Novatians soon after was divided
into two parties in consequence of this Synod, shall be related in its
proper course: <span id="fr_656"></span>[657](#fn_656.md) but we must now
notice what took place about the same time in the Western parts.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_648"></span>[112:649](2020153.htm#fr_648.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p3"></span>On the Novatians and their schism,
see Schaff, *Hist. of the Christ. Ch.* Vol. I. p. 450, 451; Neander,
*Hist. of Christ. Ch.* Vol. I. p. 237–248. On Socrates’ attitude toward
Novatianism, see Introd. p. ix. Cf. also Euseb. *H. E.* VI. 43.

<span id="fn_649"></span>[112:650](2020153.htm#fr_649.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p4"></span>His right name was Novatian, although
the Greek writers call him uniformly Navatus, ignoring or confusing him
with another person whose name is strictly Novatus. Cf. Jerome,
*Scriptor. Eccles.* LXX.; also Smith and Wace, *Dict. of Christ. Biog.*

<span id="fn_650"></span>[112:651](2020153.htm#fr_650.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p5"></span>This was the great *Seventh
Persecution,* and the first which historians agree in calling strictly
‘general.’ It took place in 249–251 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>, and consisted in a
systematic effort to uproot Christianity throughout the empire. Many
eminent Christians were put to death during its course, and others,
among whom was Origen, were tortured. Cf. Origen, *Contra Celsum,* III.;
Gregory of Nyssa, *Vita Gregori Thaumaturg.* III.; Euseb. *H. E.* VI.
40–42.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[112:652](2020153.htm#fr_651.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p6"></span>Cf. I. 10.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[112:653](2020153.htm#fr_652.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p7"></span>[1 John
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016.md),
[17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#017.md)<span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p7.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_653"></span>[113:654](2020153.htm#fr_653.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p8"></span>Cf. I. 8 and note.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[113:655](2020153.htm#fr_654.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p9"></span>The accuracy of this statement is
disputed by Valesius, who asserts that the Novatians wrote a book
entitled *The Martyrdom of Novatian,* but that this book was full of
false statements and fables, and had been disproved by Eulogius, bishop
of Alexandria in the sixth book of his treatise *Against the Novatians.*
Besides, in this *Martyrdom of Novatian* the founder of the sect was not
represented as suffering martyrdom, but simply as being a ‘confessor.’
Cf. I. 8, note 12.

<span id="fn_655"></span>[113:656](2020153.htm#fr_655.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p10"></span>Let it be noted that Novatian was a
native of Phrygia and naturally had many followers in that province.

<span id="fn_656"></span>[113:657](2020153.htm#fr_656.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxviii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxviii-p11"></span>V. 21.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Damasus ordained Bishop of Rome. Sedition and Loss of Life caused
by the Rivalry of Ursinus.](2020154.md)
