[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020398)  [Next](2020400) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Athanasius, after having
been Seven Years concealed in the House of a Wise and Beautiful Virgin,
reappears at that time in Public, and enters the Church of Alexandria*.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.vi-p2.1"></span>At</span> this period, Athanasius, who had
long remained in concealment, having heard of the death of Constantius,
appeared by night in the church at Alexandria. <span
id="fr_1375"></span>[1376](#fn_1375) His unexpected appearance excited
the greatest astonishment. He had escaped falling into the hands of the
governor of Egypt, who, at the command of the emperor, and at the
request of the friends of George, had formed plans to arrest him, as
before stated, and had concealed himself in the house of a holy virgin
in Alexandria. It is said that she was endowed with such extraordinary
beauty, that those who beheld her regarded her as a phenomenon of
nature; and that men who possessed continence and prudence, kept aloof
from her in order that no blame might be attached to them by the
suspicious. She was in the very flower of youth and was exceedingly
modest and prudent, qualities which are wont alone to adorn the body
even to a refinement of beauty when nature may not be helpful with the
gift. For it is not true, as some assert, that “as is the body, so is
the soul.” On the contrary, the habit of the body is imaged forth by the
operation of the soul, and any one who is active in any way whatever
will appear to be of that nature as long as he may be thus actively
engaged.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p4"></span>This is a truth I think admitted by all
who have accurately investigated the subject. It is related that
Athanasius sought refuge in the house of this holy virgin by the
revelation of God, who designed to save him in this manner.

<span id="iii.x.vi-p5"></span>When I reflect on the result which ensued,
I cannot doubt but that all the events were directed by God; so that the
relatives of Athanasius might not have distress if any one had attempted
to trouble them about him, and had they been compelled to swear. There
was nothing to excite suspicion of a priest being concealed in the house
of so lovely a virgin. However, she had the courage to receive him, and
through her prudence preserved his life. She was his most faithful
keeper and assiduous servant; for she washed his feet and brought him
food, and she alone served in every other necessity, which nature
demands in her exacting uses; the books he stood in need of she cared
for through the help of others; during the long time in which these
services were rendered, none of the inhabitants of Alexandria knew
anything about it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1375"></span>[330:1376](2020399.htm#fr_1375) <span
id="iii.x.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vi-p3"></span>Pallad. *H. I.* 136; cf. Soc. iii. 4; cf.
*Chronicon prævium* to Festal letters, under <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.x.vi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span> 360.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Violent Death and Triumph of George, Bishop of Alexandria. The
Result of Certain Occurrences in the Temple of Mithra. Letter of Julian
on this Aggravated Circumstance.](2020400)
