[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020077)  [Next](2020079) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxviii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVIII</span>.—*Athanasius’ Account
of the Deeds of Violence committed at Alexandria by George the Arian.*

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p2.1"></span>What</span> cruelties George perpetrated at
Alexandria at the same time may be learned from the narration of
Athanasius, who both suffered in and witnessed the occurrences. In his
‘Apology for his flight,’ <span id="fr_345"></span>[346](#fn_345)
speaking of these transactions, he thus expresses himself:

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p4"></span>‘Moreover, they came to Alexandria,
again seeking to destroy me: and on this occasion their proceedings were
worse than before; for the soldiery having suddenly surrounded the
church, there arose the din of war, instead of the voice of prayer.
Afterwards, on his arrival during Lent, <span
id="fr_346"></span>[347](#fn_346) George, sent from Cappadocia, added to
the evil which he was instructed to <span id="page_55">p. 55</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxviii-Page_55"></span>work. When Easter-week <span
id="fr_347"></span>[348](#fn_347) was passed, the virgins were cast into
prison, the bishops were led in chains by the military, and the
dwellings even of orphans and widows were forcibly entered and their
provisions pillaged. Christians were assassinated by night; houses were
sealed; <span id="fr_348"></span>[349](#fn_348) and the relatives of the
clergy were endangered on their account. Even these outrages were
dreadful; but those that followed were still more so. For in the week
after the holy Pentecost, the people, having fasted, went forth to the
cemetery to pray, because all were averse to communion with George: that
wickedest of men being informed of this, instigated against them
Sebastian, an officer who was a Manichæan. He, accordingly, at the head
of a body of troops armed with drawn swords, bows, and darts, marched
out to attack the people, although it was the Lord’s day: finding but
few at prayers,—as the most part had retired because of the lateness of
the hour,—he performed such exploits as might be expected from them.
Having kindled a fire, he set the virgins near it, in order to compel
them to say that they were of the Arian faith: but seeing they stood
their ground and despised the fire, he then stripped them, and so beat
them on the face, that for a long time afterwards they could scarcely be
recognized. Seizing also about forty men, he flogged them in an
extraordinary manner: for he so lacerated their backs with rods fresh
cut from the palm-tree, which still had their thorns on, that some were
obliged to resort repeatedly to surgical aid in order to have the thorns
extracted from their flesh, and others, unable to bear the agony, died
under its infliction. All the survivors with one virgin they banished to
the Great Oasis. <span id="fr_349"></span>[350](#fn_349) The bodies of
the dead they did not so much as give up to their relatives, but denying
them the rites of sepulture they concealed them as they thought fit,
that the evidences of their cruelty might not appear. They did this
acting as madmen. For while the friends of the deceased rejoiced on
account of their confession, but mourned because their bodies were
uninterred, the impious inhumanity of these acts was sounded abroad the
more conspicuously. For soon after this they sent into exile out of
Egypt and the two Libyas the following bishops: Ammonius, Thmuïs, Caïus,
Philo, Hermes, Pliny, Psenosiris, Nilammon, Agatho, Anagamphus, Mark,
Ammonius, another Mark, Dracontius, Adelphius, and Athenodorus; and the
presbyters Hierax and Discorus. And so harshly did they treat them in
conducting them, that some expired while on their journey, and others in
the place of banishment. In this way they got rid of more than thirty
bishops, for the anxious desire of the Arians, like Ahab’s, was to
exterminate the truth if possible.’

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p9"></span>Such are the words of Athanasius in
regard to the atrocities perpetrated by George at Alexandria. The
emperor meanwhile led his army into Illyricum. For there the urgency of
public affairs demanded his presence; and especially the proclamation of
Vetranio <span id="fr_350"></span>[351](#fn_350) as emperor by the
military. On arriving at Sirmium, he came to a conference with Vetranio
during a truce; and so managed, that the soldiers who had previously
declared for him changed sides, and saluted Constantius alone as
Augustus and sovereign autocrat. In the acclamations, therefore, no
notice was taken of Vetranio. Vetranio, perceiving himself to be
abandoned, immediately threw himself at the feet of the emperor;
Constantius, taking from him his imperial crown and purple, treated him
with great clemency, and recommended him to pass the rest of his days
tranquilly in the condition of a private citizen: observing that a life
of repose at his advanced age was far more suitable than a dignity which
entailed anxieties and care. Vetranio’s affairs came to this issue; and
the emperor ordered that a liberal provision out of the public revenue
should be given him. Often afterwards writing to the emperor during his
residence at Prusa in Bithynia, Vetranio assured him that he had
conferred the greatest blessing on him, by liberating him from the
disquietudes which are the inseparable concomitants of sovereign power.
Adding that he himself did not act wisely in depriving himself of that
happiness in retirement, which he had bestowed upon him. Let this
suffice on this point. After these things, the Emperor Constantius
having created Gallus his kinsman Cæsar, and given him his own
name, <span id="fr_351"></span>[352](#fn_351) sent him to Antioch in
Syria, providing thus for the guarding of the eastern parts. When Gallus
was entering this city, the Savior’s sign appeared in the East: <span
id="fr_352"></span>[353](#fn_352) for a pillar in the form of a cross
seen in the heavens gave occasion of great amazement to the spectators.
His other generals the emperor <span id="page_56">p. 56</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-Page_56"></span>despatched against Magnentius with
considerable forces, and he himself remained at Sirmium, awaiting the
course of events.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_345"></span>[54:346](2020078.htm#fr_345) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p3"></span>Athan. *Apol. de Fuga,* 6.

<span id="fn_346"></span>[54:347](2020078.htm#fr_346) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p5.1"></span>Τεσσαρακοστή</span> , lit. = ‘forty days’
fast,’ formed by mistaken analogy to <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p5.2"></span>πεντηκοστή</span>

<span id="fn_347"></span>[55:348](2020078.htm#fr_347) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p5.3"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p6"></span>Suspending, i.e., all violence during
the period of festivity attending the observance of Easter.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[55:349](2020078.htm#fr_348) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p7"></span>Houses are often sealed by state and
municipal officials in the East, even at the present time, when their
contents are to be confiscated, or for any other reason an inventory is
to be made by the authorities. The sealing consists in fastening and
securing the locks and bolts and attaching the impression of the
official seal to some sealing-wax which is put over them. In this case
the object of the sealing was apparently the confiscation of the
contents.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[55:350](2020078.htm#fr_349) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p8"></span>The modern *El-Onah* or *El-Kharjeh,*
situated west of the Nile, seven days’ journey from Thebes, contains
several small streams, and abounds in vegetation, including palm-trees,
orange and citron groves, olive orchards, &c. See Smith, *Dict. of
Geogr.*

<span id="fn_350"></span>[55:351](2020078.htm#fr_350) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p10"></span>Sozomen (IV. 4) calls him <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.v.xxviii-p10.1"></span>Οὐετερανίων</span> ;
cf. also Zosimus, II. 44, on the way in which he was elevated and soon
afterwards reduced.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[55:352](2020078.htm#fr_351) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p11"></span>See I. 1, and note on the name of
Eusebius Pamphilus; cf. Smith and Cheetham, *Dict. of Christ. Ant.
Names.*

<span id="fn_352"></span>[55:353](2020078.htm#fr_352) <span
id="ii.v.xxviii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxviii-p12"></span>Similar to the appearance mentioned in
I. 2. See note on that passage.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Heresiarch Photinus.](2020079)
