[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020026)  [Next](2020028.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.xviii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*The Emperor
Constantine abolishes Paganism and erects many Churches in Different
Places.*

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p2.1"></span>After</span> this the emperor became
increasingly attentive to the interests of the Christians, and abandoned
the heathen superstitions. He abolished the combats of the gladiators,
and set up his own statues in the temples. And as the heathens affirmed
that it was Serapis who brought up the Nile for the purpose of
irrigating Egypt, because a cubit was usually carried into his temple,
he directed Alexander to transfer the cubit to the church. And although
they predicted that the Nile would not overflow because of the
displeasure of Serapis, nevertheless there was an inundation in the
following year and afterwards, taking place regularly: thus it was
proved by fact that the rising of the Nile was not in consequence of
their superstition, but by reason of the decrees of Providence. About
the same time those barbarians the Sarmatians and Goths made incursions
on the Roman territory; yet the emperor’s earnestness respecting the
churches was by no means abated, but he made suitable provision for both
these matters. Placing his confidence in the Christian banner, <span
id="fr_217"></span>[218](#fn_217.md) he completely vanquished his enemies,
so as even to cast off the tribute of gold which preceding emperors were
accustomed to pay the barbarians: while they themselves, being
terror-struck at the unexpectedness of their defeat, then for the first
time embraced the Christian religion, by means of which Constantine had
been protected. Again he built other churches, one of which was erected
near the Oak of Mamre, under which the Sacred Oracles declare that
Abraham entertained angels. For the emperor having been informed that
altars had been reared under that oak, and that pagan sacrifices were
offered upon them, censured by letter Eusebius bishop of Cæsarea, and
ordered that the altars should be demolished, and a house of prayer
erected beside the oak. He also directed that another church should be
constructed in Heliopolis in Phœnicia, for this reason. Who originally
legislated for the inhabitants of Heliopolis I am unable to state, but
his character and morals may be judged of from the \[practice of that\]
city; for the laws of the country ordered the women among them to be
common, and therefore the children born there were of doubtful descent,
so that there was no distinction of fathers and their offspring. Their
virgins also were presented for prostitution to the strangers who
resorted thither. The emperor hastened to correct this evil which had
long prevailed among them. And passing a solemn law of chastity, he
removed the shameful evil and provided for the mutual recognition of
families. And having built churches there, he took care that a bishop
and sacred clergy should be ordained. Thus he reformed the corrupt
manners of the people of Heliopolis. He likewise demolished the temple
of Venus at Aphaca on Mount Libanus, and abolished the infamous deeds
which were there celebrated. Why need I describe his expulsion of the
Pythonic demon from Cilicia, by commanding the mansion in which he was
lurking to be razed from its foundations? So great indeed was the
emperor’s devotion to Christianity, that when he was about to enter on a
war with Persia, he prepared a tabernacle formed of embroidered linen on
the model of a church, just as Moses had done in the wilderness; <span
id="fr_218"></span>[219](#fn_218.md) and this so constructed as to be
adapted to conveyance from place to place, in order that he might have a
house of prayer even in the most desert regions. But the war was not at
that time carried on, being prevented through dread of the emperor. It
would, I conceive, be out of place here to describe the emperor’s
diligence in rebuilding cities and converting many villages into cities;
as for example Drepanum, to which he gave his mother’s name, and
Constantia in Palestine, so called from his sister. For my task is not
to enumerate of the emperor’s actions, but simply such as are connected
with Christianity, and especially those which relate to the churches.
Wherefore I leave to others more competent to detail such matters, the
emperor’s glorious achievements, inasmuch as they belong to a different
subject, and require a distinct treatise. But I myself should have been
silent, if the Church had remained undisturbed by divisions: for where
the subject does not supply matter for relation, there is no necessity
for a narrator. Since however subtle and vain disputation has confused
and at the same time scattered the apostolic faith of Christianity, I
thought it desirable to record these things, in order that the <span
id="page_23">p. 23</span> <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-Page_23"></span>transactions of the churches might not
be lost in obscurity. For accurate information on these points procures
celebrity among the many, and at the same time renders him who is
acquainted with them more secure from error, and instructs him not to be
carried away by any empty sound of sophistical argumentation which he
may chance to hear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_217"></span>[22:218](2020027.htm#fr_217.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p3.1"></span>τροπαί& 251·</span>: see above, chap. 2.

<span id="fn_218"></span>[22:219](2020027.htm#fr_218.md) <span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.xviii-p4"></span>[Ex.
xxxv.-xl](../../../bib/kjv/exo035.htm#000.md)<span
id="ii.iv.xviii-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: In what Manner the Nations in the Interior of India were
Christianized in the Times of Constantine.](2020028.md)
