[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020506)  [Next](2020508.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*The Statue of the
Empress; what happened there; the Teaching of John; Convocation of
another Synod against John; his Deposition*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xx-p2.1"></span>Not</span> long after these occurrences the
silver statue of the empress, which is still to be seen to the south of
the church opposite the grand council-chamber, was placed upon a column
of porphyry on a high platform, <span
id="fr_1609"></span>[1610](#fn_1609.md) and the event was celebrated there
with applause and popular spectacles of dances and mimes, as was then
customary on the erection of the statues of the emperors. In a public
discourse to the people John charged that these proceedings reflected
dishonor on the Church. This remark recalled former grievances to the
recollection of the empress, and irritated her so exceedingly at the
insult that she determined to convene another council. He did not yield,
but added fuel to her indignation by still more openly declaiming
against her in the church; and it was at this period that he pronounced
the memorable discourse commencing with the words, “Herodias is again
enraged; again she dances; again she seeks to have the head of John in a
basin.”

<span id="iii.xiii.xx-p4"></span>Several bishops arrived soon after at
Constantinople, and amongst them were Leontius, bishop of Ancyra, and
Acacius, bishop of Berea. The festival of our Lord’s Nativity was then
at hand, and the emperor, instead of repairing to the church as usual,
sent to acquaint John that he could not hold communion with him until he
had cleared himself of the charges. John spiritedly replied that he was
ready to prove his innocence; and this so intimidated his accusers that
they did not dare to follow up the charges. The judges decided that,
having been once deposed, he ought not to be admitted to a second trial.
But they called on John to defend himself on this point only, that after
he had been deposed, he had sat on the episcopal throne before a synod
had reinstated him. In his defense he appealed to the decision of the
bishops who had, subsequently to the council of “The Oak,” held
communion with him. The judges waived this argument, under the plea that
those who had held communion with John were inferior in point of number
to those who had deposed him, and that a canon was in force by which he
stood condemned. Under this pretext they therefore deposed him, although
the law in question had been enacted by heretics; for the Arians, after
having taken advantage of various calumnies to expel Athanasius from the
church of Alexandria, enacted this law from the apprehension of a change
in public affairs, for they struggled to have the decisions against him
remain uninvestigated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1609"></span>[412:1610](2020507.htm#fr_1609.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xx-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 18; Pallad. *Dialog.* 9–12;
Chrys. *Ep. ad Inn. ibid.* 2.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Calamities suffered by the People after the Expulsion of John.
The Plots against him of Assassination.](2020508.md)
