[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020075)  [Next](2020077) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVI</span>.—*After the Death of
Constans, the Western Emperor, Paul and Athanasius are again ejected
from their Sees: the Former on his Way into Exile is slain; but the
Latter escapes by Flight.*

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.1"></span>The</span> conflux of these disastrous events
occurred during a short space of time; for they happened in the fourth
year after the council at Sardica, during the consulate of Sergius and
Nigrinian. <span id="fr_343"></span>[344](#fn_343) When these
circumstances were published, the entire sovereignty of the empire
seemed to devolve on Constantius alone, who, being accordingly
proclaimed in the East sole Autocrat, made the most vigorous
preparations against the usurpers. Hereupon the adversaries of
Athanasius, thinking a favorable crisis had arisen, again framed the
most calumnious charges against him, before his arrival at Alexandria;
assuring the Emperor Constantius that he was subverting all Egypt and
Libya. And his having undertaken to ordain out of the limits of his own
diocese, tended not a little to accredit the accusations against him.
Meanwhile in this conjuncture, Athanasius entered Alexandria; and having
convened a council of the bishops in Egypt, they <span id="page_54">p.
54</span> <span id="ii.v.xxvi-Page_54"></span>confirmed by their
unanimous vote, what had been determined in the Synod at Sardica, and
that assembled at Jerusalem by Maximus. But the emperor, who had been
long since imbued with Arian doctrine, reversed all the indulgent
proceedings he had so recently resolved on. And first of all he ordered
that Paul, bishop of Constantinople, should be sent into exile; whom
those who conducted strangled, at Cucusus in Cappadocia. Marcellus was
also ejected, and Basil again made ruler of the church at Ancyra. Lucius
of Adrianople, being loaded with chains, died in prison. The reports
which were made concerning Athanasius so wrought on the emperor’s mind,
that in an ungovernable fury he commanded him to be put to death
wherever he might be found: he moreover included Theodulus and Olympius,
who presided over churches in Thrace, in the same proscription.
Athanasius, however, was not ignorant of the intentions of the emperor;
but learning of them he once more had recourse to flight, and so escaped
the emperor’s menaces. The Arians denounced this retreat as criminal,
particularly Narcissus, bishop of Neronias in Cilicia, George of
Laodicæa, and Leontius who then had the oversight of the church at
Antioch. This last person, when a presbyter, had been divested of his
rank, <span id="fr_344"></span>[345](#fn_344) because in order to remove
all suspicion of illicit intercourse with a woman named Eustolium, with
whom he spent a considerable portion of his time, he had castrated
himself and thenceforward lived more unreservedly with her, on the
ground that there could be no longer any ground for evil surmises.
Afterwards however, at the earnest desire of the Emperor Constantius, he
was created bishop of the church at Antioch, after Stephen, the
successor of Placitus. So much respecting this.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_343"></span>[53:344](2020076.htm#fr_343) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p3"></span>350 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_344"></span>[54:345](2020076.htm#fr_344) <span
id="ii.v.xxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxvi-p4"></span>Cf. *Apost. Cann.* XXII. and XXIII.;
according to these any cleric was to be deposed if found guilty of such
a crime. The Council of Nicæa also passed a canon on the subject which
is as follows: ‘If a man has been mutilated by physicians during
sickness, or by barbarians, he may remain among the clergy; but if a man
in good health has mutilated himself, he must resign his post after the
matter has been proved among the clergy, and in future no one who has
thus acted should be ordained. But as it is evident that what has just
been said only concerns those who have thus acted with intention, and
have dared to mutilate themselves, those who have been made eunuchs by
barbarians or by their masters will be allowed, conformably to the
canon, to remain among the clergy, if in other respects they are
worthy.’ *Canon* I. See Hefele, *Hist. of the Councils,* Vol. I. p. 375,
376.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Macedonius having possessed himself of the See of Constantinople
inflicts much Injury on those who differ from him.](2020077)
