[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020236)  [Next](2020238.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xx"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*A Second Overthrow of the
Persians by the Romans.*

<span id="ii.x.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xx-p2.1"></span>Now</span> the emperor of the Romans dwelling
in Constantinople being fully aware that God had plainly given him the
victory was so benevolent that although those under him had been
successful in war nevertheless he desired to make peace; and to that end
he dispatched Helion, a man in whom he placed the greatest confidence,
with a commission to enter into a pacific treaty with the Persians.
Helion having arrived in Mesopotamia, at the place where the Romans for
their own security had formed a trench, sent before him as his deputy
Maximin an eloquent man who was the associate of Ardaburius the
commander-in-chief of the army, to make preliminary arrangements
concerning the terms of peace. Maximin on coming into the presence of
the Persian king, said he had been sent to him on this matter, not by
the Roman emperor, but by his generals; for he said this war was not
even known to the emperor, and if known would be considered
insignificant by him. And as the sovereign of Persia had gladly decided
to receive the embassy,—for his troops were suffering from want of
provisions,—there came to him that corps among them which is
distinguished by the name of ‘the Immortals.’ <span
id="fr_956"></span>[957](#fn_956.md) This is a body of brave men numbering
about ten thousand—and counselled the king not to listen to any
overtures for peace, until they should have made an attack upon the
Romans, who, they said, were now become extremely incautious. The king
approving their advice, ordered the ambassador to be imprisoned and a
guard set over him, and permitted the Immortals to put their design upon
the Romans into execution. They therefore, on arriving at the place
appointed, divided themselves into two bands, with a view to surround
some portion of the Roman army. The Romans observing but one body of
Persians approaching them, prepared themselves to receive it, not having
seen the other division, in consequence of their suddenly rushing forth
to battle. But just as the engagement was about to commence, Divine
Providence so ordered it, that another division of the Roman army under
Procopius a general emerged from behind a certain hill and perceiving
their comrades in danger, attacked the Persians in the rear. Thus were
they, who but a little before had surrounded the Romans, themselves
encompassed. Having utterly destroyed these in a short time, the Romans
turned upon those who broke forth from their ambuscade and in like
manner slew every one of them with darts. In this way those who by the
Persians were termed ‘the Immortals’ were all of them shown to be
mortal, Christ having executed this vengeance upon the Persians because
they had shed the blood of so many of his pious worshippers. The king of
the Persians on being informed of the disaster, pretended to be ignorant
of what had taken place, and ordered the embassy to be admitted, he thus
addressing the ambassador: ‘I agree to the peace, not as yielding to the
Romans, but to gratify you, whom I have found to be the most prudent of
all the Romans.’ Thus was that war concluded which had been undertaken
on account of the suffering Christians in Persia, under the consulate of
the two Augusti, <span id="fr_957"></span>[958](#fn_957.md) being the
thirteenth of Honorius, and the tenth of Theodosius, in the fourth year
of the 300th Olympiad: and with it terminated the persecution which had
been excited in Persia against the Christians.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_956"></span>[163:957](2020237.htm#fr_956.md) <span
id="ii.x.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xx-p3"></span>A Persian body-guard called <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x.xx-p3.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x.xx-p3.2"></span>Αθάνατοι</span>,
‘Immortals,’ existed during the period of the invasion of Greece by the
Persians (cf. Herodotus, VII. 31). The organization and discipline of
the later body must have been, of course, very different.

<span id="fn_957"></span>[163:958](2020237.htm#fr_957.md) <span
id="ii.x.xx-p3.3"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xx-p4"></span>422 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xx-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Kind Treatment of the Persian Captives by Acacius Bishop of
Amida.](2020238.md)
