[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020502)  [Next](2020504.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xvi"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVI.—</span>*The Dispute between
the Empress and John. Arrival of Theophilus from Egypt. Cyrinus, Bishop
of Chalcedon*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xvi-p2.1"></span>After</span> the departure of Epiphanius,
John, when preaching in the church as usual, chanced to inveigh against
the vices to which females are peculiarly prone. <span
id="fr_1605"></span>[1606](#fn_1605.md) The people imagined that his
strictures were enigmatically directed against the wife of the emperor.
The enemies of the bishop did not fail to report his discourse in this
sense to the empress; and she, conceiving herself to have been insulted,
complained to the emperor, and urged the necessity for the speedy
presence of Theophilus and the convocation of a council. Severian,
bishop of Gabala, who had not yet changed his former resentment against
John, cooperated in the promotion of these measures. I am not in
possession of sufficient data to determine whether there was any truth
in the current report that John delivered the discourse above mentioned
with express allusion to the empress, because he suspected her of having
excited Epiphanius against him. Theophilus arrived soon after at
Chalcedon in Bithynia, and was followed thither by many bishops. Some of
the bishops joined him in compliance with his own invitation, and others
in obedience to the commands of the emperor. The bishops whom John had
deposed in Asia repaired to Chalcedon with the utmost alacrity, as
likewise all those who cherished any feeling of hostility against him.
The ships which Theophilus expected from Egypt had already come to
Chalcedon. When they had convened again in the same place, and when they
had deliberated how the attempt against John might be judiciously
forwarded by them, Cyrinus, leader of the church of Chalcedon, who was
an Egyptian and a relative of Theophilus, and who had besides some other
difficulties with John, spoke very abusively of him. Justice, however,
seemed to follow him speedily; for Maruthas, a native of Mesopotamia,
who had accompanied the bishops, happened to tread on his foot; and
Cyrinus suffered so severely from this accident that he was unable to
repair with the other bishops to Constantinople, although his aid was
necessary to the execution of the designs that had been formed against
John. The wound assumed so alarming an appearance, that the surgeons
were obliged to perform several operations on the leg; and at length
mortification took place, and spread over the whole body, and even
extended to the other foot. He expired soon afterwards in great agony.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1605"></span>[409:1606](2020503.htm#fr_1605.md) <span
id="iii.xiii.xvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xvi-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 15; Pallad. *Dialog.* 3,
8–10; also Chrysostom’s letter to Innocent, *ibid.* 2. Cf. Theodoret,
*H. E.* v. 34.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council held by Theophilus and the Accusers of John in Rufinianæ.
John is summoned to attend, and not being present, was deposed by
Them.](2020504.md)
