[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020384)  [Next](2020386) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIII</span>.—*Acacius and Aëtius;
and how the Deputies of the Two Councils of Ariminum* <span
id="page_319">p. 319</span> <span id="iii.ix.xxiii-Page_319"></span>*and
of Seleucia were led by the Emperor to accept the Same Doctrines*.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p2.1"></span>Immediately</span> after the above
transactions, the adherents of Acacius repaired to the emperor; <span
id="fr_1340"></span>[1341](#fn_1340) but the other bishops returned to
their respective homes. The ten bishops who had been unanimously chosen
as deputies to the emperor, met, on their arrival at the court, the ten
deputies <span id="fr_1341"></span>[1342](#fn_1341) of the council of
Ariminum, and likewise the partisans of Acacius. These latter had gained
over to their cause the chief men attached to the palace, and, through
their influence, had secured the favor of the emperor. It was reported
that some of these proselytes had espoused the sentiments of Acacius at
some previous period; that some were bribed by means of the wealth
belonging to the churches; and that others were seduced by the subtilty
of the arguments presented to them, and by the dignity of the persuader.
Acacius was, in fact, no common character; by nature he was gifted with
great powers of intellect and eloquence, and he exhibited no want of
skill or of address in the accomplishment of his schemes. He was the
president of an illustrious church, and could boast of Eusebius
Pamphilus as his teacher, whom he succeeded in the episcopate, and was
more honorably known than any other man by the reputation and succession
of his books. Endowed with all these advantages, he succeeded with ease
in whatever he undertook.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p5"></span>As there were at this period at
Constantinople all together twenty deputies, ten from each council,
besides many other bishops, who, from various motives, had repaired to
the city, Honoratus, <span id="fr_1342"></span>[1343](#fn_1342) whom the
emperor, before his departure to the West, had constituted chief
governor of Constantinople, received directions to examine, in the
presence of the exarchs of the great council, the reports circulated
concerning Aëtius and his heresy. Constantius, with some of the rulers,
eventually undertook the investigation of this case; and as it was
proved that Aëtius had introduced dogmas essentially opposed to the
faith, the emperor and the other judges were offended at his blasphemous
statements. It is said that the partisans of Acacius at first feigned
ignorance of this heresy, for the purpose of inducing the emperor and
those around him to take cognizance of it; for they imagined that the
eloquence of Aëtius would be irresistible; that he would infallibly
succeed in convincing his auditory; and that his heresy would conquer
the unwilling. When, however, the result proved the futility of their
expectations, they demanded that the formulary of faith accepted by the
council of Ariminum should receive the sanction of the deputies from the
council of Seleucia. As these latter protested that they would never
renounce the use of the term “substance,” the Acacians declared to them
upon oath that they did not hold the Son to be, in substance, dissimilar
from the Father; but that, on the contrary, they were ready to denounce
this opinion as heresy. They added that they esteemed the formulary
compiled by the Western bishops at Ariminum the more highly, because the
word “substance” had been unexpectedly expunged from it; because, they
said, if this formulary were to be received, there would be no further
mention, either of the word “substance” or of the term “consubstantial,”
to which many of the Western priests were, from their reverence for the
Nicæan council, peculiarly attached.

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p7"></span>It was for these reasons that the
emperor approved of the formulary; and when he recalled to mind the
great number of bishops who had been convened at Ariminum, and reflected
that there is no error in saying either that “the Son is like unto the
Father” or “of the same substance as the Father”; and when he further
considered that no difference in signification would ensue, if, for
terms which do not occur in Scripture, other equivalent and
uncontrovertible expressions were to be substituted (such, for instance,
as the word “similar”), he determined upon giving his sanction to the
formulary. Such being his own sentiments, he commanded the bishops to
accept the formulary. The next day preparations were made for the
pompous ceremony of proclaiming him consul, which, according to the
Roman custom, took place in the beginning of the month of January, and
the whole of that day and part of the ensuing night the emperor spent
with the bishops, and at length succeeded in persuading the deputies of
the council of Seleucia to receive the formulary transmitted from
Ariminum.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1340"></span>[319:1341](2020385.htm#fr_1340) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p3"></span>A few hints in Philost. iv. 12; Soc.
ii. 41. Cf. Sulp. Sev. *H. S.* ii. 43–45; Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 27. But
the main part is independent.

<span id="fn_1341"></span>[319:1342](2020385.htm#fr_1341) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p4"></span>Cf. iv. 18; twenty. Philost. tells us
that Acacius prepared the minutes of this Synod.

<span id="fn_1342"></span>[319:1343](2020385.htm#fr_1342) <span
id="iii.ix.xxiii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xxiii-p6"></span>Concerning this Honoratus see the
*Descriptio Consulum* of Idatius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Formulary of the Council of Ariminum approved by the Acacians.
List of the Deposed Chief-Priests, and the Causes of their
Condemnation.](2020386)
