[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020334)  [Next](2020336.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIII</span>.—*Marcellus Bishop
of Ancyra; his Heresy and Deposition*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p2.1"></span>At</span> the same period, Marcellus,
bishop of Ancyra, <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1205](#fn_1204.md) in Galatia,
was deposed and cast out of the Church by the bishops assembled at
Constantinople, because he had introduced some new doctrines, whereby he
taught that the existence of the Son of God commenced when He was born
of Mary, and that His kingdom would have an end; he had, moreover, drawn
up a written document wherein these views were propounded. Basil, a man
of great eloquence and learning, was invested with the bishopric of the
parish of Galatia. They also wrote to the churches in the neighboring
regions, to desire them to search for the copies of the book <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[1206](#fn_1205.md) written by Marcellus, and to
destroy them, and to lead back any whom they might find to have embraced
his sentiments. They stated that the work was too voluminous to admit of
their transcribing the whole in their epistle, but that they inserted
quotations of certain passages in order to prove that the doctrines
which they had condemned were there advocated. Some persons, however,
maintained that Marcellus had merely propounded a few questions which
had been misconstrued by the adherents of Eusebius, and represented to
the emperor as actual confessions. Eusebius and his partisans were much
irritated against Marcellus, because he had not consented to the
definitions propounded by the Synod in Phœnicia, nor to the regulations
which had been made in favor of Arius at Jerusalem; and had likewise
refused to attend at the consecration of the Great Martyrium, in order
to avoid communion with them. In their letter to the emperor, they dwelt
largely upon this latter circumstance, and brought it forward <span
id="page_282">p. 282</span> <span id="iii.vii.xxxiii-Page_282"></span>as
a charge, alleging that it was a personal insult to him to refuse
attendance at the consecration of the temple which he had constructed at
Jerusalem. The motive by which Marcellus was induced to write this work
was that Asterius, who was a sophist and a native of Cappadocia, had
written a treatise in defense of the Arian doctrines, and had read it in
various cities, and to the bishops, and likewise at several Synods where
he had attended. Marcellus undertook to refute his arguments, and while
thus engaged, he, either deliberately or unintentionally, fell into the
opinions of Paul of Samosata. He was afterwards, however, reinstated in
his bishopric by the Synod of Sardis, after having proved that he did
not hold such sentiments.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[281:1205](2020335.htm#fr_1204.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p3"></span>Soc. i. 36. Soz. has more detail as
to Asterius, and better order; both probably took from the same source.
Compare the attitude of Athan. toward Marcellus.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[281:1206](2020335.htm#fr_1205.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxxiii-p4"></span>Hil. *Fragm.* ii. 22, gives the
title of this work as *de Subjectione Domini Christi.* Eus. Pamp. wrote
a refutation of this book.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of Constantine the Great; he died after Baptism and was
buried in the Temple of the Holy Apostles.](2020336.md)
