[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020433)  [Next](2020435) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xviii"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xviii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xviii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVIII</span>.—*The Persecution
which occurred at Antioch, on the Orontes. The Place of Prayer in
Edessa, called after the Apostle Thomas; the Assembly there, and
Confession of the Inhabitants of Edessa*.

<span id="iii.xi.xviii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xviii-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor went to Antioch, and
entirely ejected from the churches of that city and of the neighboring
cities all those who adhered to the Nicene doctrines; <span
id="fr_1460"></span>[1461](#fn_1460) moreover, he oppressed them with
manifold punishments; as some affirm, he commanded many to be put to
death in various ways, and caused others to be cast into the river
Orontes. Having heard that there was a magnificent oratory at Edessa,
named after <span id="page_357">p. 357</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xviii-Page_357"></span>the Apostle Thomas, he went to see it.
He beheld the members of the Catholic Church assembled for worship in
the plain before the walls of the city; for there, too, they had been
deprived of their houses of prayer. It is said that the emperor
reproached the prefect thoroughly and struck him on the jaw with his
fist for having permitted these congregations contrary to his edict.
Modestus (for this was the name of the prefect), although he was himself
a heretic, secretly warned the people of Edessa not to meet for prayer
on the accustomed spot the next day; for he had received orders from the
emperor to punish all who should be seized. He uttered such threats with
the forethought that none, or at least but a few, would incur danger,
and with the desire to appease the wrath of the monarch. But the people
of Edessa, totally disregarding the threat, ran together with more than
their customary zeal, and filled the usual place of meeting.

<span id="iii.xi.xviii-p4"></span>Modestus, on being apprised of their
proceedings, was undecided as to what measures ought to be adopted, and
repaired in embarrassment to the plain with the throng. A woman, leading
a child by the hand, and trailing her mantle in a way unbefitting the
decency of women, forced her way through the files of the soldiers who
were conducted by the prefect, as if bent upon some affair of
importance. Modestus remarked her conduct, ordered her to be arrested,
and summoned her into his presence, to inquire the cause of her running.
She replied that she was hastening to the plain where the members of the
Catholic Church were assembled. “Know you not,” replied Modestus, “that
the prefect is on his way thither for the purpose of condemning to death
all who are found on the spot?” “I have heard so,” replied she, “and
this is the very reason of my haste; for I am fearful of arriving too
late, and thus losing the honor of martyrdom for God.” The governor
having asked her why she took her child with her, she replied, “In order
that he may share in the common suffering, and participate in the same
reward.” Modestus, struck with astonishment at the courage of this
woman, went to the emperor, and, acquainting him with what had occurred,
persuaded him not to carry out a design which he showed to be
disgraceful and disastrous. Thus was the Christian faith confessed by
the whole city of Edessa.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1460"></span>[356:1461](2020434.htm#fr_1460) <span
id="iii.xi.xviii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xviii-p3"></span>Ruf. ii. 5; Soc. iv. 17, 18. Soz.
resembles Soc. in both incidents. Soc. resembles Ruf. in the Edessa
story; neither mention the prefect’s name, as does Soz. Philost. ix. 11;
Theodoret, *H. E.* iv. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of the Great Athanasius; the Elevation of Lucius, who was
Arian-Minded, to the See; the Numerous Calamities he brought upon the
Churches in Egypt; Peter, who served after Athanasius, passed over to
Rome.](2020435)
