[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020230)  [Next](2020232) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xiv"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIV</span>.—*The Monks of Nitria come
down and raise a Sedition against the Prefect of Alexandria.*

<span id="ii.x.xiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xiv-p2.1"></span>Some</span> of the monks inhabiting the
mountains of Nitria, of a very fiery disposition, whom Theophilus some
time before had unjustly armed against Dioscorus and his brethren, being
again transported with an ardent zeal, resolved to fight in behalf of
Cyril. About five hundred of them therefore quitting their monasteries,
came into the city; and meeting the prefect in his chariot, they called
him a pagan idolater, and applied to him many other abusive epithets. He
supposing this to be a snare laid for him by Cyril, exclaimed that he
was a Christian, and had been baptized by Atticus the bishop at
Constantinople. As they gave but little heed to his protestations, and a
certain one of them named Ammonius threw a stone at Orestes which struck
him on the head and covered him with the blood that flowed from the
wound, all the guards with a few exceptions fled, plunging into the
crowd, some in one direction and some in another, fearing to be stoned
to death. Meanwhile the populace of Alexandria ran to the rescue of the
governor, and put the rest of the monks to flight; but having secured
Ammonius they delivered him up to the prefect. He immediately put him
publicly to the torture, which was inflicted with such severity that he
died under the effects of it: and not long after he gave an account to
the emperors of what had taken place. Cyril also on the other hand
forwarded his statement of the matter to the emperor: and causing the
body of Ammonius to be deposited in a certain church, he gave him the
new appellation of Thaumasius, <span id="fr_942"></span>[943](#fn_942)
ordering him to be enrolled among the martyrs, and eulogizing his
magnanimity in church as that of one who had fallen in a conflict in
defence of piety. But the more sober-minded, although Christians, did
not accept Cyril’s prejudiced estimate of him; for they well knew that
he had suffered the punishment due to his rashness, and that he had not
lost his life under the torture because he would not deny Christ. And
Cyril himself being conscious of this, suffered the recollection of the
circumstance to be gradually obliterated by silence. But the animosity
between Cyril and Orestes did not by any means subside at this point,
but was kindled <span id="fr_943"></span>[944](#fn_943) afresh by an
occurrence similar to the preceding.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_942"></span>[160:943](2020231.htm#fr_942) <span
id="ii.x.xiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiv-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xiv-p3.1"></span>Θαυμάσιος</span> , ‘wonderful,’ ‘admirable.’

<span id="fn_943"></span>[160:944](2020231.htm#fr_943) <span
id="ii.x.xiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xiv-p4"></span>The original here has <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x.xiv-p4.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.x.xiv-p4.2"></span>πέσβεσε</span>,
‘quenched,’ ‘extinguished,’ but the context demands the very opposite
meaning, unless indeed the outrage on Hypatia was considered the last in
the series of occasions of quarrel between Orestes and Cyril, after
which the difference gradually died out.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Hypatia the Female Philosopher.](2020232)
