[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020268)  [Next](2020270.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ii.i"></span><span id="page_191">p. 191</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_191"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p1"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p1.1"></span>Introduction.</span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p2"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.ii.i-p3"></span><span class="c4"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p3.1"></span>Salaminius Hermias Sozomen</span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p4"></span> ————————————

<span id="iii.ii.i-p5"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p5.1"></span>Part I.—The Life.</span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p6"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p6.1"></span>The</span> name is an unusual and difficult
one. It seems desirable to give preference to the order which Photius
adopts, but to preserve the spelling in Nicephorus Callistus, and in the
captions of the chief manuscripts, and therefore to call him Salaminius
Hermias Sozomen. What the term Salaminius indicates, cannot yet be
accurately determined. There are no data to show any official connection
of Sozomen with Salamis opposite Athens, or Salamis (Constantia) in
Cyprus; certainly there is no record of any naval service. In vi. 32,
where he speaks of the greater lights of monasticism in Palestine,
Hilarion, Hesychas, and Epiphanius, he remarks, “At the same period in
the monasteries, Salamines, Phuscon, Malachion, Crispion, four brethren,
were highly distinguished.” In the tart controversy between Epiphanius
and the empress, the latter had said, “You have not power to revive the
dead; otherwise your archdeacon would not have died.” Sozomen explains,
“She alluded to Crispion, the archdeacon, who had died a short time
previously; he was brother to Phuscon and Salamanus, monks whom I had
occasion to mention when detailing the history of events under the reign
of Valens” (viii. 15). The readings in the first citation fluctuate
between the forms Salamines and Salamanes. Since these monks were of the
family of Alaphion, intimate friends and neighbors of the grandfather of
Sozomen (v. 15), it might be conjectured that Salamines stood in some
relationship with Sozomen, such as sponsor or teacher, and that the
cognomen might have its origin from such a connection. It seems strange
in such a case that he would not have dwelt upon the bond, or at least
have emphasized the life of this particular brother by a special note;
but he simply avers, “Some good men belonging to this family have
flourished even in our own days; and in my youth I saw some of them, but
they were then very aged.” Nor in the other passages (vi. 32, viii. 15)
is there any hint of intimacy. At the same time, this seems as yet the
most warranted explanation of the epithet. Hermias was quite a common
name even among Christians. It was originally connected with the
household or local worship of Hermes, as the giver of an unexpected
gift, or it may be as the utterance of a parental wish for the future
success of the newcomer. Although it contained a heathen reminiscence,
it was probably conferred in this case because it was ancestral. The
name Sozomen itself is documentarily a very unusual one; and was
probably bestowed upon the child by the father as a devout recognition
of deliverance for himself and his boy, and in contrast with the family
surname. A certain præfectus domestico, to whom Isidore of Pelusium
addresses a letter (i. 300), was also so called; he must have been a
cotemporary. It would be a pleasant surprise could he be identified with
the historian; and it would not be at all impossible, for Evagrius, the
advocate and historian, was so promoted (*H. E.* vi. 24). The
biographical hints in Sozomen’s surviving work are of the smallest; and
outside tradition has preserved absolutely nothing. His ancestors were
apparently from early times inhabitants of the village of Bethelia, in
the territory of Gaza, <span id="page_192">p. 192</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_192"></span>and near to that important city. By race,
they were probably of Philistine rather than Jewish descent; for they
were pagans (Hellenists) up to the time of Hilarion, in the second
quarter of the fourth century, and our historian contrasts them with the
Hebrews. The family was one of distinction, belonging to a sort of
village patricianate. That of Alaphion was of still greater dignity. The
village of Bethelia was populous with a mixture of Gentiles and Jews;
the former, however, largely predominating. Its name appears to have
been derived from the Pantheon, erected on an artificial acropolis, and
so overlooking the whole community, whose universalistic religious zeal
was thus symbolized. The term Bethel was first given to the temple, and
then was transferred to the town as Bethelia; and the use of such a form
indicates that the prevailing dialect was a variation of Syriac or
Aramaic. It is also spelled Bethelea (vi. 32). Hilarion was born in
Thabatha, another village near Gaza, to the south, on a wady of the same
name. He became a student in Alexandria, but adopted the monastic
discipline, through the example of Antony; on returning to his home, he
found his parents dead. He distributed his share of the patrimony to his
family and the poor, and then withdrew to a desert by the sea, twenty
stadia from his native village, and began his career of monastic
activity as the founder of that ethical system in Palestine. Before his
flight to other and distant seclusions, he came in contact with
Alaphion, the head of a noble family in Bethelia, seemingly on very
friendly footing with Sozomen’s grandfather. Alaphion was possessed of a
demon; neither pagan formularies nor Jewish exorcists could relieve him;
Hilarion had but to invoke the name of Christ, and the malignant agent
was expelled. <span id="fr_1042"></span>[1043](#fn_1042.md) The healed man
became at once a Christian; the grandfather of Sozomen was won to the
same profession by the care of his friend. The father, too, adopted the
new faith; many other relatives joined the ranks of the believers, in
this intensely pagan community and region; for Gaza, as the chief city,
displayed a decided hostility to the Gospel. The grandfather was a man
of native intelligence, and had moderate cultivation in general studies,
and was not without some knowledge of arithmetic. His earlier social and
intellectual position made him at once prominent among the converts,
especially as an interpreter of the Scriptures. He won the affections of
the Christians in Ascalon and Gaza and their outlying regions. In the
estimation of his grandson, he was a necessary figure in the religious
life of the Christian communities, and people carried doubtful points of
holy writ to him for solution; yet it does not appear that he held any
clerical function.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p8"></span>While the ancestor of Sozomen was
conspicuous as the religious teacher of Southwestern Palestine, the old
Philistine region, Alaphion and his family were distinguished for works
of a practical quality: they founded churches and monasteries; they were
active in the relief of strangers and the poor; some adopted the new
philosophy; and out of their ranks came martyrs and bishops. Sozomen
says nothing of his father, excepting that he was originally a pagan,
and therefore born before Hilarion’s mission. The edicts of Julian
caused a sudden revival of the old state religion, and led to many local
persecutions, where the pagans were the stronger party: Gaza and its
dependencies were of this number, and some of the tragedies of that
unhappy time are recorded by our historian. The families of Alaphion and
of Sozomen were compelled to flee, to what place is not told us;
probably the southernmost monastic retreats: the exiles certainly
returned (v. 15), not unlikely after the accession of Jovian. We can
only guess at the date of Sozomen’s birth, and somewhat in this wise.
Hilarion’s activity in Palestine was after the council of Nice, and
before the accession of Julian; we may say about <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 345. The grandfather at his
conversion may have been about forty, since he had become a conspicuous
local figure; the father, in all likelihood, was but a lad when this
change came over the domestic worship. The exile under Julian took place
very nearly in 362, and the return in 364, when the patrician of
Bethelia was verging on sixty, and the lad had become a young man. We
may place the date of Sozomen’s birth somewhere between 370 and 380.
Hilarion passed away about 371: Ephraim Syrus, in 378; Gratian was
emperor of the West; Theodosius the Great was just about to succeed
<span id="page_193">p. 193</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_193"></span>Valens in the East. Ambrose was the most
imposing ecclesiastic of the Occident; Gregory Nazianzen and Epiphanius
were the leaders of orthodoxy in the Orient.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p9"></span>There are but few details concerning his
education. That it was directed by the monks is sure; in fact, the only
form of Christian life known in that region was of the ascetic type; the
very bishops and clerical functionaries were selected from the ranks of
the practical philosophers. There was a succession of pious men in the
line of Alaphion, and with the elders of the second generation, Sozomen,
as a youth, was more or less acquainted. The names of some of them have
already been mentioned: <span id="fr_1043"></span>[1044](#fn_1043.md) all
had been pupils of Hilarion. The fourth of the brothers, Melachion by
name, must have already passed away, and legends had speedily
transfigured his memory. The influence of Epiphanius throughout
Palestine, and particularly in its southern slopes and shepheloth, was
dominant in shaping the quality of devotional thought and feeling: its
force was scarcely spent when Sozomen was a boy.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p11"></span>This accounts for the exaggerated value
he puts upon the monastic discipline as the true philosophy, and why he
desires not to appear ungrateful to its cultivators, in the writing of
his history; for he purposes to keep in mind that tremendous movement,
and to commemorate its eminent leaders under different reigns; in fact,
he decides to make it a feature of his treatment of church life and
history. There is no warrant, however, for stating that he himself
became a monk. With all his admiration for their spiritual superiority,
he does not lay claim to any direct fellowship, but rather denies his
right or competency to invade their domain. We may be sure that he
received the ordinary education imparted in the monastic schools of the
time, approximating that of similar institutions near Alexandria. In a
degree it was narrow, and growingly hostile to pagan literature;
moreover, it was apt to be provincial, if patriotic in its tone. This
will account for his desire to elevate the importance of Palestine over
against the supercilious tendency which centralized all culture in
Constantinople. The main body of his studies was conducted in the Greek
language, of which he is no slight master; indeed, he became one of the
best imitative stylists of his time, according to so good a judge as
Photius. His familiarity with the Syriac and Aramaic names, the
exactness of their transliteration, and his larger acquaintance with the
history of the Syrian church, point to a likely knowledge of at least a
dialect of that widely diffused speech; indeed, he could hardly have
escaped the patois, which seems to have predominated over the Greek in
Bethelia. In iii. 16, he allows for the loss of force and original grace
in every translation, but states that in Ephraim’s works, the Greek
rendition made in Ephraim’s own day, suffered nothing by the change, and
he institutes such a comparison between the original and its version,
that one is inclined to think he could read both. So his effort to keep
a balance in writing between the central and border lands of the empire,
and indeed outside of it, would indicate a broader linguistic sympathy.
In vi. 34, he speaks familiarly of Syrian monks, who had survived to his
own period; the wider range of his knowledge may have been due also to
the practice of his profession, or to Syrian cases brought to
Constantinople, each of which would involve a comprehension of the
language; nor less his use of the records written by the Christians of
Persia, Syria, and particularly Edessa, to preserve the story of the
Persian church and its many martyrs, whose material he used so copiously
(ii. 9–14). It is difficult to be sure of his proficiency in Latin; on
the one hand, as an advocate it would be absolutely necessary for him to
understand that language of jurisprudence; for all edicts, laws,
rescripts, were written therein: the Theodosian code itself was so
compiled in his own day. On the other hand, where he quotes Latin
documents, he invariably does it from translations into Greek made by
other hands; thus in iii. 2, of Constantine’s letter to the
Alexandrians, he says, “I have met with a copy translated from the Latin
into the Greek; I shall insert it precisely as I find it.” So in iv. 18,
the letter of the Synod of Ariminum to Constantius; and in viii. 26, the
two epistles of Innocent. Probably his second-hand report about Hilary
of Pictavium, v. 13, <span id="page_194">p. 194</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_194"></span>leans the same way. But on the whole we
must allow his profession, which necessitated a knowledge of the law
language, to outweigh the lack of original versions in his book.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p12"></span>It is difficult to judge from a solitary
work what the degree of an author’s general culture is. Clemens
Alexandrinus has multitudinous quotations; it would be easy to conclude
that he was a scholar of universal reading, and a genuine polyhistor;
but their inaccuracy and frequent infelicity make them rather appear as
the excerpts from some florilegium or some rhetorical hand-book. The
classical allusions in Sozomen are not very many; and he might well have
considered it out of place to indulge in overmuch reference in such a
record as he presents; the quality of what appears would not compel a
wide range of reading; the dedication is most fertile in familiar
illustrations, poetical, historical, and mythological. In i. 6, because
of his mentioning Aquilis, he drags the Argonauts in by the ears, hardly
from Pisander, but rather from Zosimus, who does the same in mentioning
the progress of Alaric. <span id="fr_1044"></span>[1045](#fn_1044.md) When
he describes Constantine’s tentative search for a favorable site on
which to rear his new capital, the mention of the plain of Ilium moves
the historian to relate a little tradition about the Trojan town (ii.
3). He mentions Aristotle, in whose philosophy Aëtius was versed (iii.
15); and to whose dialectic work Theophronius composed an introduction
(vii. 17). When he dwells on the imitative literature produced by
Apolinarius, he alludes indirectly to the Homeric poems, and mentions
outright his writing “comedies in imitation of Menander, tragedies
resembling those of Euripides, and odes on the model of Pindar” (v. 18).
In narrating the history of Daphne under Julian (v. 19), he gives the
myth of Apollo and Daphne. Such hints and others are no proof or
disproof of any extensive reading, and yet the way in which he alludes
to some is more after a cyclopædic fashion than any profound study of
the authors themselves. In fact, his confession in the instance of the
Apollo and Daphne myth is naive, “I leave this subject to those who are
more accurately acquainted with mythology.” This acknowledgment is not
born of any puritanic hesitancy,—for he had ventured into the sensual
bog a little way already,—but is rather a genuine declaration of his
ignorance, and that in the capital where Anthemius and Synesius were
authorities. Probably we have a little light in the limitations and
illiberality of his early training, by recalling his attitude toward the
imitative writings of Apolinarius, which sprang up to countervail the
Julian edict, which the Christians interpreted as a prohibition to their
enjoyment of the Hellenic culture. While Socrates whole-souledly and
forcibly advocates the humanizing effect of the ancient literature (iii.
16), Sozomen says, “Were it not for the extreme partiality with which
the productions of antiquity are regarded, I doubt not but that the
writings of Apolinarius would be held in as much estimation as those of
the ancients,” and he rather sides with the monks in their contempt for
classic studies (i. 12). He does not wholly commit himself; he is a bit
hesitant,—a characteristic of his make-up. This was an absorbing
question in that and previous days, as it has continued to agitate the
church, more or less, until our own time. In his time the influence of
the monks and the clergy, who were pervaded with the ascetic spirit, was
more and more against the humanities; the court fluctuated, while the
training of the Valentinian and Theodosian succession had been decidedly
monastic, and its sympathies were mainly with the intolerant tendency,
the necessities of their position, and the splendid and overshadowing
political abilities of men like Libanius, Themistius, Anthemius,
Troïlus, could not be set aside. Some of them, too, had proved
themselves to be the saviours and uplifters of the state. The learning
and grace of Eudocia, the empress, the spirit of her early training as
the daughter of an Athenian philosopher, and her own poetic gifts, were
persuasive agents in sustaining a classical survival among the
Christians at the court, before she fell under the blight of her
husband’s jealousy. Cyrus, the restorer of Constantinople, filled his
verses with the same antique flavor. The clergy, whose preliminary
training had been in the schools of the sophists, or at the
Universities, could not wholly bury their sympathy, although they went
through casuistic struggles such as that of <span id="page_195">p.
195</span> <span id="iii.ii.i-Page_195"></span>Jerome. The Arians, too,
were frequently of a larger culture, and on the Germanic side, of signal
military skill and political sagacity, whose services the state could
not dispense with. The University which even the monastically drilled
Theodosius the Younger organized in Constantinople, while seeking to
give a Christian tone to the higher education, previously controlled by
Athens, made very liberal provision for the languages, if not so much
for philosophy. Sozomen, as we see, inclined to a less generous view,
and thought Apolinarius had such a universal genius, that his numerous
originals might be dispensed with; Homer, Menander, Euripides, Pindar,
but for an affectation, need not have been missed. This shows the thin
quality of his reading, if not the restricted quantity of it, and lays
bare the impotence of his critical faculty. These limitations were
doubtless due in large measure to the shrunken ideals of his Palestinian
education: it savored of Epiphanius’ temper and impress.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p14"></span>His education on the religious side was
in the Nicene faith as professed by the Catholic Church in the East, to
which the monks remained, not always thoughtfully faithful, in all that
stormy period. As Sozomen says, the people were unable to follow the
refinements of theological discussion, and took their cue from those
whose lives seemed better than that of the ordinary clergy. He had,
however, no close drill in the arguments pro and con, judging from his
own declarations of inability to follow the various aspects of Arian
discussion. After citing the letter of Gregory Nazianzen to Nectarius,
in which the distinctive features of the heresy of Apolinarius are
given, he supplements: “What I have said, may, I think, suffice to show
the nature of the sentiments maintained by Apolinarius and Eunomius. If
any one desire more detailed information, I can only refer him to the
works on the subject, written either by them or by others, concerning
these men. I do not profess easily to understand or to expound these
matters” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p14.1"></span>ἐ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p14.2"></span>πεὶ ἐμοὶ οὔτε συνιέναι τὰ τοιαῦτα, οὔτε
μεταφράζειν εὐπετές</span>, vi. 27). And when he enumerates the causes
of rupture among the Eunomians, “I should be prolix were I to enter into
further particulars; and indeed the subject would be by no means an easy
one to me, since I have no such dialectic skill” (<span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.i-p14.3"></span>ἐ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="iii.ii.i-p14.4"></span>πεὶ μηδὲ ἐμπείρως ἔχω τῶν
τοιούτων διαλέξεων</span>, vii. 17). It would seem, then, that his
logical training had not been of a very deep quality, and yet it must be
said that such definitions and arguments as he does state in the history
of controversy are orderly and lucid. Metaphysics also seems to have had
no large place in his earlier studies; but he certainly did become
familiar with its later theological terms and distinctions, and he draws
a clear line between the various contestants who warred for and against
consubstantiality. His reading also covered some philosophical
speculations, as one gathers from a sentence in v. 6, “For it is not
true, as some assert, that as is the body, so is the soul.” He probably
also early learned to distinguish between ontology and ethics, by the
practical lines drawn between the clerical disputant and the monastic
philosopher. A sentence in his history of Meletius, bishop of Antioch
(iv. 28), emphasizes this difference as we seldom find it in early
Christian literature: “In his first discourse he confines himself to
instructing the people in what we call ethics (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p14.5"></span>τοὺς καλουμένους ἠθικοὺς λόγους</span>), and
then openly declared the Son to be of the same substance as the Father.”

<span id="iii.ii.i-p15"></span>His spirit was taught to enslave itself
with legalistic fetters, and where he does rise above them, it is with
trembling misgivings; he had a side for larger things, like Socrates,
due probably to his profession, but he was afraid to venture quite so
far, and yet he is magnanimous as compared with the better educated and
clerical Theodoret.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p16"></span>To those early school years we must also
attribute his statement, that he was a witness to the fidelity of Zeno,
bishop of Majuma, the seaport of Gaza. “It is said, and I myself am
witness of the truth of the assertion, that when he was bishop of the
church in Majuma, he was never absent at morning or evening hymns, or
any other worship of God, unless attacked by some malady; and yet he was
at this period an old man, being nearly a hundred years of age” (vii.
28). The patriarch’s self-support and industry were in like manner the
object of his youthful admiration. The struggle of the bishop of Gaza to
assert his jurisdiction over Majuma, the seaport which had its own
episcopate, and desired to retain its ecclesiastical autonomy, after it
<span id="page_196">p. 196</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_196"></span>had lost its civil independence, Sozomen
speaks of as happening in his day, and was one of the news of his youth;
and one catches in his statement an inner satisfaction with the decision
of the council which recognized the freedom of the Christian community
by the sea (v. 3). In connection with public worship, he had very likely
heard in those earlier days the reading of the Apocalypse of Peter. He
says in vii. 19, “Thus the book entitled the Apocalypse of Peter, which
was considered altogether spurious by the ancients, is still read in
some of the churches of Palestine, on the day of preparation, when the
people observe a fast in memory of the passion of the Saviour.” And a
favorite book he saw in the hands of the monks of his native land, was
the Apocalypse of Paul, “although unrecognized by the ancients” (vii.
19). A familiarity with such books gives a key to his later attitude
toward prophecy.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p17"></span>There is no evidence as to what persuaded
him to study law, nor do we know when he was enrolled as a student. The
fact that he mentions the school of Berytus as the place where Bishop
Triphyllius had prosecuted jurisprudence for so long a while (i. 11) can
hardly be taken as a suggestion of Sozomen’s own residence there. It
would have been more likely for him to have attended lectures at the
University of Alexandria or Antioch, with which cities he shows a
considerable acquaintance. His studies were probably based on the Codex
Gregorianus, with its supplement, the Codex Hermogenianus; for it was in
his own day, and during the writing of his history, that the Codex
Theodosianus was begun, and one is sorry to miss his name from the list
of its compilers; and it was not until <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p17.1"></span>a.d.</span> 439, that it was proclaimed as
the text-book of imperial law. That he was admitted to the practice of
that profession, we have direct evidence, as in the case of Evagrius,
(*H. E*. vi. 7) while as to Socrates, it is simply an uncertified
tradition. Sozomen speaks of his afflicted friend Aquilinus (ii. 3),
“who is even at the present time residing with us, and is an advocate in
the same courts of justice as that to which we belong.” From the tenor
of the legal notices in his history it is likely that he practiced in
the episcopal courts as well; for these had assumed form, and the
function of an advocate is regulated in several synodical canons. He is
more careful and systematic in stating the course of important
legislation with regard to religion and the Church, than any other
historian. Thus under Constantine, i. 3, 5, 8, 9, 21, 23, ii. 32; under
Constantius, iii. 17, iv. 15; under Julian, v. 5, 15, 17; under Jovian,
vi. 3; Valens, vi. 12, 19; Gratian, vii. 1; Gratian and Theodosius, vii.
4; under Theodosius, vii. 9, 12, 16, 20, 25, viii. 4; Valentinian, ii.
(Justina), vii. 13; Arcadius, viii. 7, 24. There is no instance of his
own practice such as Evagrius gives (*H. E*. vi. 7).

<span id="iii.ii.i-p18"></span>We can only guess at the time of his
settlement in Constantinople. One would judge from his narrative, that
he was not there during the riots excited by the deposition of
Chrysostom, <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p18.1"></span>a.d.</span> 404. He may have arrived a little
after the elevation of Atticus to the see, as successor to Arsacius, who
had followed John, somewhere about 406, a year before the death of the
orator, and two years before the decease of the Emperor Arcadius. Under
the sage Anthemius, he was finding his way in his profession. Under
Pulcheria, one is inclined to suppose that he obtained some recognition.
The capital thereafter remained the center of his practice, and he
appears to be still in connection with the dikasteries while he is
writing the second book of his history (ii. 3). There are a few personal
points in his life at the imperial city which he hints at. Thirty five
stadia overland from the city, toward the Pontus, was Hestiæ; owing to
an appearance of the Archangel Michael, a temple was built there, and,
as a consequence, called Michaelium. It became noted for its curative
properties, both for physical and mental disorders. Sozomen himself had
been afflicted, how, he does not tell us,—whether by reverses, or
dangers, or disease, or other suffering,—but he resorted thither and
testifies to the benefit he received (ii. 3). There is another personal
incident which he records in ix. 2. He was a spectator of the splendid
ceremonials connected with the discovery and transfer of the remains of
the Forty Martyrs: he saw the costly caskets, the festival, and the
procession; he heard the music of the commemorative odes, and beheld the
deposit of the relics by the body of St. Thyrsus. A number of other
spectators whom he knew were there, the greater part of whom were living
at the writing of his record. <span id="page_197">p. 197</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_197"></span>This celebration took place much later,
under the episcopate of Proclus; therefore after the year 434. A final
personal hint is given in his statements of the overthrow of Uldis.
Concerning the remnant of the Sciri, who as a result of that campaign
were scattered as slaves over Asia Minor, he remarks, “I have seen many
in Bithynia, near Mt. Olympus, living apart from one another, and
cultivating the hills and valleys of that region” (ix. 5). As to the
nature of this tour, we know nothing. He must have been active in many
of the later ecclesiastical and secular matters which he narrates, for
the first endeavor of his history is to mention the affairs in which he
was concerned (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p18.2"></span>μεμνήσομαι δὲ πραγμάτων οἷς παρέτυχον</span>,
i. I). We can only deplore that he makes no sign, in the unfolding
story, possibly some might have been indicated had he completed his
ninth book.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p19"></span>The influential circles of the Eastern
and Western capital were divided into parties on a variety of themes.
One such, on the lines of culture, we have already considered. A second
and very decisive one, was the question whether the foreigners,
especially the Goths and the Persians, should be admitted into the
service of the state. The stronger body believed in the use and
incorporation of these new elements. What before was a variable matter,
became a fixed policy under Theodosius the Great, and in all directions.
His weak sons were controlled by both factions alternately. Anthemius,
Pulcheria, and Theodosius II. adhered in the main to the liberal view.
Yet the presence of a cry, Rome for the Romans, could overthrow such a
man as Stilicho, and elevate such a weakling as Olympius. Sozomen, from
his handling of the events, allied himself with the illiberal cabal; and
while he sought room for a representation of foreign Christianity in his
book, nevertheless opposed the intrusion of at least the northern
element into the offices of the empire.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p20"></span>There was a third line of cleavage among
the people and the court. A very strong and persistent faction set
itself against the admission of pagans and Arians into political
position. These two, dying elements often combined to save themselves
from extinction. The court itself fluctuated, because the Germanic
politicians were mostly Arian, and the best scholars of political
science were pagans. Exigencies compelled the recognition of masters
like Anthemius and Troïlus. Sozomen threw in his lot with the narrower
clique. He does not condescend to mention the best statesman of his
time, or the wisest political thinker. Socrates does, and with
admiration. The portrayal of Alaric is from the estimate of him as a
leader in whom the hopes of pagans and Arians revived. Gaïnas is
traduced, because he was the rallying-point of expiring Arianism in the
East.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p21"></span>Sozomen, as we have seen, sided also with
the majority in honoring the monastic life, which was bitterly opposed
by many politicians and ecclesiastics. Naturally, therefore, he regarded
life from a more pietistic standpoint, than did the court under the
leadership either of Eudoxia or Eudocia. He responded to the puritanism
of Chrysostom and Pulcheria.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p22"></span>He is a defender of Chrysostom, and
answers such criticisms as Socrates has made. We can scarcely doubt that
his heart was with the Johnites, although he may not have entered their
separatist communion.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p23"></span>We can gather from intimations in his
history that Sozomen had traveled somewhat. He shows a better knowledge
of Palestine, than even Epiphanius; he must have kept up his connection
with his native land to have been so well informed as to its traditions,
places, and customs. Naturally the greater part of this interest centers
in Gaza and its neighborhood, as his old home. In ii. 1, 2, his story of
the invention of the Cross and the holy buildings erected by Helena,
improves on the original, by local detail and color. In ii. 4, he
enlarges upon the Eusebian account of Constantine’s purgation of Mamre
or Terebinthus, as one familiar with the spot and with its fair. In ii.
5, he gives a bit of history of Gaza and Majuma under Constantine. In
ii. 20, he narrates the election of Maximus as bishop of Jerusalem, from
a source which no one else has used. In iii. 14, his biographical
notices of Hilarion, Hesychas, and others, indicate an exact
topographical knowledge. The Julian edict gives occasion to state the
<span id="page_198">p. 198</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_198"></span>dissensions between Gaza and its seaport
(vii. 3). Quite graphic is the martyrology of Gaza and its vicinity,
given in v. 9. In discussing Julian’s outrage on the image of Christ at
Paneas (v. 27), and the miraculous well at Nicopolis, formerly Emmaus,
we see signs of local acquaintanceship. In v. 22, Julian is said to
write to the patriarchs, and rulers, and people, asking for their
prayers for himself and his empire; here is a distinct reference to the
then existing patriarchate; so all the details of the attempted
restoration betray a well-informed hand, as well as state the fact of
direct communication with the witnesses of the phenomena. The
biographies in vi. 32 are bound up with Southern Palestine, and
particularly with Bethelia and Gerar. Similarities in vii. 28, of those
more closely related to him, easily prove that he was near home. In
viii. 13, Scythopolis is selected by the fugitive Egyptian monks,
because its many palms afforded them their customary means of support,—a
circumstance narrated by no one else. Nor are local hints wanting in the
story of the finding of Zachariah’s body (ix. 17), with its legends.
There is in one sense a disproportionate mention of Palestine, and
designedly, not only from patriotic motives, but from a desire to
vindicate its historic position in the development of Church history,
and to rebuke the prevailing tendency of churchmen and historians to
press it into the background. It is a curious juxtaposition, that the
councils of Chalcedon should so soon after have vindicated the primacy
of Jerusalem. There is also a better acquaintance with the facts and
purposes of Jewish history, the relation of Judaism to Christianity (i.
1); the genesis of the Saracens, and their association with the covenant
people (vi. 38); the regulations of the paschal season, especially in
vii. 18; as well as a greater accuracy in the transliteration of names
of places.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p24"></span>It was no inconsiderable journey from
Gaza to his school, and from his school to Constantinople. The hints
concerning Palestine, already mentioned, indicate personal observation.
Beyond these we have suggestions that may look to his having been in
Arabia and Cyprus, as, when he speaks (vii. 19) of knowing the custom in
both places, to have a chorepiscopus at the head of a local church. So,
too, in Alexandria, he was struck with the strange position of the
bishop in not rising when the Gospels were read, something he had never
known or heard of in other communities,—words which point to familiarity
with that city. One would be glad to think of his having visited Tarsus,
since he was acquainted with Cilix, a presbyter of that city, whom he
consulted about the origin of the Apocalypse of Paul (vii. 19). That he
knew Bithynia from the sight of it, we have already seen (ix. 5). He
describes or alludes to architectural or topographic features of
Alexandria, Antioch, and possibly Edessa, in a way that scarcely leaves
a doubt of his having seen those cities; we may suppose that his
clientelage would compel journeys to and fro.

<span id="iii.ii.i-p25"></span>His work abounds with allusions to
structures and regions of Constantinople, to say nothing of its
vicinity. The general description of the building of the city by
Constantine (ii. 3) already gives some of its principal features. Of the
churches, he mentions the first of those dedicated to the Archangel St.
Michael (ii. 3), at some remove from the city (Hestiæ, Michaelium), and
to be distinguished from a later structure on the opposite shore, and
one in the city, erected to the same patron angel; <span
id="fr_1045"></span>[1046](#fn_1045.md) —the church of the Apostles, which
became the place of sepulture for emperors and even bishops (ii. 34, iv.
21, viii. 10);—the church of Acacius the martyr (iv. 21), to which
Macedonius endeavored to remove the coffin of Constantine;—the church of
Sophia (iv. 26), begun by Constantine, and dedicated under
Constantius,—with which was connected a baptistery (viii. 21); this
great edifice was burned in the tumult which arose after the second
exile of Chrysostom was announced (viii. 22);—the house of prayer begun
by Chrysostom and completed by Sisinnius, containing the tomb of the
martyred Notaries; this was outside the walls, in a spot previously
devoted to the execution of criminals, and an object of dread, because
of frequenting ghosts (iv. 3);—the church of the Novatians, situated in
a part of the city called Pelargum; this was taken down by them and
transferred to a suburb <span id="page_199">p. 199</span> <span
id="iii.ii.i-Page_199"></span>named Sycæ, hence the edifice was entitled
Anastasia; it was restored to its original spot under Julian (iv.
20);—the little dwelling which was converted into a house of prayer for
Gregory Nazianzen, and so became a church, also called Anastasia (vii.
5);—the church reared by Macedonius, which received the name of Paul,
bishop of Constantinople, when Theodosius removed the confessor’s body
to that building; it is described as a spacious and distinguished temple
(vii. 10); when Theodosius the Great conveyed the head of John the
Baptist to Hebdomas, in the suburbs, where was the seventh milestone, he
erected on that site a spacious and magnificent temple, which became a
center of imperial devotion and miraculous cures (vii. 21, 24, viii. 4,
14);—the church reared in honor of St. Stephen, the proto-martyr (viii.
24);—the church dedicated to the memory of St. Mocus the Martyr, where
Dioscorus was buried (viii. 17);—the place where the body of Thyrsus the
Martyr reposed, and whither the relics of the forty soldiers were
transferred (ix. 2); this was a temple, according to Procopius. <span
id="fr_1046"></span>[1047](#fn_1046.md) In Chalcedon, he mentions the
church of St. Euphemia, so glowingly described by Evagrius, and that of
SS. Peter and Paul in the Oak (Ruffinum).

<span id="iii.ii.i-p28"></span>While he speaks of the number of monks
and nuns, in and about Constantinople (iv. 2, viii. 9), and alludes in a
general way to their dwellings (iv. 20), he mentions no particular
establishment except that founded by Marathonius, which stood in
Sozomen’s time. He also refers to the Xenodochia, the Nosocomia, the
Cherotrophia, and the Ptochotrophia (iv. 20, 27, viii. 9), but he does
not specialize, not even concerning the group of institutions founded
and endowed by Pulcheria (ix. 8). There were residences for the bishops
and clergy, but these are only hinted at (vii. 14, viii. 14). The
palaces and the forums are mentioned only in a general way, but the
splendid council chamber (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.ii.i-p28.1"></span>μέγιστος οἶκος τῆς συγκλήτου βουλῆς</span>),
which was burned with the Sophia, is described as south of that edifice.
He refers to the Hippodrome in the third region, with a little
description of its early form and place (vi. 39, viii. 21). Certain of
the eight public baths are mentioned, the commodious thermæ called after
Zeuxippus (iii. 9) is set forth as a conspicuous and large structure,
and the palace as adjoining it near the sea-side. This was in the second
region. He speaks correctly of baths bearing the names of Anastasia and
Carosa, daughters of Valens, standing in his own time (vi. 9). The baths
of Constantius are characterized as very spacious when he tells us how
the followers of John resorted thither for the paschal feast (viii. 21).

<span id="iii.ii.i-p29"></span>We have some brief notices of a few
friends outside the earlier circles in Bethelia and Gaza. By the advice
of some pious acquaintances, who were versed in the mysteries, he
decided not to publish the Nicene symbol (i. 20). Among those who
experienced relief at the Michaelium, was a fellow-advocate, Aquilinus;
the story of his cure is told us from Sozomen’s own observation, and
from the statements made by his colleague (ii. 3). He was on good terms
with Cilix, the venerable presbyter of Tarsus (vii. 19). He had a friend
or friends, who were cognizant of affairs under Theophilus (viii. 12);
and similarly with some who had been intimate with Chrysostom (viii. 9).
It is not unlikely that he knew Nicarete in her old age, a lady of
Bithynia remarkable for her sacrificial life, whose memory is preserved
by him alone (viii. 23). The facts which he brings to light concerning
Pulcheria, and the submission of his work to the younger Theodosius,
shows that he was received graciously by both.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1042"></span>[192:1043](2020269.htm#fr_1042.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p7"></span>v. 15, and *Hieron. de vita Hilarionis*.

<span id="fn_1043"></span>[193:1044](2020269.htm#fr_1043.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p10"></span>v. 15; vi. 32; viii. 15.

<span id="fn_1044"></span>[194:1045](2020269.htm#fr_1044.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p13"></span>Zos. v. 29.

<span id="fn_1045"></span>[198:1046](2020269.htm#fr_1045.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p26"></span>Procopius *de Ædificis*, i. 3, 8.

<span id="fn_1046"></span>[199:1047](2020269.htm#fr_1046.md) <span
id="iii.ii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii.i-p27"></span>*de Ædificis*, i. 4.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Sozomen as Author.](2020270.md)
