[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020520)  [Next](2020522.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.v"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V</span>.—*The Different Nations took
up Arms against the Romans, of whom some were, through the Providence of
God defeated, and others brought to Terms of Amity*.

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.v-p2.1"></span>It</span> happened about the same time that
the Huns, who were encamped in Thrace, retreated disgracefully and cast
off many of their number although they had neither been attacked nor
pursued. <span id="fr_1627"></span>[1628](#fn_1627.md) Uldis, the leader of
the barbarous tribes who dwell near the Ister, crossed that river at the
head of a large army, and encamped on the frontiers of Thrace. He took
possession by treachery of a city of Mœsia, called Castra Martis, and
thence made incursions into the rest of Thrace, and insolently refused
to enter into terms of alliance with the Romans. The prefect of the
Thracian soldiers made propositions of peace to him, but he replied by
pointing to the sun, and declaring that it would be easy to him, if he
desired to do so, to subjugate every region of the earth that is
enlightened by that luminary. But while Uldis was uttering menaces of
this description, and was ordering as large a tribute as he pleased, and
that on this condition peace could be established with the Romans or the
war would continue,—when affairs were so helpless, God gave manifest
proofs of special favor towards the present reign; for, shortly
afterwards, the immediate attendants and the leaders of the tribes of
Uldis were discussing the Roman form of government, the philanthropy of
the emperor, and his promptitude and liberality in rewarding the best
and good men. It was not without God that they turned to the love of the
points so discussed and seceded to the Romans, to whose camp they joined
themselves, together with the troops ranged under themselves. Finding
himself thus abandoned, Uldis escaped with difficulty to the opposite
bank of the river. Many of his troops were slain; and among others the
whole of the barbarous tribe called the Sciri. This tribe had been very
strong in point of numbers before falling into this misfortune. Some of
them were killed; and others were taken prisoners, and conveyed in
chains to Constantinople. The governors were of opinion that, if allowed
to remain together, they would probably make a revolution. Some of them
were, therefore, sold at a low price; while others were given away as
slaves for presents, upon condition that they should never be permitted
to return to Constantinople, or to Europe, but be separated by the sea
from the places familiar to them. Of these, a number was left unsold;
and they were ordered to settle in different places. I have seen many in
Bithynia, near Mount Olympus, living apart from one another, and
cultivating the hills and valleys of that region.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1627"></span>[422:1628](2020521.htm#fr_1627.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.v-p3"></span>Independent chapter; cf. Zos. v. 22.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alaric the Goth. He assaulted Rome, and straitened it by
War.](2020522.md)
