[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020148)  [Next](2020150.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Assault upon the
Monks, and Banishment of their Superiors, who exhibit Miraculous Power.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>The</span> emperor Valens having issued an
edict commanding that the orthodox should be persecuted both in
Alexandria and in the rest of Egypt, depopulation and ruin to an immense
extent immediately followed: some were dragged before the tribunals,
others cast into prison, and many tortured in various ways, and in fact
all sorts of punishments were inflicted upon persons who aimed only at
peace and quiet. When these outrages had been perpetrated at Alexandria
just as Lucius thought proper, Euzoïus returned to Antioch, and Lucian
the Arian, attended by the commander-in-chief of the army with a
considerable body of troops, immediately proceeded to the monasteries of
Egypt, where the general in person assailed the assemblage of holy men
with greater fury even than the ruthless soldiery. On reaching these
solitudes they found the monks engaged in their customary exercises,
praying, healing diseases, and casting out devils. Yet they, regardless
of these extraordinary evidences of Divine power, suffered them not to
continue their solemn devotions, but drove them out of the oratories by
force. Rufinus declares that he was not only a witness of these
cruelties, but also one of the sufferers. Thus in them were renewed
those things which are spoken of by the apostle: <span
id="fr_634"></span>[635](#fn_634.md) ‘for they were mocked, and had trial
of scourgings, were stripped naked, put in bonds, stoned, slain with the
sword, went about in the wilderness clad in sheep-skins and goat-skins,
being destitute, afflicted, tormented, of whom the world was not worthy,
wandering in deserts, in mountains, in dens and caves of the earth.’ In
all these things ‘they obtained a good report’ for their faith and their
works, and the cures which the grace of Christ wrought by their hands.
But as it appears Divine Providence permitted them to endure these
evils, ‘having for them provided something better,’ <span
id="fr_635"></span>[636](#fn_635.md) that through their sufferings others
might obtain the salvation of God, and this subsequent events seem to
prove. When therefore these wonderful men proved superior to all the
violence which was exercised toward them, Lucius in despair advised the
military chief to send the fathers of the monks into exile: these were
the Egyptian Macarius, and his namesake of Alexandria, both of whom were
accordingly banished to an island where there was no Christian
inhabitant, and in this island there was an idolatrous temple, and a
priest whom the inhabitants worshiped as a god. On the arrival of these
holy men at the island, the demons of that place were filled with fear
and trepidation. Now it happened at the same time that the priest’s
daughter became suddenly possessed by a demon, and began to act with
great fury, and to overturn everything that came in her way; nor was any
force sufficient to restrain her, but she cried with a loud voice to
these saints of God, saying:—‘Why are ye come here to cast us out from
hence also?’ <span id="fr_636"></span>[637](#fn_636.md) Then did the men
there also display the peculiar power which they had received through
Divine grace: for having cast out the demon from the maid, and presented
her cured to her father, they led the priest himself, and also all the
in<span id="page_110">p. 110</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-Page_110"></span>habitants of the island to the
Christian faith. Whereupon they immediately brake their images in
pieces, and changed the form of their temple into that of a church; and
having been baptized, they joyfully received instruction in the
doctrines of Christianity. Thus these marvelous individuals, after
enduring persecution on account of the ‘homoousian’ faith, were
themselves more approved, became the means of salvation to others, and
confirmed the truth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_634"></span>[109:635](2020149.htm#fr_634.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p3"></span>[Heb. xi.
36-38](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#036.md)<span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p3.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_635"></span>[109:636](2020149.htm#fr_635.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p4"></span>[Heb. xi.
40](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#040.md)<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_636"></span>[109:637](2020149.htm#fr_636.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxiv-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p5"></span>[Matt. viii.
29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029.md)<span id="ii.vii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Didymus the Blind Man.](2020150.md)
