[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020064)  [Next](2020066.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xv"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xv-p1"></span><span id="page_42">p. 42</span> <span
id="ii.v.xv-Page_42"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XV</span>.—*Athanasius and Paul* <span
id="fr_284"></span>[285](#fn_284.md) *going to Rome, and having obtained
Letters from Bishop Julius, recover their respective Dioceses.*

<span id="ii.v.xv-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xv-p3.1"></span>Athanasius</span>, meanwhile, after a
lengthened journey, at last reached Italy. The western division of the
empire was then under the sole power of Constans, the youngest of
Constantine’s sons, his brother Constantine having been slain by the
soldiers, as was before stated. At the same time also Paul, bishop of
Constantinople, Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of Ancyra, a city of the
Lesser Galatia, and Lucius of Adrianople, having been accused on various
charges, and expelled from their several churches arrived at the
imperial city. There each laid his case before Julius, bishop of Rome.
He on his part, by virtue of the Church of Rome’s peculiar privilege,
sent them back again into the East, fortifying them with commendatory
letters; and at the same time restored to each his own place, and
sharply rebuked those by whom they had been deposed. Relying on the
signature of the bishop Julius, the bishops departed from Rome, and
again took possession of their own churches, forwarding the letters to
the parties to whom they were addressed. These persons considering
themselves treated with indignity by the reproaches of Julius, called a
council at Antioch, assembled themselves and dictated a reply to his
letters as the expression of the unanimous feeling of the whole
Synod. <span id="fr_285"></span>[286](#fn_285.md) It was not his province,
they said, to take cognizance of their decisions in reference to any
whom they might wish to expel from their churches; seeing that they had
not opposed themselves to him, when Novatus was ejected from the church.
These things the bishops of the Eastern church communicated to Julius,
bishop of Rome. But, as on the entry of Athanasius into Alexandria, a
tumult was raised by the partisans of George the Arian, in consequence
of which, it is affirmed, many persons were killed; and since the Arians
endeavor to throw the whole odium of this transaction on Athanasius as
the author of it, it behooves us to make a few remarks on the subject.
God the Judge of all only knows the true causes of these disorders; but
no one of any experience can be ignorant of the fact, that such fatal
accidents are for the most part concomitants of the factious movements
of the populace. It is vain, therefore, for the calumniators of
Athanasius to attribute the blame to him; and especially Sabinus, <span
id="fr_286"></span>[287](#fn_286.md) bishop of the Macedonian heresy. For
had the latter reflected on the number and magnitude of the wrongs which
Athanasius, in conjunction with the rest who hold the doctrine of
consubstantiality, had suffered from the Arians, or on the many
complaints made of these things by the Synods convened on account of
Athanasius, or in short on what that arch-heretic Macedonius himself has
done throughout all the churches, he would either have been wholly
silent, or if constrained to speak, would have spoken more plausible
words, instead of these reproaches. But as it is intentionally
overlooking all these things, he willfully misrepresents the facts. He
makes, however, no mention whatever of the heresiarch, desiring by all
means to conceal the daring enormities of which he knew him to be
guilty. And what is still more extraordinary, he has not said one word
to the disadvantage of the Arians, although he was far from entertaining
their sentiments. The ordination of Macedonius, whose heretical views he
had adopted, he has also passed over in silence; for had he mentioned
it, he must necessarily have recorded his impieties also, which were
most distinctly manifested on that occasion. Let this suffice on this
subject.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_284"></span>[42:285](2020065.htm#fr_284.md) <span
id="ii.v.xv-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xv-p2"></span>Julius, in his letter to the Eastern
bishops (*Ep. I. adv. Eusebianos,* 4 and 5), mentions Athanasius and
Marcellus, ex-bishop of Ancyra, as with him at this time, but does not
allude to Paul; from which it has been inferred that Socrates is in
error here in setting the date of Paul’s visit to Rome at this time, as
otherwise Julius would have named him also with Athanasius and
Marcellus. Sozomen, as usual, copies the mistake of Socrates; cf. Sozom.
III. 15.

<span id="fn_285"></span>[42:286](2020065.htm#fr_285.md) <span
id="ii.v.xv-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xv-p4"></span>It appears from this that there was no
recognition of any special prerogative or right belonging to the bishop
of Rome as yet. The position of that bishop during these agitations in
the Eastern church, when the Western church was in comparative peace,
seems to be that of an arbitrator voluntarily invoked, rather than of an
official judge. Cf. Neander, *Hist. of the Christ. Church,* Vol. II. p.
171, 172.

<span id="fn_286"></span>[42:287](2020065.htm#fr_286.md) <span
id="ii.v.xv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xv-p5"></span>i.e. in his *Collection of Synodical
Transactions,* mentioned in chap. 17.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Emperor Constantius, through an Order to Philip the Prætorian
Prefect, secures the Exile of Paul, and the Installation of Macedonius
in his See.](2020066.md)
