[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020284)  [Next](2020286.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Constantine enacts a Law
in favor of Celibates and of the Clergy*.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.ix-p2.1"></span>There</span> was an ancient Roman law, by
which those who were unmarried at the age of twenty-five were not
admitted to the same privileges as the married; <span
id="fr_1085"></span>[1086](#fn_1085.md) amongst other clauses in this law,
it was specified that those who were not the very nearest kinsmen could
gain nothing from a will; and also, that those who were childless were
to be deprived of half of any property that might be bequeathed to them.
The object of this ancient Roman law was to increase the population of
Rome and the subject people, which had been much reduced in numbers by
the civil wars, not a long while before this law. The emperor,
perceiving that this enactment militated against the interests of those
who continued in a state of celibacy and remained childless for the sake
of God, and deeming it absurd to attempt the multiplication of the human
<span id="page_246">p. 246</span> <span
id="iii.vi.ix-Page_246"></span>species by the care and zeal of man
(since nature always receiving increase or decrease according to the
fiat from on high), made a law enjoining that the unmarried and
childless should have the same advantages as the married. He even
bestowed peculiar privileges on those who embraced a life of continence
and virginity, and permitted them, contrary to the usage which prevailed
throughout the Roman empire, to make a will before they attained the age
of puberty; for he believed that those who devoted themselves to the
service of God and the cultivation of philosophy would, in all cases,
judge aright. For a similar reason the ancient Romans permitted the
vestal virgins to make a will as soon as they attained the age of six
years. That was the greatest proof of the superior reverence for
religion. Constantine exempted the clergy everywhere from taxation, and
permitted litigants to appeal to the decision of the bishops if they
preferred them to the state rulers. <span
id="fr_1086"></span>[1087](#fn_1086.md) He enacted that their decree should
be valid, and as far superior to that of other judges as if pronounced
by the emperor himself; that the governors and subordinate military
officers should see to the execution of these decrees: and that the
definitions made by synods should be irreversible.

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p5"></span>Having arrived at this point of my
history, it would not be right to omit all mention of the laws passed in
favor of those individuals in the churches who had received their
freedom. Owing to the strictness of the laws and the unwillingness of
masters, there were many difficulties in the way of the acquisition of
this better freedom; that is to say, of the freedom of the city of Rome.
Constantine therefore made three laws, enacting that all those
individuals in the churches, whose freedom should be attested by the
priests, should receive the freedom of Rome. <span
id="fr_1087"></span>[1088](#fn_1087.md)

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p7"></span>The records of these pious regulations
are still extant, it having been the custom to engrave on tablets all
laws relating to manumission. Such were the enactments of Constantine;
in everything he sought to promote the honor of religion; and religion
was valued, not only for its own sake, but also on account of the virtue
of those who then participated in it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1085"></span>[245:1086](2020285.htm#fr_1085.md) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p3"></span>The Lex Papia Poppæa. For its origin
under Augustus, see Tacit. *Ann.* iii. 25; Eus. *V. C.* iv. 26.

<span id="fn_1086"></span>[246:1087](2020285.htm#fr_1086.md) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p4"></span>Constantine makes mention of this law in
his Epistle to the bishops of Numidia, in Baronius, *A. E.* <span
class="c13"><span id="iii.vi.ix-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span> 316; n. lxiv.;
Eus. *H. E.* x. 7; Cod. Theod. i. 27, de episcopali definitione, 1; xvi.
2, de episcopes ecclesiis et clericis, 2.

<span id="fn_1087"></span>[246:1088](2020285.htm#fr_1087.md) <span
id="iii.vi.ix-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.ix-p6"></span>Cod. Theod. iv. 7, de manumissionibus
inecclesia, 1.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Great Confessors who survived.](2020286.md)
