[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020224)  [Next](2020226.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII.—</span>*Propagation of
Christianity among the Persians by Maruthas Bishop of Mesopotamia.*

<span id="ii.x.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.viii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this same time it happened that
Christianity was disseminated in Persia, by reason of the following
causes. Frequent embassies were sent to and fro between the sovereigns
of Persia and the Roman empire, for which there were continual
occasions. Necessity brought it about at that time that the Roman
emperor thought proper to send Maruthas bishop of Mesopotamia, who has
been before mentioned, <span id="fr_923"></span>[924](#fn_923.md) on a
mission to the king of the Persians. The king <span id="page_157">p.
157</span> <span id="ii.x.viii-Page_157"></span>discovering great piety
in the man treated him with great honor, and gave heed to him as one who
was indeed beloved of God. This excited the jealousy of the magi, <span
id="fr_924"></span>[925](#fn_924.md) whose influence is considerable over
the Persian monarch, for they feared lest he should persuade the king to
embrace Christianity. For Maruthas had by his prayers cured the king of
a violent headache to which he had been long subject, and which the magi
had been unable to relieve. The magicians therefore had recourse to this
deception. As the Persians worship fire, and the king was accustomed to
pay his adorations in a certain edifice to the fire which was kept
perpetually burning, they concealed a man underneath the sacred hearth,
ordering him to make this exclamation at the time of day when the king
was accustomed to perform his devotion! ‘The king should be thrust out
because he is guilty of impiety, in imagining a Christian priest to be
loved by the Deity.’ When Isdigerdes—for that was the king’s name—heard
these words, he determined to dismiss Maruthas, notwithstanding the
reverence with which he regarded him. But Maruthas being truly a
God-loving man, by the earnestness of his prayers, detected the
imposition of the magi. Going to the king therefore he addressed him
thus: ‘Be not deluded, O king,’ said he, ‘but when you again enter that
edifice and hear the same voice, explore the ground below, and you will
discover the fraud. For it is not the fire that speaks, but human
contrivance does this.’ The king received the suggestion of Maruthas and
went as usual to the little house where the ever-burning fire was. When
he again heard the same voice, he ordered the hearth to be dug up;
whereupon the impostor, who uttered the supposed words of the Deity, was
discovered. Becoming indignant at the deception thus attempted the king
commanded that the tribe of the magi should be decimated. When this was
effected he permitted Maruthas to erect churches wherever he wished; and
from that time the Christian religion was diffused among the Persians.
Then Maruthas being recalled went to Constantinople; not long afterwards
however, he was again sent as ambassador to the Persian court. Again the
magi devised contrivances so as by all possible means to prevent the
king from giving him audience. One of their devices was to cause a most
disgusting smell where the king was accustomed to go, and then accuse
the Christians of being the authors of it. The king however having
already had occasion to suspect the magi, very diligently and closely
scrutinized the matter; and again the authors of the nuisance were
detected. Wherefore he punished several of them, and held Maruthas in
still higher honor. For the Romans as a nation he had much regard, and
prized good feeling on their part very highly. Nay, he almost embraced
the Christian faith himself, as Maruthas in conjunction with Abdas
bishop of Persia gave another experimental proof of its power: for these
two by giving themselves to much fasting and prayer, had cast out a
demon with which the king’s son was possessed. But the death of
Isdigerdes <span id="fr_925"></span>[926](#fn_925.md) prevented his making
an open profession of Christianity. The kingdom then devolved on
Vararanes his son, in whose time the treaty between the Romans and
Persians was broken as we shall have occasion to narrate a little
later. <span id="fr_926"></span>[927](#fn_926.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_923"></span>[156:924](2020225.htm#fr_923.md) <span
id="ii.x.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p3"></span>Cf. VI. 15.

<span id="fn_924"></span>[157:925](2020225.htm#fr_924.md) <span
id="ii.x.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p4"></span>A caste of priests who exercised great
influence in Persia mentioned both in the Old and the New Testament. Cf.
Smith, *Dict. of the Bible,* art. <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.viii-p4.1"></span>Magi</span>.

<span id="fn_925"></span>[157:926](2020225.htm#fr_925.md) <span
id="ii.x.viii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p5"></span>420 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.viii-p5.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_926"></span>[157:927](2020225.htm#fr_926.md) <span
id="ii.x.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.viii-p6"></span>Chap. 18 below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bishops of Antioch and Rome.](2020226.md)
