[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020253)  [Next](2020255) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII</span>.—*Miracle performed
by Silvanus Bishop of Troas formerly of Philippopolis.*

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p2.1"></span>Silvanus</span> was formerly a rhetorician,
and had been brought up in the school of Troïlus the sophist; but aiming
at perfection in his Chris<span id="page_174">p. 174</span> <span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-Page_174"></span>tian course, he entered on the ascetic
mode of life, and set aside the rhetorician’s pallium. Atticus bishop of
Constantinople having taken notice of him afterwards ordained him bishop
of Philippopolis. <span id="fr_1020"></span>[1021](#fn_1020) Thus he
resided three years in Thrace; but being unable to endure the cold of
that region—for his constitution was delicate and sickly—he begged
Atticus to appoint some one else in his place, alleging that it was for
no other reason but the cold that he resigned residence in Thrace. This
having been done, Silvanus resided at Constantinople, where he practiced
so great austerities that, despising the luxurious refinements of the
age, he often appeared in the crowded streets of that populous city shod
with sandals made of hay. Some time having elapsed, the bishop of Troas
died; on which account the inhabitants of that city came to Atticus
concerning the appointment of a successor. While he was deliberating
whom he should ordain for them, Silvanus happened to pay him a visit,
which at once relieved him from further anxiety; for addressing
Silvanus, he said: ‘You have now no longer any excuse for avoiding the
pastoral administration of a church; for Troas is not a cold place: so
that God has considered your infirmity of body, and provided you a
suitable residence. Go thither then, my brother, without delay.’
Silvanus therefore removed to that city.

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p4"></span>Here a miracle was performed by his
instrumentality, which I shall now relate. An immense ship for carrying
burdens, such as they term ‘float,’ <span
id="fr_1021"></span>[1022](#fn_1021) intended for the conveyance of
enormous pillars, had been recently constructed on the shore at Troas.
This vessel it was necessary to launch. But although many strong ropes
were attached to it, and the power of a vast number of persons was
applied, the vessel was in no way moved. When these attempts had been
repeated several days successively with the like result, the people
began to think that a devil detained the ship; they therefore went to
the bishop Silvanus, and entreated him to go and offer a prayer in that
place. For thus only they thought it could be launched. He replied with
his characteristic lowliness of mind that he was but a sinner, and that
the work pertained to some one who was just and not to himself. Being at
length prevailed on by their continued entreaties, he approached the
shore, where after having prayed, he touched one of the ropes, and
exhorting the rest to vigorous exertion, the ship was by the first pull
instantly set in motion, and ran swiftly into the sea. This miracle
wrought by the hands of Silvanus, stirred up the whole population of the
province to piety. But the uncommon worth of Silvanus was manifested in
various other ways. Perceiving that the ecclesiastics made a merchandise
of the contentions of those engaged in law-suits, he would never
nominate any one of the clergy as judge: but causing the documents of
the litigants to be delivered to himself, he summoned to him some pious
layman in whose integrity he had confidence; and committing to him the
adjudication of the case, he soon equitably settled all the differences
of the litigants; and by this procedure Silvanus acquired for himself
great reputation from all classes of persons.

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p6"></span>We have indeed digressed pretty much
from the course of our history in giving this account of Silvanus; but
yet it will not, we imagine, be unprofitable. Let us now however return
to the place from which we departed. Maximian, having been ordained on
the 25th of October, under the consulate of Bassus and Antiochus, <span
id="fr_1022"></span>[1023](#fn_1022) the affairs of the church were
reduced to a better ordered and more tranquil condition.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1020"></span>[174:1021](2020254.htm#fr_1020) <span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p3"></span>Another indication that the patriarchal
functions of the bishop of Constantinople were at this time exercised
and recognized. The Council of Chalcedon somewhat later (in 451 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>a.d.</span>) formally
ordered in its twenty-eighth canon that the metropolitans of the
Thracian Pontic, and Asian dioceses should be ordained by the bishop of
Constantinople, their election being first secured by the clergy and
laity of the dioceses, and referred to the patriarch afterwards.

<span id="fn_1021"></span>[174:1022](2020254.htm#fr_1021) <span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>πλατήν</span>, a sort of raft; the word is
incorrectly spelled <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p5.2"></span>πλατή</span> according to Sophocles (*Greek
Lexic*., &c.), and should be <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p5.3"></span>πλωτή</span>.

<span id="fn_1022"></span>[174:1023](2020254.htm#fr_1022) <span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxxvii-p7"></span>431 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.x.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Many of the Jews in Crete embrace the Christian Faith.](2020255)
