[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020349)  [Next](2020351.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*After the Synod,
the East and the West are separated; the West nobly* <span
id="page_291">p. 291</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xiii-Page_291"></span>*adheres to the Faith of the Nicene
Council, while the East is disturbed by Contention here and there over
this Dogma*.

<span id="iii.viii.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xiii-p2.1"></span>After</span> this Synod, the Eastern and
the Western churches ceased to maintain the intercourse which usually
exists among people of the same faith, and refrained from holding
communion with each other. <span id="fr_1254"></span>[1255](#fn_1254.md)
The Christians of the West separated themselves from all as far as
Thrace; those of the East as far as Illyria. This divided state of the
churches was mixed, as might be supposed, with dissentient views and
calumnies. Although they had previously differed on doctrinal subjects,
yet the evil had attained no great height, for they had still held
communion together and were wont to have kindred feelings. The Church
throughout the whole of the West in its entirety regulated itself by the
doctrines of the Fathers, and kept aloof from all contentions and
hair-splitting about dogma. Although Auxentius, who had become bishop of
Milan, and Valens and Ursacius, bishops of Pannonia, had endeavored to
lead that part of the empire into the Arian doctrines, their efforts had
been carefully anticipated by the president of the Roman see and the
other priests, who cut out the seeds of such a troublesome heresy. As to
the Eastern Church, although it had been racked by dissension since the
time of the council of Antioch, and although it had already openly
differed from the Nicæan form of belief, yet I think it is true that the
opinion of the majority united in the same thought, and confessed the
Son to be of the substance of the Father. There were some, however, who
were fond of wrangling and battled against the term “consubstantial” for
those who had been opposed to the word at the beginning, thought, as I
infer, and as happens to most people, that it would be a disgrace to
appear as conquered. Others were finally convinced of the truth of the
doctrines concerning God, by the habit of frequent disputation on these
themes, and ever afterwards continued firmly attached to them. Others
again, being aware that contentions ought not to arise, inclined toward
that which was gratifying to each of the sides, on account of the
influence, either of friendship or they were swayed by the various
causes which often induce men to embrace what they ought to reject, and
to act without boldness, in circumstances which require thorough
conviction. Many others, accounting it absurd to consume their time in
altercations about words, quietly adopted the sentiments inculcated by
the council of Nicæa. Paul, bishop of Constantinople, Athanasius, bishop
of Alexandria, the entire multitude of monks, Antony the Great, who
still survived, his disciples, and a great number of Egyptians and of
other places in the Roman territory, firmly and openly maintained the
doctrines of the Nicæan council throughout the other regions of the
East. As I have been led to allude to the monks, I shall briefly mention
those who flourished during the reign of Constantius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1254"></span>[291:1255](2020350.htm#fr_1254.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xiii-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 22. The rest of the chapter
is marked by an independent survey of the division.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of the Holy Men who flourished about this time in Egypt, namely,
Antony, the Two Macariuses, Heraclius, Cronius, Paphnutius, Putubastus,
Arsisius, Serapion, Piturion, Pachomius, Apollonius, Anuph, Hilarion,
and a Register of many other Saints.](2020351.md)
