[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020473)  [Next](2020475.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*Banishment of
Eunomius by Theodosius the Great. Theophronius, his Successor; of
Eutychus, and of Dorotheus, and their Heresies; of those called
Psathyrians; Division of the Arians into Different Parties; those in
Constantinople were more Limited*.

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> subjects as the above,
however, are best left to the decision of individual judgment.

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p3"></span>The emperor, about this period,
condemned Eunomius to banishment. <span
id="fr_1550"></span>[1551](#fn_1550.md) This heretic had fixed his
residence in the suburbs of Constantinople, and held frequent churches
in private houses, where he read his own writings. He induced many to
embrace his sentiments, so that the sectarians, who were named after
him, became very numerous. He died not long after his banishment, and
was interred at Dacora, his birthplace, a village of Cappadocia,
situated near Mount Argeus, in the territory of Cæsarea. Theophronius,
who was also a native of Cappadocia, and who had been his disciple,
continued to promulgate his doctrines. Having gotten a smattering,
through the writings of Aristotle, he composed an introduction to the
study of the syllogisms in them, which he entitled “Exercises for the
Mind.” But he afterwards engaged, I have understood, in many
unprofitable disputations, and soon ceased to confine himself to the
doctrines of his master. But being eager for new things, he endeavored
to prove, from the terms which are placed in the Sacred Scriptures, that
though God foreknows that which is not, and knows that which is, and
remembers what has happened, he does not always have that knowledge in
the same manner with respect to the future and present, and changes his
knowledge of the past. As this hypothesis appeared positively absurd to
the Eunomians, they excommunicated him from their church; and he
constituted himself the leader of a new sect, called, after his name,
Theophronians. Not long after, Eutychus, one of the Eunomians,
originated another sect in Constantinople, to which his own name was
given. For the question had been proposed, as to whether the Son of God
is or is not acquainted with the last hour; and for its solution, the
words of the evangelist were quoted, in which it is stated that the day
and hour are known only to the Father. <span
id="fr_1551"></span>[1552](#fn_1551.md) Eutychus, however, contended that
this knowledge belongs also to the Son, inasmuch as He has received all
things from the Father. The Eunomian presidents, having condemned this
opinion, he seceded from communion with them, and went to join Eunomius
in his place of banishment. A deacon, and some other individuals, who
had been dispatched from Constantinople to accuse Eutychus, and, if
necessary, to oppose him in argument, arrived first at the place of
destination. When Eunomius was made acquainted with the object of their
journey, he expressed himself in favor of the sentiments propounded by
Eutychus; and, on his arrival, prayed with him, although it was not
lawful to <span id="page_388">p. 388</span> <span
id="iii.xii.xvii-Page_388"></span>pray with any one who travels
unprovided with letters written in sacred characters, attesting his
being in communion. Eunomius died soon after this contention; and the
Eunomian president, at Constantinople, refused to receive Eutychus into
communion; for he antagonized him from jealousy because he was not even
of clerical rank, and because he could not answer his arguments, and did
not find it possible to solve his problems. Eutychus, therefore,
separated those who had espoused his sentiments into a personal heresy.
Many assert that he and Theophronius were the first who propounded the
peculiar views entertained by the Eunomians concerning divine baptism.
The above is a brief account of such details as I have been able to give
in order to afford a succinct knowledge of the causes which led the
Eunomians to be divided among themselves. I should be prolix were I to
enter into further particulars; and, indeed, the subject would be by no
means an easy one to me, since I have no such dialectic skill.

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p6"></span>The following question was, in the
meantime, agitated among the Arians of Constantinople: Prior to the
existence of the Son (whom they regard as having proceeded out of
nothing), is God to be termed the Father? Dorotheus, who had been
summoned from Antioch to rule over them in the place of Marinus, was of
opinion that God could not have been called the Father prior to the
existence of the Son, because the name of Father has a necessary
connection with that of Son. Marinus, on the other hand, maintained that
the Father was the Father, even when the Son existed not; and he
advanced this opinion either from conviction, or else from the desire of
contention, and from jealousy at the preference that had been shown to
Dorotheus in the Church. The Arians were thus divided into two parties;
Dorotheus and his followers retained possession of the houses of prayer,
while Marinus, and those who seceded with him, erected new edifices in
which to hold their own churches. The name “Psathyrians” and “Goths”
were given to the partisans of Marinus; Psathyrians, because
Theoctistus, a certain cake-vender (<span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p6.1"></span>ψαθυροπώλης</span> ) was a zealous
advocate of their opinions; and Goths, because their sentiments were
approved by Selinus, bishop of that nation. Almost all these barbarians
followed the instructions of Selinus, and they gathered in churches with
the followers of Marinus. The Goths were drawn to Selinus particularly
because he had formerly been the secretary of Ulphilas, and had
succeeded him as bishop. He was capable of teaching in their churches,
not only in the vernacular, but also in the Greek language.

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p7"></span>Soon after a contest for precedency
arose between Marinus and Agapius, whom Marinus himself had ordained
bishop over the Arians at Ephesus; and in the quarrel which ensued, the
Goths took the part of Agapius. It is said that many of the Arian clergy
of that city were so much irritated through the ambition displayed by
these two bishops, that they communed with the Catholic Church. Such was
the origin of the division of the Arians into two factions,—a division
which still subsists; so that, in every city, they have separate
churches. The Arians at Constantinople, however, after a separation of
thirty-five years, were reconciled to each other by Plinthas, formerly a
consul, <span id="fr_1552"></span>[1553](#fn_1552.md) general of the
cavalry and infantry, a man possessed of great influence at court. To
prevent the revival of the former dissensions among them, the question
which had been the cause of the division was forbidden to be mooted. And
these occurrences took place later.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1550"></span>[387:1551](2020474.htm#fr_1550.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p4"></span>Soc. v. 20, 23, 24; Philost. x. 6.
Soz. has some independent points.

<span id="fn_1551"></span>[387:1552](2020474.htm#fr_1551.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p5"></span>[Matt. xxiv.
36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036.md)<span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p5.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_1552"></span>[388:1553](2020474.htm#fr_1552.md) <span
id="iii.xii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xii.xvii-p8"></span>He held the consulate with Monaxius,
<span class="c13"><span id="iii.xii.xvii-p8.1"></span>a.d.</span> 419.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Another Heresy, that of the Sabbatians, is originated by the
Novatians. Their Synod in Sangarus. Account in Greater Detail of the
Easter Festival.](2020475.md)
