[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020136)  [Next](2020138.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xii"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*The Macedonians,
pressed by the Emperor’s Violence toward them, send a Deputation to
Liberius Bishop of Rome, and subscribe the Nicene Creed.*

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xii-p2.1"></span>When</span> the maintainers of the
‘homoousian’ doctrine had been thus severely dealt with, and put to
flight, the persecutors began afresh to harass the Macedonians; who
impelled by fear rather than violence, send deputations to one another
from city to city, declaring the necessity of appealing to the emperor’s
brother, and also to Liberius bishop of Rome: and that it was far better
for them to embrace their faith, than to communicate with the party of
Eudoxius. They sent for this purpose Eustathius bishop of Sebastia, who
had been several times deposed, Silvanus of Tarsus in Cilicia, and
Theophilus of Castabala in the same province; charging them to dissent
in nothing from Liberius concerning the faith, but to enter into
communion with the Roman church, and confirm the doctrine of the
*homoousian.* These persons therefore proceeded to Old Rome, carrying
with them the letters of those who had separated themselves from Acacius
at Seleucia. To the emperor they could not have access, he being
occupied in the Gauls with a war against the Sarmatæ; but they presented
their letters to Liberius. He at first refused to admit them; saying
they were of the Arian faction, and could not possibly be received into
communion by the church, inasmuch as they had rejected the Nicene Creed.
To this they replied that by change of sentiment they had acknowledged
the truth, having long since renounced the Anomœan <span
id="fr_594"></span>[595](#fn_594.md) Creed, and avowed the Son to be in
every way ‘like the Father’: moreover that they considered the terms
‘like’ <span id="page_101">p. 101</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xii-Page_101"></span>(*homoios*) and *homoousios* to have
precisely the same import. When they had made this statement, Liberius
demanded of them a written confession of their faith; and they
accordingly presented him a document in which the substance of the
Nicene Creed was inserted. I have not introduced here, because of their
length, the letters from Smyrna, Asia, and from Pisidia, Isauria,
Pamphylia, and Lycia, in all which places they had held Synods. The
written profession which the deputies sent with Eustathius, delivered to
Liberius, is as follows:

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p4"></span>‘To our Lord, Brother, and
fellow-Minister Liberius: Eustathius, Theophilus, and Silvanus,
salutations in the Lord.

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p5"></span>‘On account of the insane opinion of
heretics, who cease not to introduce occasions of offense into the
catholic churches, we being desirous of checking their career, come
forward to express our approbation of the doctrines recognized the Synod
of orthodox bishops which has been convened at Lampsacus, Smyrna, and
various other places: from which Synod we being constituted a
deputation, bring a letter to your benignity and to all the Italian and
Western bishops, by which we declare that we hold and maintain the
catholic faith which was established in the holy council at Nicæa under
the reign of Constantine of blessed memory, by three hundred and
eighteen bishops, and has hitherto continued entire and unshaken; in
which creed the term *homoousios* is holily and devoutly employed in
opposition to the pernicious doctrine of Arius. We therefore, together
with the aforesaid persons whom we represent, profess under our own
hand, that we have held, do hold, and will maintain the same faith even
unto the end. We condemn Arius, and his impious doctrine, with his
disciples, and those who agree with his sentiments; as also the same
heresy of Sabellius, <span id="fr_595"></span>[596](#fn_595.md) the
Patripassians, <span id="fr_596"></span>[597](#fn_596.md) the
Marcionites, <span id="fr_597"></span>[598](#fn_597.md) the
Photinians, <span id="fr_598"></span>[599](#fn_598.md) the
Marcellians, <span id="fr_599"></span>[600](#fn_599.md) that of Paul of
Samosata, <span id="fr_600"></span>[601](#fn_600.md) and those who
countenance such tenets; in short all the heresies which are opposed to
the aforesaid sacred creed, which was piously and in a catholic spirit
set forth by the holy fathers at Nicæa. But we especially anathematize
that form of the creed which was recited at the Synod of Ariminum, <span
id="fr_601"></span>[602](#fn_601.md) as altogether contrary to the
before-mentioned creed of the holy Synod of Nicæa, to which the bishops
at Constantinople affixed their signatures, being deceived by artifice
and perjury, by reason of its having been brought from Nice, <span
id="fr_602"></span>[603](#fn_602.md) a town of Thrace. Our own creed, and
that of those whose delegates we are, is this:

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p14"></span>‘“We believe in one God the Father
Almighty, the Maker of all things visible and invisible: and in one
only-begotten God, the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God; begotten of
the Father; that is of the substance of the Father; God of God, Light of
Light, very God of very God; begotten not made, of the same substance
with the Father, through whom all things were made which are in heaven,
and which are upon the earth: who for us men, and for our salvation,
descended, became incarnate, and was made man; suffered, and rose again
the third day; ascended into the heavens, and will come to judge the
living and the dead. \[We believe\] also in the Holy Spirit. But the
Catholic and Apostolic Church of God anathematizes those who assert that
‘there was a time when he was not,’ and ‘that he was not before he was
begotten,’ and that ‘he was made of things which are not’; or those that
say ‘the Son of God is of another hypostasis’ or ‘substance than the
Father,’ or that ‘he is mutable, or susceptible of change.’

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p15"></span>‘“I, Eustathius, bishop of the city of
Sebastia, with Theophilus and Silvanus, delegates of the Synod of
Lampsacus, Smyrna, and other places, have voluntarily subscribed this
confession of faith with our own hands. And if, after the publication of
this creed, any one shall presume to calumniate either us, or those who
sent us, let him come with the letters of your holiness before such
orthodox bishops as your sanctity shall approve of, and bring the matter
to an issue with us before them; and if any charge shall be
substantiated, let the guilty be punished.”’

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p16"></span>Liberius having securely pledged the
delegates by this document, received them into communion, and afterwards
dismissed them with this letter:

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p17"></span>The Letter of Liberius Bishop of Rome,
to the Bishops of the Macedonians.

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p18"></span>To our beloved brethren and
fellow-ministers, Evethius, Cyril, Hyperechius, Uranius, Heron,
Elpidius, Maximus, Eusebius, Eucarpius, Heortasius, Neon, Eumathius,
Faustinus, Proclinus, Pasinicus, Arsenius, Severus, Didymion,
Brittanius, Callicrates, Dalmatius, Ædesius, Eustochius, Ambrose,
Gelonius, Pardalius, Macedonius, Paul, Marcellus, Heraclius, Alexander,
Adolius, Marcian, Sthenelus, John, Macer, Charisius, <span
id="page_102">p. 102</span> <span
id="ii.vii.xii-Page_102"></span>Silvanus, Photinus, Anthony, Aythus,
Celsus, Euphranon, Milesius, Patricius, Severian, Eusebius, Eumolpius,
Athanasius, Diophantus, Menodorus, Diocles, Chrysampelus, Neon,
Eugenius, Eustathius, Callicrates, Arsenius, Eugenius, Martyrius,
Hieracius, Leontius, Philagrius, Lucius, and to all the orthodox bishops
in the East, Liberius bishop of Italy, and the bishops throughout the
West, salutations always in the Lord.

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p19"></span>Your letters, beloved brethren,
resplendent with the light of faith, delivered to us by our highly
esteemed brethren, the bishops Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus,
brought to us the much longed-for joy of peace and concord: and this
chiefly because they have demonstrated and assured us that your opinion
and sentiments are in perfect harmony with those both of our
insignificance, and also with those of all the bishops in Italy and the
Western parts. We knowledge this to be the Catholic and Apostolic faith,
which until the time of the Synod at Nicæa had continued unadulterated
and unshaken. This creed your legates have professed that they
themselves hold, and to our great joy have obliterated every vestige and
impression of an injurious suspicion, by attesting it not only in word,
but also in writing. We have deemed it proper to subjoin to these
letters a copy of this their declaration, lest we should leave any
pretext to the heretics for entering into a fresh conspiracy, by which
they might stir up the smouldering embers of their own malice, and
according to their custom, rekindle the flames of discord. Moreover our
most esteemed brethren, Eustathius, Silvanus, and Theophilus, have
professed this also, both that they themselves, and also your love, have
always held, and will maintain unto the last, the creed approved of at
Nicæa by 318 Orthodox Bishops; which contains the perfect truth, and
both confutes and overthrows the whole swarm of heretics. For it was not
of their own will, but by Divine appointment that so great a number of
bishops was collected against the madness of Arius, as equaled that of
those by whose assistance blessed Abraham through faith destroyed so
many thousand of his enemies. <span id="fr_603"></span>[604](#fn_603.md)
This faith being comprehended in the terms *hypostasis* and
*homoousios,* like a strong and impregnable fortress checks and repels
all the assaults and vain machinations of Arian perverseness. Wherefore
when all the Western bishops were assembled at Ariminum, whither the
craft of the Arians had drawn them, in order that either by deceptive
persuasions, or to speak more truly, by the coercion of the secular
power, they might erase, or indirectly revoke what had been introduced
into the creed with so much prudence, their subtlety was not of the
least avail. For almost all those who at Ariminum were either allured
into error, or at that time deceived, have since taken a right view of
the matter; and after anathematizing the exposition of faith set forth
by those who were convened at Ariminum, have subscribed the Catholic and
Apostolic Creed which was promulgated at Nicæa. They have entered into
communion with us, and regard the dogma of Arius and his disciples with
increased aversion, and are even indignant against it. Of which fact
when the legates of your love saw the indubitable evidences, they
annexed yourselves to their own subscription; anathematizing Arius, and
what was transacted at Ariminum against the creed ratified at Nicæa, to
which even you yourselves, beguiled by perjury, were induced to
subscribe. Whence it appeared suitable to us to write to your love, and
to accede to your just request, especially since we are assured by the
profession of your legates that the Eastern bishops have recovered their
senses, and now concur in opinion with the orthodox of the West. We
further give you to understand, lest ye should be ignorant of it, that
the blasphemies of the Synod of Ariminum have been anathematized by
those who seem to have been at that time deceived by fraud, and that all
have acknowledged the Nicene Creed. It is fit therefore that it should
be made generally known by you that such as have had their faith
vitiated by violence or guile, may now emerge from heretical darkness
into the Divine light of catholic liberty. Moreover whosoever of them,
after this council, shall not disgorge the poison of corrupt doctrine,
by abjuring all the blasphemies of Arius, and anathematizing them, let
them know that they are themselves, together with Arius and his
disciples and the rest of the serpents, whether Sabellians,
Patripassians, or the followers of any other heresy, dissevered and
excommunicated from the assemblies of the Church, which does not admit
of illegitimate children. May God preserve you steadfast, beloved
brethren.

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p21"></span>When the adherents of Eustathius had
received this letter, they proceeded to Sicily, where they caused a
Synod of Sicilian bishops to be convened, and in their presence avowed
the homoousian faith, and professed their adherence to the Nicene Creed:
then having received from them also a letter to the same effect as the
preceding, they returned to those who had sent them. They on their part,
on the receipt of the letters of Liberius, sent delegates from city to
city to the prominent supporters of the doctrine of the *homoousion,*
exhorting them to assemble simultaneously at Tarsus in Cilicia, in order
to confirm the Nicene Creed, and ter<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>
<span id="ii.vii.xii-Page_103"></span>minate all the contentions which
had subsequently arisen. And indeed this would probably have been
accomplished had not the Arian bishop, Eudoxius, who at that time
possessed great influence with the emperor, thwarted their purpose; for
on learning of the Synod that had been summoned to meet \[at Tarsus\],
he became so exasperated that he redoubled his persecution against them.
That the Macedonians by sending legates to Liberius were admitted to
communion with him, and professed the Nicene Creed, is attested by
Sabinus himself, in his *Collection of Synodical Transactions.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_594"></span>[100:595](2020137.htm#fr_594.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p3"></span>See II. 35, and Hefele, *Hist. of the
Ch. Councils,* Vol. II. p. 218 seq.

<span id="fn_595"></span>[101:596](2020137.htm#fr_595.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p6"></span>See I. 5, and note.

<span id="fn_596"></span>[101:597](2020137.htm#fr_596.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p7"></span>The Patripassians were a sect of the
early Church (end of second century), who asserted the identity of the
Son with the Father. And, as on being confronted with the question
whether it was the Father that suffered on the cross they answered in
the affirmative, they were called Patripassians. Their leader was
Praxeas. See Tertull. *Adv. Praxeam* (the whole treatise is meant to be
a refutation of this heresy).

<span id="fn_597"></span>[101:598](2020137.htm#fr_597.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p8"></span>Followers of the well-known Gnostic
leader of the second century. For his peculiar views, see Tertull. *Adv.
Marcionem;* Epiphan. *Hæres.* XLII.; also Smith and Wace, *Dict. of
Christ. Biog.,* under <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vii.xii-p8.1"></span>Marcion</span>, and ecclesiastical
histories.

<span id="fn_598"></span>[101:599](2020137.htm#fr_598.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p9"></span>Cf. II. 18 and 29.

<span id="fn_599"></span>[101:600](2020137.htm#fr_599.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p10"></span>Cf. I. 36; II. 20.

<span id="fn_600"></span>[101:601](2020137.htm#fr_600.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p11"></span>See note, I. 36.

<span id="fn_601"></span>[101:602](2020137.htm#fr_601.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p12"></span>See II. 37.

<span id="fn_602"></span>[101:603](2020137.htm#fr_602.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p13"></span>See II. 37. As it appears from V. 4,
Liberius was actually deceived by the artifice.

<span id="fn_603"></span>[102:604](2020137.htm#fr_603.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xii-p20"></span>[Gen. xiv.
14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014.md)<span id="ii.vii.xii-p20.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eunomius separates from Eudoxius; a Disturbance is raised at
Alexandria by Eudoxius, and Athanasius flees into Voluntary Exile again,
but in Consequence of the Clamors of the People the Emperor recalls and
re-establishes him in his See.](2020138.md)
