[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020341)  [Next](2020343.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p1"></span><span id="page_285">p. 285</span> <span
id="iii.viii.v-Page_285"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.v-p1.1"></span>Chapter V.—</span>*The Partial Council of
Antioch; it deposed Athanasius; it substituted Gregory; its Two
Statements of the Faith; those who agreed with them*.

<span id="iii.viii.v-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.v-p2.1"></span>Soon</span> after these occurrences, the
emperor went to Antioch, a city of Syria. <span
id="fr_1220"></span>[1221](#fn_1220.md) Here a church had already been
completed, which excelled in size and beauty. Constantine began to build
it during his lifetime, and as the structure had been just finished by
his son Constantius, it was deemed a favorable opportunity by the
partisans of Eusebius, who of old were zealous for it, to convene a
council. They, therefore, with those from various regions who held their
sentiments, met together in Antioch; <span
id="fr_1221"></span>[1222](#fn_1221.md) their bishops were about
ninety-seven in number. Their professed object was the consecration of
the newly finished church; but they intended nothing else than the
abolition of the decrees of the Nicæan Council, and this was fully
proved by the sequel. The Church of Antioch was then governed by
Placetus, <span id="fr_1222"></span>[1223](#fn_1222.md) who had succeeded
Euphronius. The death of Constantine the Great had taken place about
five years prior to this period. When all the bishops had assembled in
the presence of the emperor Constantius, the majority expressed great
indignation, and vigorously accused Athanasius of having contemned the
sacerdotal regulation which they had enacted, <span
id="fr_1223"></span>[1224](#fn_1223.md) and taken possession of the
bishopric of Alexandria without first obtaining the sanction of a
council. They also deposed that he was the cause of the death of several
persons, who fell in a sedition excited by his return; and that many
others had on the same occasion been arrested and delivered up to the
judicial tribunals. By these accusations they contrived to cast odium on
Athanasius, and it was decreed that Gregory should be invested with the
government of the Church of Alexandria. They then turned to the
discussion of doctrinal questions, and found no fault with the decrees
of the council of Nice. They dispatched letters to the bishops of every
city, in which they declared that, as they were bishops themselves, they
had not followed Arius. “For how,” said they, “could we have been
followers of him, when he was but a presbyter, <span
id="fr_1224"></span>[1225](#fn_1224.md) and we were placed above him?”
Since they were the testers of his faith, they had readily received him;
and they believed in the faith which had from the beginning been handed
down by tradition. This they further explained at the bottom of their
letter, but without mentioning the substance of the Father or the Son,
or the term consubstantial. They resorted, in fact, to such ambiguity of
expression, that neither the Arians nor the followers of the decrees of
the Nicæan Council could call the arrangement of their words into
question, as though they were ignorant of the holy Scriptures. They
purposely avoided all forms of expression which were rejected by either
party, and only made use of those which were universally admitted. They
confessed <span id="fr_1225"></span>[1226](#fn_1225.md) that the Son is
with the Father, that He is the only begotten One, and that He is God,
and existed before all things; and that He took flesh upon Him, and
fulfilled the will of His Father. They confessed these and similar
truths, but they did not describe the doctrine of the Son being
co-eternal or consubstantial with the Father, or the opposite. They
subsequently changed their minds, it appears, about this formulary, and
issued another, <span id="fr_1226"></span>[1227](#fn_1226.md) which, I
think, very nearly resembled that of the council of Nice, unless,
indeed, some secret meaning be attached to the words which is not
apparent to me. Although they refrained—I know not from what motive—from
saying that the Son is consubstantial, they confessed that He is
immutable, that His Divinity is not susceptible of change, that He is
the perfect image of the substance, and counsel, and power, and glory of
the Father, and that He is the first-born of every creature. They stated
that they had found this formulary of faith, and that it was entirely
written by Lucianus, <span id="fr_1227"></span>[1228](#fn_1227.md) who was
martyred in Nicomedia, and who was a man highly approved and exceedingly
accurate in the sacred Scriptures. I know not whether this statement was
really true, or whether they merely advanced it in order to give weight
to their own document, by connecting with it the dignity of a martyr.
Not only did Eusebius (who, on the expulsion of Paul, had been
transferred from Nicomedia to the throne of Constantinople) participate
in this council, but likewise Acacius, the successor of Eusebius
Pamphilus, Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis, Theodore, bishop of
Heraclea, formerly called Perinthus, Eudoxius, bishop of Germanicia, who
subsequently directed the Church of Constantinople after Macedonius, and
Gregory, who had been chosen to preside over the Church of Alexandria.
It was universally acknowledged that all these bishops held the same
sentiments, such as Dianius, <span id="fr_1228"></span>[1229](#fn_1228.md)
bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia, George, bishop of Laodicea in Syria,
and many others who acted as bishops over metropolitan and other
distinguished churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[285:1221](2020342.htm#fr_1220.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 7.

<span id="fn_1221"></span>[285:1222](2020342.htm#fr_1221.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p4"></span>Soc. ii. 8–10. Soz. with independent
matter borrows from the same sources as Soc., one of which is Athan. *de
Synodis,* 22–25.

<span id="fn_1222"></span>[285:1223](2020342.htm#fr_1222.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p5"></span>Also called Flaccillus. Soc. ii. 8.

<span id="fn_1223"></span>[285:1224](2020342.htm#fr_1223.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p6"></span>Cf. Soc. ii. 10.

<span id="fn_1224"></span>[285:1225](2020342.htm#fr_1224.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p7"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* 22.

<span id="fn_1225"></span>[285:1226](2020342.htm#fr_1225.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p8"></span>This creed is given in Athan. *de
Synodis,* 23. Cf. Soc. ii. 10; here only in a suggestion and criticism.

<span id="fn_1226"></span>[285:1227](2020342.htm#fr_1226.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p9"></span>Theophronius’ statement is passed over,
and the final creed is here given in summary. Athan. *de Synodis,* 24,
25.

<span id="fn_1227"></span>[285:1228](2020342.htm#fr_1227.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p10"></span>This person was a presbyter of Antioch.
Cf. vi. 12; Philost. ii. 12–14; Eus. *H. E.* ix. 6.

<span id="fn_1228"></span>[285:1229](2020342.htm#fr_1228.md) <span
id="iii.viii.v-p10.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.v-p11"></span>He is also called Dianœus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Eusebius surnamed Emesenus; Gregory accepted Alexandria;
Athanasius seeks Refuge in Rome.](2020343.md)
