[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020195)  [Next](2020197) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.iv"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter III</span>.—*Birth and Education of
John Bishop of Constantinople.*

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.iv-p2.1"></span>John</span> was a native of Antioch in
Syria-Cœle, son of Secundus and Anthusa, and scion of a noble family in
that country. He studied rhetoric under Libanius the sophist, and
philosophy under Andragathius the philosopher. <span
id="fr_830"></span>[831](#fn_830) Being on the point of entering the
practice of civil law, and reflecting on the restless and unjust course
of those who devote themselves to the practice of the forensic courts,
he was turned to the more tranquil mode of life, which he adopted,
following the example of Evagrius. <span
id="fr_831"></span>[832](#fn_831) Evagrius <span id="page_139">p.
139</span> <span id="ii.ix.iv-Page_139"></span>himself had been educated
under the same masters, and had some time before retired to a private
mode of life. Accordingly he laid aside his legal habit, and applied his
mind to the reading of the sacred scriptures, frequenting the church
with great assiduity. He moreover induced Theodore and Maximus, who had
been his fellow-students under Libanius the sophist, to forsake a
profession whose primary object was gain, and embrace a life of greater
simplicity. Of these two persons, Theodore afterwards became bishop of
Mopsuestia <span id="fr_832"></span>[833](#fn_832) in Cilicia, and
Maximus of Seleucia in Isauria. At that time being ardent aspirants
after perfection, they entered upon the ascetic life, under the guidance
of Diodorus <span id="fr_833"></span>[834](#fn_833) and Carterius, who
then presided over a monastic institution. The former of these was
subsequently elevated to the bishopric of Tarsus, and wrote many
treatises, in which he limited his attention to the literal sense of
scripture, avoiding that which was mystical. <span
id="fr_834"></span>[835](#fn_834) But enough respecting these persons.
Now John was then living on the most intimate terms with Basil, <span
id="fr_835"></span>[836](#fn_835) at that time constituted a deacon by
Meletius, but afterwards ordained bishop of Cæsarea in Cappadocia.
Accordingly Zeno <span id="fr_836"></span>[837](#fn_836) the bishop on
his return from Jerusalem, appointed him a reader in the church at
Antioch. While he continued in the capacity of a reader he composed the
book *Against the Jews.* Meletius having not long after conferred on him
the rank of deacon, he produced his work *On the Priesthood,* <span
id="fr_837"></span>[838](#fn_837) and those *Against Stagirius;* and
moreover those also *On the Incomprehensibility of the Divine Nature*,
and *On the Women* <span id="fr_838"></span>[839](#fn_838) *who lived
with the Ecclesiastics.* Afterwards, upon the death of Meletius at
Constantinople,—for there he had gone on account of Gregory Nazianzen’s
ordination,—John separated himself from the Meletians, without entering
into communion with Paulinus, and spent three whole years in retirement.
Later, when Paulinus was dead, he was ordained a presbyter by Evagrius
the successor of Paulinus. Such is a brief outline of John’s career
previous to his call to the episcopal office. It is said that on account
of his zeal for temperance he was stern and severe; and one of his early
friends has said ‘that in his youth he manifested a proneness to
irritability, rather than to modesty.’ Because of the rectitude of his
life, he was free from anxiety about the future, and his simplicity of
character rendered him open and ingenuous; nevertheless the liberty of
speech he allowed himself was offensive to very many. In public teaching
he was powerful in reforming the morals of his auditors; but in private
conversation he was frequently thought haughty and assuming by those who
did not know him.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_830"></span>[138:831](2020196.htm#fr_830) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p3"></span>Sozomen (VIII. 2) also says that
Chrysostom went from the school of Libanius to a private life instead of
the legal profession as was expected of him, but from some utterances of
Libanius, as well as from Chrysostom’s own representation, *de
Sacerdot.* I. 1. 4, it appears that he had spent some time in the
practice of the law.

<span id="fn_831"></span>[138:832](2020196.htm#fr_831) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p4"></span>It is not certain who this Evagrius was.
Valesius thinks he was the presbyter of that name mentioned by Jerome,
*de Scriptor. Eccl.*

<span id="fn_832"></span>[139:833](2020196.htm#fr_832) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p5"></span>It has been supposed by some that this was
the Theodore addressed in II. 1, VI. Int. and VII. 47; but not with good
reason. Cf. note 4, p. xii. of Int. On Theodore of Mopsuestia, the great
‘Exegete’ and theologian, see Smith & Wace; also Sieffert, *Theodor.
Mopsuestenus Vet. Test. Sobrie Interpret. Vindex* and H. B. Swete,
*Theodori Episc. Mopsuestiæ in Epp. B. Pauli. Commentarii.*

<span id="fn_833"></span>[139:834](2020196.htm#fr_833) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p6"></span>Sozomen also attests the simplicity of
Diodorus’ interpretations of the Old Testament. The principle which he
adopted, of seeking for a literal and historical meaning in preference
to the allegorical and mystical interpretations attached to the Old
Testament by Origen and the Alexandrians, became the corner-stone of the
Antiochian system of interpretation as elaborated by his pupils Theodore
of Mopsuestia and Theodoret.

<span id="fn_834"></span>[139:835](2020196.htm#fr_834) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p7"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix.iv-p7.1"></span>θεωρίας</span> lit. ‘speculations’ by which
are evidently meant the allegorical and subjective or contemplative
explanations of the Alexandrians.

<span id="fn_835"></span>[139:836](2020196.htm#fr_835) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p7.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p8"></span>‘Socrates and Kurtz (in the tenth edition
of his *Kirchengeschichte,* I. 223) confound this Basil with Basil the
Great of Cappadocia, who was eighteen years older than Chrysostom, and
died in 379. Chrysostom’s friend was probably (as Baronius and
Montfaucon conjecture) identical with Basil, bishop of Raphanea in
Syria, near Antioch, who attended the Council of Constantinople in 381.’
Comp. Venables in Smith and Wace; Schaff in Prolegomena to Vol. IX. of
*The Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers,* p. 6, note 2. The conjecture of
Baronius is assented to also by Valesius.

<span id="fn_836"></span>[139:837](2020196.htm#fr_836) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p9"></span>According to Baronius, this Zeno was
bishop of Tyre, but Valesius makes an ingenious objection to this view,
and asserts that some other city must have been the real see of Zeno.

<span id="fn_837"></span>[139:838](2020196.htm#fr_837) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p10"></span>This treatise, commonly termed *de
Sacerdotio,* and the *Homilies* are the most famous of Chrysostom’s
works; for a full account, as well as translation, of these works, see
*Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers,* Vol. IX.

<span id="fn_838"></span>[139:839](2020196.htm#fr_838) <span
id="ii.ix.iv-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.iv-p11"></span>These were women who lived in the houses
of the clergy as sisters, and exercised themselves in works of piety and
charity. At a very early period, however, scandal seems to have arisen
from this practice, and strong measures were repeatedly adopted by the
Church for their suppression. Paul of Samosata was, according to
Eusebius (*H. E.* VII. 30), deposed partly for keeping these sisters in
his house. They were called Syneisactæ (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.ix.iv-p11.1"></span>Συνείσακτοι</span> ). Cf. Bingham, *Christ.
Antiq.* XVII. 5. 20, and Council of Nicæa, Can. 3. Hefele, *Hist. of Ch.
Councils,* Vol. I. p. 379.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Of Serapion the Deacon on whose Account John becomes Odious to
his Clergy.](2020197)
