[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020498)  [Next](2020500) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XII</span>.—*About the Four
Brothers, called “The Long,” who were Ascetics, and of whom Theophilus
was an Enemy; about Isidore and the Events which came about through
these Four*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p2.1"></span>The</span> controversy would most likely
have been terminated, had it not been renewed by Theophilus himself,
from inimical feelings against Ammonius, Dioscorus, Eusebius, and
Euthymius, who were called “the long.” <span
id="fr_1600"></span>[1601](#fn_1600) They were brothers; and, as we have
before stated, became conspicuous among the philosophers at Scetis. They
were at one period beloved by Theophilus above all the other monks of
Egypt; he sought their society, and frequently dwelt with them. He even
conferred on Dioscorus the bishopric of Hermopolis. He was confirmed in
his hatred of them, on account of his enmity to Isidore, whom he had
endeavored to ordain in Constantinople after Nectarius. Some say, that a
woman, belonging to the Manichean heresy, had been converted to the
faith of the Catholic Church; Theophilus rebuked the arch-presbyter
(towards whom he had other reasons for entertaining resentful feeling),
because he had admitted her to participate in the sacred mysteries
before she had adjured her former heresy. Peter, for this was the name
of the arch-presbyter, maintained that he had received the woman into
communion according to the laws of the Church, and with the consent of
Theophilus; and referred to Isidore, as a witness to the truth of what
he had deposed. Isidore happened to be then at Rome on an embassy; but,
on his return, he testified that the assertions of Peter were true.
Theophilus resented this avowal as a calumny, and ejected both him and
Peter from the Church. Such is the account given by some persons of the
transaction. I have, however, heard it alleged, by a man of undoubted
veracity, who was very intimate with the monks above mentioned, that the
enmity of Theophilus towards Isidore originated from two causes. One of
these causes was identical with that specified by Peter the presbyter,
namely, that he had refused to attest the existence of a testament in
which the inheritance was entailed on the sister of Theophilus; the
other cause alleged by this individual was, that Isidore refused to give
up certain moneys that had been confided to him for the relief of the
poor, and which Theophilus wished to appropriate to the erection of
churches; saying that it is better to restore the bodies of the
suffering, which are more rightly to be considered the temples of God,
and for which end the money had been furnished, than to build walls. But
from whatever cause the enmity of Theophilus might have originated,
Isidore, immediately after his excommunication, joined his former
companions, the monks at Scetis. Ammonius, with a few others, then
repaired to Theophilus, and entreated him to restore Isidore to
communion. Theophilus readily promised to do as they requested; but as
time passed away, and nothing more was effected for them, and it became
evident that Theophilus was pretending, they again repaired to him,
renewed their entreaties, and pressed him to be faithful to his
engagement. Instead of complying, Theophilus thrust one of the monks
into prison, for the purpose of intimidating the others. But he erred in
this. Ammonius and all the monks with him then <span id="page_407">p.
407</span> <span id="iii.xiii.xii-Page_407"></span>went to the prison,
into which they were readily admitted by the jailer, who imagined that
they had come to bring provisions to the prisoner; but having once
obtained admission, they refused to leave the prison. When Theophilus
heard of their voluntary confinement, he sent to desire them to come to
him. They replied, that he ought first to take them out of prison
himself, for it was not just, after having been subjected to public
indignity, that they should be privately released from confinement. At
length, however, they yielded and went to him. Theophilus apologized for
what had occurred, and dismissed them as if he had no further intention
of molesting them; but by himself, he champed and was vexed, and
determined to do them ill. He was in doubt, however, as to how he could
ill-treat them, as they had no possessions, and despised everything but
philosophy, until it occurred to him, to disturb the peace of their
retirement. From his former intercourse with them he had gathered that
they blamed those who believe that God has a human form, and that they
adhered to the opinions of Origen; he brought them into collision with
the multitude of monks who maintained the other view. A terrible
contention prevailed among the monks, for they did not think it worth
while to persuade one another by flaming arguments for themselves in an
orderly way, but settled down into insults. They gave the name of
Origenists to those who maintained the incorporeality of the Deity,
while those who held the opposite opinion were called Anthropomorphists.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1600"></span>[406:1601](2020499.htm#fr_1600) <span
id="iii.xiii.xii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xii-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 7, 9; Pallad, *Dialog.* 6.
Soz. has different order and some new opinions.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: These Four repair to John on account of his Interest; for this
Reason, Theophilus was enraged, and prepares himself to fight against
John.](2020500)
