[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020449)  [Next](2020451) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXIV</span>.—*Monks of Edessa:
Julianus, Ephraim Syrus, Barus, and Eulogius; Further, the Monks of
Cœle-Syria: Valentinus, Theodore, Merosas, Bassus, Bassonius; and the
Holy Men of Galatia and Cappadocia, and Elsewhere; why those Saints
until recently were Long-Lived*.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2.1"></span>Gaddanas</span> and Azizus dwelt with
Aones, and emulated his virtues. <span
id="fr_1502"></span>[1503](#fn_1502) Ephraim the Syrian, who was an
historian, and has been noticed <span
id="fr_1503"></span>[1504](#fn_1503) in our own recital of events under
the reign of Constantius, was the most renowned philosopher in this
time, together with Julian, in the neighborhood of Edessa and its
adjacent regions. Barses <span id="fr_1504"></span>[1505](#fn_1504) and
Eulogius were both, at a later period than that to which we are
referring, ordained <span id="page_371">p. 371</span> <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-Page_371"></span>bishops, but not of any city; for the
title was merely an honorary one, conferred on them as a compensation
for their excellent conduct; and they were ordained in their own
monasteries. Lazarus, to whom we have already alluded, was ordained
bishop in the same manner. Such were the most celebrated philosophers of
asceticism who flourished in Syria, Persia, and the neighboring
countries, so far, at least, as I have been able to ascertain. The
course common to all, so to speak, consisted in diligent attention to
the state of the soul, which by means of fasting, prayer, and hymns to
God, they kept in constant preparation to quit the things of this world.
They devoted the greater part of their time to these holy exercises, and
they wholly despised worldly possessions, temporal affairs, and the ease
and adornment of the body. Some of the monks carried their self-denial
to an extraordinary height. Battheus, for instance, by excessive
abstinence and fasting, had worms crawl from his teeth; Halas, again,
had not tasted bread for eighty years; and Heliodorus passed many nights
without yielding to sleep, and added thereto seven days of fasting.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p6"></span>Although Cœle-Syria and Upper Syria,
with the exception of the city of Antioch, was slowly converted to
Christianity, it was not lacking in ecclesiastical philosophers, whose
conduct appeared the more heroic from their having to encounter the
enmity and hatred of the inhabitants of the place. And they nobly
refrained from resistance, or resorting to the law, but spiritedly
endured the insults and blows inflicted by the pagans. Such, I found,
was the course pursued by Valentian, who, according to some accounts,
was born at Emesa, but according to others, at Arethusa. Another
individual of the same name distinguished himself by similar conduct, as
likewise Theodore. Both were from Titti, which is of the nome of the
Apameans; not less distinguished were Marosas, a native of Nechilis,
Bassus, Bassones, and Paul. This latter was from the village of
Telmison. He rounded many communities in many places, and introduced the
method essential to the knowledge of philosophy, and finally established
the greatest and most distinguished community of monks in a place called
Jugatum. Here, after a long and honorable life, he died, and was
interred. Some of the monks who have practiced philosophy in a
distinguished and divine way have survived to our own days; indeed, most
of those to whom allusion has been made enjoyed a very long term of
existence; and I am convinced that God added to the length of their days
for the express purpose of furthering the interests of religion. They
were instrumental in leading nearly the whole Syrian nation, and most of
the Persians and Saracens, to the proper religion, and caused them to
cease from paganism. After beginning the monastic philosophy there, they
brought forward many like themselves.

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p7"></span>I suppose that Galatia, Cappadocia,
and the neighboring provinces contained many other ecclesiastical
philosophers at that time, for these regions formerly had zealously
embraced our doctrine. These monks, for the most part, dwelt in
communities in cities and villages, for they did not habituate
themselves to the tradition of their predecessors. The severity of the
winter, which is always a natural feature of that country, would
probably make a hermit life impracticable. Leontius and Prapidius were,
I understand, the most celebrated of these monks. The former afterwards
administered the church of Ancyra, and the latter, a man of very
advanced age, performed the episcopal functions in several villages. He
also presided over the Basileias, the most celebrated hospice for the
poor. It was established by Basil, bishop of Cæsarea, from whom it
received its name in the beginning, and retains it until to-day.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[370:1503](2020450.htm#fr_1502) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p3"></span>From Syrian biographies.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[370:1504](2020450.htm#fr_1503) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p4"></span>See above, iii. 14, 16.

<span id="fn_1504"></span>[370:1505](2020450.htm#fr_1504) <span
id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.xxxiv-p5"></span>Basil, *Ep.* cclxvii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Wooden Tripod and the Succession of the Emperor, through a
Knowledge of its Letters. Destruction of the Philosophers;
Astronomy.](2020451)
