[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020318)  [Next](2020320.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xvii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XVII</span>.—*On the Death of
Alexander, Bishop of Alexandria, at his Suggestion, Athanasius receives
the Throne; and an Account of his Youth; how he was a Self-Taught
Priest, and beloved by Antony the Great*.

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p2.1"></span>About</span> this period <span
id="fr_1165"></span>[1166](#fn_1165.md) Alexander, bishop of Alexandria,
when about to depart this life, left Athanasius as his successor, in
accordance, I am convinced, with the Divine will directing the vote upon
him. It is said that Athanasius at first sought to avoid the honor by
flight, but that he, although unwilling, was afterwards constrained by
Alexander to accept the bishopric. This is testified by Apolinarius, the
Syrian, <span id="fr_1166"></span>[1167](#fn_1166.md) in the following
terms: “In all these matters much disturbance was excited by impiety,
but its first effects were felt by the blessed teacher of this man, who
was at hand as an assistant, and behaved as a son would to his father.
Afterwards this holy man himself underwent the same experience, for when
appointed to the episcopal succession he fled to escape the honor; but
he was discovered in his place of concealment by the help of God, who
had forecast by Divine manifestations to his blessed predecessor, that
the succession was to devolve upon him. For when Alexander was on the
point of death, he called upon Athanasius, who was then absent. One who
bore the same name, and who happened to be present, on hearing him call
this way, answered him; but to him Alexander was silent, since he was
not summoning this man. Again he called, and as it often happens, the
one present kept still, and so the absent one was disclosed. Moreover,
the blessed Alexander prophetically exclaimed, ‘O Athanasius, thou
thinkest to escape, but thou wilt not escape’; meaning that Athanasius
would be called to the conflict.” Such is the account given by
Apolinarius respecting Athanasius.

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p5"></span>The Arians assert that after the death
of Alexander, the respective followers of that bishop and of Melitius
held communion together, and fifty-four bishops from Thebes, and other
parts of Egypt, assembled together, and agreed by oath to choose by a
common vote, the man who could advantageously administer the Church of
Alexandria; but that seven <span id="fr_1167"></span>[1168](#fn_1167.md) of
the bishops, in violation of their oath, and contrary to the opinion of
all, secretly ordained Athanasius; and that on this account many of the
people and of the Egyptian clergy seceded from communion with him. For
my part, I am convinced that it was by Divine appointment that
Athanasius succeeded to the high-priesthood; for he was eloquent and
intelligent, and capable of opposing plots, and of such a man the times
had the greatest need. He displayed great aptitude in the exercise of
the ecclesiastical functions and fitness for the priesthood, and was, so
to speak, from his earliest years, self-taught. It is said that the
following incident occurred to him in his youth. <span
id="fr_1168"></span>[1169](#fn_1168.md) It was the custom of the
Alexandrians to celebrate with great pomp an annual festival in honor of
one of their bishops named Peter, who had suffered martyrdom. Alexander,
who then conducted the church, engaged in the celebration of this
festival, and after having completed the worship, he remained on the
spot, awaiting the arrival of some guests whom he expected to breakfast.
In the meantime he chanced to cast his eyes towards the sea, and
perceived some children playing on the shore, and amusing themselves by
imitating the bishop and the ceremonies of the Church. At first he
considered the mimicry as innocent, and took pleasure in witnessing it;
but when they touched upon the unutterable, he was troubled, and
communicated the matter to the chief of the clergy. The children were
called together and questioned as to the game at which they were
playing, and as to what they did and said when engaged in this
amusement. At first they through fear denied; but when Alexander
threatened them with torture, they confessed that Athanasius was their
bishop and leader, and that many children who had not been initiated had
been baptized by him. Alexander carefully inquired what the priest of
their play was in the habit of saying or doing, and what they answered
or were taught. On finding that the exact routine of the Church had been
accurately observed by them, he consulted the priests around him on the
subject, and decided that it would he unnecessary to rebaptize those
who, in their simplicity, had been judged worthy of the Divine grace. He
therefore merely performed for them such offices as it is lawful only
for those who are consecrated to initiating the mysteries. He then took
Athanasius and the other children, who had playfully acted as pres<span
id="page_270">p. 270</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-Page_270"></span>byters and deacons, to their own
relations under God as a witness that they might be brought up for the
Church, and for leadership in what they had imitated. Not long after, he
took Athanasius as his table companion and secretary. He had been well
educated, was versed in grammar and rhetoric, and already when he came
to man’s estate, and before he attained the bishopric, he gave proof to
those conversing with him of his being a man of wisdom and
intellectuality. But when, <span id="fr_1169"></span>[1170](#fn_1169.md) on
the death of Alexander, the succession devolved upon him, his reputation
was greatly increased, and was sustained by his own private virtues and
by the testimony of the monk, Antony the Great. This monk repaired to
him when he requested his presence, visited the cities, accompanied him
to the churches, and agreed with him in opinion concerning the Godhead.
He evinced unlimited friendship towards him, and avoided the society of
his enemies and opponents.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1165"></span>[269:1166](2020319.htm#fr_1165.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p3"></span>About five months after the council of
Nicæa, according to a statement of Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 59.

<span id="fn_1166"></span>[269:1167](2020319.htm#fr_1166.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p4"></span>This quotation is first made by Soz.,
and is found nowhere else.

<span id="fn_1167"></span>[269:1168](2020319.htm#fr_1167.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p6"></span>See the refutation of the calumny in
Athan. *Apol. cont. Arian.* 6, where the acts of the vindicatory synod
are given, 3 sqq. Cf. Philost. ii. 11, gives a different account from
the Arian point of view; probably the whole story is from Sabinus.

<span id="fn_1168"></span>[269:1169](2020319.htm#fr_1168.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p7"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 14. Cf. Soc. i. 15,
who credits Ruf. with the story.

<span id="fn_1169"></span>[270:1170](2020319.htm#fr_1169.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xvii-p8"></span>From the *Life of Antony,* attributed
to Athanasius, which Evagrius, a presbyter of Antioch, translated into
Latin. Ruf. *H. E.* i. 8, *Hieron. de vir. illust.* 87, 88, 125.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arians and Melitians confer Celebrity on Athanasius;
concerning Eusebius, and his Request of Athanasius to admit Arius to
Communion; concerning the Term “Consubstantial” Eusebius Pamphilus and
Eustathius, Bishop of Antioch, create Tumults above all the
rest.](2020320.md)
