[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020526)  [Next](2020528) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*The Tyrants who in the
West at that Time rebelled against Honorius. They are wholly destroyed
on account of the Emperor’s Love of God*.

<span id="iii.xiv.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.xi-p2.1"></span>During</span> this period many tyrants
rebelled against Honorius in the Western government. Some fell upon one
another, while others were apprehended in a marvelous way, and so
evidenced that the Divine love toward Honorius was not common. The
soldiers in Britain <span id="fr_1634"></span>[1635](#fn_1634) were the
first to rise up in sedition, and they proclaimed Mark as tyrant.
Afterwards, however, they slew Mark, and proclaimed Gratian. Within four
months subsequently they killed Gratian, and elected Constantine in his
place, imagining that, on account of his name, he would be able to
reduce the empire firmly under his authority; and for no other reason
than this, several other persons of the same name were elected to the
tyranny. Constantine passed over from Britain to Bononia, a maritime
city of Gaul; and after inducing all the troops in Gaul and Aquitania to
espouse his cause, he reduced to obedience the inhabitants of the
regions extending to the mountains which divide Italy from Gaul, and
which the Romans have named the Cottian Alps. He then sent his oldest
son, Constans, whom he had already nominated Cæsar, and whom he
afterwards proclaimed emperor, into Spain. Constans, after making
himself master of this province, and appointing his own governors over
it, commanded that Didymus and Verinian, relatives of Honorius, should
be loaded with chains, and brought before him. Didymus and Verinian had
at first differed among themselves, but a reconciliation was effected
between them, when they found themselves menaced by the same danger.
They combined their forces, which consisted chiefly of armed peasants
and slaves. They attacked Lusitania in common, and slew many of the
soldiers sent by the tyrant for their capture.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1634"></span>[425:1635](2020527.htm#fr_1634) <span
id="iii.xiv.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.xi-p3"></span>Independent chapter. Olymp. *Fragm.* 12;
Zos. vi. 1–5; Oros. vii. 39.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Theodosiolus and Lagodius. The Races of the Vandals and Suevi.
Death of Alaric. Flight of the Tyrants Constantine and
Constans.](2020528)
