[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020320)  [Next](2020322.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xix"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIX</span>.—*Synod of Antioch;
Unjust Deposition of Eustathius; Euphronius receives the Throne;
Constantine the Great writes to the Synod and to Eusebius Pamphilus, who
refuses the Bishopric of Antioch*.

<span id="iii.vii.xix-p2"></span>A <span class="c13"><span
id="iii.vii.xix-p2.1"></span>synod</span> having been convened at
Antioch, Eustathius was deprived of the church of that city. <span
id="fr_1173"></span>[1174](#fn_1173.md) It was most generally believed that
he was deposed merely on account of his adherence to the faith of the
council of Nicæa, and on account of his having accused Eusebius,
Paulinus, bishop of Tyre, and Patrophilus, bishop of Scythopolis (whose
sentiments were adopted by the Eastern priests), of favoring the heresy
of Arius. The pretext resorted to for his deposition, however, was, that
he had defiled the priesthood by unholy deeds. His deposition excited so
great a sedition at Antioch, that the people were on the point of taking
up arms, and the whole city was in a state of commotion. This greatly
injured him in the opinion of the emperor; for when he understood what
had happened, and that the people of that church were divided into two
parties, he was much enraged, and regarded him with suspicion as the
author of the tumult. The emperor, however, sent an illustrious officer
of his palace, invested with full authority, to calm the populace, and
put an end to the disturbance, without having recourse to violence or
injury.

<span id="iii.vii.xix-p4"></span>Those who had deposed Eustathius, and
who on this account were assembled in Antioch, imagining that their
sentiments would be universally received, if they could succeed in
placing over the Church of Antioch one of their own opinion, who was
known to the emperor, and held in repute for learning and eloquence, and
that they could obtain the obedience of the rest, fixed their thoughts
upon Eusebius Pamphilus for that see. They wrote to the emperor upon
this subject, and stated that this course would be highly acceptable to
the people. He had, <span id="page_271">p. 271</span> <span
id="iii.vii.xix-Page_271"></span>in fact, been sought by all the clergy
and laity who were inimical to Eustathius. Eusebius, however, wrote to
the emperor refusing the dignity. The emperor approved of his refusal
with praise; for there was an ecclesiastical law prohibiting the removal
of a bishop from one bishopric to another. He wrote to the people and to
Eusebius, adopting his judgment and calling him happy, because he was
worthy to hold the bishopric not only of one single city, but of the
world. The emperor also wrote to the people of the Church of Antioch
concerning like-mindedness, and told them that they ought not to desire
the bishops of other regions, even as they ought not to covet the
possessions of others. In addition to these, he despatched another
epistle to the Synod, in private session, and similarly commended
Eusebius as in the letter to him for having refused the bishopric; and
being convinced that Euphronius, a presbyter of Cappadocia, and George
of Arethusa were men approved in creed, he commanded the bishops to
decide for one or other of them, or for whomsoever might appear worthy
of the honor, and to ordain a president for the Church of Antioch. On
the receipt of these letters from the emperor, Euphronius was ordained;
and I have heard that Eustathius bore this unjust calumny calmly,
judging it to be better, as he was a man who, besides his virtues and
excellent qualities, was justly admired on account of his fine
eloquence, as is evidenced by his transmitted works, which are highly
approved for their choice of words, flavor of expression, temperateness
of sentiments, elegance and grace of narration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1173"></span>[270:1174](2020321.htm#fr_1173.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xix-p3"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iii. 59–62; Soc. i. 24;
Philost. ii. 7. Soz. has additional details, especially of names. Very
likely, therefore, Soc. and Soz. have drawn from the same source.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Maximus, who succeeded Macarius in the See of
Jerusalem.](2020322.md)
