[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020086)  [Next](2020088) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVII</span>.—*Of the Synod at
Ariminum, and the Creed there published.* <span
id="fr_390"></span>[391](#fn_390)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p3.1"></span>The</span> emperor on being apprised of
what had taken place, sent these three bishops into exile; and
determined to convene an ecumenical council, that by drawing all the
Eastern bishops into the West, he might if possible bring them all to
agree. But when, on consideration, the length of the journey seemed to
present serious obstacles, he directed that the Synod should consist of
two divisions; permitting those present at Milan to meet at Ariminum in
Italy: but the Eastern bishops he instructed by letters to assemble at
Nicomedia in Bithynia. The emperor’s object in these arrangements was to
effect a general unity of opinion; but the issue was contrary to his
expectation. For neither of the Synods was in harmony with itself, but
each was divided into opposing factions: for those convened at Ariminum
could not agree with one another; and the Eastern bishops assembled at
Seleucia in Isauria made another schism. The details of what took place
in both we will give in the course of our history, <span
id="fr_391"></span>[392](#fn_391) but we shall first make a few
observations on Eudoxius. About that time Leontius having died, who had
ordained the heretic Aëtius <span id="fr_392"></span>[393](#fn_392) as
deacon, Eudoxius bishop of Germanicia—this city is in Syria—who was then
at Rome, thinking no time was to be lost, speciously represented to the
emperor that the city over which he presided was in need of his counsel
and care, and requested permission to return there immediately. This the
emperor readily acceded to, having no suspicion of a clandestine
purpose: Eudoxius having some of the principal officers of the emperor’s
bedchamber as coadjutors, deserted his own diocese, and fraudulently
installed himself in the see of Antioch. His first desire was to restore
Aëtius; accordingly he convened a council of bishops for the purpose of
reinvesting Aëtius with the dignity of the diaconate. But this could in
no way be brought about, for the odium with which Aëtius was regarded
was more prevalent than the exertions of Eudoxius in his favor. When the
bishops were assembled at Ariminum, those from the East declared that
they were willing to pass in silence the case of Athanasius: a
resolution that was zealously supported by Ursacius and Valens, who had
formerly maintained the tenets of Arius; but, as I have already stated,
had afterwards presented a recantation of their opinion to the bishop of
Rome, and publicly avowed their assent to the doctrine of
consubstantiality. For these men always inclined to side with the
dominant party. Germinius, Auxentius, Demophilus and Gaius made the same
declaration in reference to Athanasius. When therefore some endeavored
to propose one thing in the convocation of bishops, and some another,
Ursacius and Valens said that all former draughts of the creed ought to
be considered as set aside, and the last alone, which had been prepared
at their late convention at Sirmium, regarded as authorized. They then
caused to be read a paper which they held in their hands, containing
another form of the creed: this had indeed been drawn up at Sirmium, but
had been kept concealed, as we have before observed, until their present
publication of it at Ariminum. It has been translated from the Latin
into Greek, and is as follows: <span id="fr_393"></span>[394](#fn_393)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p7"></span>’The catholic faith was expounded at
Sirmium in presence of our lord Constantius, <span
id="fr_394"></span>[395](#fn_394) in the consulate <span
id="fr_395"></span>[396](#fn_395) of the most illustrious Flavius
Eusebius, and Hypatius, on the twenty-third of May.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p10"></span>‘We believe in one only and true God,
the Father Almighty, the Creator and Framer of all things: and in one
only-begotten Son of God, before all ages, before all beginning, before
all conceivable time, and before all comprehensible thought, begotten
without passion: by whom the ages were framed, and all things made: who
was begotten as the only-begotten of the Father, only of only, God of
God, like to the Father who begat him, according to the Scriptures:
whose generation no one knows, but the Father only who begat him. We
know that this his only-begotten Son came down from the heavens by his
Father’s consent for the putting away of sin, was born of the Virgin
Mary, conversed with his disciples, and fulfilled every dispensation
according to the Father’s will: was crucified and died, and descended
into the lower parts of the earth, and disposed matters there; at the
sight of whom the (door-keepers of Hades <span id="page_62">p. 62</span>
<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-Page_62"></span>trembled <span
id="fr_396"></span>[397](#fn_396) ): having arisen on the third day, he
again conversed with his disciples, and after forty days were completed
he ascended into the heavens, and is seated at the Father’s right hand;
and at the last day he will come in his Father’s glory to render to
every one according to his works. \[We believe\] also in the Holy
Spirit, whom the only-begotten Son of God Jesus Christ himself promised
to send to the human race as the Comforter, according to that which is
written: <span id="fr_397"></span>[398](#fn_397) “I go away to my
Father, and will ask him, and he will send you another Comforter, the
Spirit of truth. He shall receive of mine, and shall teach you, and
bring all things to your remembrance.” As for the term “substance,”
which was used by our fathers for the sake of greater simplicity, but
not being understood by the people has caused offense on account of the
fact that the Scriptures do not contain it, it seemed desirable that it
should be wholly abolished, and that in future no mention should be made
of substance in reference to God, since the divine Scriptures have
nowhere spoken concerning the substance of the Father and the Son. But
we say that the Son is in all things *like* the Father, as the Holy
Scriptures affirm and teach.’

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13"></span>These statements having been read,
those who were dissatisfied with them rose and said ‘We came not hither
because we were in want of a creed; for we preserve inviolate that which
we received from the beginning; but we are here met to repress any
innovation upon it which may have been made. If therefore what has been
recited introduces no novelties, now openly anathematize the Arian
heresy, in the same manner as the ancient canon of the church has
rejected all heresies as blasphemous: for it is evident to the whole
world that the impious dogma of Arius has excited the disturbances of
the church, and the troubles which exist until now.’ This proposition,
which was not accepted by Ursacius, Valens, Germinius, Auxentius,
Demophilus, and Gaïus, rent the church asunder completely: for these
prelates adhered to what had then been recited in the Synod of Ariminum;
while the others again confirmed the Nicene Creed. They also ridiculed
the superscription of the creed that had been read; and especially
Athanasius, in a letter which he sent to his friends, wherein he thus
expresses himself: <span id="fr_398"></span>[399](#fn_398)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p15"></span>‘What point of doctrine was wanting to
the piety of the catholic church, that they should now make an
investigation respecting the faith, and prefix moreover the consulate of
the present times to their published exposition of it? For Ursacius,
Valens, and Germinius have done what was neither done, nor even heard
of, at any time before among Christians: having composed a creed such as
they themselves are willing to believe, they prefaced it with the
consulate, month, and day of the present time, in order to prove to all
discerning persons that theirs is not the ancient faith, but such as was
originated under the reign of the present emperor Constantius. <span
id="fr_399"></span>[400](#fn_399) Moreover they have written all things
with a view to their own heresy: and besides this, pretending to write
respecting the Lord, they name another “Lord” as theirs, even
Constantius, who has countenanced their impiety, so that those who deny
the Son to be eternal, have styled him eternal emperor. Thus are they
proved to be the enemies of Christ by their profanity. But perhaps the
holy prophets’ record of time afforded them a precedent for \[noticing\]
the consulate! Now even if they should presume to make this pretext,
they would most glaringly expose their own ignorance. The prophecies of
these holy men do indeed mark the times. Isaiah and Hosea lived in the
days of Uzziah, Joatham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah; <span
id="fr_400"></span>[401](#fn_400) Jeremiah in the time of Josiah; <span
id="fr_401"></span>[402](#fn_401) Ezekiel and Daniel in the reign of
Cyrus and Darius; and others uttered their predictions in other times.
Yet they did not then lay the foundations of religion. That was in
existence before them, and always was, even before the creation of the
world, God having prepared it for us in Christ. Nor did they designate
the commencement of their own faith; for they were themselves men of
faith previously: but they signified the times of the promises given
through them. Now the promises primarily referred to our Saviour’s
advent; and all that was foretold respecting the course of future events
in relation to Israel and the Gentiles was collateral and subordinate.
Hence the periods mentioned indicated not the beginning of their faith,
as I before observed, but the times in which these prophets lived and
foretold such things. But these sages of our day, who neither compile
histories, nor predict future events, after writing, “The Catholic Faith
was published,” immediately add the consulate, with the month and the
day: and as the holy prophets wrote the date of their records and of
their own ministration, so these men intimate the era of their own
faith. And would that they had written concerning *their own* faith
only—since they have now begun to believe—and had not undertaken to
write respecting the Catholic faith. For they have not written, “Thus we
believe”; but, <span id="page_63">p. 63</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-Page_63"></span>“The Catholic Faith was published.” The
temerity of purpose herein manifested argues their ignorance; while the
novelty of expression found in the document they have concocted shows it
to be the same as the Arian heresy. By writing in this manner, they have
declared when they themselves began to believe, and from what time they
wish it to be understood their faith was first preached. And just as
when the evangelist Luke says, <span id="fr_402"></span>[403](#fn_402)
“A decree of enrolment was published,” he speaks of an edict which was
not in existence before, but came into operation at that time, and was
published by him who had written it; so these men by writing “The faith
has now been published,” have declared that the tenets of their heresy
are of modern invention, and did not exist previously. But since they
apply the term “Catholic” to it, they seem to have unconsciously fallen
into the extravagant assumption of the Cataphrygians, asserting even as
they did, that “the Christian faith was first revealed to us, and
commenced with us.” And as those termed Maximilla and Montanus, so these
style Constantius their Lord, instead of Christ. But if according to
them the faith had its beginning from the present consulate, what will
the fathers and the blessed martyrs do? Moreover what will they
themselves do with those who were instructed in religious principles by
them, and died before this consulate? By what means will they recall
them to life, in order to obliterate from their minds what they seemed
to have taught them, and to implant in its stead those new discoveries
which they have published? So stupid are they as to be only capable of
framing pretenses, and these such as are unbecoming and unreasonable,
and carry with them their own refutation.’

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p20"></span>Athanasius wrote thus to his friends:
and the interested who may read through his whole epistle will perceive
how powerfully he treats the subject; but for brevity’s sake we have
here inserted a part of it only. The Synod deposed Valens, Ursacius,
Auxentius, Germinius, Gaïus, and Demophilus for refusing to anathematize
the Arian doctrine; who being very indignant at their deposition,
hastened directly to the emperor, carrying with them the exposition of
faith which had been read in the Synod. The council also acquainted the
emperor with their determinations in a communication which translated
from the Latin into Greek, was to the following effect: <span
id="fr_403"></span>[404](#fn_403)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p22"></span>Epistle of the Synod of Ariminum to
the Emperor Constantius.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p23"></span>We believe that it was by the
appointment of God, as well as at the command of your piety, that the
decrees formerly published have been executed. Accordingly we Western
bishops came out of various districts to Ariminum, in order that the
faith of the catholic church might be made manifest, and that those who
held contrary views might be detected. For on a considerate review by us
of all points, our decision has been to adhere to the ancient faith
which the prophets, the gospels, and the apostles have revealed through
our Lord Jesus Christ, the guardian of your empire, and the protector of
your person, which faith also we have always maintained. We conceived
that it would be unwarrantable and impious to mutilate any of those
things which have been justly and rightly ratified, by those who sat in
the Nicene council with Constantine of glorious memory, the father of
your piety. Their doctrine and views have been infused into the minds
and preached in the hearing of the people, and found to be powerfully
opposed, even fatal, to the Arian heresy. And not only this heresy, but
also all others have been put down by it. Should therefore anything be
added to or taken away from what was at that time established, it would
prove perilous; for if either of these things should happen, the enemy
will have boldness to do as they please. <span
id="fr_404"></span>[405](#fn_404)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p25"></span>Wherefore Ursacius and Valens being
heretofore suspected of entertaining Arian sentiments, were suspended
from communion: but in order to be restored to it they made an apology,
and claimed that they had repented of their shortcoming, as their
written recantation attests: they therefore obtained pardon and complete
absolution.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p26"></span>The time when these things occurred
was when the council was in session at Milan, when the presbyters of the
church of Rome were also present.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p27"></span>At <span
id="fr_405"></span>[406](#fn_405) the same time, having known that
Constantine, who even after his death is worthy of honorable mention,
exposed the faith with due precision, but being born of men was baptized
and departed to the peace due to him as his reward, we have deemed it
improper to innovate after him disregarding so many holy <span
id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-Page_64"></span>confessors and martyrs, who also were
authors of this confession, and persevered in their faith in the ancient
system of the catholic church. Their faith God has perpetuated down to
the years of your own reign through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whose
grace it also became possible for you to so strengthen your dominion as
to rule over one portion of the world.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p29"></span>Yet have these infatuated and wretched
persons, endued with an unhappy disposition, again had the temerity to
declare themselves the propagators of false doctrine, and even endeavor
to subvert the constitution of the Church. For when the letters of your
piety had ordered us to assemble for the examination of the faith, they
laid bare their intention, stripped of its deceitful garb. For they
attempted with certain craft and confusion to propose innovations,
having in this as allies Germinius, Auxentius, <span
id="fr_406"></span>[407](#fn_406) and Gaius, who continually cause
strife and dissension, and their single teaching has surpassed the whole
body of blasphemies. But when they perceived that we had not the same
disposition or mind as they in regard to their false views they changed
their minds during our council and said another expression of belief
should be put forth. And short indeed was the time which convinced them
of the falsity of their views.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p31"></span>In order, therefore, that the affairs
of the Church may not be continually brought into the same condition,
and in order that trouble and tumult may not continually arise and
confuse all things, it appeared safe to preserve the previously
determined views firm and unalterable, and to separate from our
communion the persons above named; for which reason we have despatched
to your clemency delegates who will communicate the opinion of the
council to you. And to our delegates we have given this commission above
all, that they should accredit the truth taking their motive from the
ancient and right decisions. They will inform your holiness that peace
will not be established as Ursacius and Valens say when some point of
the right be overturned. For how can those be at peace who destroy
peace? Rather will strife and tumult be occasioned by these things in
the church of Rome also, as in the other cities. Wherefore, now, we
beseech your clemency that you should look upon our delegation with a
calm eye and listen to it with favor, and not allow that anything should
be changed, thus bringing insult to the deceased, but permit us to
continue in those things which have been defined and legislated by our
ancestors; who, we should say, acted with shrewdness and wisdom and with
the Holy Spirit. For the innovations they introduce at present fill the
believing with distrust and the unbelieving with cruelty. <span
id="fr_407"></span>[408](#fn_407) We further implore you to instruct
that the bishops who dwell in foreign parts, whom both the infirmity of
age and the ills of poverty harass should be assisted to return easily
and speedily to their own homes, so that the churches may not remain
bereft of their bishops. Still further we beg of you this also, that
nothing be stricken off, nor anything be added, to the articles \[of
faith\] remaining over from the times of your pious father even until
now; but that these may continue inviolate. Permit us not to toil and
suffer longer, nor to be separated from our dioceses, but that together
with our own peoples we may in peace have time to offer prayers and
thanksgiving, supplicating for your safety and continuance in the
dominion, which may the divinity grant unto you perpetually. Our
delegates bear the signatures and greetings of the bishops. These
\[delegates\] will from the Divine Scriptures themselves instruct your
piety.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p33"></span>The Synod then thus wrote and sent
their communications to the emperor by the bishops \[selected for that
purpose\]. But the partisans of Ursacius and Valens having arrived
before them, did their utmost to calumniate the council, exhibiting the
exposition of the faith which they had brought with them. The emperor,
prejudiced beforehand towards Arianism, became extremely exasperated
against the Synod, but conferred great honor on Valens and Ursacius and
their friends. Those deputed by the council were consequently detained a
considerable time, without being able to obtain an answer: at length,
however, the emperor replied through those who had come to him, in the
manner following:

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p34"></span>‘Constantius Victor and Triumphator
Augustus to all the bishops convened at Ariminum.

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p35"></span>‘That our especial care is ever
exercised respecting the divine and venerated law even your sanctity is
not ignorant. Nevertheless we have hitherto been unable to give an
audience to the twenty bishops sent as deputation from you, for an
expedition against the barbarians has become necessary. And since, as
you will admit, matters relative to the divine law ought to be entered
on with a mind free from all anxiety; I have therefore ordered these
bishops to await our return to Adrianople; that when all public business
shall have been duly attended to, we may be able then to hear and
consider what they shall propose. In the meanwhile let it not seem
troublesome to your gravity to wait for their return; since when they
shall convey to <span id="page_65">p. 65</span> <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-Page_65"></span>you our resolution, you will be prepared
to carry into effect such measures as may be most advantageous to the
welfare of the catholic church.’

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p36"></span>The bishops on receipt of this letter
wrote thus in reply: <span id="fr_408"></span>[409](#fn_408)

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p38"></span>‘We have received your clemency’s
letter, sovereign lord, most beloved of God, in which you inform us that
the exigencies of state affairs have hitherto prevented your admitting
our delegates to your presence: and you bid us await their return, until
your piety shall have learnt from them what has been determined on by us
in conformity with the tradition of our ancestors. But we again protest
by this letter that we can by no means depart from our primary
resolution; and this also we have commissioned our deputies to state. We
beseech you therefore, both with serene countenance to order this
present epistle of our modesty to be read; and also to listen favorably
to the representations with which our delegates have been charged. Your
mildness doubtless perceives, as well as we, to how great an extent
grief and sadness prevail, because of so many churches being bereft of
their bishops in these most blessed times of yours. Again therefore we
entreat your clemency, sovereign lord most dear to God, to command us to
return to our churches, if it please your piety, before the rigor of
winter; in order that we may be enabled, in conjunction with the people,
to offer up our accustomed prayers to Almighty God, and to our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, his only-begotten Son, for the prosperity of your
reign, as we have always done, and even now do in our prayers.’

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p39"></span>The bishops having waited together
some time after this letter had been despatched, inasmuch as the emperor
deigned no reply, they departed to their respective cities. Now the
emperor had long before intended to disseminate Arian doctrine
throughout the churches; and was anxious to give it the pre-eminence;
hence he pretended that their departure was an act of contumely,
declaring that they had treated him with contempt by dissolving the
council in opposition to his wishes. He therefore gave the partisans of
Ursacius unbounded license to act as they pleased in regard to the
churches: and directed that the revised form of creed which had been
read at Ariminum should be sent to the churches throughout Italy;
ordering that whoever would not subscribe it should be ejected from
their sees, and that others should be substituted in their place. <span
id="fr_409"></span>[410](#fn_409) And first Liberius, bishop of Rome,
having refused his assent to that creed, was sent into exile; the
adherents of Ursacius appointing Felix to succeed him, who had been a
deacon in that church, but on embracing the Arian heresy was elevated to
the episcopate. Some however assert that he was not favorable to that
opinion, but was constrained by force to receive the ordination of
bishop. After this all parts of the West were filled with agitation and
tumult, some being ejected and banished, and others established in their
stead. These things were effected by violence, on the authority of the
imperial edicts, which were also sent into the eastern parts. Not long
after indeed Liberius was recalled, and reinstated in his see; for the
people of Rome having raised a sedition, and expelled Felix from their
church, the emperor even though against his wish consented. The
partisans of Ursacius, quitting Italy, passed through the eastern parts;
and arriving at Nice, a city of Thrace, they dwelt there a short time
and held another Synod, and after translating the form of faith which
was read at Ariminum into Greek, they confirmed and published it afresh
in the form quoted above, giving it the name of the general council, in
this way attempting to deceive the more simple by the similarity of
names, and to impose upon them as the creed promulgated at Nicæa in
Bithynia, that which they had prepared at Nice in Thrace. <span
id="fr_410"></span>[411](#fn_410) But this artifice was of little
advantage to them; for it was soon detected, they became the object of
derision. Enough now has been said of the transactions which took place
in the West: we must now proceed to the narrative of what was done in
the East at the same time.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_390"></span>[61:391](2020087.htm#fr_390) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p2"></span>Cf. Sozomen, III. 19; IV. 15–19;
Theodoret, *H. E.* II. 18–21; Rufin. II. 21; Philostorgius, IV. 10. Also
Hefele, *Hist. of the Ch. Councils,* Vol. II. p. 246–271.

<span id="fn_391"></span>[61:392](2020087.htm#fr_391) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4"></span>Ch. 39.

<span id="fn_392"></span>[61:393](2020087.htm#fr_392) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p5"></span>According to Theodoret (*H. E.* II. 19)
Aëtius was promoted to the diaconate under Leontius at Antioch; but
Leontius, on being censured by Flavian and Diodorus for ordaining one
who was notorious for his blasphemous utterances, divested him of his
diaconate. Hence, later, Eudoxius attempted to restore him, as is here
said.

<span id="fn_393"></span>[61:394](2020087.htm#fr_393) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p6"></span>Athan. *de Synod.* 8; but Athanasius
does not say that this creed was translated from Latin, as he does
whenever he produces any document put into Greek from Latin; whence it
appears, according to Valesius, that this is the form drawn up in Greek
by Marcus of Arethusa, and submitted to the third Sirmium council in
359, but read at Ariminum as here said (cf. ch. 30, and note). The
argument is not considered conclusive by Reading as far as it regards
the original language of the creed; that it was written by Marcus of
Arethusa, however, seems to be proved.

<span id="fn_394"></span>[61:395](2020087.htm#fr_394) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8"></span>The title of the emperor in Athanasius’
version is ‘The most pious and victorious emperor Constantius Augustus,
eternal Augustus,’ &c., which agrees with the representations of the
ancients on the vainglory of Constantius. Cf. Amm. Marcellin. *Rerum
Gestarum,* XVI. 10. 2, 3 (ed. Eyssenhardt).

<span id="fn_395"></span>[61:396](2020087.htm#fr_395) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p9"></span>359 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_396"></span>[62:397](2020087.htm#fr_396) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11"></span>[Job xxxviii.
17](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#017)<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11.1"></span>
(LXX).

<span id="fn_397"></span>[62:398](2020087.htm#fr_397) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p11.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p12"></span>[John
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#016), [John
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p12.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_398"></span>[62:399](2020087.htm#fr_398) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p14"></span>Athan. *de Synod.* 8.

<span id="fn_399"></span>[62:400](2020087.htm#fr_399) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p16"></span>This appeal to antiquity, as the test
of truth, is very common with the earlier Fathers; cf. Eusebius’
treatment of the Scriptures of the New Testament, *H. E.* III. 3, 24,
25, *et al.*

<span id="fn_400"></span>[62:401](2020087.htm#fr_400) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p17"></span>[Isa.
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#002), [Hos.
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)<span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p17.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_401"></span>[62:402](2020087.htm#fr_401) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p17.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p18"></span>[Jer. i.
2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002)<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p18.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_402"></span>[63:403](2020087.htm#fr_402) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p18.2"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p19"></span>[Luke ii.
1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001)<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p19.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_403"></span>[63:404](2020087.htm#fr_403) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p21"></span>Athan, *de Synod*. 10. The Latin
original which is given in Hilar. *Fragm.* 8, was adopted by Valesius in
this place, and subsequently also by the English translators. We have
followed the Greek of Socrates, giving the most important differences in
the following four notes; viz. 15, 16, 17, and 18. How these variations
originated it is impossible to tell with assurance; but it is not
improbable that they may represent two drafts, of which one was
originally tentative.

<span id="fn_404"></span>[63:405](2020087.htm#fr_404) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p24"></span>The Latin original here contains the
following paragraph not reproduced by Socrates: ‘These matters having
been strictly investigated and the creed drawn up in the presence of
Constantine, who after being baptized, departed to God’s rest in the
faith of it, we regard as an abomination any infringement thereon, or
any attempt to invalidate the authority of so many saints, confessors,
and successors of the martyrs, who assisted at that council, and
themselves preserved inviolate all the determinations of the ancient
writers of the catholic church: whose faith has remained unto these
times in which your piety has received from God the Father, through
Jesus Christ our God and Lord, the power of ruling the world.’

<span id="fn_405"></span>[63:406](2020087.htm#fr_405) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p28"></span>The Latin original omits the following
paragraph, ending with the words ‘over our portion of the world.’

<span id="fn_406"></span>[64:407](2020087.htm#fr_406) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p29.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p30"></span>The Latin original in Hilar. omits the
name of Auxentius.

<span id="fn_407"></span>[64:408](2020087.htm#fr_407) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p32"></span>Instead of the Greek words here
translated, ‘fill the believing with distrust and the unbelieving with
cruelty,’ the Latin original reads ‘*verum etiam infideles ad
credulitatem vetantur accedere.*’

<span id="fn_408"></span>[65:409](2020087.htm#fr_408) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p37"></span>Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* II. 20.

<span id="fn_409"></span>[65:410](2020087.htm#fr_409) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p40"></span>Cf. Theodoret, *H. E.* II. 16.

<span id="fn_410"></span>[65:411](2020087.htm#fr_410) <span
id="ii.v.xxxvii-p40.1"></span>

<span id="ii.v.xxxvii-p41"></span>Hilar. *Fragm.* 8; Hefele, *Hist. of
Ch. Councils,* Vol. II. p. 257.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cruelty of Macedonius, and Tumults raised by him.](2020088)
