[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020401)  [Next](2020403.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.ix"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.ix-p1.1"></span>Chapter IX</span>.—*Martyrdom of the Saints
Eusebius, Nestabus, and Zeno in the City of Gaza*.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.ix-p2.1"></span>As</span> I have advanced thus far in my
history, and have given an account of the death of George and of
Theodoritus, I deem it right to relate some particulars concerning the
death of the three brethren, Eusebius, Nestabus, and Zeno. <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[1381](#fn_1380.md) The inhabitants of Gaza, being
inflamed with rage against them, dragged them from their house, in which
they had concealed themselves and cast them into prison, and beat them.
They then assembled in the theater, and cried out loudly against them,
declaring that they had committed sacrilege in their temple, and had
used the past opportunity for the injury and insult of paganism. By
these shouts and by instigating one another to the murder of the
brethren, they were filled with fury; and when they had been mutually
incited, as a crowd in revolt is wont to do, they rushed to the prison.
They handled the men very cruelly; sometimes with the face and sometimes
with the back upon the ground, the victims were dragged along, and were
dashed to pieces by the pavement. I have been told that even women
quitted their distaffs and pierced them with the weaving-spindles, and
that the cooks in the markets snatched from their stands the boiling
pots foaming with hot water and poured it over the victims, or
perforated them with spits. When they had torn the flesh from them and
crushed in their skulls, so that the brain ran out on the ground, their
bodies were dragged out of the city and flung on the spot generally used
as a receptacle for the carcasses of beasts; then a large fire was
lighted, and they burned the bodies; the remnant of the bones not
consumed by the fire was mixed with those of camels and asses, that they
might not be found easily. But they were not long concealed; for a
Christian woman, who was an inhabitant, though not a native of Gaza,
collected the bones at night by the direction of God. She put them in an
earthen pot and gave them to Zeno, their cousin, to keep, for thus God
had informed her in a dream, and also had indicated to the woman where
the man lived: and before she saw him, he was shown to her, for she was
previously unacquainted with Zeno; and when the persecution had been
agitated recently he remained concealed. He was within a little of being
seized by the people of Gaza and being put to death; but he had effected
his escape while the people were occupied in the murder of his cousins,
and had fled to Anthedon, a maritime city, about twenty stadia from Gaza
and similarly favorable to paganism and devoted to idolatry. When the
inhabitants of this city discovered that he was a Christian, they beat
him terribly on the back with rods and drove him out of the city. He
then fled to the harbor of Gaza and concealed himself; and here the
woman found him and gave him the remains. He kept them carefully in his
house until the reign of Theodosius, when he was ordained bishop; and he
erected a house of prayer beyond the walls of the city, placed an altar
there, and deposited the bones of the martyrs near those of Nestor, the
Confessor. Nestor had been on terms of intimacy with his cousins, and
was seized with them by the people of Gaza, imprisoned, and scourged.
But those who dragged him through the city were affected by his personal
beauty; and, struck with compassion, they cast him, before he was quite
dead, out of the city. Some persons found him, and carried him to the
house of Zeno, where he expired during the dressing of his cuts and
wounds. When the inhabitants of Gaza began to reflect on the enormity of
their crime, they trembled lest the emperor should take vengeance on
them.

<span id="iii.x.ix-p4"></span>It was reported that the emperor was
filled with indignation, and had determined upon punishing the decuria;
but this report was false, and had no foundation save in the fears and
self-accusations of the criminals. Julian, far from evincing as much
anger against them as he had manifested against the Alexandrians on the
murder of George, did not even write to rebuke the people of Gaza. On
the contrary, he deposed the governor of the province, and held him as a
suspect, and represented that clemency alone prevented his being put to
death. The crime imputed to him was, that of having arrested some of the
inhabitants of Gaza, who were reported to have begun the sedition and
murders, and of having imprisoned them until judgment could be passed
upon them in accordance with the laws. “For what right had he,” asked
the emperor, “to arrest the citizens merely for retaliating on a few
Galileans the injuries that had been inflicted on them and their gods?”
This, it is said, was the fact in the case.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[332:1381](2020402.htm#fr_1380.md) <span
id="iii.x.ix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.ix-p3"></span>Soz. alone reports this, probably from
local martyrology or from Bishop Zeno.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning St. Hilarion and the Virgins in Heliopolis who were
destroyed by Swine. Strange Martyrdom of Mark, Bishop of
Arethusa.](2020403.md)
