[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020513)  [Next](2020515) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvii"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXVII</span>.—*The Terrible
Events which resulted from the Treatment of John. Death of the Empress
Eudoxia. Death of Arsacius. And further concerning Atticus, the
Patriarch, his Birthplace, and Character*.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p2.1"></span>Such</span> were the letters of Innocent
from which the opinion which he entertained of John may readily be
inferred. About the same period some hailstones of extraordinary
magnitude fell at Constantinople and in the suburbs of the city. <span
id="fr_1618"></span>[1619](#fn_1618) Four days afterwards, the wife of
the emperor died. These occurrences were by many regarded as indications
of Divine wrath on account of the persecution that had been carried on
against John. For Cyrinus, bishop of Chalcedon, one of his principal
calumniators, had long previously terminated his life in the midst of
great bodily agony, arising from the accident that had occurred to his
foot, and the consequent necessary amputation of the leg by the
physicians. Arsacius, too, died after he had presided but a very short
period over the church of Constantinople. Many candidates were proposed
as his successor; and four months after his decease, Atticus, a
presbyter, of the clergy of Constantinople, and one of the enemies of
John, was ordained. He was a native of Sebaste in Armenia. He had been
instructed from his youth in the principles of monastic philosophy by
monks of the Macedonian heresy. These monks, who then enjoyed a very
high reputation at Sebaste for philosophy, were of the discipline of
Eustathius, to whom allusion has been already made as bishop there, and
a leader of the best monks. When Atticus attained the age of manhood, he
embraced the tenets of the Catholic Church. He possessed more by nature
than by learning, and became a participant in affairs, and was as
skillful in carrying on intrigues as in evading the machinations of
others. He was of a very engaging disposition, and was beloved by many.
The discourses which he delivered in the church did not rise above
mediocrity; and although not totally devoid of erudition, they were not
accounted by his auditors of sufficient value to be preserved in
writing. Being intent, if an opportunity offered itself anywhere, he
exercised himself in the most approved Greek authors; but lest, in
conversation about these writers, he might appear unlettered, he
frequently concealed what he did know. It is said that he manifested
much zeal in behalf of those who entertained the same sentiments as
himself, and that he rendered himself formidable to the heterodox. When
he wished he could easily throw them into alarm; but he at once
transformed himself and would appear meek. Such is the information which
those who knew the man have furnished.

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p4"></span>John acquired great celebrity even
in his exile. He possessed ample pecuniary resources, and being besides
liberally supplied with money by Olympias, the deaconess, and others, he
purchased the liberty of many captives from the Isaurian robbers, and
restored them to their families. He also administered to the necessities
of many who were in want; and by his kind words comforted those who did
not stand in need of money. Hence he was exceedingly beloved not only in
Armenia, where he dwelt, but by all the people of the neighboring
countries, and the inhabitants of Antioch and of the other parts of
Syria, and of Cilicia, who frequently sought his society.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1618"></span>[417:1619](2020514.htm#fr_1618) <span
id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiii.xxvii-p3"></span>Soc. vi. 19, 20, vii. 2; Pallad.
*Dialog. ibid.* Soz. has new facts, and a sobered judgment of Atticus.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Effort of Innocent, Bishop of Rome, to recall John through a
Council. Concerning those who were sent by him to make Trial of the
Matter. The Death of John Chrysostom.](2020515)
