[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020119)  [Next](2020121.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vi.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXII</span>.—*Jovian is proclaimed
Emperor.*

<span id="ii.vi.xxii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p2.1"></span>The</span> soldiery being thrown into
extreme perplexity by an event so unexpected, and without delay, on the
following day proclaimed Jovian emperor, a person alike distinguished
for his courage and birth. He was a military tribune when Julian put
forth an edict giving his officers the option of either sacrificing or
resigning their rank in the army, and chose rather to lay down his
commission, <span id="fr_544"></span>[545](#fn_544.md) than to obey the
mandate of an impious prince. Julian, however, being pressed by the
urgency of the war which was <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> <span
id="ii.vi.xxii-Page_91"></span>before him, retained him among his
generals. On being saluted emperor, he positively declined to accept the
sovereign power: and when the soldiers brought him forward by force, he
declared that ‘being a Christian, he did not wish to reign over a people
who chose to adopt paganism as their religion.’ They all then with one
voice answered that they also were Christians: upon which he accepted
the imperial dignity. Perceiving himself suddenly left in very difficult
circumstances, in the midst of the Persian territory, where his army was
in danger of perishing for want of necessaries, he agreed to terminate
the war, even on terms by no means honorable to the glory of the Roman
name, but rendered necessary by the exigencies of the crisis. Submitting
therefore to the loss of the government of Syria, <span
id="fr_545"></span>[546](#fn_545.md) and giving up also Nisibis, a city of
Mesopotamia, he withdrew from their territories. The announcement of
these things gave fresh hope to the Christians; while the pagans
vehemently bewailed Julian’s death. Nevertheless the whole army
reprobated his intemperate heat, and ascribed to his rashness in
listening to the wily reports of a Persian deserter, the humiliation of
ceding the territories lost: for being imposed upon by the statements of
this fugitive, he was induced to burn the ships which supplied them with
provisions by water, by which means they were exposed to all the horrors
of famine. Then also Libanius composed a funeral oration on him, which
he designated *Julianus, or Epitaph,* wherein he celebrates with lofty
encomiums almost all his actions; but in referring to the books which
Julian wrote against the Christians, he says that he has therein clearly
demonstrated the ridiculous and trifling character of their sacred
books. Had this sophist contented himself with extolling the emperor’s
other acts, I should have quietly proceeded with the course of my
history; but since this famous rhetorician has thought proper to take
occasion to inveigh against the Scriptures of the Christian faith, we
also propose to pause a little and in a brief review consider his words.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_544"></span>[90:545](2020120.htm#fr_544.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxii-p3"></span>See above, chap. 13.

<span id="fn_545"></span>[91:546](2020120.htm#fr_545.md) <span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.vi.xxii-p4"></span>So the <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p4.1"></span>mss.</span> and Bright. The same reading was
also before Epiphanius Scholasticus and Nicephorus; but Valesius
conjecturally amends the reading <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.vi.xxii-p4.2"></span>τοὺς Σύρους τῆς ἀρχῆς</span> into <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xxii-p4.3"></span>τοὺς ὅρους τῆς
ἀρχῆς</span>, alleging that Socrates himself later mentions the loss as
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.vi.xxii-p4.4"></span>ζημίαν τῶν
ὅρων</span>. If the reading of Valesius be considered correct, then we
must translate ‘submitting to the loss of the borders,’ supplying ‘of
the empire.’ This would include the districts beyond the Tigris.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Refutation of what Libanius the Sophist said concerning
Julian.](2020121.md)
