[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020416)  [Next](2020418) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xi.i"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.i-p1"></span><span id="page_345">p. 345</span> <span
id="iii.xi.i-Page_345"></span><span class="c22"><span
id="iii.xi.i-p1.1"></span>Book VI.</span>

<span id="iii.xi.i-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.i-p2.1"></span>Chapter I</span>.—*Expedition of Julian into
Persia; he was worsted and broke off his Life Miserably. Letter written
by Libanius, describing his Death*.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xi.i-p3.1"></span>I have</span> narrated in the preceding book
the occurrences which took place in the Church, during the reign of
Julian. <span id="fr_1424"></span>[1425](#fn_1424) This emperor, having
determined to carry on the war with Persia, made a rapid transit across
the Euphrates in the beginning of spring, and, passing by Edessa from
hatred to the inhabitants, who had long professed Christianity, he went
on to Carræ, where there was a temple of Jupiter, in which he offered up
sacrifice and prayer. He then selected twenty thousand armed men from
among his troops, and sent them towards the Tigris, in order that they
might guard those regions, and also be ready to join him, in case he
should require their assistance. He then wrote to Arsacius, king of
Armenia, one of the Roman allies, to bespeak his aid in the war. In this
letter Julian manifested the most unbounded arrogance; he boasted of the
high qualities which had, he said, rendered him worthy of the empire,
and acceptable to the gods for whom he cared; he reviled Constantius,
his predecessor, as an effeminate and impious emperor, and threatened
Arsacius in a grossly insulting way; and since he understood that he was
a Christian, he intensified his insults, or eagerly and largely uttered
unlawful blasphemies against Christ, for he was wont to dare this in
every case. He told Arsacius that unless he acted according to his
directions, the God in whom he trusted would not be able to defend him
from his vengeance. When he considered that all his arrangements had
been duly made, he led his army through Assyria.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p5"></span>He took a great many towns and fortresses,
either through treachery or by battle, and thoughtlessly proceeded
onwards, without reflecting that he would have to return by the same
route. He pillaged every place he approached, and pulled down or burnt
the granaries and storehouses. As he was journeying up the Euphrates, he
arrived at Ctesiphon, a very large city, whither the Persian monarchs
have now transferred their residence from Babylon. The Tigris flows near
this spot. As he was prevented from reaching the city with his ships, by
a part of the land which separated it from the river, he judged that
either he must pursue his journey by water, or quit his ships and go to
Ctesiphon by land; and he interrogated the prisoners on the subject.
Having ascertained from them that there was a canal which had been
blocked up in the course of time, he caused it to be cleared out, and,
having thus effected a communication between the Euphrates and the
Tigris, he proceeded towards the city, his ships floating along by the
side of his army. But the Persians appeared on the banks of the Tigris
with a formidable display of horse and many armed troops, of elephants,
and of horses; and Julian became conscious that his army was besieged
between two great rivers, and was in danger of perishing, either by
remaining in its present position, or by retreating through the cities
and villages which he had so utterly devastated that no provisions were
attainable; therefore he summoned the soldiers to see horse-races, and
proposed rewards to the fleetest racers. In the meantime he commanded
the officers of the ships to throw over the provisions and baggage of
the army, so that the soldiers, seeing themselves in danger by the want
of necessaries, might turn about boldly and fight their enemies more
desperately. After supper he sent for the generals and tribunes and
commanded the embarkation of the troops. They sailed along the Tigris
during the night and came at once to the opposite banks and disembarked;
but their departure was perceived by some of the Persians, who exhorted
one another to oppose them, but those still asleep the Romans readily
overcame.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p6"></span>At daybreak, the two armies engaged in
battle; and after much bloodshed on both sides, the Romans returned by
the river, and encamped near Ctesiphon. The emperor, being no longer
desirous of proceeding further, burnt his vessels, as he considered that
they required too many soldiers to guard them; and he then commenced his
retreat along the Tigris, which was to his left. The prisoners, who
acted as guides to the Romans, led them to a fertile country where <span
id="page_346">p. 346</span> <span id="iii.xi.i-Page_346"></span>they
found abundance of provisions. Soon after, an old man who had resolved
to die for the liberty of Persia, allowed himself to be taken prisoner,
and was brought before the emperor. On being questioned as to the route,
and seeming to speak the truth, he persuaded them to follow him as
capable of transporting the army very speedily to the Roman frontiers.
He observed that for the space of three or four days’ journey this road
would be difficult, and that it would be necessary to carry provisions
during that time, as the surrounding country was sterile. The emperor
was deceived by the discourse of this wise old man, and approved the
march by this route. On advancing further, after the lapse of three
days, they were cast upon an uncultivated region. The old prisoner was
put to torture. He confessed that he had exposed himself voluntarily to
death for the sake of his country, and was therefore prepared to endure
any sufferings that could be inflicted on him.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p7"></span>The Roman troops were now worn out by the
length of the journey and the scarcity of provisions, and the Persians
chose this moment to attack them.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p8"></span>In the heat of the conflict which ensued,
a violent wind arose; and the sky and the sun were totally concealed by
the clouds, while the air was at the same time mixed with dust. During
the darkness which was thus produced, a horseman, riding at full gallop,
directed his lance against the emperor, and wounded him mortally. After
throwing Julian from his horse, the unknown assailant secretly went
away. Some conjectured that he was a Persian; others, that he was a
Saracen. There are those who insist that he who struck the blow was a
Roman soldier, who was indignant at the imprudence and temerity which
the emperor had manifested in exposing his army to such peril.
Libanius, <span id="fr_1425"></span>[1426](#fn_1425) the sophist, a
native of Syria, the most intimate friend of Julian, expressed himself
in the following terms concerning the person who had committed the deed:
“You desire to know by whom the emperor was slain. I know not his name.
We have a proof, however, that the murderer was not one of the enemies;
for no one came forward to claim the reward, although the king of Persia
caused proclamation to be made, by a herald, of the honors to be awarded
to him who had performed the deed. We are surely beholden to the enemy
for not arrogating to themselves the glory of the action, but for
leaving it to us to seek the slayer among ourselves.

<span id="iii.xi.i-p10"></span>“Those who sought his death were those
who lived in habitual transgression of the laws, and who had formerly
conspired against him, and who therefore perpetrated the deed as soon as
they could find an opportunity. They were impelled by the desire of
obtaining a greater degree of freedom from all control than they could
enjoy under his government; and they were, perhaps, mainly stimulated by
their indignation at the attachment of the emperor to the service of the
gods, to which they were averse.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[345:1425](2020417.htm#fr_1424) <span
id="iii.xi.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.i-p4"></span>Philost. vii. 15; Eutrop. *Brev. hist.
rom.* x. 16; Eunap. *Fr.* ii. 15–19; Am. Marcel. xxiii. and xxiv.; Ruf.
i. 36; Soc. iii. 21; Greg. Naz. *Or. cont. Jul.* ii. 8–15; Zos. iii.
12–30; Orosius, vii. 30.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[346:1426](2020417.htm#fr_1425) <span
id="iii.xi.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xi.i-p9"></span>*Libanii Op.* vol. ii. p. 614, ed. Reisk.
Cf. Soc. iii. 22, 23; a summary and refutation of Libanius.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: He perished under Divine Wrath. Visions of the Emperor's Death
seen by Various Individuals. Reply of the Carpenter's Son; Julian tossed
his Blood aloft to Christ. Calamities which Julian entailed upon the
Romans.](2020418)
