[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020237)  [Next](2020239.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.x.xxi"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxi-p1"></span><span id="page_164">p. 164</span> <span
id="ii.x.xxi-Page_164"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Kind Treatment of the
Persian Captives by Acacius Bishop of Amida.*

<span id="ii.x.xxi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.x.xxi-p2.1"></span>A noble</span> action of Acacius bishop of
Amida, at that time greatly enhanced his reputation among all men. As
the Roman soldiery would on no consideration restore to the Persian king
the captives whom they had taken, these captives, about seven thousand
in number, were being destroyed by famine in devastating Azazene, and
this greatly distressed the king of the Persians. Then Acacius thought
such a matter was by no means to be trifled with; having therefore
assembled his clergy, he thus addressed them: ‘Our God, my brethren,
needs neither dishes nor cups; for he neither eats nor drinks, nor is in
want of anything. Since then, by the liberality of its faithful members
the church possesses many vessels both of gold and silver, it behooves
us to sell them, that by the money thus raised we may be able to redeem
the prisoners and also supply them with food.’ Having said these things
and many others similar to these, he ordered the vessels to be melted
down, and from the proceeds paid the soldiers a ransom for their
captives, whom he supported for some time; and then furnishing them with
what was needful for their journey, sent them back to their sovereign.
This benevolence on the part of the excellent Acacius, astonished the
king of the Persians, as if the Romans were accustomed to conquer their
enemies as well by their beneficence in peace as their prowess in war.
They say also that the Persian king wished that Acacius should come into
his presence, that he might have the pleasure of beholding such a man; a
wish which by the emperor Theodosius’ order was soon gratified. So
signal a victory having through Divine favor been achieved by the
Romans, many who were illustrious for their eloquence, wrote panegyrics
in honor of the emperor, and recited them in public. The empress herself
also composed a poem in heroic verse: for she had excellent literary
taste; being the daughter of Leontius the Athenian sophist, she had been
instructed in every kind of learning by her father; Atticus the bishop
had baptized her a little while previous to her marriage with the
emperor, and had then given her the Christian name of Eudocia, <span
id="fr_958"></span>[959](#fn_958.md) instead of her pagan one of
Athenaïs. <span id="fr_959"></span>[960](#fn_959.md) Many, as I have said,
produced eulogiums on this occasion. Some, indeed, were stimulated by
the desire of being noticed by the emperor; while others were anxious to
display their talents to the masses, being unwilling that the
attainments they had made by dint of great exertion should lie buried in
obscurity.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_958"></span>[164:959](2020238.htm#fr_958.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxi-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.x.xxi-p3.1"></span>Εὐδοκία</span>, ‘Benevolence.’

<span id="fn_959"></span>[164:960](2020238.htm#fr_959.md) <span
id="ii.x.xxi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.x.xxi-p4"></span>The *Chronicon Paschale* gives a different
account of Eudocia. It says that her father’s name was Heraclitus. When
he died her brothers Gesius and Valerian refused to give her her share
of the inheritance. She came to Constantinople to plead for her rights
through Pulcheria, the sister of Theodosius, and impressed the latter so
favorably that Pulcheria persuaded Theodosius to make her his wife (cf.
*Chronic. Pasch.* year 420). Her brothers on hearing of her elevation to
the throne fled to Greece, but she sent for them and persuaded
Theodosius to appoint them to high offices, on the ground that she was
indebted to them for her good fortune (cf. *Chronic. Pasch.* year 421).
Besides her ode commemorating the victory of the imperial forces over
the Persians, several other works of hers are mentioned, viz.
paraphrases of the Pentateuch, Joshua, and Judges into Greek hexameters,
a version of the prophecies of Zachariah and Daniel, and a poem in three
books on St. Cyprian and St. Justina; to these Zonaras adds that she
completed the *Centones Homerici* of Patricius. Her later years were
clouded by a misunderstanding between her husband and herself, which is
variously given by the contemporaneous historians and altogether passed
over by Socrates. Cf. Evagrius, *H. E.* I. 20, 22, and Zonaras *Ann.*
XIII.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Virtues of the Emperor Theodosius the Younger.](2020239.md)
