[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020199)  [Next](2020201) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Dissension between
Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria and the Monks of the Desert.
Condemnation of Origen’s Books.*

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.viii-p2.1"></span>The</span> question had been started a
little before, <span id="fr_850"></span>[851](#fn_850) whether God is a
corporeal existence, and has the form of man; or whether he is
incorporeal, and without human or, generally speaking, any other bodily
shape? From this question arose strifes and contentions among a very
great number of persons, some favoring one opinion on the subject, and
others patronizing the opposite. Very many of the more simple ascetics
asserted that God is corporeal, and has a human figure: but most others
condemn their judgment, and contended that God is incorporeal, and free
of all form whatever. With these latter Theophilus bishop of Alexandria
agreed so thoroughly that in the church before all the people he
inveighed against those who attributed to God a human form, expressly
teaching that the Divine Being is wholly incorporeal. When the Egyptian
ascetics were apprised of this, they left their monasteries and came to
Alexandria; where they excited a tumult against the bishop, accusing him
of impiety, and threatening to put him to death. Theophilus becoming
aware of his danger, after some consideration had recourse to this
expedient to extricate himself from the threatened death. Going to the
monks, he in a conciliatory tone thus addressed them: ‘In seeing you, I
behold the face of God.’ The utterance of this saying moderated the fury
of these men <span id="page_143">p. 143</span> <span
id="ii.ix.viii-Page_143"></span>and they replied: ‘If you really admit
that God’s countenance is such as ours, anathematize Origen’s
book; <span id="fr_851"></span>[852](#fn_851) for some drawing arguments
from them oppose themselves to our opinion. If you will not do this,
expect to be treated by us as an impious person, and the enemy of God.’
‘But as far as I am concerned,’ said Theophilus, ‘I will readily do what
you require: and be ye not angry with me, for I myself also disapprove
of Origen’s works, and consider those who countenance them deserving of
censure.’ Thus he succeeded in appeasing and sending away the monks at
that time; and probably the whole dispute respecting this subject would
have been set at rest, had it not been for another circumstance which
happened immediately after. Over the monasteries in Egypt there were
four devout persons as superintendents named Dioscorus, Ammonius,
Eusebius, and Euthymius: these men were brothers, and had the
appellation of ‘the Tall Monks’ given them on account of their stature.
They were moreover distinguished both for the sanctity of their lives,
and the extent of their erudition, and for these reasons their
reputation was very high at Alexandria. Theophilus in particular, the
prelate of that city, loved and honored them exceedingly: insomuch that
he constituted one of them, Dioscorus, bishop of Hermopolis <span
id="fr_852"></span>[853](#fn_852) against his will, having forcibly
drawn him from his retreat. Two of the others he entreated to continue
with him, and with difficulty prevailed upon them to do so; still by the
exercise of his authority as bishop he accomplished his purpose: when
therefore he had invested them with the clerical office, he committed to
their charge the management of ecclesiastical affairs. They, constrained
by necessity, performed the duties thus imposed on them successfully;
nevertheless they were dissatisfied because they were unable to follow
philosophical pursuits and ascetic exercises. And as in process of time,
they thought they were being spiritually injured, observing the bishop
to be devoted to gain, and greedily intent on the acquisition of wealth,
and according to the common saying ‘leaving no stone unturned’ for the
sake of gain, they refused to remain with him any longer, declaring that
they loved solitude, and greatly preferred it to living in the city. As
long as he was ignorant of the true motive for their departure, he
earnestly begged them to abide with him; but when he perceived that they
were dissatisfied with his conduct, he became excessively irritated, and
threatened to do them all kinds of mischief. But they making little
account of his menaces retired into the desert; upon which Theophilus,
who was evidently of a hasty and malignant temperament, raised not a
small clamor against them, and by every contrivance earnestly sought to
do them injury. He also conceived a dislike against their brother
Dioscorus, bishop of Hermopolis. He was moreover extremely annoyed at
the esteem and veneration in which he was held by the ascetics. Being
aware, however, that he would be able to do no harm to these persons
unless he could stir up hostility in the minds of the monks against
them, he used this artifice to effect it. He well knew that these men in
their frequent theological discussions with him, had maintained that the
Deity was incorporeal, and by no means had a human form; because \[they
argued\] such a constitution would involve the necessary accompaniment
of human passions. Now this has been demonstrated by the ancient writers
and especially Origen. Theophilus, however though entertaining the very
same opinion respecting the Divine nature, yet to gratify his vindictive
feelings, did not hesitate to pervert what he and they had rightly
taught: but imposed upon the majority of the monks, men who were sincere
but ‘rude in speech,’ <span id="fr_853"></span>[854](#fn_853) the
greater part of whom were quite illiterate. Sending letters to the
monasteries in the desert, he advised them not to give heed either to
Dioscorus or to his brothers, inasmuch as they affirmed that God had not
a body. ‘Whereas,’ said he, ‘according to the sacred Scripture God has
eyes, ears, hands, and feet, as men have; but the partisans of
Dioscorus, being followers of Origen, introduce the blasphemous dogma
that God has neither eyes, ears, feet, nor hands.’ By this sophism he
took advantage of the simplicity of these monks and thus a hot
dissension was stirred up among them. Such as had a cultivated mind
indeed were not beguiled by this plausibility, and therefore still
adhere to Dioscorus and Origen; but the more ignorant who greatly
exceeded the others in number, inflamed by an ardent zeal without
knowledge, immediately raised an outcry against their brethren. A
division being thus made, both parties branded each other as impious;
and some listening to Theophilus called their brethren ‘Origenists,’ and
‘impious’ and the others termed those who were convinced by Theophilus
‘Anthropomorphitæ.’ On this account violent altercation arose, and an
inextinguishable war between the monks. Theophilus on receiving
intimation of the success of his device, went to Nitria where the
monasteries are, accompanied by a multitude of persons, and armed the
monks against Dioscorus and his brethren; who being <span
id="page_144">p. 144</span> <span id="ii.ix.viii-Page_144"></span>in
danger of losing their lives, made their escape with great difficulty.

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p7"></span>While these things were in progress in
Egypt John bishop of Constantinople was ignorant of them, but flourished
in eloquence and became increasingly celebrated for his discourses.
Moreover he first enlarged the prayers contained in the nocturnal hymns,
for the reason I am about to assign.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_850"></span>[142:851](2020200.htm#fr_850) <span
id="ii.ix.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p3"></span>By Audius or Audæus, the founder of the
Audian heresy. Cf. Epiphan. *Hær*. LXX.; Walch, *Histor. der
Ketzereien*, Vol. III. p. 300; also Iselin, *Audios und die Audianer*,
in *Jahrbücher für Protestant. Theologie*, April, 1890; p. 298 *seq.*

<span id="fn_851"></span>[143:852](2020200.htm#fr_851) <span
id="ii.ix.viii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p4"></span>On the dispute concerning Origen’s
views, see below, chap. 13.

<span id="fn_852"></span>[143:853](2020200.htm#fr_852) <span
id="ii.ix.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p5"></span>There were two cities named Hermopolis
in Egypt; the most important of these in the Thebaid was known as
Hermopolis proper, whereas the other (the one here alluded to) was
situated in lower Egypt and designated Hermopolis *parva.*

<span id="fn_853"></span>[143:854](2020200.htm#fr_853) <span
id="ii.ix.viii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.viii-p6"></span>[2 Cor. xi.
6](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#006)<span id="ii.ix.viii-p6.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Arians and the Supporters of the 'Homoousion' hold Nocturnal
Assemblies and sing Antiphonal Hymns, a Species of Composition ascribed
to Ignatius, surnamed Theophorus. Conflict between the Two
Parties.](2020201)
