[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020347)  [Next](2020349.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.viii.xi"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XI</span>.—*The Long Formulary and
the Enactments issued by the Synod of Sardica. Julius, Bishop of Rome,
and Hosius, the Spanish Bishop, deposed by the Bishops of the East,
because they held Communion with Athanasius and the Rest*.

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.viii.xi-p2.1"></span>Three</span> years afterwards, the bishops
of the East <span id="fr_1244"></span>[1245](#fn_1244.md) sent to those of
the West a formulary of faith, which, because it had been framed with
verbiage and thoughts in excess of any former confession, was called
<span class="Greek"><span id="iii.viii.xi-p3.1"></span>μακρόστιχος
ἔκθεσις</span>. <span id="fr_1245"></span>[1246](#fn_1245.md) In this
formulary they made no mention of the substance of God, but those are
excommunicated who maintain that the Son arose out of what had no
previous existence, or that He is of Another hypostasis, and not of God,
or that there was a time or an age in which He existed not. Eudoxius,
who was still bishop of Germanicia, Martyrius, and Macedonius, carried
this document, but the Western priests did not entertain it; for they
declared that they felt fully satisfied with the doctrines established
at Nicæa, and thought it entirely unnecessary to be too curious about
such points.

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p5"></span>After the Emperor Constans <span
id="fr_1246"></span>[1247](#fn_1246.md) had requested his brother to
reinstate the followers of Athanasius in their sees, and had found his
application to be unavailing, on account of the counteracting influence
of those who adopted a hostile heresy; and when, moreover, the party of
Athanasius and Paul entreated Constans to assemble a Synod on account of
the plots for the abolition of orthodox doctrines, both the emperors
were of the opinion that the bishops of the East and of the West should
be convened on a certain day at Sardica, a city of Illyria. The bishops
of the East, who had previously assembled at Philippopolis, a city of
Thrace, wrote to the bishops of the West, who had already assembled at
Sardica, that they would not join them, unless they would eject the
followers of Athanasius from their assembly, and from communion with
them, because they had been deposed. They afterwards went to Sardica,
but declared they would not enter the church, while those who had been
deposed by them were admitted thither. The bishops of the West replied,
that they never had ejected them, and that they would not yield this
now, particularly as Julius, bishop of Rome, after having investigated
the case, had not condemned them, and that besides, they were present
and ready to justify themselves and to refute again the offenses imputed
to them. These declarations, however, were of no avail; and since the
time they had appointed for the adjustment of their differences,
concerning which they had convened, had expired, they finally wrote
letters to one another on these points, and by these they were led to an
increase of their previous ill-will. And after they had convened
separately, they brought forward opposite decisions; for the Eastern
bishops confirmed the sentences they had already enacted against
Athanasius, Paul, Marcellus, and Asclepas, and deposed Julius, bishop of
Rome, <span id="page_290">p. 290</span> <span
id="iii.viii.xi-Page_290"></span>because he had been the first to admit
those who had been condemned by them, into communion; and Hosius, the
confessor, was also deposed, partly for the same reason, and partly
because he was the friend of Paulinus and Eustathius, the rulers of the
church in Antioch. Maximus, bishop of Treves, was deposed, because he
had been among the first who had received Paul into communion, and had
been the cause of his returning to Constantinople, and because he had
excluded from communion the Eastern bishops who had repaired to Gaul.
Besides the above, they likewise deposed Protogenes, bishop of Sardica,
and Gaudentius; <span id="fr_1247"></span>[1248](#fn_1247.md) the one
because he favored Marcellus, although he had previously condemned him,
and the other because he had adopted a different line of conduct from
that of Cyriacus, his predecessor, and had supported many individuals
then deposed by them. After issuing these sentences, they made known to
the bishops of every region, that they were not to hold communion with
those who were deposed, and that they were not to write to them, nor to
receive letters from them. They likewise commanded them to believe what
was said concerning God in the formulary which they subjoined to their
letter, and in which no mention was made of the term “consubstantial,”
but in which, those were excommunicated who said there are three Gods,
or that Christ is not God, or that the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost are the same, or that the Son is unbegotten, or that there was a
time or an age in which He existed not. <span
id="fr_1248"></span>[1249](#fn_1248.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1244"></span>[289:1245](2020348.htm#fr_1244.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p3"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* 26, in ten heads,
and given by Soc. ii. 19, and with like introduction.

<span id="fn_1245"></span>[289:1246](2020348.htm#fr_1245.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p4"></span>For the whole section, Soc. ii. 19, 20;
Athan. *de Synodis,* 26. Cf. Hil. *Frag.* ii. and iii.; Sulp. Sev. *H.
S.* ii. 36.

<span id="fn_1246"></span>[289:1247](2020348.htm#fr_1246.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xi-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p6"></span>Soc. ii. 20, but Soz. has other
details.

<span id="fn_1247"></span>[290:1248](2020348.htm#fr_1247.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p7"></span>He was bishop of Naïssus in Mœsia
Superior.

<span id="fn_1248"></span>[290:1249](2020348.htm#fr_1248.md) <span
id="iii.viii.xi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.viii.xi-p8"></span>This section concerning the Synod of
the Eastern bishops is probably from Sabinus. Cf. Hil. *Frag.* iii.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Bishops of the Party of Julius and Hosius held another
Session and deposed the Eastern High Priests, and also made a Formulary
of Faith.](2020349.md)
