[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020371)  [Next](2020373) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.x"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.x-p1.1"></span>Chapter X</span>.—*Divers Machinations of the
Arians against Athanasius, and his Escape from Various Dangers through
Divine Interposition. Evil Deeds perpetrated by George in Egypt after
the Expulsion of Athanasius*.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.x-p2.1"></span>There</span> is no doubt but that Athanasius
was beloved of God, and endowed with the gift of foreseeing the
future. <span id="fr_1305"></span>[1306](#fn_1305) More wonderful facts
than those which we have related might be adduced to prove his intimate
acquaintance with futurity. It happened that during the life of
Constans, the Emperor Constantius was once determined upon ill-treating
this holy man; but Athanasius fled, and concealed himself with some one
of his acquaintances. He lived for a long time in a subterraneous and
sunless dwelling, which <span id="page_306">p. 306</span> <span
id="iii.ix.x-Page_306"></span>had been used as a reservoir for water. No
one knew where he was concealed except a serving-woman, who seemed
faithful, and who waited upon him. As the heterodox, however, were
anxiously intent upon taking Athanasius alive, it appears that, by means
of gifts or promises, they at length succeeded in corrupting the
attendant. But Athanasius was forewarned by God of her treachery, and
effected his escape from the place. The servant was punished for having
made a false deposition against her masters, while they, on their part,
fled the country; for it was accounted no venial crime by the heterodox
to receive or to conceal Athanasius, but was, on the contrary, regarded
as an act of disobedience against the express commands of the emperor,
and as a crime against the empire, and was visited as such by the civil
tribunals. It has come to my hearing that Athanasius was saved on
another occasion in a similar manner. He was again obliged for the same
reason to flee for his life; and he set sail up the Nile <span
id="fr_1306"></span>[1307](#fn_1306) with the design of retreating to
the further districts of Egypt, but his enemies received intelligence of
his intention, and pursued him. Being forewarned of God that he would be
pursued, he announced it to his fellow-passengers, and commanded them to
return to Alexandria. While he sailed down the river, his plotters rowed
by. He reached Alexandria in safety, and effectually concealed himself
in the midst of its similar and numerous houses. His success in avoiding
these and many other perils led to his being accused of sorcery by the
pagan and the heterodox. It is reported, that once, as he was passing
through the city, a crow was heard to caw, and that a number of pagans
who happened to be on the spot, asked him in derision what the crow was
saying. He replied, smiling, “It utters the sound cras, the meaning of
which in the Latin language is, ‘tomorrow’ and it has hereby announced
to you that the morrow will not be propitious to you; for it indicates
that you will be forbidden by the Roman emperor to celebrate your
festival tomorrow.” Although this prediction of Athanasius appeared to
be absurd, it was fulfilled; for the following day edicts were
transmitted to the governors from the emperor, by which it was commanded
that the pagans were not to be permitted to assemble in the temples to
perform their usual ceremonies, nor to celebrate their festival; and
thus was abolished the most solemn and magnificent feast which the
pagans had retained. What I have said is sufficient to show that this
holy man was endowed with the gift of prophecy.

<span id="iii.ix.x-p5"></span>After Athanasius had escaped, in the
manner we have described, from those who sought to arrest him, his
clergy and people remained for some time in possession of the churches;
but eventually, the governor of Egypt and the commander of the army
forcibly ejected all those who maintained the sentiments of Athanasius,
in order to deliver up the government of the churches to those who
favored George, whose arrival was then expected. Not long after he
reached the city, and the churches were placed under his authority. He
ruled by force rather than by priestly moderation; and as he strove to
strike terror into the minds of the people, and carried on a cruel
persecution against the followers of Athanasius, and, moreover,
imprisoned and maimed many men and women, he was accounted a tyrant. For
these reasons he fell into a universal hate; the people were so deeply
incensed at his conduct, that they rushed into the church, and would
have torn him to pieces; in such an extremity of danger, he escaped with
difficulty, and fled to the emperor. Those who held the sentiments of
Athanasius then took possession of the churches. But they did not long
retain the mastery of them; for the commander of the troops in Egypt
came and restored the churches to the partisans of George. An imperial
shorthand writer of the notary class was afterwards sent to punish the
leaders of the sedition, and he tortured and scourged many of the
citizens. When George returned a little while after, he was more
formidable, it appears, than ever, and was regarded with greater
aversion than before, for he instigated the emperor to the perpetration
of many evil deeds; and besides, the monks of Egypt openly declared him
to be perfidious and inflated with arrogance. The opinions of these
monks were always adopted by the people, and their testimony was
universally received, because they were noted for their virtue and the
philosophical tenor of their lives.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1305"></span>[305:1306](2020372.htm#fr_1305) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 18, 33, 34; Soc. ii. 45;
iii. 14; Sozomen groups these stories without regard to time; see next
chapter; he has some independent material.

<span id="fn_1306"></span>[306:1307](2020372.htm#fr_1306) <span
id="iii.ix.x-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.x-p4"></span>Soc. iii. 14.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Liberius, Bishop of Rome, and the cause of his being exiled by
Constantius. Felix his Successor.](2020373)
