[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020399)  [Next](2020401) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.x.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VII</span>.—*Violent Death and
Triumph of George, Bishop of Alexandria. The Result* <span
id="page_331">p. 331</span> <span id="iii.x.vii-Page_331"></span>*of
Certain Occurrences in the Temple of Mithra. Letter of Julian on this
Aggravated Circumstance*.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.x.vii-p2.1"></span>After</span> Athanasius had been preserved in
this wise and appeared suddenly in the church, no one knew whence he
came. <span id="fr_1376"></span>[1377](#fn_1376) The people of
Alexandria, however, rejoiced at his return, and restored his churches
to him.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p4"></span>The Arians, being thus expelled from the
churches, were compelled to hold their assemblies in private houses, and
constituted Lucius, in the place of George, as the bishop of their
heresy. George had been already slain; for when the magistrates had
announced to the public the decease of Constantius, and that Julian was
sole ruler, the pagans of Alexandria rose up in sedition. They attacked
George with shouts and reproaches as if they would kill him at once. The
repellants of this precipitate attack, then put him in prison; a little
while after they rushed, early in the morning, to the prison, killed
him, flung the corpse upon a camel, and after exposing it to every
insult during the day, burnt it at nightfall. I am not ignorant that the
Arian heretics assert that George received this cruel treatment from the
followers of Athanasius; but it seems to me more probable that the
perpetrators of these deeds were the pagans; for they had more cause
than any other body of men to hate him, especially on account of the
insults be offered their images and their temples; and having, moreover,
prohibited them from sacrificing, or performing the ancestral rites.
Besides, the influence he had acquired in the palaces intensified the
hatred towards him; and as the people are wont to feel towards those in
power, they regarded him as unendurable.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p5"></span>A calamity had also taken place at a spot
called Mithrium; it was originally a desert, and Constantius had
bestowed it on the church of Alexandria. While George was clearing the
ground, in order to erect a house of prayer, an adytum was discovered.
In it were found idols and certain instruments for initiation or
perfection which seemed ludicrous and strange to the beholders. The
Christians caused them to be publicly exhibited, and made a procession
in order to nettle the pagans; but the pagans gathered a multitude
together, and rushed upon and attacked the Christians, after arming
themselves with swords, stones, and whatever weapon came first to hand.
They slew many of the Christians, and, in derision of their religion,
crucified others, and they left many wounded.

<span id="iii.x.vii-p6"></span>This led to the abandonment of the work
that had been commenced by the Christians, while the pagans murdered
George as soon as they had heard of the accession of Julian to the
empire. This fact is admitted by that emperor himself, which he would
not have confessed unless he had been forced by the truth; for he would
rather, I think, have had the Christians, whoever they were, than the
pagans to be the murderers of George; but it could not be concealed. It
is apparent in the letter which he wrote on the subject to the
inhabitants of Alexandria, <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1378](#fn_1377)
wherein he expresses severe opinions. In this epistle he only censures
and passes over the punishment; for he said that he feared Serapis,
their tutelary divinity, and Alexander their founder, and Julian, his
own uncle, who formerly was governor of Egypt and of Alexandria. This
latter was so favorable to paganism and hated Christianity so
exceedingly, that contrary to the wishes of the emperor, he persecuted
the Christians unto death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1376"></span>[331:1377](2020400.htm#fr_1376) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p3"></span>Soc. iii. 2–4. Cf. Philost. vii. 2; Am.
Marcel. xxii. 11. 3–11; Athan. *Ep. ad. Episc.* 7; *Hist. Arian.* 51,
72, 75, etc.; *Juliani Op. Epp.* 8, 9, 10, 36, 45, 55.

<span id="fn_1377"></span>[331:1378](2020400.htm#fr_1377) <span
id="iii.x.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.x.vii-p7"></span>Text given by Soc. iii. 3; cf. *Juliani
Op. Ep.* 10.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning Theodore, the Keeper of the Sacred Vessels of Antioch.
How Julian, the Uncle of the Traitor, on Account of these Vessels, falls
a Prey to Worms.](2020401)
