[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020016)  [Next](2020018) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iv.viii"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p1"></span><span id="page_8">p. 8</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_8"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*Of the Synod which was
held at Nicæa in Bithynia, and the Creed there* <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) *put forth.*

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p3.1"></span>Such</span> admirable and wise counsel did
the emperor’s letter contain. But the evil had become too strong both
for the exhortations of the emperor, and the authority of him who was
the bearer of his letter: for neither was Alexander nor Arius softened
by this appeal; and moreover there was incessant strife and tumult among
the people. Moreover another local source of disquietude had pre-existed
there, which served to trouble the churches,—the dispute namely in
regard to the Passover, which was carried on in the regions of the East
only. <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153) This arose from some
desiring to keep the Feast more in accordance with the custom of the
Jews; while others preferred its mode of celebration by Christians in
general throughout the world. This difference, however, did not
interfere with their communion, although their mutual joy was
necessarily hindered. When, therefore, the emperor beheld the Church
agitated on account of both of these causes, he convoked a General
Council, <span id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) summoning all the
bishops by letter to meet him at Nicæa in Bithynia. Accordingly the
bishops assembled out of the various provinces and cities; respecting
whom Eusebius Pamphilus thus writes, word for word, in his third book of
the life of Constantine: <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155)

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p7"></span>‘Wherefore the most eminent of the
ministers of God in all the churches which have filled Europe, Africa,
and Asia, were convened. And one sacred edifice, dilated as it were by
God, contained within it on the same occasion both Syrians and
Cilicians, Phœnicians, Arabs and Palestinians, and in addition to these,
Egyptians, Thebans, Libyans, and those who came from Mesopotamia. At
this synod a Persian bishop was also present, neither was the Scythian
absent from this assemblage. Pontus also and Galatia, Pamphylia,
Cappadocia, Asia and Phrygia, supplied those who were most distinguished
among them. Besides, there met there Thracians and Macedonians, Achaians
and Epirots, and even those who dwelt still further away than these, and
the most celebrated of the Spaniards himself <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156) took his seat among the rest. The
prelate <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157) of the imperial city was
absent on account of age; but some of his presbyters were present and
filled his place. Such a crown, composed as a bond of peace, the emperor
Constantine alone has ever dedicated to Christ his Saviour, as a
thank-offering worthy of God for victory over his enemies, having
appointed this convocation among us in imitation of the Apostolic
Assembly. <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158) For among them it is
said were convened “devout men of every nation under heaven; Parthians,
Medes and Elamites, and those who dwelt in Mesopotamia, Judæa and
Cappadocia, Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and the part
of Libya which is toward Cyrene, strangers from Rome also, both Jews and
proselytes with Cretans and Arabs.” That congregation, however, was
inferior in this respect, that all present were not ministers of God:
whereas in this assembly the number of bishops exceeded three
hundred; <span id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159) while the number of the
presbyters, deacons, and acolyths <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) and others who attended them was
almost incalculable. Some of these ministers of God were eminent for
their wisdom, some for the strictness of their life, and patient
endurance \[of persecution\], and others united in themselves all these
distinguished characteristics: some were venerable from their advanced
age, others were conspicuous for their youth and vigor of mind, and
others had but recently entered on their ministerial career. <span
id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) For all these the emperor appointed an
abundant supply of daily food to be provided.’

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p14"></span>Such is Eusebius’ account of those who
met on this occasion. The emperor having completed the festal
solemnization of this triumph over Licinius, came also in person to
Nice.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p15"></span>There were among the bishops two of
extraordinary celebrity, Paphnutius, bishop of Upper Thebes, and
Spyridon, bishop of Cyprus: why I have so particular referred to these
two individuals, I shall state hereafter. Many of the laity were also
present, who were practiced in the art of reasoning, <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) and each eager to advocate the cause
of his own party. Eusebius, bishop of Nicomedia, as was before said,
sup<span id="page_9">p. 9</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_9"></span>ported the opinion of Arius, together with
Theognis and Maris; of these the former was bishop of Nicæa, and Maris
of Chalcedon in Bithynia. These were powerfully opposed by Athanasius, a
deacon of the Alexandrian church, who was highly esteemed by Alexander
his bishop, and on that account was much envied, as will be seen
hereafter. Now a short time previous to the general assembling of the
bishops, the disputants engaged in preparatory logical contests before
the multitudes; and when many were attracted by the interest of their
discourse, one of the laity, *a confessor* <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) , who was a man of unsophisticated
understanding, reproved these reasoners, telling them that Christ and
his apostles did not teach us dialectics, art, nor vain subtilties, but
simple-mindedness, which is preserved by faith and good works. As he
said this, all present admired the speaker and assented to the justice
of his remarks; and the disputants themselves, after hearing his plain
statement of the truth, exercised a greater degree of moderation: thus
then was the disturbance caused by these logical debates suppressed at
this time.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p18"></span>On the following day all the bishops
were assembled together in one place; the emperor arrived soon after and
on his entrance stood in their midst, and would not take his place,
until the bishops by bowing intimated their desire that he should be
seated: such was the respect and reverence which the emperor entertained
for these men. When a silence suitable to the occasion had been
observed, the emperor from his seat began to address them words of
exhortation to harmony and unity, and entreated each to lay aside all
private pique. For several of them had brought accusations against one
another and many had even presented petitions to the emperor the day
before. But he, directing their attention to the matter before them, and
on account of which they were assembled, ordered these petitions to be
burnt; merely observing that ‘Christ enjoins him who is anxious to
obtain forgiveness, to forgive his brother.’ When therefore he had
strongly insisted on the maintenance of harmony and peace, he sanctioned
again their purpose of more closely investigating the questions at
issue. But it may be well to hear what Eusebius says on this subject, in
his third book of the Life of Constantine. <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) His words are these:

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p20"></span>‘A variety of topics having been
introduced by each party and much controversy being excited from the
very commencement, the emperor listened to all with patient attention,
deliberately and impartially considering whatever was advanced. He in
part supported the statements which were made on either side, and
gradually softened the asperity of those who contentiously opposed each
other, conciliating each by his mildness and affability. And as he
addressed them in the Greek language, for he was not unacquainted with
it, he was at once interesting and persuasive, and wrought conviction on
the minds of some, and prevailed on others by entreaty, those who spoke
well he applauded. And inciting all to unanimity at length he succeeded
in bringing them into similarity of judgment, and conformity of opinion
on all the controverted points: so that there was not only unity in the
confession of faith, but also a general agreement as to the time for the
celebration of the feast of Salvation. <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) Moreover the doctrines which had thus
the common consent, were confirmed by the signature of each individual.’

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p22"></span>Such in his own words is the testimony
respecting these things which Eusebius has left us in writing; and we
not unfitly have used it, but treating what he has said as an authority,
have introduced it here for the fidelity of this history. With this end
also in view, that if any one should condemn as erroneous the faith
professed at this council of Nicæa, we might be unaffected by it, and
put no confidence in Sabinus the Macedonian, <span
id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) who calls all those who were convened
there ignoramuses and simpletons. For this Sabinus, who was bishop of
the Macedonians at Heraclea in Thrace, having made a collection of the
decrees published by various Synods of bishops, has treated those who
composed the Nicene Council in particular with contempt and derision;
not perceiving that he thereby charges Eusebius himself with ignorance,
who made a like confession after the closest scrutiny. And in fact some
things he has willfully passed over, others he has perverted, and on all
he has put a construction favorable to his own views. Yet he commends
Eusebius Pamphilus as a trustworthy witness, and praises the emperor as
capable in stating Christian doctrines: but he still brands the faith
which was declared at Nicæa, as having been set forth by ignorant
persons, and such as had no intelligence in the matter. And thus he
voluntarily contemns the words of a man whom he himself pronounces a
wise and true witness: for Eusebius declares, that of the ministers of
God who were present at the Nicene Synod, some were eminent for the word
of wisdom, others for the strictness of their life; and that the emperor
himself being <span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_10"></span>present, leading all into unanimity,
established unity of judgment, and agreement of opinion among them. Of
Sabinus, however, we shall make further mention as occasion may require.
But the agreement of faith, assented to with loud acclamation at the
great council of Nicæa is this:

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p24"></span>‘We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible:—and in one <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167) Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the
only-begotten of the Father, that is of the substance of the Father; God
of God and Light of light; true God of true God; begotten, not made,
consubstantial <span id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) with the Father:
by whom all things were made, both which are in heaven and on earth: who
for the sake of us men, and on account of our salvation, descended,
became incarnate, and was made man; suffered, arose again the third day,
and ascended into the heavens, and will come again to judge the living
and the dead. \[We\] also \[believe\] in the Holy Spirit. But the holy
Catholic and Apostolic church anathematizes those who say “There was a
time when he was not,” and “He was not before he was begotten” and “He
was made from that which did not exist,” and those who assert that he is
of other substance or essence than the Father, or that he was created,
or is susceptible of change.’ <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p28"></span>This creed was recognized and
acquiesced in by three hundred and eighteen \[bishops\]; and being, as
Eusebius says, unanimous is expression and sentiment, they subscribed
it. Five only would not receive it, objecting to the term *homoousios,*
‘of the same essence,’ or *consubstantial:* these were Eusebius bishop
of Nicomedia, Theognis of Nice, Maris of Chalcedon, Theonas of
Marmarica, and Secundus of Ptolemaïs. ‘For,’ said they ‘since that is
*consubstantial* which is from another either by partition, derivation
or germination; by germination, as a shoot from the roots; by
derivation, as children from their parents; by division, as two or three
vessels of gold from a mass, and the Son is from the Father by none of
these modes: therefore they declared themselves unable to assent to this
creed.’ Thus having scoffed at the word *consubstantial,* they would not
subscribe to the deposition of Arius. Upon this the Synod anathematized
Arius, and all who adhered to his opinions, prohibiting him at the same
time from entering into Alexandria. At the same time an edict of the
emperor sent Arius himself into exile, together with Eusebius and
Theognis and their followers; Eusebius and Theognis, however, a short
time after their banishment, tendered a written declaration of their
change of sentiment, and concurrence in the faith of the
*consubstantiality* of the Son with the Father, as we shall show as we
proceed.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p29"></span>At this time during the session of the
Synod, Eusebius, surnamed Pamphilus, bishop of Cæsarea in Palestine, who
had held aloof for a short time, after mature consideration whether he
ought to receive this definition of the faith, at length acquiesced in
it, and subscribed it with all the rest: he also sent to the people
under his charge a copy of the Creed, with an explanation of the word
*homoousios,* that no one might impugn his motives on account of his
previous hesitation. Now what was written by Eusebius was as follows in
his own words:

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p30"></span>’You have probably had some intimation,
beloved, of the transactions of the great council convened at Nicæa, in
relation to the faith of the Church, inasmuch as rumor generally outruns
true account of that which has really taken place. But lest from such
report alone you might form an incorrect estimate of the matter, we have
deemed it necessary to submit to you, in the first place, an exposition
of the faith proposed by us in written form; and then a second which has
been promulgated, consisting of ours with certain additions to its
expression. The declaration of faith set forth by us, which when read in
the presence of our most pious emperor, seemed to meet with universal
approbation, was thus expressed:

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p31"></span>‘“According as we received from the
bishops who preceded us, both in our instruction <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) \[in the knowledge of the truth\], and
when we were baptized; as also we have ourselves learned from the sacred
Scriptures: and in accordance with what we have both believed and taught
while discharging the duties of presbyter and the episcopal office
itself, so now we believe and present to you the distinct avowal of our
faith. It is this:

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p33"></span>‘“We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible:—and in one Lord,
Jesus Christ, the Word of God, God of God, Light of light, Life of life,
the only-begotten Son, born before all creation, <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) begotten of God the Father, before all
ages, by whom also all things were made; who on account of our salvation
became incarnate, and lived <span id="page_11">p. 11</span> <span
id="ii.iv.viii-Page_11"></span>among men; and who suffered and rose
again on the third day, and ascended to the Father, and shall come again
in glory to judge the living and the dead. We believe also in one Holy
Spirit. We believe in the existence and subsistence of each of these
\[persons\]: that the Father is truly Father, the Son truly Son, and the
Holy Spirit truly Holy Spirit; even as our Lord also, when he sent forth
his disciples to preach the Gospel, said, <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) ‘Go and teach all nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit.’
Concerning these doctrines we steadfastly maintain their truth, and avow
our full confidence in them; such also have been our sentiments
hitherto, and such we shall continue to hold until death and in an
unshaken adherence to this faith, we anathematize every impious heresy.
In the presence of God Almighty, and of our Lord Jesus Christ we
testify, that thus we have believed and thought from our heart and soul,
since we have possessed a right estimate of ourselves; and that we now
think and speak what is perfectly in accordance with the truth. We are
moreover prepared to prove to you by undeniable evidences, and to
convince you that in time past we have thus believed, and so preached.”

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p36"></span>‘When these articles of faith were
proposed, there seemed to be no ground of opposition: nay, our most
pious emperor himself was the first to admit that they were perfectly
correct, and that he himself had entertained the sentiments contained in
them; exhorting all present to give them their assent, and subscribe to
these very articles, thus agreeing in a unanimous profession of them,
with the insertion, however, of that single word “*homoousios*”
(consubstantial), an expression which the emperor himself explained, as
not indicating corporeal affections or properties; and consequently that
the Son did not subsist from the Father either by division or
abscission: for said he, a nature which is immaterial and incorporeal
cannot possibly be subject to any corporeal affection; hence our
conception of such things can only be in divine and mysterious terms.
Such was the philosophical view of the subject taken by our most wise
and pious sovereign; and the bishops on account of the word
*homoousious,* drew up this formula of faith.

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p37"></span>*The Creed.* <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173)

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p39"></span>‘“We believe in one God, the Father
Almighty, Maker of all things visible and invisible:—and in one Lord
Jesus Christ, the Son of God, the only-begotten of the Father, that is
of the substance of the Father; God of God, Light of light, true God of
true God; begotten not made, consubstantial with the Father; by <span
id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174) whom all things were made both which
are in heaven and on earth; who for the sake of us men, and on account
of our salvation, descended, became incarnate, was made man, suffered
and rose again on the third day; he ascended into the heavens, and will
come to judge the living and the dead. \[We believe\] also in the Holy
Spirit. But those who say ‘There was a time when he was not,’ or ‘He did
not exist before he was begotten,’ or ‘He was made of nothing’ or assert
that ‘He is of other substance or essence than the Father,’ or that the
Son of God is created, or mutable, or susceptible of change, the
Catholic and apostolic Church of God anathematizes.”

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p41"></span>‘Now this declaration of faith being
propounded by them, we did not neglect to investigate the distinct sense
of the expressions “of the substance of the Father, and consubstantial
with the Father.” Whereupon questions were put forth and answers, and
the meaning of these terms was clearly defined; when it was generally
admitted that *ousias* (of the essence or substance) simply implied that
the Son is of the Father indeed, but does not subsist as a part of the
Father. To this interpretation of the sacred doctrine which declares
that the Son is of the Father, but is not a part of his substance, it
seemed right to us to assent. We ourselves therefore concurred in this
exposition; nor do we cavil at the word “*homoousios*” having regard to
peace, and fearing to lose a right understanding of the matter. On the
same grounds we admitted also the expression “begotten, not made”: “for
*made,*” said they, “is a term applicable in common to all the creatures
which were made by the Son, to whom the Son has no resemblance.
Consequently he is no creature like those which were made by him, but is
of a substance far excelling any creature; which substance the Divine
Oracles teach was begotten of the Father by such a mode of generation as
cannot be explained nor even conceived by any creature.” Thus also the
declaration that “the Son is consubstantial with the Father” having been
discussed, it was agreed that this must not be understood in a corporeal
sense, or in any way analogous to mortal creatures; inasmuch as it is
neither by division of substance, nor by abscission nor by any change of
the Father’s substance and power, since the underived nature of the
Father is inconsistent with all these things. That he is consubstantial
with the Father then simply implies, that the Son of God has no
resemblance to created things, but is in every respect like the Father
only who begat him; and that he is of <span id="page_12">p. 12</span>
<span id="ii.iv.viii-Page_12"></span>no other substance or essence but
of the Father. To which doctrine, explained in this way, it appeared
right to assent, especially since we knew that some eminent bishops and
learned writers among the ancients have used the term “*homoousios*” in
their theological discourses concerning the nature of the Father and the
Son. Such is what I have to state to you in reference to the articles of
faith which have been promulgated; and in which we have all concurred,
not without due examination, but according to the senses assigned, which
were investigated in the presence of our most highly favored emperor,
and for the reasons mentioned approved. We have also considered the
anathema pronounced by them after the declaration of faith inoffensive;
because it prohibits the use of illegitimate <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) terms, from which almost all the
distraction and commotion of the churches have arisen. Accordingly,
since no divinely inspired Scripture contains the expressions, “of
things which do not exist,” and “there was a time when he was not,” and
such other phrases as are therein subjoined, it seemed unwarrantable to
utter and teach them: and moreover this decision received our sanction
the rather from the consideration that we have never heretofore been
accustomed to employ these terms. We deemed it incumbent on us, beloved,
to acquaint you with the caution which has characterized both our
examination of and concurrence in these things: and that on justifiable
grounds we resisted to the last moment the introduction of certain
objectionable expressions as long as these were not acceptable; and
received them without dispute, when on mature deliberation as we
examined the sense of the words, they appeared to agree with what we had
originally proposed as a sound confession of faith.’

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p43"></span>Such was the letter addressed by
Eusebius Pamphilus to the Christians at Cæsarea in Palestine. At the
same time the Synod itself also, with one accord, wrote the following
epistle to the church of the Alexandrians, and to believers in Egypt,
Libya, and Pentapolis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[8:153](2020017.htm#fr_152) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p2"></span>Cf. the parallel account in Sozom. I.
17.

<span id="fn_153"></span>[8:154](2020017.htm#fr_153) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p4"></span>In a single sentence this controversy
was as to whether the Easter should be observed on a fixed day in every
year or on the 14th of the lunar month Nisan of the Jews, on whatever
day of the week that might happen to fall. For a fuller discussion of
the controversy, see Smith’s *Dict. of the Bible,* and the literature
there referred to.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[8:155](2020017.htm#fr_154) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p5.1"></span>οἰκουμενικήν</span> : hence this is called
the first Ecumenical Council.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[8:156](2020017.htm#fr_155) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p6"></span>Euseb. *Life of Const.* III. 7–9.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[8:157](2020017.htm#fr_156) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p8"></span>Hosius mentioned before in chap. 7.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[8:158](2020017.htm#fr_157) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p9"></span>According to Valesius, who follows
Musculus, the prelate here meant was the bishop of Rome. The reason
alleged is that at the time of the meeting of the council,
Constantinople had not yet been made the ‘imperial city.’ But
considering the general indifference of Socrates to the affairs of the
Western Church, and the fact that when he wrote, the imperial city was
actually Constantinople, it is very probable that it is the bishop of
that city he means to name here, and not the bishop of Rome.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[8:159](2020017.htm#fr_158) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p10"></span>[Acts ii.
5-11](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p10.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_159"></span>[8:160](2020017.htm#fr_159) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p11"></span>The exact number is variously given as
250 by Eusebius (*Life of Const.* III. 8); 270 by Eustathius; 318 by
Evagrius (*H. E.* III. 31); Athanasius (*Ep.* to the African bishops);
Hilarius (*Contra Constantium*); Jerome (*Chronicon*), and Rufinus.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[8:161](2020017.htm#fr_160) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p12"></span>Young priests; lit. ‘followers,’ from
<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p12.1"></span>ἀ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p12.2"></span>κόλουθος</span>.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[8:162](2020017.htm#fr_161) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p12.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p13"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p13.1"></span>τῷ μέσῳ τρόπῳ</span>: besides the meaning
given to these words here they may be taken (1) as describing the
temperate and genial character of the men so characterized, on the
assumption that <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p13.2"></span>μέσος</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p13.3"></span>=</span> <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p13.4"></span>μέτριος</span> as often elsewhere, or (2)
as applicable to those who occupied the middle ground in the
controversy; of these, (2) is not admissible, as nothing has been said
in the immediate context about the controversy, and as age is the main
basis of classification in the passage; (1) also is less probable than
the rendering given above.

<span id="fn_162"></span>[8:163](2020017.htm#fr_162) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p16"></span>Dialectics.

<span id="fn_163"></span>[9:164](2020017.htm#fr_163) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p17"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p17.1"></span>εἷς τῶν ὁμολογητῶν</span> : the term <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p17.2"></span>ὁ</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p17.3"></span>μολογητής</span> was
applied to those who during the persecutions had refused to sacrifice to
idols, persisting in his profession of Christianity in spite of
suffering. Cf. Clem. *Strom.* IV. 12; Petr. Alex. *Epist. Can.* 14.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[9:165](2020017.htm#fr_164) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p19"></span>Euseb. *Life of Const.* III. 13.

<span id="fn_165"></span>[9:166](2020017.htm#fr_165) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p21"></span>The Passover, or Easter.

<span id="fn_166"></span>[9:167](2020017.htm#fr_166) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p23"></span>Macedonian = follower of Macedonius,
not a native resident of Macedonia. Sabinus was the author of a
collection of the acts of the Synod used by Socrates quite freely (cf.
I. 9; II. 15, 17 *et al.*). Socrates, however, criticises him for
prejudice against the orthodox. Sabinus was bishop of the church of the
Macedonians in Heraclea, a city in Thrace.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[10:168](2020017.htm#fr_167) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p25"></span>This is according to the reading of
Valesius, Hussey, and Bright. The reading, ‘*our* Lord,’ &c., of the
English translations in Bagster and Bohn’s series is probably a
typographical error, though strangely perpetuated down to the reprint of
1888.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[10:169](2020017.htm#fr_168) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p26"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p26.1"></span>ομοουσιον</span> , ‘of the same essence’;
the word has become a historic landmark in theological debate, and one
of the stock words of theological terminology.

<span id="fn_169"></span>[10:170](2020017.htm#fr_169) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p26.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p27"></span>This creed is found twelve times in
eleven ancient sources, two versions being given in the Acts of the
Council of Chalcedon. The second version of the Council of Chalcedon
contains certain additions from the creed of Constantinople; all the
rest substantially agree. Cf. Schaff, *Creeds of Christendom,* Vol. I.
p. 24, and Vol. II. p. 60, 91; Walch, *Antiquitates Symbolicæ* (1772),
p. 87 seq.; Hahn, *Bibliothek der Symbole,* p. 40–107, and other
literature referred to in Schaff’s *Creeds,* &c.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[10:171](2020017.htm#fr_170) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p32"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p32.1"></span>κατηχήσει</span> ; the word is used of the
steps preliminary to baptism, chief among which was instruction in the
truth. Cf. VII. 17, and Smith’s *Dict. of the Bible.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[10:172](2020017.htm#fr_171) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p34"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.1"></span>πρωτότοκον πάσης κτίσεως</span>, taken from
[Col. i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.2"></span>. For the uses of <span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.3"></span>πρῶτος</span> instead of <span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iv.viii-p34.4"></span>πρότερος</span>, see
[John i. 15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015)<span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.5"></span>.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[11:173](2020017.htm#fr_172) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p34.6"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p35"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p35.1"></span>μαθητεύσατε</span> , from [Matt. xxviii.
19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019)<span id="ii.iv.viii-p35.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[11:174](2020017.htm#fr_173) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p38"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p38.1"></span>τὸ μάθημα</span>: lit. ‘lesson.’

<span id="fn_174"></span>[11:175](2020017.htm#fr_174) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p40"></span>Through.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[12:176](2020017.htm#fr_175) <span
id="ii.iv.viii-p41.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iv.viii-p42"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p42.1"></span>ἀ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iv.viii-p42.2"></span>γράφοις</span>: lit. ‘unwritten,’ but
defined by Hesychius as above.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Letter of the Synod, relative to its Decisions: and the
Condemnation of Arius and those who agreed with him.](2020018)
