[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020198)  [Next](2020200) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.ix.vii"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.vii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI.—</span>*Gaïnas the Goth attempts
to usurp the Sovereign Power; after filling Constantinople with
Disorder, he is slain.*

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.ix.vii-p2.1"></span>I shall</span> now narrate some memorable
circumstances that occurred at that period, in which it <span
id="page_141">p. 141</span> <span id="ii.ix.vii-Page_141"></span>will be
seen how Divine Providence interposed by extraordinary agencies for the
preservation of the city and Roman empire from the utmost peril. Gaïnas
was a barbarian by extraction but after becoming a Roman subject, and
having engaged in military service, and risen by degrees from one rank
to another, he was at length appointed general-in-chief both of the
Roman horse and foot. When he had obtained this lofty position, he
forgot his position and relations, and was unable to restrain himself
and on the other hand according to the common saying ‘left no stone
unturned’ in order to gain control of the Roman government. To
accomplish this he sent for the Goths out of their own country, and gave
the principal commissions in the army to his relations. Then when
Tribigildus, one of his kinsmen who had the command of the forces in
Phrygia, had at the instigation of Gaïnas broken out into open revolt,
and was filling the people of Phrygia with confusion and dismay, he
managed to have deputed to him the oversight of matters in the disturbed
province. Now the Emperor Arcadius not suspecting \[any harm\] committed
the charge of these affairs to him. Gaïnas therefore immediately set out
at the head of an immense number of the barbarous Goths, apparently on
an expedition against Tribigildus, but with the real intention of
establishing his own unjust domination. On reaching Phrygia he began to
subvert everything. Consequently the affairs of the Romans were
immediately thrown into great consternation, not only on account of the
vast barbarian force which Gaïnas had at his command, but also because
the most fertile and opulent regions of the East were threatened with
desolation. In this emergency the emperor, acting with much prudence,
sought to arrest the course of the barbarian by address: he accordingly
sent him an embassy with instructions to appease him for the present by
every kind of concession. Gaïnas having demanded that Saturninus and
Aurelian, two of the most distinguished of the senatorial order, and men
of consular dignity, whom he knew to be unfavorable to his pretensions,
should be delivered up to him, the emperor most unwillingly yielded to
the exigency of the crisis; and these two persons, prepared to die for
the public good, nobly submitted themselves to the emperor’s disposal.
They therefore proceeded to meet the barbarian, at a place used for
horse-racing some distance from Chalcedon, being resolved to endure
whatever he might be disposed to inflict; but however they suffered no
harm. The usurper simulating dissatisfaction, advanced to Chalcedon,
whither the emperor Arcadius also went to meet him. Both then entered
the church where the body of the martyr Euphemia is deposited, and there
entered into a mutual pledge on oath that neither would plot against the
other. The emperor indeed kept his engagement, having a religious regard
to an oath, and being on that account beloved of God. But Gaïnas soon
violated it, and did not swerve from his original purpose; on the
contrary he was intent on carnage, plunder, and conflagration, not only
against Constantinople, but also against the whole extent of the Roman
empire, if he could by any means carry it into effect. The city was
accordingly quite inundated by the barbarians, and its residents were
reduced to a condition equivalent to that of captives. Moreover so great
was the danger of the city that a comet of prodigious magnitude,
reaching from heaven even to the earth, such as was never before seen,
gave forewarning of it. <span id="fr_844"></span>[845](#fn_844) Gaïnas
first most shamelessly attempted to make a seizure of the silver
publicly exposed for sale in the shops: but when the proprietors,
advised beforehand by report of his intention, abstained from exposing
it on their counters, his thoughts were diverted to another object,
which was to send an immense body of barbarians at night for the purpose
of burning down the palace. Then indeed it appeared distinctly that God
had providential care over the city: for a multitude of angels appeared
to the rebels, in the form of armed men of gigantic stature, before whom
the barbarians, imagining them to be a large army of brave troops,
turned away with terror and departed. When this was reported to Gaïnas,
it seemed to him quite incredible—for he knew that the greatest part of
the Roman army was at a distance, dispersed as a garrison over the
Eastern cities—and he sent others on the following night and repeatedly
afterwards. Now as they constantly returned with the same statement—for
the angels of God always presented themselves in the same form—he came
with a great multitude, and at length became himself a spectator of the
prodigy. Then supposing that what he saw was really a body of soldiers,
and that they concealed themselves by day, and baffled his designs by
night, he desisted from his attempt, and took another resolution which
he conceived would be detrimental to the Romans; but the event proved it
to be greatly to their advantage. Pretending to be under demoniacal
possession, he went forth as if for prayer to the church of *St. John
the Apostle*, which is seven miles distant from the city. Together with
him went barbarians who carried out arms, having concealed them in casks
and other specious coverings. And when the soldiers who guarded the city
gates detected these, and would not suffer them to pass, the barbarians
drew their swords and put them to <span id="page_142">p. 142</span>
<span id="ii.ix.vii-Page_142"></span>death. A fearful tumult thence
arose in the city, and death seemed to threaten every one; nevertheless
the city continued secure at that time, its gates being every where well
defended. The emperor with timely wisdom proclaimed Gaïnas a public
enemy, and ordered that all the barbarians who remained shut up in the
city should be slain. Thus one day after the guards of the gates had
been killed, the Romans attacked the barbarians within the walls near
the church of the Goths—for thither such of them as had been left in the
city had betaken themselves—and after destroying a great number of them
they set the church on fire, and burnt it to the ground. Gaïnas being
informed of the slaughter of those of his party who did not manage to
get out of the city, and perceiving the failure of all his artifices,
left St. John’s church, and advanced rapidly towards Thrace. On reaching
the Chersonnese he endeavored to pass over from thence and take
Lampsacus, in order that from that place he might make himself master of
the Eastern parts. As the emperor had immediately dispatched forces in
pursuit both by land and by sea, another wonderful interposition of
Divine Providence occurred. For while the barbarians, destitute of
ships, hastily put together rafts and were attempting to cross on them,
suddenly the Roman fleet appeared, and the west wind began to blow hard.
This afforded an easy passage to the Romans; but the barbarians with
their horses, tossed up and down in their frail barks by the violence of
the gale, were at length overwhelmed by the waves; many of them also
were destroyed by the Romans. In this manner during the passage a vast
number of the barbarians perished; but Gaïnas departing thence fled into
Thrace, where he fell in with another body of the Roman forces and was
slain by them together with the barbarians that attended him. <span
id="fr_845"></span>[846](#fn_845) Let this cursory notice of Gaïnas
suffice here.

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p5"></span>Those who may desire more minute details
of the circumstances of that war, should read *The Gaïnea* of Eusebius
Scholasticus, <span id="fr_846"></span>[847](#fn_846) who was at that
time a pupil of Troïlus the sophist; and having been a spectator of the
war, related the events of it in an heroic poem consisting of four
books; and inasmuch as the events alluded to had but recently taken
place, he acquired for himself great celebrity. The poet Ammonius has
also very lately composed another description in verse of the same
transactions, which he recited before the emperor in the sixteenth
consulate <span id="fr_847"></span>[848](#fn_847) of Theodosius the
younger, which he bore with Faustus.

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p8"></span>This war was terminated under the
consulate of Stilicho and Aurelian. <span
id="fr_848"></span>[849](#fn_848) The year following, <span
id="fr_849"></span>[850](#fn_849) the consulate was celebrated by
Fravitus also a Goth by extraction, who was honored by the Romans, and
showed great fidelity and attachment to them, rendering important
services in this very war. For this reason he attained to the dignity of
consul. In that year on the tenth of April there was born a son to the
Emperor Arcadius, the good Theodosius.

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p11"></span>But while the affairs of the state were
thus troubled, the dignitaries of the Church refrained not in the least
from their disgraceful cabals against each other, to the great reproach
of the Christian religion; for during this time the ecclesiastics
incited tumults against each other. The source of the mischief
originated in Egypt in the following manner.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_844"></span>[141:845](2020199.htm#fr_844) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p3"></span>Cf. Vergil, *Georg.* I. 488, ‘Nec diri
toties arsere cometæ’; and *Am.* X. 272–274.

<span id="fn_845"></span>[142:846](2020199.htm#fr_845) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p4"></span>Cf. an account of Gaïnas and his
rebellion in Zosimus, V. 18–22.

<span id="fn_846"></span>[142:847](2020199.htm#fr_846) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p6"></span>On the surname of ‘Scholasticus,’ see
Introd. p. ix. note 20, also Macar. *Homil.* 15, §24. On Eusebius
Scholasticus, see Smith and Wace, *Eusebius* (134) *Scholasticus.*

<span id="fn_847"></span>[142:848](2020199.htm#fr_847) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p7"></span>438 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.vii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_848"></span>[142:849](2020199.htm#fr_848) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p9"></span>400 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.vii-p9.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_849"></span>[142:850](2020199.htm#fr_849) <span
id="ii.ix.vii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="ii.ix.vii-p10"></span>401 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.ix.vii-p10.1"></span>a.d.</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dissension between Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria and the Monks
of the Desert. Condemnation of Origen's Books.](2020200)
