[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020185)  [Next](2020187.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.viii.xxii"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXI</span>.—*Peculiar Schism among
the Novatians.* <span id="fr_760"></span>[761](#fn_760.md)

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p3"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p3.1"></span>Of</span> the Novatian church at
Constantinople Agelius was the bishop for the space of forty
years, <span id="fr_761"></span>[762](#fn_761.md) viz. from the reign of
Constantine until the sixth year of that of the emperor Theodosius, as I
have stated somewhere previously. <span
id="fr_762"></span>[763](#fn_762.md) He perceiving his end approaching,
ordained Sisinnius to succeed him in the bishopric. <span
id="fr_763"></span>[764](#fn_763.md) This person was a presbyter of the
church over which Agelius presided, remarkably eloquent, and had been
instructed in philosophy by Maximus, at the same time as the emperor
Julian. Now as the Novatian laity were dissatisfied with this election,
and wished rather that he had ordained Marcian, a man of eminent piety,
on account of whose influence their sect had been left unmolested during
the reign of Valens, Agelius therefore to allay his people’s discontent,
laid his hands on Marcian also. Having recovered a little from his
illness, he went to the church and thus of his own accord addressed the
congregation: ‘After my decease let Marcian be your bishop; and after
Marcian, Sisinnius.’ He survived these words but a short time; Marcian
accordingly having been constituted bishop of the Novatians, a division
arose in their church also, from this cause. Marcian had promoted to the
rank of presbyter a converted Jew named Sabbatius, who nevertheless
continued to retain many of his Jewish prejudices; and moreover he was
very ambitious of being made a bishop. Having therefore confidentially
attached to his interest two presbyters, Theoctistus and Macarius, who
were cognizant of his designs, he resolved to defend that innovation
made by the Novatians in the time of Valens, at Pazum a village of
Phrygia, concerning the festival of Easter, to which I have already
adverted. <span id="fr_764"></span>[765](#fn_764.md) And in the first
place, under pretext of more ascetic austerity, he privately withdrew
from the church, saying that ‘he was grieved on account of certain
persons whom he suspected of being unworthy of participation in the
sacrament.’ It was however soon discovered that his object was to hold
assemblies apart. When Marcian understood this, he bitterly censured his
own error, in ordaining to the presbyterate persons so intent on
vain-glory; and frequently said, ‘That it had been better for him to
have laid his hands on thorns, than to have imposed them on Sabbatius.’
To check his proceedings, he procured a Synod of Novatian bishops to be
convened at Angarum, <span id="fr_765"></span>[766](#fn_765.md) a
commercial town near Helenopolis in Bithynia. On assembling here they
summoned Sabbatius, and desired him to explain the cause of his
discontent. Upon his affirming that he was troubled about the
disagreement that existed respecting the Feast of Easter, and that it
ought to be kept according to the custom of the Jews, and agreeable to
that sanction which those convened at Pazum had appointed, the bishops
present at the Synod perceiving that this assertion was a mere
subterfuge to disguise his desire after the episcopal chair, obliged him
to pledge himself on oath that he would never accept a bishopric. When
he had so sworn, they passed a canon respecting this feast, which they
entitled ‘indifferent,’ declaring that ‘a disagreement on such a point
was not a sufficient reason for separation from the church; and that the
council of Pazum had done nothing prejudicial to the catholic canon.
That although the ancients who lived nearest to the times of the
apostles differed about the observance of this festival, it did not
prevent their communion with one another, nor create any dissension.
Besides that the Novatians at imperial Rome had never followed the
Jewish usage, but always kept Easter after the equinox; and yet they did
not separate from those of their own faith, who celebrated it on a
different day.’ From these and many such considerations, they made the
‘Indifferent’ Canon, above-mentioned, concerning Easter, whereby every
one was at liberty to keep the custom which he had by predilection in
this matter, if he so pleased; and that it should make no difference as
regards communion, but even though celebrating differently they should
be in accord in the church. After this rule had been thus <span
id="page_130">p. 130</span> <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-Page_130"></span>established, Sabbatius being bound by
his oath, anticipated the fast by keeping it in private, whenever any
discrepancy existed in the time of the Paschal solemnity, and having
watched all night, he celebrated the sabbath of the passover; then on
the next day he went to church, and with the rest of the congregation
partook of the sacraments. He pursued this course for many years, so
that it could not be concealed from the people; in imitation of which
some of the more ignorant, and chiefly the Phrygians and Galatians,
supposing they should be justified by this conduct imitated him, and
kept the passover in secret after his manner. But Sabbatius afterwards
disregarding the oath by which he had renounced the episcopal dignity,
held schismatic meetings, and was constituted bishop of his followers,
as we shall show hereafter. <span id="fr_766"></span>[767](#fn_766.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_760"></span>[129:761](2020186.htm#fr_760.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p1.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p2"></span>The main reason adduced for
considering Socrates a Novatian is his peculiarly detailed account of
the Novatian heresy, and the nearness in which he puts it to the
orthodox faith. See Introd. p. ix and chap. 19 of this book, note 8;
also II. 38 and VI. 21.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[129:762](2020186.htm#fr_761.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p4"></span>See above, chap. 12, note 2. This was
in 384 <span class="c13"><span id="ii.viii.xxii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>

<span id="fn_762"></span>[129:763](2020186.htm#fr_762.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p5"></span>IV. 9 and 12 of this book.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[129:764](2020186.htm#fr_763.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p6"></span>On the irregularity of this action,
see chap. 15 above, note 1. Sisinnius is again mentioned in VI. 1. 31;
VII. 6 and 12.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[129:765](2020186.htm#fr_764.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p7"></span>Cf. IV. 28.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[129:766](2020186.htm#fr_765.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p8"></span>Probably the modern Angora. Valesius
however, had conjecturally substituted the word Sangarum in this place,
supposing that the place named was a town on the banks of the river
Sangarius.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[130:767](2020186.htm#fr_766.md) <span
id="ii.viii.xxii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="ii.viii.xxii-p9"></span>Cf. VII. 5 and 12.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Author's Views respecting the Celebration of Easter, Baptism,
Fasting, Marriage, the Eucharist, and Other Ecclesiastical
Rites.](2020187.md)
