[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020374)  [Next](2020376) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xiii"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p1.1"></span>Chapter XIII</span>.—*Innovations of
Eudoxius censured in a Letter written by George, Bishop of Laodicea.
Deputation from the Council of Ancyra to Constantius*.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p2.1"></span>After</span> Eudoxius had introduced these
new doctrines, many members of the church of Antioch, who were opposed
to them, were excommunicated. <span id="fr_1317"></span>[1318](#fn_1317)
George, bishop of Laodicea, gave them a letter to take to the bishops
who had been invited from the neighboring towns of Ancyra in Galatia by
Basil, for the purpose of consecrating a church which he had erected.
This letter was as follows:—

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p4"></span>“George, to his most honored lords
Macedonius, Basil, Cecropius, and Eugenius, sends greeting in the Lord.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p5"></span>“Nearly the whole city has suffered
from the shipwreck of Aëtius. The disciples of this wicked man, whom you
contemned, have been encouraged by Eudoxius, and promoted by him to
clerical appointments, and Aëtius himself has been raised to the highest
honor. Go, then, to the assistance of this great city, lest by its
shipwreck the whole world should be submerged. Assemble yourselves
together, and solicit the signatures of other bishops, that Aëtius may
be ejected from the church of Antioch, and that his disciples who have
been manipulated beforehand into the lists of the clergy by Eudoxius,
may be cut off. If Eudoxius persist in affirming with Aëtius, that the
Son is dissimilar from the Father, and in preferring those who uphold
this dogma to those who reject it, the city of Antioch is lost to you.”
Such was the strain of George’s letter.

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p6"></span>The bishops who were assembled at
Ancyra clearly perceived by the enactments of Eudoxius at Antioch, that
he contemplated the introduction of innovations in doctrine; they
apprised the emperor of this fact, and besought him that the doctrine
established at Sardica, at Sirmium, and at other councils, might be
confirmed, and especially the dogma that the Son is of like substance
with the Father. In order to proffer this request to the emperor, they
sent to him a deputation composed of the following bishops: Basil,
bishop of Ancyra; Eustathius, bishop of Sebaste; Eleusius, bishop of
Cyzicus; and Leontius, the presbyter of the imperial bed-chamber. On
their arrival at the palace, they found that Asphalius, a presbyter of
Antioch, and a zealot of the Aëtian heresy, was on the point of taking
his departure, after having terminated the business for which he
undertook the journey and having obtained a letter from the emperor. On
receiving, however, the intelligence concerning the heresy conveyed by
the deputation from Ancyra, Constantius condemned Eudoxius and his
followers, withdrew the letter he had confided to Asphalius, and wrote
the following one:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1317"></span>[308:1318](2020375.htm#fr_1317) <span
id="iii.ix.xiii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xiii-p3"></span>Philost. iv. 4–6, 8; x. 12; and
fragment in Suidas s. Eudoxius; Athan. *Hist. Arian.* 4, 5; Hil. *de
Synod.* 8, 9, 90; Soc. ii. 37, 40; Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 25, 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Letter of the Emperor Constantius against Eudoxius and his
Partisans.](2020376)
