[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020325)  [Next](2020327.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-p1"></span><span id="page_274">p. 274</span>
<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-Page_274"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxiv-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIV</span>.—*Some Indian Nations
received Christianity at that Time through the Instrumentality of Two
Captives, Frumentius and Edesius*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxiv-p2.1"></span>We</span> have heard that about this
period some of the most distant of the nations that we call Indians, to
whom the preaching of Bartholomew was unknown, shared in our doctrine,
through Frumentius, <span id="fr_1184"></span>[1185](#fn_1184.md) who
became a priest and teacher of the sacred learning among them. But in
order that we may know, even by the marvel of what happened in India,
that the doctrine of the Christians ought to be received as a system not
from man, as it seems a tissue of miracles to some, it is necessary to
relate the reason for the ordination of Frumentius. It was as follows:
The most celebrated philosophers among the Greeks explored unknown
cities and regions. Plato, the friend of Socrates, dwelt for a time
among the Egyptians, in order to acquaint himself with their manners and
customs. He likewise sailed to Sicily for the sight of its craters,
whence, as from a fountain, spontaneously issued streams of fire, which
frequently overflowing, rushed like a river and consumed the neighboring
regions, so that even yet many fields appear burnt and cannot be sown or
planted with trees, just as they narrate about the land of Sodom. These
craters were likewise explored by Empedocles, a man highly celebrated
for philosophy among the Greeks, and who has expounded his knowledge in
heroic verse. He set out to investigate this fiery eruption, when either
because he thought such a mode of death preferable to any other, or
because, to speak more truthfully, he perhaps knew not wherefore he
should seek to terminate his life in this manner, he leaped into the
fire and perished. Democritus of Coös explored many cities and climates
and nations, and he says concerning himself that eighty years of his
life were spent in traveling through foreign lands. Besides these
philosophers, thousands of wise men among the Greeks, ancient and
modern, devoted themselves to this travel. In emulation, Meropius, a
philosopher of Tyre in Phœnicia, journeyed as far as India. They say he
was accompanied by two youths, named Frumentius and Edesius; they were
his relatives; he conducted their rhetorical training, and educated them
liberally. After exploring India as much as possible, he set out for
home, and embarked in a vessel which was on the point of sailing for
Egypt. It happened that, from want of water or some other necessary, the
vessel was obliged to stop at some port, and the Indians rushed upon it
and murdered all, Meropius included. These Indians had just thrown off
their alliance with the Romans; they took the boys as living captives,
because they pitied their youth, and conducted them to their king. He
appointed the younger one his cup-bearer; the older, Frumentius, he put
over his house and made him administrator of his treasures; for he
perceived that he was intelligent and very capable in business. These
youths served the king usefully and faithfully during a long course of
years, and when he felt his end approaching, his son and wife surviving,
he rewarded the good-will of the servants with liberty, and permitted
them to go where they pleased. They were anxious to return to Tyre,
where their relatives resided; but the king’s son being a minor, his
mother besought them to remain for a little while and take charge of
public affairs, until her son reached the years of manhood. They yielded
to her entreaties, and directed the affairs of the kingdom and of the
government of the Indies. Frumentius, by some Divine impulse, perhaps
because God moved him spontaneously, inquired whether there were any
Christians in India, or Romans among the merchants, who had sailed
thither. Having succeeded in finding the objects of his inquiry, he
summoned them into his presence, treated them with love and
friendliness, and convened them for prayer, and the assembly was
conducted after the Roman usage; and when he had built houses of prayer,
he encouraged them to honor God continually.

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-p4"></span>When the king’s son attained the age
of manhood, Frumentius and Edesius besought him and the queen, and not
without difficulty persuaded the rulers to be separated from themselves,
and having parted as friends, they went back as Roman subjects. Edesius
went to Tyre to see his relatives, and was soon after advanced to the
dignity of presbyter. Frumentius, however, instead of returning to
Phœnicia, repaired to Alexandria; for with him patriotism and filial
piety were subordinate to religious zeal. He conferred with Athanasius,
the head of the Alexandrian Church, described to him the state of
affairs in India, and the necessity of appointing a bishop over the
Christians located in that country. Athanasius assembled the endemic
priests, and consulted with them on the subject; and he ordained
Frumentius bishop of India, since he was peculiarly qualified and apt to
do much service among those among whom he was the first to manifest the
name of Christian, and the seed of the participation in the doctrine was
sown. <span id="fr_1185"></span>[1186](#fn_1185.md) Frumentius, therefore,
returned to India, and, it is said, discharged the priestly functions so
admirably that he became an object of uni<span id="page_275">p.
275</span> <span id="iii.vii.xxiv-Page_275"></span>versal admiration,
and was revered as no less than an apostle. God highly honored him,
enabling him to perform many wonderful cures, and to work signs and
wonders. Such was the origin of the Indian priesthood.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1184"></span>[274:1185](2020326.htm#fr_1184.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxiv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-p3"></span>Ruf. i. 9, who gathered the facts from
Edesius himself. Cf. Soc. i. 19. Soz. substitutes the scientific order
of Plato, Empedocles, and Democritus for that of Metrodorus. The story
is briefly reported by Theodoret, *H. E.* i. 23.

<span id="fn_1185"></span>[274:1186](2020326.htm#fr_1185.md) <span
id="iii.vii.xxiv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxiv-p5"></span>Athan. *Apol. ad Const.* 29–31.
Frumentius was called the Abba Salama of <span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vii.xxiv-p5.1"></span>Αὐξούμις</span> (Axum). Cf. *Historia
Ethiopica,* Ludolf; Nic. Call. repeats this story of Rufinus in his *H.
E.* i. 37, with which compare the narrative in xvii. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Council of Tyre; Illegal Deposition of St. Athanasius.](2020327.md)
