[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020006)  [Next](2020008.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.iii.iii"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p1.1"></span>III. Socrates’ Ecclesiastical
History</span>.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p2.1"></span>Until</span> the beginning of the fourth
century historiography remained a pagan science. With the exception of
the Acts of the Apostles and its apocryphal imitations, no sort of
attempt had <span id="page_xiv">p. xiv</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xiv"></span>been made to record even the annals of
the Christian Church. At the opening of the fourth century Eusebius
conceived the idea of writing a history which should include a complete
account of the Church’s life to his own days. Hence he has correctly
been called the Father of Church History. His work was done so
satisfactorily to his contemporaries and immediate successors that none
of them undertook to go over the same field again. <span
id="fr_60"></span>[61](#fn_60.md) They estimated the thoroughness and
accuracy of his work much higher than later ages have done. But this
respect, which enhanced the magnitude of his work in their eyes, at the
same time inspired many of them with a desire to imitate him.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p4"></span>Thus a school of church historians
arose, and a number of continuations of Eusebius’ *History* were
undertaken. Of these, six are known to have seen the light: three of
these again are either in part or wholly lost; viz., those of *Philippus
Sidetes*, of *Philastorgius*, and of *Hesychius*. The first because of
internal characteristics which made it difficult to use; the second
because its author was a heretic (an Arian), and with the wane of the
sect to which he belonged, his work lost favor and was gradually
ostracized by the orthodox, and thus was lost, with the exception of an
abstract preserved by Photius; and the third, for reasons unknown and
undiscoverable, met with the same fate, not leaving even as much as an
abstract behind. The remaining three are the histories of *Socrates*,
*Sozomen*, and *Theodoret.* That of Theodoret begins with the rise of
Arianism, and ends with Theodore of Mopsuestia (429 <span
class="c13"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p4.1"></span>a.d.</span>). That of
Sozomen was begun with the purpose of including the history of the years
between 323 (date of the overthrow of Licinius by Constantine) and 439
(the seventeenth consulship of Theodosius the Younger), but for some
reason was closed with the death of the Emperor Honorius (423), and so
covers just one hundred years. The work of Socrates, being evidently
older than either of the other two, is more directly a continuation of
the *Ecclesiastical History* of Eusebius. The motives which actuated him
to continue the narratives of Eusebius may be gathered from the work to
be his love for history, <span id="fr_61"></span>[62](#fn_61.md) especially
that of his own times, <span id="fr_62"></span>[63](#fn_62.md) his respect
for Eusebius, and the exhortation of Theodorus, to whom the work is
dedicated. <span id="fr_63"></span>[64](#fn_63.md) The author opens with a
statement of his purpose to take up the account where Eusebius had left
it off, and to review such matters as, according to his judgment, had
not been adequately treated by his predecessor. Accordingly he begins
with the accession of Constantine (306 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p7.2"></span>a.d.</span>), when the persecution begun by
Diocletian came to an end, and stops with the year 439. He mentions the
number of years included in his work as 140. As a matter of fact, only
133 years are recorded; but the number given by the author is doubtless
not meant to be rather a round than a precise number. The close of his
history is the seventeenth consulship of Theodosius the Younger—the same
as the proposed end of Sozomen’s work. Why Socrates did not continue his
history later is not known, except perhaps because, as he alleges, peace
and prosperity seemed to be assured to the church, and history is made
not in time of peace, but in the turmoils and disturbances of war and
debate. The period covered by the work is very eventful. It is during
this period that three of the most important councils of the church were
held: those of Nicæa (325), of Constantinople (381), and the first
council of Ephesus (431), besides the second of Ephesus, called the
“*Robbers’* Council” (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p7.3"></span>λῃστρική</span>), and that of Chalcedon,
which were held not much later. It is this period which saw the church
coming to the ascendant. Instead of its being persecuted, or even merely
tolerated, it then becomes dominant. With its day of peace from without
comes the day of its internal strife, and so <span id="page_xv">p.
xv</span> <span id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xv"></span>various sects and
heresies spring up and claim attention in church history. Socrates
appreciated the importance which these contentions gave to his
work. <span id="fr_64"></span>[65](#fn_64.md)

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p9"></span>Geographically Socrates’ work is limited
to the East. The western branch of the church is mentioned in it only as
it enters into relations with the eastern. The division of the history
into seven books is made on the basis of the succession in the eastern
branch of the Roman Empire. The seven books cover the reigns of eight
eastern emperors. Two of these reigns—that of Julian (361–363) and that
of Jovian (363–364)—were so brief that they are combined and put into
one book, but otherwise the books are each devoted to the reign of one
emperor. The first book treats of the church under Constantine the Great
(306–337); the second, of the period under Constantius II. (337–360);
the third, of that under Julian and Jovian taken together (360–364); the
fourth, of the church under Valens (364–378); the fifth, of Theodosius
the Great (379–395); the sixth, of Arcadius (395–408); and the seventh,
to those years of Theodosius the Younger (408–439) which came within the
period of Socrates’ work.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p10"></span>As the title of the work (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p10.1"></span>᾽</span><span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p10.2"></span>Εκκλησιαστικὴ
῾Ιστορία</span>) indicates, the subject is chiefly the vicissitudes and
experiences of the Christian Church; but the author finds various
reasons for interweaving with the account of ecclesiastical affairs some
record also of the affairs of the state. His statement <span
id="fr_65"></span>[66](#fn_65.md) of these reasons puts first among them
the relief his readers would experience by passing from the accounts of
the perpetual wranglings of bishops to something of a different
character; second, the information which all ought to have on secular as
well as ecclesiastical matters; and third, the interlacing of these two
lines, on account of which the understanding of the one cannot be full
without some knowledge of the other. ‘By a sort of sympathy,’ says he,
‘the church takes part in the disturbances of the state,’ and ‘since the
emperors became Christians, the affairs of the church have become
dependent on them, and the greatest synods have been held and are held
at their bidding.’ It cannot be said, however, that Socrates either
thoroughly realized or attempted any systematic treatment of his subject
from the point of view of the true relations of church and state; he
simply had the consciousness that the two spheres were not as much
dissociated as one might assume.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p12"></span>On the general character of Socrates’
*History* it may be said that, compared with those produced by his
contemporaries, it is a work of real merit, surpassing in some respects
even that of his great predecessor, Eusebius. The latter has confused
his account by adopting, under the influence of his latest informant,
differing versions of facts already narrated, without erasing the
previous versions or attempting to harmonize or unify them. Compare with
this feature Socrates’ careful and complete revision of his first two
books on obtaining new and more trustworthy information. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[67](#fn_66.md)

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p14"></span>In the collection of his facts Socrates
everywhere tried to reach primary sources. A great portion of his work
is drawn from oral tradition, the accounts given by friends and
countrymen, the common, but not wild, rumors of the capital, and the
transient literature of the day. Whenever he depends on such
information, Socrates attempts to reach as far as possible the accounts
of eye-witnesses, <span id="fr_67"></span>[68](#fn_67.md) and appends any
doubts he may have as to the truth of the statements they make. Of
written works he has used for the period where his work and that of
Eusebius overlap the latter’s *Ecclesiastical History* and *Life of
Constantine*; <span id="fr_68"></span>[69](#fn_68.md) for other events he
follows Rufinus, <span id="fr_69"></span>[70](#fn_69.md) abandoning him,
however, in his second edition, whenever he conflicts with more
trustworthy authorities. He has also made use of Archelaus’
*Acts*, <span id="fr_70"></span>[71](#fn_70.md) of Sabinus’ *Collection of
the Acts of the Synods*, which he criticises for unfairness, <span
id="fr_71"></span>[72](#fn_71.md) Epiphanius’ *Ancoratus*, <span
id="fr_72"></span>[73](#fn_72.md) George of Laodicea, <span
id="fr_73"></span>[74](#fn_73.md) Athanasius’ *Apolog.,* <span
id="fr_74"></span>[75](#fn_74.md) *de Syn.*, <span
id="fr_75"></span>[76](#fn_75.md) and *de Decr. Nic*., <span
id="fr_76"></span>[77](#fn_76.md) Evagrius, <span
id="fr_77"></span>[78](#fn_77.md) Palladius, <span
id="fr_78"></span>[79](#fn_78.md) Nestorius, <span
id="fr_79"></span>[80](#fn_79.md) and Origen. <span
id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80.md) <span id="page_xvi">p. xvi</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xvi"></span>Christian writers before Origen are
known to him and mentioned by him, such as Irenæus, Clement of
Alexandria, Apollinaris the Elder, Serapion, and others; but he does not
seem to have used their works as sources, probably because they threw no
light on the subject at hand, his period being entirely different from
that in which they flourished. Besides these writers, Socrates has also
used public documents, pastoral and episcopal letters, decrees, acts,
and other documents not previously incorporated in written works. Some
of these the author has used, but does not quote *in extenso*, on
account of their length. <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81.md) Of the
sources that he might have used, but has not, may be mentioned Dexippus,
Eunapius (<span class="Greek"><span id="ii.iii.iii-p29.1"></span>χρονικὴ
ἱστορία</span>), Olympiodorus (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p29.2"></span>λόγοι ἱστορικοί</span>), and especially
Zosimus, his contemporary (<span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p29.3"></span>ἱ</span><span class="Greek"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p29.4"></span>στορία νέα</span>). Whether these were
unknown to him, or whether he deemed it unnecessary to make use of the
information given by them, or considered them untrustworthy, it cannot
be ascertained. It is sufficient to say that for the period he covers,
and the geographical limitation he has put on his work, his array of
facts is sufficiently large and to the purpose. The use he makes of
these facts also shows sufficiently the historian as thorough as he
could be considering the time and environment in which he flourished.
There is an evident attempt throughout his work at precision. He marks
the succession of bishops, the years in which each event took place by
the consulships and Olympiads of Roman and Greek history. He has made
painstaking investigations on various topics, such as the different
usages in various localities, respecting the observance of Easter, the
performance of the rites of baptism and marriage, the manner of fasting,
of church assemblies, and other ecclesiastical usages. <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82.md) His accuracy has been questioned from the
time of Photius <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83.md) to our own days. It
cannot be denied that there are a number of errors in the *History*. He
confused Maximian and Maximin. <span id="fr_84"></span>[85](#fn_84.md) He
ascribes three ‘Creeds’ to the first Council of Sirmium, whereas these
belonged to other councils. In general he is confused on the individuals
to whom he ascribes the authorship of the Sirmian creeds. <span
id="fr_85"></span>[86](#fn_85.md) Similar confusion and lack of
trustworthiness is noticed in his version of the sufferings of Paul of
Constantinople and the vicissitudes of the life of Athanasius. He has
wrongly given the number of those who dissented from the decision of the
Council of Nicæa as five. The letter of the Council only mentions
two,—Theonas and Secundus. The exile of Eusebius and Theognis is
ascribed to a later period and a different cause by Jerome and
Philostorgius, and it is generally conceded that Socrates’ information
was erroneous on this subject also. He is incorrect on several
particulars in the lives of Basil and Gregory of Nazianzus, as also in
assigning the attack at night on the church of St. Theonas to the
usurpation of Gregory, the Arian bishop of Alexandria. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[87](#fn_86.md)

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p35"></span>The chronology of Socrates is generally
accurate to about the beginning of the sixth book, or the year 398. A
number of errors are found in it after that. But even before the date
named, the dates of the Council of Sardica (347) and of the death of
Athanasius (373, for which Socrates gives 371) are given wrong. St.
Polycarp’s martyrdom is also put out of its proper place by about one
hundred years. <span id="fr_87"></span>[88](#fn_87.md) Valens’ stay at
Antioch and persecution of the orthodox is put too early. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[89](#fn_88.md) The Olympiads are given wrong. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[90](#fn_89.md)

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p39"></span>Socrates is generally ignorant of the
affairs of the Western Church. He gives a cursory account of Ambrose,
but says nothing of the great Augustine, or even of the Donatist
controversy, in spite of all its significance and also of the extreme
probability that he knew of it; as Pelagius and Celestius, who traveled
in the East about this time, could not but have made the Eastern Church
acquainted with its details. In speaking of the Arian council of Antioch
in 341, he seems to think that the Roman bishop had a sort of veto-power
over the decisions of Occidental councils. The only legitimate
inference, however, from the language of the bishop’s claim is that he
thought he had a right to be invited to attend in common with the other
bishops of Italy. <span id="fr_90"></span>[91](#fn_90.md) So, <span
id="page_xvii">p. xvii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xvii"></span>again, on the duration of the fast
preceding Easter among the western churches, he makes the mistaken
statement that it was three weeks, and that Saturdays and Sundays were
excepted.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p41"></span>Finally, the credence which Socrates
gives to stories of miracles and portents must be noted as a blemish in
his history. On the other hand, he was certainly not more credulous than
his contemporaries in this respect; many of them, if we are to judge
from Sozomen as an illustration, were much more so. The age was not
accustomed to sifting accounts critically with a view to the elimination
of the untrue. Socrates shows in this respect the historical instinct in
the matter of distinguishing between various degrees of probability and
credibility, but does not seem to exercise this instinct in dealing with
accounts of the prodigious.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p42"></span>To offset these faults we must take
account, on the other hand, of the persistent and successful attempt of
our historian at impartiality. Of all the Christian writers of his day
he is the fairest towards those who differed from the creed of his
church. No one else has done justice to Julian, <span
id="fr_91"></span>[92](#fn_91.md) or to the various heretical sects of the
day, as Socrates has. To avoid even the appearance of partiality, he
makes a rule for himself not to speak in terms of praise of any living
person; <span id="fr_92"></span>[93](#fn_92.md) and it must be said that he
faithfully observes this rule, making but one exception in favor of the
emperor Theodosius the Younger. <span id="fr_93"></span>[94](#fn_93.md) Of
this prince he gives a eulogistic picture, altogether different from the
representations universally found in the other historians of the
age. <span id="fr_94"></span>[95](#fn_94.md) His independence of judgment
is more signally manifested in his estimates of ecclesiastics,
especially the more prominent ones, <span id="fr_95"></span>[96](#fn_95.md)
bordering at times on unjust severity. ‘In short,’ says Harnack, summing
up his estimate of Socrates, ‘the rule to be applied to Socrates is that
his learning and knowledge can be trusted only a little, but his good
will and straightforwardness a great deal. Considering the circumstances
under which he wrote and the miseries of the times, it can only be
matter for congratulation that such a man should have been our informant
and that his work has been preserved to us.’ <span
id="fr_96"></span>[97](#fn_96.md)

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p49"></span>Socrates’ style is characterized by
simplicity and perspicuity. From the very start he informs us that he is
about to make a new departure in this respect. <span
id="fr_97"></span>[98](#fn_97.md) Eusebius’ language was not entirely
satisfactory to him, nor that of older writers. <span
id="fr_98"></span>[99](#fn_98.md) Hence his own attempt everywhere at
plain, unadorned expression. The criticism of Photius, <span
id="fr_99"></span>[100](#fn_99.md) that Socrates’ style ‘had nothing
remarkable about it,’ although made in the spirit of censure, is true,
and according to Socrates’ standard (which is also that of modern times)
amounts to a commendation. Socrates, however, was not lacking in good
humor and satire, <span id="fr_100"></span>[101](#fn_100.md) as well as in
appreciation of short and pithy utterances; he often quotes proverbs and
epigrammatic sayings, <span id="fr_101"></span>[102](#fn_101.md) and knows
the influence of the anecdote and reminiscence in interesting the
reader.

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p55"></span>The value of Socrates’ *History* cannot
be overestimated. It will always remain a source of primary importance.
Though, as already noted, its ideal as a history is below that set up by
Thucydides, Tacitus, and others of an earlier age,—below even that of
Eusebius,—yet as a collection of facts and documents in regard to some
of the most important events of the church’s life it is invaluable. Its
account of the great Arian controversy, its details of the Councils of
Nicæa, Chalcedon, Constantinople, and Ephesus, besides those of the
lesser, local conventions, its biographical items relative to the lives
of the emperors, the bishops, and monks—some of whom are of pivotal
importance in the movements of the times, its sketches of Ulphilas and
Hypatia, its record of the manner and time of the conversion of the
Saracens, the Goths, the Burgundians, the Iberians, and the Persians, as
well as of the persecution of the Jews, the paschal controversy, <span
id="page_xviii">p. xviii</span> <span
id="ii.iii.iii-Page_xviii"></span>not to mention a vast number of other
details of minor importance, will always be read and used with the
deepest interest by lovers of ecclesiastical history.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_60"></span>[xiv:61](2020007.htm#fr_60.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p3"></span>That this was not due to a general
conviction that one history of a period rendered another of the same
period unnecessary is evident from the fact that the period immediately
succeeding is treated of by three successive historians, and that the
second of these, at least, knows and uses the work of his predecessor.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[xiv:62](2020007.htm#fr_61.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p5"></span>Harnack, however, successfully proves
that Socrates’ ideal of history, in spite of his love for it, was far
from being the scientific idea which existed among pagan writers even of
the age preceding his own. Cf. Herzog-Plitt, *Real-Encyk*. Vol. 14, p.
413 sq.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[xiv:63](2020007.htm#fr_62.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p6"></span>VI. 1.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[xiv:64](2020007.htm#fr_63.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p7"></span>Cf. II. 1; VI. Int.; VII. 47. This
Theodorus is simply addressed as ἱερὲ τοῦ θεοῦ ἄνθρωπε, from which it
has been rightly inferred that he was an ordained presbyter. The view
that Theodore of Mopsuestia is the person addressed has been proved to
be erroneous from the date of his death, 429 <span class="c13"><span
id="ii.iii.iii-p7.1"></span>a.d.</span> The *Ecclesiastical History* was
no doubt completed after that event, and could not have contained an
address to the eminent Theodore.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[xv:65](2020007.htm#fr_64.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p7.4"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p8"></span>VII. 47.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[xv:66](2020007.htm#fr_65.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p10.3"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p11"></span>V. Int.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[xv:67](2020007.htm#fr_66.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p13"></span>II. 1. The new information here
referred to is drawn from the works of Athanasius, which had come into
the hands of the author. Cf. II. 17.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[xv:68](2020007.htm#fr_67.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p15"></span>I. Int.; V. 19; VI. Int.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[xv:69](2020007.htm#fr_68.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p16"></span>I. 8.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[xv:70](2020007.htm#fr_69.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p16.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p17"></span>I. 12, 19; II. 1; III. 19; IV. 24, 26.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[xv:71](2020007.htm#fr_70.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p18"></span>I. 22.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[xv:72](2020007.htm#fr_71.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p19"></span>I. 8; II. 15, 17, 20; III. 10, 25; IV.
12, 22.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[xv:73](2020007.htm#fr_72.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p20"></span>V. 24.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[xv:74](2020007.htm#fr_73.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p21"></span>I. 24.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[xv:75](2020007.htm#fr_74.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p22"></span>II. 28; III. 8.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[xv:76](2020007.htm#fr_75.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p22.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p23"></span>II. 37.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[xv:77](2020007.htm#fr_76.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p24"></span>VI. 13.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[xv:78](2020007.htm#fr_77.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p24.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p25"></span>III. 7.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[xv:79](2020007.htm#fr_78.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p26"></span>IV. 23.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[xv:80](2020007.htm#fr_79.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p27"></span>VII. 19–24.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[xv:81](2020007.htm#fr_80.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p27.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p28"></span>III. 7.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[xvi:82](2020007.htm#fr_81.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p28.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p29"></span>II. 17.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[xvi:83](2020007.htm#fr_82.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p29.5"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p30"></span>V. 22.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[xvi:84](2020007.htm#fr_83.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p30.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p31"></span>Phot. *Biblioth. Cod*. 28. ἀλλὰ καὶ ἐν
τοῖς δόγμασι οὐ λίαν ἀκριβής. Whether in this phrase he meant to accuse
Socrates with inaccuracy in the narration of facts or indifference to
theological dogma is not very clear. Probably the former.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[xvi:85](2020007.htm#fr_84.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p31.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p32"></span>I. 2.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[xvi:86](2020007.htm#fr_85.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p32.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p33"></span>II. 30.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[xvi:87](2020007.htm#fr_86.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p33.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p34"></span>II. 11.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[xvi:88](2020007.htm#fr_87.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p35.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p36"></span>V. 22.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[xvi:89](2020007.htm#fr_88.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p36.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p37"></span>IV. 17.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[xvi:90](2020007.htm#fr_89.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p37.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p38"></span>On the chronology of Socrates, see
Harnack and Jeep.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[xvi:91](2020007.htm#fr_90.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p39.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p40"></span>II. 8 and 17.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[xvii:92](2020007.htm#fr_91.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p42.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p43"></span>III. 1, 12, 14, 21, 23.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[xvii:93](2020007.htm#fr_92.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p43.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p44"></span>VI. Int.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[xvii:94](2020007.htm#fr_93.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p44.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p45"></span>VII. 22.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[xvii:95](2020007.htm#fr_94.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p45.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p46"></span>Cf. Sozomen, IX. 1, and Gibbon, IV.
163.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[xvii:96](2020007.htm#fr_95.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p46.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p47"></span>Cf. attitude towards Chrysostom and
Cyril of Alexandria, above alluded to; also his censure of pride and
contention among members of the clergy. See V. Int. 15, 23; VI. 6; VII.
11, 29.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[xvii:97](2020007.htm#fr_96.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p47.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p48"></span>In *Encycl. Britan*.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[xvii:98](2020007.htm#fr_97.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p49.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p50"></span>I. 1, οὐ φράσεως ὄγκου φροντίζοντες ;
so in III. 1, μηδεὶς ἐπιζητείτω κόμπον φράσεως; and VI. Int., ῎Ισθι δὲ
ἡμᾶς μὴ ἐσπουδακέναι περὶ τὴν φράσιν, where he adds that if he had
attempted a different style, he might have failed of his purpose of
writing a popular history.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[xvii:99](2020007.htm#fr_98.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p50.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p51"></span>VI. 22; VII. 27.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[xvii:100](2020007.htm#fr_99.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p51.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p52"></span>*Biblioth. Cod*. 28.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[xvii:101](2020007.htm#fr_100.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p52.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p53"></span>III. 16; IV. 22; VI. 13; VII. 21, 34.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[xvii:102](2020007.htm#fr_101.md) <span
id="ii.iii.iii-p53.1"></span>

<span id="ii.iii.iii-p54"></span>II. 8; III. 21; V. 15; VII. 29, 31.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: History of Socrates' Work.](2020008.md)
