[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020381)  [Next](2020383) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.xx"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xx-p1.1"></span>Chapter XX</span>.—*Events which took place
in the Eastern Churches: Marathonius, Eleusius of Cyzicus, and
Macedonius expel those who maintain the Term “Consubstantial.”
Concerning the Churches of the Novatians; how one Church was
Transported; the Novatians enter into Communion with the Orthodox*.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.xx-p2.1"></span>While</span> the events I have above related
were taking place in Italy, the East, even before the council of
Seleucia had been constituted, was the theatre of great
disturbances. <span id="fr_1332"></span>[1333](#fn_1332) The adherents
of Acacius and Patrophilus, having ejected Maximus, turned over the
church of Jerusalem to Cyril. Macedonius harassed Constantinople and the
neighboring cities; he was abetted by Eleusius and Marathonius. This
latter was originally a deacon in his own church, and was a zealous
superintendent of the poor of the monastical dwellings inhabited by men
and women, and Macedonius raised him to the bishopric of Nicomedia.
Eleusius, who, not without distinction, was formerly attached to the
military service of the palace, had been ordained bishop of Cyzicus. It
is said that Eleusius and Marathonius were both good men in their
conduct, but that they were zealous in persecuting those who maintained
that the Son is of the same substance as the Father, although they were
not so distinctly cruel as Macedonius, who not only expelled those who
refused to hold communion with him, but imprisoned some, and dragged
others before the tribunals. In many cases he compelled the unwilling to
communion. He seized children and women who had not been initiated and
initiated them, and destroyed many churches in different places, under
the pretext that the emperor had commanded the demolition of all houses
of prayer in which the Son was recognized to be of the same substance as
the Father.

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p4"></span>Under this pretext the church of the
Novatians at Constantinople, situated in that part of the city called
Pelargus, was destroyed. It is related that these heretics performed a
courageous action with the aid of the members of the <span
id="page_316">p. 316</span> <span
id="iii.ix.xx-Page_316"></span>Catholic Church, with whom they made
common cause. When those who were employed to destroy this church were
about to commence the work of demolition, the Novatians assembled
themselves together; some tore down the materials, and others conveyed
them to a suburb of the city called Sycæ. They quickly achieved this
task; for men, women, and children participated in it, and by offering
their labor to God they were extraordinarily inspirited. By the exercise
of this zeal the church was soon renewed, and, from this circumstance,
received the name of Anastasia. After the death of Constantius, Julian,
his successor, granted to the Novatians the ground which they had
previously possessed, and permitted them to rebuild their church. The
people spiritedly took advantage of this permission, and transported the
identical materials of the former edifice from Sycæ. But this happened
at a later period of time than that which we are now reviewing. At this
period a union was nearly effected between the Novatian and Catholic
churches; for as they held the same opinions concerning the Godhead, and
were subjected to a common persecution, the members of both churches
assembled and prayed together. The Catholics then possessed no houses of
prayer, for the Arians had wrested them from them. It appears, too, that
from the frequent intercourse between the members of each church, they
reasoned that the differences between them were vain, and they resolved
to commune with one another. A reconciliation would certainly have been
effected, I think, had not the desire of the multitude been frustrated
by the slander of a few individuals, who asserted that there was an
ancient law prohibiting the union of the churches.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1332"></span>[315:1333](2020382.htm#fr_1332) <span
id="iii.ix.xx-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.xx-p3"></span>Soc. ii. 38, from which the most of this
chapter is derived; a few details in addition are given by Soz. Cf.
Theodoret, *H. E.* ii. 26.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proceedings of Macedonius in Mantinium. His Removal from his See
when he attempted to remove the Coffin of Constantine the Great. Julian
was pronounced Cæsar.](2020383)
