[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020283)  [Next](2020285.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vi.viii"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p1.1"></span>Chapter VIII</span>.—*List of the Benefits
which Constantine conferred in the Freedom of the Christians and
Building of Churches; and other Deeds for the Public Welfare.*

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p2.1"></span>As</span> soon as the sole government of
the Roman empire was vested in Constantine, he issued a public
decree <span id="fr_1081"></span>[1082](#fn_1081.md) commanding all his
subjects in the East to honor the Christian religion, carefully to
worship the Divine Being, and to recognize that only as Divine which is
also essentially so, and which has the power that endures for ever and
ever: for he delights to give all good things ungrudgingly to those who
zealously embrace the truth; he meets their undertakings with the best
hopes, while misfortunes, whether in peace or in war, whether in public
or in private life, befall transgressors. Constantine then added, but
without vain boasting, that, God having accounted him as a fitting
servant, worthy to reign, he had been led from the British sea to the
Eastern provinces in order that the Christian religion might be
extended, and that those who, on account of the worship of God had
remained steadfast in confessions or martyrdoms, might be advanced to
public honors. After making these statements, he entered upon a myriad
other details by which he thought his subjects might be drawn to
religion. He decreed that all acts and judgments passed by the
persecutors of the church against Christianity should be revoked; and
commanded that all those who, on account of their confession of Christ,
had been sent to banishment—either to the isles or elsewhere, contrary
to their own inclination—and all those who had been condemned to labor
in the mines, the public works, the harems, the linen factories, or had
been enrolled as public functionaries, should be restored to liberty. He
removed the stigma of dishonor from those upon whom it had been cast,
and permitted those who had been deprived of high appointments in the
army, either to reassume their former place, or with an honorable
discharge, to enjoy a liberal ease according to their own choice; and
when he had recalled all to the enjoyment of their former liberties and
customary honors, he likewise restored their possessions. In the case of
those who had been slain, and whose property had been confiscated, he
enacted that the inheritance should be transferred to the next of kin,
or, in default of heirs, to the church belonging to the locality where
the estate was situated; and when the inheritance had passed into other
hands, and had become either private or national property, he commanded
it to be restored. He likewise promised to resort to the fittest and
best possible arrangements when the property had been purchased by the
exchequer, or had been received therefrom by gift. These measures, as it
had been said, having been enacted by the emperor, and ratified by law,
were forthwith carried into execution. Christians were thus placed in
almost all the principal posts of the Roman government; the worship of
false gods was universally prohibited; and the arts of divination, the
dedication of statues, and the celebration of pagan festivals were
interdicted. Many of the most ancient customs observed in the cities
fell into disuse: and among the Egyptians the measure used to indicate
the increase of the waters of the Nile was no longer borne into pagan
temples, but into churches. The <span id="page_245">p. 245</span> <span
id="iii.vi.viii-Page_245"></span>spectacle of gladiators was then
prohibited among the Romans; and the custom which prevailed among the
Phœnicians of Lebanon and Heliopolis of prostituting virgins before
marriage, who were accustomed to cohabit in lawful marriage after the
first trial of an illicit intercourse, was abolished. Of the houses of
prayer, the emperor repaired some which were of sufficient magnitude;
others were brilliantly restored by additional length and breadth, and
he erected new edifices in places where no building of the kind had
existed previously. He furnished the requisite supplies from the
imperial treasury, and wrote to the bishops of the cities and the
governors of the provinces, desiring them to contribute whatever might
be wished, and enjoining submission and zealous obedience to the
priests.

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p4"></span>The prosperity of religion kept pace
with the increased prosperity of the empire. After the war with
Licinius, the emperor was successful in battle against foreign nations;
he conquered the Sarmatians and the people called Goths, and concluded
an advantageous treaty with them. These people dwelt upon the Ister; and
as they were very warlike, and always ready in arms both by the
multitude and magnitude of their bodies, they kept the other tribes of
barbarians in awe, and found antagonists in the Romans alone. It is said
that, during this war, Constantine perceived clearly, by means of signs
and dreams, that the special protection of Divine Providence had been
extended to him. Hence when he had vanquished all those who rose up in
battle against him he evinced his thankfulness to Christ by zealous
attention to the concerns of religion, and exhorted the governors to
recognize the one true faith and way of salvation. He enacted that part
of the funds levied from tributary countries should be forwarded by the
various cities to the bishops and clergy, wherever they might be
domiciled, and commanded that the law enjoining this gift should be a
statute forever. In order to accustom the soldiers to worship God as he
did, he had their weapons marked with the symbol of the cross, and he
erected a house of prayer in the palace. When he engaged in war, he
caused a tent to be borne before him, constructed in the shape of a
church, so that in case he or his army might be led into the desert,
they might have a sacred edifice in which to praise and worship God, and
participate in the mysteries. <span id="fr_1082"></span>[1083](#fn_1082.md)
Priests and deacons followed the tent, who fulfilled the orders about
these matters, according to the law of the church. From that period the
Roman legions, which now were called by their number, provided each its
own tent, with attendant priests and deacons. He also enjoined the
observance of the day termed the Lord’s day, <span
id="fr_1083"></span>[1084](#fn_1083.md) which the Jews call the first day
of the week, and which the pagans dedicate to the sun, as likewise the
day before the seventh, and commanded that no judicial or other business
should be transacted on those days, but that God should be served with
prayers and supplications. He honored the Lord’s day, because on it
Christ arose from the dead, and the day above mentioned, because on it
he was crucified. He regarded the cross with peculiar reverence, on
account both of the power which it conveyed to him in the battles
against his enemies, and also of the divine manner in which the symbol
had appeared to him. He took away by law the crucifixion customary among
the Romans, from the usage of the courts. He commanded that this divine
symbol should always be inscribed and stamped whenever coins and images
should be struck, and his images, which exist in this very form, still
testify to this order. And indeed he strove in everything, particularly
in the enactment of laws, to serve God. It appears, too, that he
prohibited many flagitious and licentious connections, <span
id="fr_1084"></span>[1085](#fn_1084.md) which till that period had not been
forbidden; as one, who cares about it, may see at a glance from these
few instances what the laws were, which he established about these
points; it appears to me unreasonable now to treat them exhaustively. I
consider it necessary, however, to mention the laws enacted for the
honor and consolidation of religion, as they constitute a considerable
portion of ecclesiastical history. I shall therefore proceed to the
recital.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1081"></span>[244:1082](2020284.htm#fr_1081.md) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p3"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p3.1"></span>γράμμα δημόσιον</span>. The decree is given
at full length in Eus. *V. C.* ii. 24–42; and the other legislative
chapters of Bks. ii. and iv. Cf. Eus. *H. E.* x. 5–7; Soc. i. 18.

<span id="fn_1082"></span>[245:1083](2020284.htm#fr_1082.md) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p5"></span><span class="Greek"><span
id="iii.vi.viii-p5.1"></span>Μυστηρίων</span> , that is to say, the
sacraments of the church.

<span id="fn_1083"></span>[245:1084](2020284.htm#fr_1083.md) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p5.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p6"></span>Eus. *V. C.* iv. 18, 19.

<span id="fn_1084"></span>[245:1085](2020284.htm#fr_1084.md) <span
id="iii.vi.viii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi.viii-p7"></span>He probably alludes to the law of
Constantine, “de raptu virginum vel viduarum.” See Codex Theodos. ix.
24.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Constantine enacts a Law in favor of Celibates and of the
Clergy.](2020285.md)
