[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020330)  [Next](2020332) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.vii.xxix"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxix-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxix-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXIX</span>.—*Alexander, Bishop of
Constantinople; his Refusal to receive Arius into Communion; Arius is
burst asunder while seeking Natural Relief*.

<span id="iii.vii.xxix-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.vii.xxix-p2.1"></span>After</span> the Synod of Jerusalem, Arius
went to Egypt, <span id="fr_1199"></span>[1200](#fn_1199) but as he
could not obtain permission to hold communion with the Church of
Alexandria, he returned to Constantinople. As all those who had embraced
his sentiments, and those who were attached to Eusebius, bishop of
Nicomedia, had assembled cunningly in that city for the purpose of
holding a council, Alexander, who was then ordering the see of
Constantinople, used every effort to dissolve the council. But as his
endeavors were frustrated, he openly refused all covenant with Arius,
affirming that it was neither just nor according to ecclesiastical
canons, to make powerless their own vote, and that of those bishops who
had been assembled at Nicæa, from nearly every region under the sun.
When the partisans of Eusebius perceived that their arguments produced
no effect on Alexander, they had recourse to contumely, and threatened
that unless he would receive Arius into communion on a stated day, he
should be expelled from the church, and that another should be elected
in his place who would be willing to hold communion with Arius. They
then separated, the partisans of Eusebius, to await the time they had
fixed for carrying their menaces into execution, and Alexander to pray
that the words of Eusebius might be prevented from being carried into
deed. His chief source of fear arose from the fact that the emperor had
been persuaded to give way. On the day before the appointed day he
prostrated himself before the altar, and continued all the night in
prayer to God, that his enemies might be prevented from carrying their
schemes into execution against him. Late in the afternoon, Arius, being
seized suddenly with pain in the stomach, was compelled to repair to the
public place set apart for emergencies of this nature. As some time
passed away without his coming out, some persons, who were waiting for
him outside, entered, and found him dead and still sitting upon the
seat. When his death became known, all people did not view the
occurrence under the same aspect. Some believed that he died at that
very hour, seized by a sudden disease of the heart, or suffering
weakness from his joy over the fact that his matters were falling out
according to his mind; others imagined that this mode of death was
inflicted on him in judgment, on account of his impiety. Those who held
his sentiments were of opinion that his death was brought about by
magical arts. It will not be out of place to quote what Athanasius,
bishop of Alexandria, stated on the subject. The following is his
narrative:—

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1199"></span>[279:1200](2020331.htm#fr_1199) <span
id="iii.vii.xxix-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii.xxix-p3"></span>Ruf. *H. E.* i. 12, 13; Soc. i. 37,
38; Athan. *Ep. ad Serapion,* and *ad Episcop. Ægypt. et Lib.* 19. Soz.
follows Athan. and Ruf. Athan. says he derived his statements from
Macarius, a presbyter, an eye-witness of some of the events narrated in
this chapter and the next.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Account given by the Great Athanasius of the Death of
Arius.](2020332)
