[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020160)  [Next](2020162.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p1.1"></span>Chapter XXXVI</span>.—*The Saracens, under
Mavia their Queen, embrace Christianity; and Moses, a Pious Monk, is
consecrated their Bishop.*

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p2.1"></span>No</span> sooner had the emperor departed
from Antioch, than the Saracens, <span id="fr_673"></span>[674](#fn_673.md)
who had before been in alliance with the Romans, revolted from them,
being led by Mavia their queen, whose husband was then dead. All the
regions of the East therefore were at that time ravaged by the Saracens:
but a certain divine Providence repressed their fury in the manner I am
about to describe. A person named Moses, a Saracen by birth, who led a
monastic life in the desert, became exceedingly eminent for his piety,
faith, and miracles. Mavia the queen of the Saracens was therefore
desirous that this person should be constituted bishop over her nation,
and promised on the condition to terminate the war. The Roman generals
considering that a peace founded on such terms would be extremely
advantageous, gave immediate directions for its ratification. Moses was
accordingly seized, and brought from the desert to Alexandria, in order
that he might there be invested with the bishopric: but on his
presentation for that purpose to Lucius, who at that time presided over
the churches in that city, he refused to be ordained by him, protesting
against it in these words: ‘I account myself indeed unworthy of the
sacred office; but if the exigencies of the state require my bearing it,
it shall not be by Lucius laying his hand on me, for it has been filled
with blood.’ When Lucius told him that it was his duty to learn from him
the principles of religion, and not to utter reproachful language, Moses
replied, ‘Matters of faith are not now in question: but your infamous
practices against the brethren sufficiently prove that your doctrines
are not Christian. For a Christian is “no striker, reviles not, does not
fight”; for “it becomes not a servant of the Lord to fight.” <span
id="fr_674"></span>[675](#fn_674.md) But your deeds cry out against you by
those who have been sent into exile, who have been exposed to the wild
beasts, and who had been delivered up to the flames. Those things which
our own eyes have beheld are far more convincing than what we receive
from the report of another.’ As Moses expressed these and other similar
sentiments his friends took him to the mountains, that he might receive
ordination from those bishops who lived in exile there. Moses having
thus been consecrated, the Saracen war was terminated; and so
scrupulously did Mavia observe the peace thus entered into with the
Romans that she gave her daughter in marriage to Victor the
commander-in-chief of the Roman army. Such were the transactions in
relation to the Saracens.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_673"></span>[116:674](2020161.htm#fr_673.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p3"></span>The name Saracen (<span
class="Greek"><span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p3.1"></span>Σαρακηνός</span> ,
perhaps from the Arabic *Sharkeen* ‘Orientals’) was used vaguely at
first; the Greek writers of the first centuries gave it to the Bedouin
Arabs of Eastern Arabia, while others used it to designate the Arab
races of Syria and Palestine, and others the Berber of North Eastern
Africa, who later conquered Spain and Sicily and invaded France. The
name became very familiar in Europe during the period of the Crusades.
On Saracens, consult the interesting fiftieth chapter of Gibbon’s
*Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.*

<span id="fn_674"></span>[116:675](2020161.htm#fr_674.md) <span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p3.2"></span>

<span id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p4"></span>[2 Tim. ii.
24](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#024.md)<span
id="ii.vii.xxxvi-p4.1"></span>.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: After the Departure of Valens from Antioch, the Alexandrians
expel Lucius, and restore Peter, who had come with Letters from Damasus
Bishop of Rome.](2020162.md)
