[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index.md) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020519)  [Next](2020521.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.xiv.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p1.1"></span>Chapter IV</span>.—*Truce with Persia.
Honorius and Stilicho. Transactions in Rome and Dalmatia*.

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p2.1"></span>Although</span> the Persians had prepared to
take up arms, they were induced to conclude a truce with the Romans for
a hundred years. <span id="fr_1625"></span>[1626](#fn_1625.md)

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p4"></span>Stilicho, the general of the troops of
Honorius, was suspected of having conspired to proclaim his son
Eucherius emperor of the East, and was, in consequence, slain by the
army at Ravenna. He had, at a former period, while Arcadius was still
living, conceived bitter feelings of enmity against his officers, and
was hence impelled to bring the two empires into collision. He caused
Alaric, the leader of the Goths, to secure the office of general of the
Romans, and advised him to seize Illyria; and, having sent forward
Jovian, the appointed prefect, he agreed to join him shortly with Roman
troops, and to reduce its subjects under the rule of Honorius. Alaric
quitted the barbarous region bordering on Dalmatia and Pannonia, where
he had been dwelling, and marched at the head of his soldiery to Epirus;
after remaining for some time in that country, he retreated to Italy,
without having accomplished anything. For he was about to migrate
according to the agreement, but he was restrained by the letters of
Honorius. After the death of Arcadius, Honorius projected a journey to
Constantinople, in behalf of his nephew, to appoint officers faithful to
his security and empire; for he held his nephew in the place of his son,
and he was fearful lest the boy might suffer on account of his youth,
since he would be exposed to plots; but when Honorius was on the very
point of setting out on this journey, Stilicho dissuaded him from his
design, by proving to him that his presence was requisite in Italy, to
repress the schemes of Constantine, who sought to possess himself of the
sovereign power at Arles. Stilicho then took <span id="page_422">p.
422</span> <span id="iii.xiv.iv-Page_422"></span>that one of the
sceptres which the Romans call Labarum, obtained some letters from the
emperor, with which he set out, at the head of four legions, to carry on
war in the East; but a report having been spread that he had conspired
against the emperor, and had formed a scheme, in conjunction with those
in power, to raise his son to the throne, the troops rose up in
sedition, and slew the prætorian prefect <span
id="fr_1626"></span>[1627](#fn_1626.md) of Italy and of Gaul, the military
commanders, and the chief officers of the court. Stilicho himself was
slain by the soldiers at Ravenna. He had attained almost absolute power;
and all men, so to speak, whether Romans or barbarians, were under his
control. Thus perished Stilicho, on a suspicion of having conspired
against the emperors. Eucherius, his son, was also slain.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1625"></span>[421:1626](2020520.htm#fr_1625.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p3"></span>Independent; cf. Poems of Claudianus, as
above; Olymp. *Fragm.* 2–11; Zos. v. 4–38; Philost. xii. 1–3.

<span id="fn_1626"></span>[422:1627](2020520.htm#fr_1626.md) <span
id="iii.xiv.iv-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.xiv.iv-p5"></span>His name was Longinianus. Zos. v. 32.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Different Nations took up Arms against the Romans, of whom
some were, through the Providence of God defeated, and others brought to
Terms of Amity.](2020521.md)
