[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Early Church Fathers](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](2020367)  [Next](2020369) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii.ix.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p1"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p1.1"></span>Chapter VI</span>.—*Photinus, Bishop of
Sirmium. His Heresy, and the Council convened at Sirmium in Opposition
thereto. The Three Formularies of Faith. This Agitator of Empty Ideas
was refuted by Basil of Ancyra. After his Deposition Photinus, although
solicited, declined Reconciliation*.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p2"></span><span class="c11"><span
id="iii.ix.vi-p2.1"></span>About</span> this time, <span
id="fr_1290"></span>[1291](#fn_1290) Photinus, who administered the
church of Sirmium, laid before the emperor, who was then staying at that
city, a heresy which he had originated some time previously. His natural
ease of utterance and powers of persuasion enabled him to lead many into
his own way of thinking. He acknowledged that there was one God
Almighty, by whose own word all things were created, but would not admit
that the generation and existence of the Son was before all ages; on the
contrary, he alleged that Christ derived His existence from Mary. As
soon as this opinion was divulged, it excited the indignation of the
Western and of the Eastern bishops, and they considered it in common as
an innovation of each one’s particular belief, for it was equally
opposed by those who maintained the doctrines of the Nicæan council, and
by those who favored the tenets of Arius. The emperor also regarded the
heresy with aversion, and convened a council at Sirmium, where he was
then residing. Of the Eastern bishops, George, who governed the church
of Alexandria, Basil, bishop of Ancyra, and Mark, bishop of Arethusa,
were present at this council; and among the Western <span
id="page_303">p. 303</span> <span id="iii.ix.vi-Page_303"></span>bishops
were Valens, bishop of Mursa, and Hosius the Confessor. This latter, who
had attended the council of Nicæa, was unwillingly a participant of
this; he had not long previously been condemned to banishment through
the machinations of the Arians; he was summoned to the council of
Sirmium by the command of the emperor extorted by the Arians, who
believed that their party would be strengthened, if they could gain
over, either by persuasion or force, a man held in universal admiration
and esteem, as was Hosius. The period at which the council was convened
at Sirmium, was the year after the expiration of the consulate of
Sergius and Nigrinian; and during this year there were no consuls either
in the East or the West, owing to the insurrections excited by the
tyrants. Photinus was deposed by this council, because he was accused of
countenancing the errors of Sabellius and Paul of Samosata. The council
then proceeded to draw up three formularies of faith in addition to the
previous confessions, of which one was written in Greek, and the others
in Latin. But they did not agree with one another, nor with any other of
the former expositions of doctrine, either in word or import. It is not
said in the Greek formulary, <span id="fr_1291"></span>[1292](#fn_1291)
that the Son is consubstantial, or of like substance, with the Father,
but it is there declared, that those who maintain that the Son had no
commencement, or that He proceeded from an expansion of the substance of
the Father, or that He is united to the Father without being subject to
Him, are excommunicated. In one of the Roman formularies, <span
id="fr_1292"></span>[1293](#fn_1292) it is forbidden to say, of the
essence of the Godhead which the Romans call substance, that the Son is
either consubstantial, or of like substance with the Father, as such
statements do not occur in the Holy Scriptures, and are beyond the reach
of the understanding and knowledge of men. It is said, that the Father
must be recognized as superior to the Son in honor, in dignity, in
divinity, and in the relationship suggested by His name of Father; and
that it must be confessed that the Son, like all created beings, is
subject to the Father, that the Father had no commencement, and that the
generation of the Son is unknown to all save the Father. It is related,
that when this formulary was completed, the bishops became aware of the
errors it contained, and endeavored to withdraw it from the public, and
to correct it; and that the emperor threatened to punish those who
should retain or conceal any of the copies that had been made of it. But
having been once published, no efforts were adequate to suppress it
altogether.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p6"></span>The third formulary <span
id="fr_1293"></span>[1294](#fn_1293) is of the same import as the
others. It prohibits the use of the term “substance” on account of the
terms used in Latin, while the Greek term having been used with too much
simplicity by the Fathers, and having been a cause of offense to many of
the unlearned multitude, because it was not to be found in the
Scriptures, “we have deemed it right totally to reject the use of it:
and we would enjoin the omission of all mention of the term in allusion
to the Godhead, for it is nowhere said in the Holy Scriptures, that the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost are of the same substance, where the word
person is written. But we say, in conformity with the Holy Scriptures,
that the Son is like unto the Father.”

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p8"></span>Such was the decision arrived at in the
presence of the emperor concerning the faith. Hosius at first refused to
assent to it. Compulsion, however, was resorted to; and being extremely
old, he sunk, as it is reported, beneath the blows that were inflicted
on him, and yielded his consent and signature.

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p9"></span>After the deposition of Photinus, the
Synod thought it expedient to try whether it were not somehow possible
to persuade him to change his views. But when the bishop urged him, and
promised to restore his bishopric if he would renounce his own dogma,
and vote for their formulary, he would not acquiesce, but challenged
them to a discussion. On the day appointed for this purpose, the
bishops, therefore, assembled with the judges who had been appointed by
the emperor to preside at their meetings, and who, in point of eloquence
and dignity, held the first rank in the palace. Basil, bishop of Ancyra,
was selected to commence the disputation against Photinus. The conflict
lasted a long time, on account of the numerous questions started and the
answers given by each party, and which were immediately taken down in
short-hand; but finally the victory declared itself in favor of Basil.
Photinus was condemned and banished, but did not cease on that account
from enlarging his own dogma. He wrote and published many works in Greek
and Latin, in which he endeavored to show that all opinions, except his
own, were erroneous. I have now concluded all that I had to say
concerning Photinus and the heresy to which his name was affixed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1290"></span>[302:1291](2020368.htm#fr_1290) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p2.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p3"></span>Athan. *de Synodis,* 8, 9; Soc. ii.
29–31, 37; Sulp. Sev. *H. S.* ii. 36, 37.

<span id="fn_1291"></span>[303:1292](2020368.htm#fr_1291) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p4"></span>Soc. ii. 30, text.

<span id="fn_1292"></span>[303:1293](2020368.htm#fr_1292) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p5"></span>Soc. ii. 30, Latin text translated into
Greek.

<span id="fn_1293"></span>[303:1294](2020368.htm#fr_1293) <span
id="iii.ix.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ix.vi-p7"></span>Athan. *de Synodis*, 8; Soc. ii. 37, text
translated into Greek.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Death of the Tyrants Magnentius and Silvanus the Apostate.
Sedition of the Jews in Palestine. Gallus Cæsar is slain, on Suspicion
of Revolution.](2020369)
