[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12031)  [Next](cc12033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxiii"></span>

<span id="xxxiii-p1"></span>PSALM 149

<span id="xxxiii-p2"></span>If we may be allowed to compare this Psalm
with the former ones, and the next, which is the last, the only
difference is, that while the author of the Psalm, whoever he was, has
hitherto spoken of God’s special care and protection of his Church in
connection with the common providential government of the world, here he
speaks of his benefits to the Church exclusively. In the next Psalm
mention is only made of the power of God in general.

<span id="xxxiii-p3"></span>Hallelujah.

<span id="xxxiii.i"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
149:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001)<span
id="xxxiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Sing ye to Jehovah a new song: his
praise is in the congregation of the merciful. **2.** Let Israel rejoice
in his Maker: let the sons of Zion rejoice their king.  <span
id="fr_299"></span>[300](#fn_299) **3.** Let them praise his name on the
pipe,  <span id="fr_300"></span>[301](#fn_300) on the timbrel  <span
id="fr_301"></span>[302](#fn_301) and the harp let them sing psalms to
him. **4.** Because Jehovah hath taken pleasure in his people; he will
glorify the poor unto salvation.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.i-p7"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Sing to Jehovah a new song.* This
exordium proves what I have just said, that the exhortation now given is
addressed only to God’s people; for the singular goodness which is
particularly extended to them affords more ample matter of praise. The
probable conjecture is, that the Psalm was composed at the time when the
people were begun to rejoice, or after they had returned to their native
country from the Babylonish captivity. We will see from the context that
a promise is given of recovery from their ruined condition. The object,
I think, of the Psalmist, is to encourage them to expect the full and
complete deliverance, some prelude of which had been suddenly and
unexpectedly given in the permission to return. As the Church was not
fully restored at once, but was with difficulty and only after a long
period brought to a state of vigor, comfort such as this was much
needed. The Spirit of God would also furnish a remedy for evils which
were afterwards to break out; for the Church had scarcely begun to
respire when it was again harassed with various evils, and oppressed by
the cruel tyranny of Antiochus, which was followed up by a dreadful
dispersion. The Psalmist had good reason therefore for animating the
godly to look forward for the full accomplishment of the mercy of God,
that they might be persuaded of divine protection until such time as the
Messiah should arise who would gather all Israel. He calls this *a new
song,* as we have noticed elsewhere, to distinguish it from those with
which the saints commonly and daily praised God, for praise is their
continued exercise. It follows that he speaks of some rare and unusual
benefit, demanding signal and particular thanksgiving. And I am disposed
to think that whoever may have been the author of the Psalm, he alludes
to that passage in Isaiah, (<span id="xxxiii.i-p8.1"></span>[Isa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010)<span
id="xxxiii.i-p8.1"></span>,) “Sing unto the Lord a new song,” when he
speaks of the future restoration of the Church, and the eternal kingdom
of Christ. In the second clause of the verse there is a promise implied.
For though he proceeds to exhort the Lord’s people to sing God’s praises
together, he hints along with this that the Church would coalesce again
into one body, so as to celebrate God’s praises in the solemn assembly.
We know that so scattered were the Israelites, that the sacred songs
ceased to be sung, as elsewhere they complain of being called upon to
sing —

<span id="xxxiii.i-p9"></span>“How shall we sing the songs of the Lord
in a strange land?” (<span id="xxxiii.i-p9.1"></span>[Ps
137:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#004)<span
id="xxxiii.i-p9.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.i-p10"></span>He bids them prepare therefore after this
sad dispersion for holding their sacred assemblies again.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p11"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p12"></span>**2.** *Let Israel rejoice in his Maker.*
He insists upon the same point, that the Lord’s people should rest
firmly persuaded that their family had not been chosen out in vain from
the rest of the world, but that God would be mindful of his covenant,
and not allow the mercies which he had extended to them to fail or
become extinct. Although they had been temporarily deprived of the
inheritance of the land of Canaan, which was the pledge of their
adoption, the Psalmist calls God their *Maker, and king of the sons of
Zion,* to remind them that when adopted to a pre-eminency above other
nations, this was a species of new creation. So in <span
id="xxxiii.i-p12.1"></span>[Ps
45:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#006)<span id="xxxiii.i-p12.1"></span>,
the Israelites are called “the work of God’s hands,” not merely because
they were like other men created by him, but because he had formed them
anew, and distinguished them with a new honor, that, of being separated
front the whole human race. The name king has a wider signification,
intimating that as this people was at first formed by God, so it was
with the view of their being ever governed by his power. The musical
instruments he mentions were peculiar to this infancy of the Church, nor
should we foolishly imitate a practice which was intended only for God’s
ancient people. But the Psalmist confirms what has been already
mentioned, that their religious assemblies which had been for a time
interrupted would soon be restored, and they would call upon the name of
the Lord in the due order of his worship.

<span id="xxxiii.i-p13"></span><span id="xxxiii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p14"></span>**4.** *For God hath taken pleasure in
his people.* We have spoken elsewhere of the verb <span
id="xxxiii.i-p14.1"></span>רצה, *ratsah* here it means *free favor,* the
Psalmist saying that it was entirely of his good pleasure that God had
chosen this people to himself. From this source flows what is added in
the second clause, that God would give a new glory of deliverance to the
afflicted. In the Hebrew <span id="xxxiii.i-p14.2"></span>ענוים,
*anavim,* means *poor and afflicted ones,* but the term came afterwards
to be applied to *merciful persons,* as bodily afflictions have a
tendency to subdue pride, while abundance begets cruelty. The Psalmist
accordingly mitigates the sadness of present evils by administering
seasonable consolation, that God’s people, when oppressed by troubles,
might look forward with hope to the glorious deliverance which was yet
unseen. The sum of the passage is — that God, who had fixed his love
upon his chosen people, could not possibly abandon them to such miseries
as they now suffered under.

<span id="xxxiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
149:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#005)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** The merciful shall rejoice in
glory; they shall shout for joy upon their couches.  <span
id="fr_302"></span>[303](#fn_302) **6.** The high praises of God are in
their throat  <span id="fr_303"></span>[304](#fn_303) and a two-edged
sword is in their hand: **7.** To execute vengeance upon the nations,
castigations upon the peoples: **8.** To bind their kings with chains,
and their nobles with iron fetters: **9.** To execute upon them the
judgment written: this honor is to all his merciful ones. Hallelujah.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p7"></span>**5.** *They shall rejoice.* In making
mention here of joy, jubilee, and the high praises of God, he shows
still more clearly from the effects which it would produce, that he does
not speak of a common benefit of God; for had not the deliverance of the
people been of a remarkable kind, there would have been no occasion for
such joy*,* and even triumph. And by these expressions he intimates that
the people would not be brought back from exile to be immediately
dispersed again, but to flourish in the enjoyment of every species of
blessing. He on this account makes mention of *couches,* teaching them
to expect daily rest under the divine protection. He declares that they
would be furnished with arms and power, not only to ward off enemies,
but to put them to flight on every side, so as to reduce to subjection
kings and nations which formerly ruled over them. By *swords of a
double-mouth,* or *two-edged,* are meant such as cut on both sides, for
at that time swords had but one edge.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p9"></span>**7.** *To execute vengeance, etc*. Both
during their exile and after their return from it, this might seem to be
altogether incredible. Nor did it take place before the advent of
Christ; for though the Machabaei and their posterity reduced the
neighboring nations to subjection, this was but a faint prelude and
earnest to direct the thoughts of the Lord’s people to what was
approaching. But as Haggai prophesied that the glory of the second
Temple would be greater than of the first, so here there is promised a
more prosperous state than had ever existed. (<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>[Hag
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#009)<span id="xxxiii.ii-p9.1"></span>.)
Reduced as the Jews were in numbers, and low as was the state of things
among them, the Psalmist announces to all nations which opposed and
troubled them, that they would have the ascendancy. As they were yet
tributary, and dwelt at Jerusalem only by sufferance, they were called
to exercise faith in a promise which, to the judgment of sense, might
appear visionary, and to raise their thoughts to the infinite power of
God, which triumphs over all worldly obstacles. The vengeance spoken of
is such as the Israelites would take, not under the influence of private
resentment, but by commandment of God; and this we mention that none may
infer that they are allowed to take vengeance for personal injuries.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p10"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p11"></span>The next verse, where mention is made of
*kings* and *nobles,* is an amplification; for had he only spoken of
peoples and nations, this might have been restricted to the common
people and men of low condition. Here is something much greater — that
kings and others of noble rank would be dragged to punishment in chains.
But it is to be remembered, as I have just hinted, that but a small part
of this splendid prospect was realized until Christ appeared; for any
small increase of prosperity which the people enjoyed under the
Machabaei was not worthy of any consideration, except in so far as by
this help God sustained the drooping spirits of the people up to
Christ’s advent. Here the prediction of Jacob is to be noticed —

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p12"></span>“the scepter shall not depart from
Judah, until Shiloh come.” (<span id="xxxiii.ii-p12.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p12.1"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p13"></span>But the Machabaei sprung from another
tribe. We must, infer, therefore, that the regular order was then
interrupted, and that to make the prosperous state of the people to have
been based upon their victories, is building a castle in the air. And
God would appear designedly to have removed the government from the
tribe of Judah, lest this success should intoxicate the minds of his
people; for most of them, through pride in these signal victories,
overlooked the true and substantial deliverance. As the Psalmist treats
here of the perfection of the prosperity of the people, it follows that
he refers to the Messiah, that their expectation and desire of him might
never cease either in their prosperity or adversity.

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p14"></span><span id="xxxiii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p15"></span>**9.** *To perform the judgment, etc*.
He qualifies what he had said in the previous verses, in which he might
have appeared to arm the Lord’s people for deeds of warlike cruelty. At
first sight it might appear strange, that they who were called the
merciful ones of God, should be sent out with drawn swords to commit
slaughter, and pour out human blood; for what evidence was here of
mercy? But when God himself is the author of the vengeance taken, it is
just judgment, not cruelty. When mention is made of the *judgment
written,* the Psalmist reminds the Jews that they were called to liberty
by command of God — to that liberty which had been unjustly wrested from
them by’ foreigners and tyrants, and that they could not be blamed for
executing judgment written. Any exposition of the passage is faulty
which does not proceed upon this as being the Psalmist’s design, that he
would have the Jews to consider the divine mandate, not to proceed under
the influence of private resentment, and to throw a rein over passion;
saying upon the matter, that God’s children may not execute vengeance
but when called to it, there being an end of all moderation when men
yield themselves up to the impulse of their own spirits. Another
question might arise here by way of objection. Christ is said to have
come without crying or lifting up his voice, that he might not break the
bruised reed, (<span id="xxxiii.ii-p15.1"></span>[Mt
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#020)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.1"></span>,) and he inculcates the same character upon
his followers. The answer is obvious, that Christ is also armed with an
iron scepter, by which to bruise the rebellious, and is elsewhere
described as stained with blood, as slaying his enemies on every side,
and not being wearied with the slaughter of them. (<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.2"></span>[Isa
63:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#002)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.2"></span>.) Nor is it surprising, considering the
obstinacy which universally prevails in the world, that the mercy which
is treated with such indignity should be converted into severity. Now
the doctrine laid down in the passage admits of being rightly applied to
our practice, in this way, that what is here said of the two-edged
sword, applies more especially to the Jews, and not properly to us, who
have not a power of this kind permitted; except, indeed, that rulers and
magistrates are vested by God with the sword to punish all manner of
violence; but this is something peculiar to their office.  <span
id="fr_304"></span>[305](#fn_304) As to the Church collective, the sword
now put into our hand is of another kind, that of the word and spirit,
that we may slay for a sacrifice to God those who formerly were enemies,
or again deliver them over to everlasting destruction unless they
repent. (<span id="xxxiii.ii-p16.2"></span>[Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p16.2"></span>.) For what Isaiah predicted of Christ
extends to all who are his members*,* —

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p17"></span>“He shall smite the wicked with the word
of his mouth,  
and shall slay them with the breath of his lips.”  
(<span id="xxxiii.ii-p17.3"></span>[Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p17.3"></span>.)

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p18"></span>If believers quietly confine themselves
within these limits of their calling, they will find that the promise of
vengeance upon their enemies has not been given in vain. For when God
calls us, as I have said above, to judgment written, he puts a restraint
both upon our spirits and actions, so as that we must not attempt what
he has not commanded. When it is said, in the close of the verse, that
*this honor is to all the merciful ones of God,* he not only exhorts to
the practice of piety, but gives us a support for our encouragement,
lest we should think that we might be losers by exercising mercy and
patience, as most men give vent to fury and rage, under the idea that
the only way to defend their life is by showing the savageness of
wolves. Although God’s people, therefore, have nothing of the strength
of the giant, and will not move a finger without divine permission, ‘and
have a calm spirit, the Psalmist declares, that they have an honorable
and splendid issue out of all their troubles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_299"></span>[300](cc12032.htm#fr_299) <span
id="xxxiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p3"></span> “The Jewish government was a *Theocracy,*
which commenced at the time of the departure from Egypt; and continued
in some degree till the coming of Christ, as had been foretold by Jacob,
<span id="xxxiii.i-p3.1"></span>[Ge
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)<span
id="xxxiii.i-p3.1"></span>.” — *Dimock.*

<span id="fn_300"></span>[301](cc12032.htm#fr_300) <span
id="xxxiii.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p4"></span> In our English Bible it is in the text,
“in the dance;” and on the margin, “or with the pipe.” <span
id="xxxiii.i-p4.2"></span>מחול *machol,* the Hebrew word employed, is
often in our authorized version rendered “dance”; but this is not its
meaning. It denotes, as Parkhurst states, “some fistular wind instrument
of music, with holes, as a flute, pipe or fife, from <span
id="xxxiii.i-p4.3"></span>חל, *chal* to make a hole or opening.” “I know
no place in the Bible.” Says Dr. Adam Clark, “where <span
id="xxxiii.i-p4.4"></span>מחול, *mechol,* and <span
id="xxxiii.i-p4.5"></span>מחלת, *mechalath,* mean *dance* of any kind;
they constantly mean some kind of pipe.”

<span id="fn_301"></span>[302](cc12032.htm#fr_301) <span
id="xxxiii.i-p4.6"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.i-p5"></span> The Hebrew name for this kind of this
musical instrument is <span id="xxxiii.i-p5.2"></span>תף, *toph.* The
timbrel, tympanum, or tambourine, was used chiefly by women, and was
employed in choral dances, or occasions of religious or festal
processions. Thus we read in <span id="xxxiii.i-p5.3"></span>[Exod.
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#020),
[21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021)<span id="xxxiii.i-p5.3"></span>,
“And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took a timbrel in her
hand; and all the women went out after her with timbrels and dances. And
Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he hath triumphed
gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.” The
principle of the <span id="xxxiii.i-p5.4"></span>פף, *toph,* or timbrel
was that of a prepared skin stretched upon a hoop or frame. There were
various kinds or forms of this instrument. “Our common tambourine, with
small cymbals inserted in the frame, also appears in some paintings,
\[of Egyptian and European antiquity,\] and is now very common in
Western Asia. We are told that the frame was either of metal or wood and
that the ass’s skin was usually employed for the covering. They were not
always played by the naked hand; but were sometimes struck with small
batons, or with a knotty whip with many thongs, instead of which, on
particular festivals, a sprig of some tree or plant, considered suitable
to the occasion, was sometimes employed.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon
the Bible.* The timbrel is evidently of oriental origin. From the
reference to it in <span id="xxxiii.i-p5.5"></span>[Ge
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#027)<span id="xxxiii.i-p5.5"></span>,
where <span id="xxxiii.i-p5.6"></span>תף is translated “tabret,” we
learn that it was known in the time of Jacob, that is, ages previous to
the existence of the great European nations of antiquity; and both the
Greeks and Romans confessed that their instruments of this class were
derived from Egyptians and Syrians. See volume 3

<span id="fn_302"></span>[303](cc12032.htm#fr_302) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p3"></span> The people of the East sat on couches in
their private parties, banquets, etc., as well as reposed on them during
night. The language here may, therefore, be expressive of the praise
they would ascribe to God at their festal banquets and in their private
companies. An exhortion has previously been given (<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p3.1"></span>[Ps
149:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#001)<span
id="xxxiii.ii-p3.1"></span>) to praise God in the public assembly. Green
supposes that the reference is to the couches on which they reclines
when they partook of the eucharistical sacrifices.

<span id="fn_303"></span>[304](cc12032.htm#fr_303) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p4"></span> “The original is <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p4.1"></span>בגרונם, in their throats. It is probable the
Hebrew, when a living language, was extremely *guttural,* as the Arabian
language now is.” — *Fry.*

<span id="fn_304"></span>[305](cc12032.htm#fr_304) <span
id="xxxiii.ii-p15.3"></span>

<span id="xxxiii.ii-p16"></span> “<span id="xxxiii.ii-p16.1"></span>Qui
est ici dit du glaive trainchant des deux cotes, appartient specialment
aux Juifs, et ne peut pas estre approprie an nous,” etc. — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 150](cc12033)
