[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12022)  [Next](cc12024) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxiv"></span>

<span id="xxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 140

<span id="xxiv-p2"></span>David complains of the implacable cruelty of
his enemies, and of their treachery and rancorous calumnies. In the
close, having besought God’s help, and expressing his persuasion of
obtaining his layout, he comforts himself with the hope of deliverance,
and just vengeance being executed upon his enemies.

<span id="xxiv-p3"></span>*To the chief Musician* — *A Psalm of David.*

<span id="xxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
140:1-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#001)<span id="xxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Deliver me, O Jehovah! from the evil
man, (homo,) preserve me from the man (vir)  <span
id="fr_221"></span>[222](#fn_221) of injuries. **2.** Who imagine
mischiefs in their heart; daily they congregate for war. **3.** They
have sharpened their tongue like a serpent:  <span
id="fr_222"></span>[223](#fn_222) the poison of an asp  <span
id="fr_223"></span>[224](#fn_223) is under their lips. Selah **4.** Keep
us, O Jehovah! from the hands of the wicked: preserve me from the man of
injuries, who plot to overthrow my goings. **5.** The proud have set a
snare for me, and have spread a net with cords: by the way side they
have set gins for me.  <span id="fr_224"></span>[225](#fn_224) Selah

<span id="xxiv.i-p10"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.i-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p12"></span>*To the chief Musician,* etc. I cannot
bring myself to restrict this Psalm to Doeg, as the great body of
interpreters do, for the context will clearly show that it speaks of
Saul, and of the counselors who ceased not to inflame the king — himself
sufficiently incensed against the life of one who was a saint of God.
Being as he was a figure of Christ, we need not wonder that the agents
of the devil directed so much of their rage against him. And this is the
reason why he animadverts so sharply upon their rancor and treachery.

<span id="xxiv.i-p13"></span>The terms *wicked* and *violent* men denote
their unwarranted attempts at his destruction without provocation given.
He therefore commends his cause to God, as having studied peace with
them, as never having injured them, but being the innocent object of
their unjust persecution. The same rule must be observed by us all, as
it is against violence and wickedness that the help of God is extended.
David is not Multiplying mere terms of reproach as men do in their
personal disputes, but conciliating God’s favor by supplying a proof of
his innocence, for he must always be upon the side of good and peaceable
men.

<span id="xxiv.i-p14"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p15"></span>**2.** *Who imagine mischief’s in their
heart*. Here he charges them with inward malignity of heart. And it is
plain that the reference is not to one man merely, for he passes to the
plural number (in a manner sufficiently common,) reverting from the head
to all his associates and copartners in guilt. Indeed what was formerly
said in the singular number may be taken indefinitely, as grammarians
say. In general he repeats what I have noticed already, that the
hostility to which he was subjected arose from no cause of his. From
this we learn that the more wickedly our enemies assail us, and the more
of treachery and clandestine acts they manifest, the nearer is the
promised aid of the Holy Spirit, who himself dictated this form of
prayer by the mouth of David. The second clause may be rendered in three
ways. Literally it reads, who gather wars, and so some understand it.
But it, is well known that the prepositions are often omitted in the
Hebrew, and no doubt lie means that they stirred up general enmity by
their false information’s being as the trumpet which sounds to battle.
Some render the verb — *to conspire, or plot together*, but this is a
farfetched and meager sense. He intimates afterwards in what manner they
stirred up unjust war by the wicked calumnies which they spread, as they
could not crush a good and innocent person by violence, otherwise than
by first overwhelming him with calumny.

<span id="xxiv.i-p16"></span><span id="xxiv.i-p16.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p17"></span>**4.** *Keep me, O Jehovah!* To complaints
and accusations he now again adds prayer, from which it appears more
clearly, as I observed already, that it is God whom he seeks to be his
avenger. It is the same sentiment repeated, with one or two words
changed; for he had said *deliver me*, now he says *keep me*, and for
*the wicked man* he substitutes the *hand of the wicked*. He had spoken
of their conceiving mischief’s, now of their plotting how they might
ruin a poor unsuspecting individual. What he had said of their fraud and
deceit he repeats in figurative language, which does not want emphasis.
He speaks of nets spread out on every side to circumvent him, unless God
interposed for his help. Though at first sight the metaphors may seem
more obscure than the prayer was in its simple unfigurative expression,
they are far from darkening the previous declarations, and they add much
to the strength of them. From the word <span
id="xxiv.i-p17.1"></span>גאים, *geim*, which signifies *proud* or
*lofty* in the Hebrew, we learn that he does not speak of common men,
but of men in power, who considered that they would have no difficulty
in crushing an insignificant individual. When our enemies attack us in
the insolence of pride, let us learn to resort to God, who can repel the
rage of the wicked. Nor does he mean to say that they attacked him
merely by bold and violent measures, for he complains of their spreading
gins and snares; both methods are spoken of, namely, that while they
were confident of the power which they possessed, they devised
stratagems for his destruction.

<span id="xxiv.ii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
140:6-10](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#006)<span
id="xxiv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p2"></span>**6.** I said to Jehovah thou art my God;
hear the voice of my supplication. **7.** O, Jehovah, my Lord! the
strength of my salvation, thou hast set a covering upon my head in the
day of arms.  <span id="fr_225"></span>[226](#fn_225) **8.** Grant not,
O Jehovah! the desires of the wicked; they have devised, do not though
consummate, they shall be exalted. Selah. **9.** As for the head of
those compassing me about, let the mischief of his lips cover him.
**10.** Let coals with fire fall upon them; he shall cast them into
deeps,  <span id="fr_226"></span>[227](#fn_226) they shall not rise
again.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.ii-p6"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p7"></span>**6.** *I said to Jehovah*. In these words
he shows that his prayers were not merely those of the lips, as
hypocrites will make loud appeals to God for mere appearance sake, but
that he prayed with earnestness, and from a hidden principle of faith.
Till we have a persuasion of being saved through the grace of God there
can be no sincere prayer. We have here an excellent illustration of the
nature of faith, in the Psalmist’s turning himself away from man’s view,
that he may address God apart, hypocrisy being excluded in this internal
exercise of the heart. This is true prayer — not the mere idle lifting
up of the voice, but the presentation of our petitions from an inward
principle of faith. To beget in himself a persuasion of his obtaining
his present requests from God, he recalls to his mind what deliverance’s
God had already extended to him. He speaks of his having been to him as
a shield in every time of danger. Some read the words in the future
tense — “Thou wilt cover my head in the day of battle.” But it is
evident David speaks of protection formerly experienced from the hand of
God, and from this derives comfort to his faith. He comes forth, not as
a raw and undisciplined recruit, but as a soldier well tried in previous
engagements. The strength of salvation is equivalent to salvation
displayed with no ordinary power.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p9"></span>**8.** *Grant not, O Jehovah! the desires
of the wicked*  <span id="fr_227"></span>[228](#fn_227) We might render
the words *Establish not*, though the meaning would be the same — that
God would restrain the desires of the wicked, and frustrate all their
aims and attempts. We see from this that it is in his power, whenever he
sees proper, to frustrate the unprincipled designs of men, and their
wicked expectations, and to dash their schemes. When, therefore, it is
found impracticable to bring our enemies to a right state of mind, we
are to pray that the devices which they have imagined may be immediately
overthrown and thwarted. In the next clause there is more ambiguity. As
the Hebrew verb <span id="xxiv.ii-p10.1"></span>פוק, *puk*, means to
lead out, as well as to strike or fall, the words might mean, that God
would not carry out into effect the counsels of the wicked. But the
opinion of those may be correct who read — *their thought is thou wilt
not strike*, David representing such hopes as the wicked are wont to
entertain. We find him elsewhere (<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.2"></span>[Ps
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p10.2"></span>)
describing their pride in a similar way, in entirely overlooking a
divine providence, and considering all events as subject to their
control, and the world placed under their sole management. The word
which follows with thus come in appropriately — they shall be *lifted
up*, in illusion to the wicked being inflated by pride, through the idea
that they can never be overtaken by adversity. If the other reading be
preferred, the negative particle must be considered as repeated —
“Suffer not their attempts to be carried into effect; let them not be
exalted.” At any rate David is to be considered as censuring the
security of his enemies, in making no account of God, and in
surrendering themselves to unbridled license.

<span id="xxiv.ii-p11"></span><span id="xxiv.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p12"></span>**9.** *As for the head, etc*. There may
be a doubt whether, under the term head, lie refers to the chief of the
faction opposed to him; for we call suppose an inversion in the
sentence, and a change of the plural to the singular number, bringing
out this sense.  <span id="fr_228"></span>[229](#fn_228) “Let the
mischief of their wicked speeches, which they intended against me, fall
upon their own head.”  <span id="fr_229"></span>[230](#fn_229) As almost
all interpreters, however, have taken the other view, I have adopted it,
only understanding the reference as being to Saul rather than Doeg.
There follows an imprecation upon the whole company of his enemies
generally, that *coals may fall upon them*, alluding to the awful fate
of Sodom and Gomorrha. We find this elsewhere (<span
id="xxiv.ii-p14.2"></span>[Ps
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006)<span id="xxiv.ii-p14.2"></span>)
set forth by the Spirit of God as an example of Divine vengeance, to
terrify the wicked; and Jude (<span id="xxiv.ii-p14.3"></span>[Jude
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#007)<span id="xxiv.ii-p14.3"></span>)
declares that God testified, by this example of everlasting
significance, that he would be the Judge of all the ungodly. Some
translate what follows — *the wilt cast them into the fire*, which might
pass. But as: <span id="xxiv.ii-p14.4"></span>ב, *beth*, in the Hebrew
often denotes instrumentality, we may properly render the words — *thou
wilt cast them down* By *fire*, or With *fire*, as God sent it forth
against Sodom and Gomorrha. He prays they may be sunk into deep pits,
whence they may never rise. God sometimes heals those whom he has
smitten with great severity; David cuts off the reprobate from the hope
of pardon, as knowing them to be beyond recovery. Had they been
disposable to repentance, he would have been inclinable on his part to
mercy.

<span id="xxiv.iii"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p1"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
140:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#011)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p2"></span>**11.** The man (vir) of tongue shall not
be established in the earth, evil shall hunt the man (vir)  <span
id="fr_230"></span>[231](#fn_230) of violence to banishments. **12.** I
have known that God will accomplish the judgment of the poor, the
judgment of the afflicted. **13.** Surely the righteous will praise thy
name, the upright shall dwell before thy face.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xxiv.iii-p5"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p6"></span>**11.** *The man of tongue*,  <span
id="fr_231"></span>[232](#fn_231) *etc*. Some understand by this the
*loquacious* *man*, but the sense is too restricted; nor is the
reference to a reproachful, garrulous, vain and boastful man, but the
man of virulence, who wars by deceit and calumny, and not openly. This
is plain from what is said of the other class of persons in the
subsequent part of the sentence, that his enemies were given to open
violence as well as to treachery and cunning — like the lion as well as
the wolf — as formerly he complained that the poison of the asp or viper
was under their lips. The words run in the future tense, and many
interpreters construe them into the optative form, or into a prayer; but
I prefer retaining the future tense, as David does not appear so much to
pray, as to look forward to a coming deliverance. Whether his enemies
wrought by treachery, or by open violence, he looks forward to God as
his deliverer. The figure drawn from hunting is expressive. The hunter,
by spreading his toils on all sides, leaves no way of escape for the
wild beast; and the ungodly cannot by any subterfuge elude the divine
judgments. *Mischief hunts them into banishment’s*, for the more they
look for impunity and escape, they only precipitate themselves more
certainly upon destruction.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p8"></span><span id="xxiv.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p9"></span>**12.** *I have known; that God*, *etc*.
There can be no question that David here seals or corroborates his
prayer by turning his thoughts and discourse to the providential
judgments of God, for, as I have already said, doubtful prayer is no
prayer at all. He declares it to be a thing known and ascertained that
God cannot but deliver the afflicted. As he may connive for a time,
however, and suffer good and upright persons to be grievously tried,
David suggests as consideration which may meet this temptation, that God
does so advisedly, that he may relieve those who are in affliction, and
recover those who are oppressed. He accordingly says in express words
that he will be *the judge of the poor and the afflicted*. In this way
does he encourage both others and himself under continued troubles, till
the time proper for deliverance arrive, intimating that though he might
be universally considered an object of pity in being exposed to the fury
of the wicked, and in not being immediately delivered by the hand of
God, he would not give way to despair, but remember that it was the very
part of God to undertake the cause of the poor. It were to weaken the
passage if we considered David merely to be speaking of his own
individual case.

<span id="xxiv.iii-p10"></span>He infers (<span
id="xxiv.iii-p10.1"></span>[Ps
140:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#013)<span
id="xxiv.iii-p10.1"></span>) that the righteous would give thanks to
God, and be safe under his help. For the particle <span
id="xxiv.iii-p10.2"></span>אך, *ach*, which is often adversative in the
Hebrew, is here affirmative, and denotes inference or consequence from
what was formerly stated. Though the godly may be silenced for a time,
and through the force of trouble may not raise the praises of God, David
expresses his conviction that what was taken away would be speedily
restored, and they would celebrate the loving kindness of the Lord with
joy and alacrity. As this is not easily believed in circumstances of
trial, the already referred to is inserted. We must endeavor, though
with a struggle, to rise to a confident persuasion, that however low
they may be brought, the Lord’s people will be restored to prosperity,
and will soon sing his praises. The second clause of the verse gives the
reason of their thanksgiving’s. He speaks of this as being the ground of
the praises of the righteous, that they experience God’s care of them,
and concern for their salvation. For *to dwell before God’s face* is to
be cherished and sustained by his fatherly regards.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_221"></span>[222](cc12023.htm#fr_221) <span
id="xxiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p3"></span> “The word ‘man’ in these two lines is
expressed in the first by <span id="xxiv.i-p3.1"></span>אדם (homo,) in
the second by <span id="xxiv.i-p3.2"></span>איש (vir.)” — *Jebb’s
Translation of the Psalms,* etc., volume 1.

<span id="fn_222"></span>[223](cc12023.htm#fr_222) <span
id="xxiv.i-p3.3"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p4"></span> Mant translates —

<span id="xxiv.i-p5"></span>*“The* *serpent’s brandished tongue is
theirs.”*

<span id="xxiv.i-p6"></span>“The verb,” says he, “here rendered
‘brandished,’ signifies either ‘to whet, sharpen,’ which is performed by
reiterated motion or friction, or to ‘vibrate.’ In either case the
metaphor, as applied to a wicked tongue, is beautiful and appropriate. I
have preferred the latter as affording a more poetical image. See
Parkhurst on <span id="xxiv.i-p6.1"></span>שנן, 3.” In illustration of
this figure Kimchi observes, that “the serpent when it comes to bite
will open its mouth, and will hiss, and move its tongue here and there
as if it would make it sharp as a *barber’s razor.*”

<span id="fn_223"></span>[224](cc12023.htm#fr_223) <span
id="xxiv.i-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p7"></span> The original word <span
id="xxiv.i-p7.1"></span>עכשוב, *achshub,* rendered “asp,” is to be found
in Scripture only in this place; and though it evidently denotes some of
the serpent tribe, it is not so easy to determine the particular species
intended. In our English Bible it is translated “adder,” and as the word
is derived from an Arabic verb, which signifies to coil up, or bend
back, it has been said that this act perfectly corresponds with the
nature of the adder, which in preparing to strike contracts itself into
a spiral form, and raises its horrid head from the middle of the orb;
and which also assumes the same form when it goes to sleep, coiling its
body into a number of circles, with its head in the center. — (*Paxton’s
Illustrations of Scripture*, vol. i. p. 428.) But the same action is
common to most serpents; and this name may, therefore have reference to
no particular species. Some, however, contend that it is another name
for the *pethem*, or *asp* mentioned in <span
id="xxiv.i-p7.2"></span>[Job
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014)<span id="xxiv.i-p7.2"></span>,
the venom of which is so deadly as to be incurable and followed by
speedy death, unless the wounded part is amputated. Such seems to have
been the opinion of the LXX., as they render it by <span
id="xxiv.i-p7.3"></span>ασπις, in which they are followed by the Vulgate
and by the Apostle Paul, who quotes this text in <span
id="xxiv.i-p7.4"></span>[Ro 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013)<span
id="xxiv.i-p7.4"></span>. Calvin here adopts the word sanctioned by
these authorities.

<span id="xxiv.i-p8"></span>“As to the poison, it will be observed, that
in the venomous serpents there is a gland under the eye secreting the
poisonous matter which is conveyed in a small tube or canal to the end
of a fang which lies concealed at the roof of the mouth. This fang is
moveable at the pleasure of the serpent, and is protruded when it is
about to strike at an antagonist. The situation of this poison, which is
in a manner behind the upper lip, gives great propriety to the
expression — ‘Adders’ poison is under their lips.’ The usage of the
Hebrew language, renders it by no means improbable that the fang itself
is called <span id="xxiv.i-p8.1"></span>לשון, *lashon*, ‘a tongue,’ in
the present text; and a serpent might be said to sharpen its tongue,
when in preparing to strike it protruded its fangs. We do not see any
explanation by which a more consistent meaning may be extracted from the
expression here employed.” — *Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible.*

<span id="fn_224"></span>[225](cc12023.htm#fr_224) <span
id="xxiv.i-p8.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.i-p9"></span> The imagery in this verse is borrowed from
the practices of hunters and fowlers in the eastern regions of the
world, who are accustomed to take and destroy the ferocious beasts and
the larger species of birds by a variety of ingenious snares and
devices. It is a curious circumstance, as noticed by Thevenot, that
artifices of this kind are literally employed against men as well as
against birds and wild beasts by some of the Orientals. “The cunningest
robbers in the world,” says he, as quoted by Mant, “are in this country.
They use a certain slip, with a running noose, which they cast with so
much slight about a man’s neck when they are within reach of him, that
they never fail, so that they strangle him in a trice.”

<span id="fn_225"></span>[226](cc12023.htm#fr_225) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p3"></span> That is, in the day of battle, in the day
of the clashing or noisy collision of arms.

<span id="fn_226"></span>[227](cc12023.htm#fr_226) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p4"></span> In the French version it is, as in our
English Bible — “<span id="xxiv.ii-p4.1"></span>Fosses profondes;” “deep
pits.” The Hebrew word, according to Parkhurst, properly means
*breaches* or *disruptions* of the earth, such as are made by an
earthquake. He conceives that the Psalmist alludes to the punishment of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiram, and of the two hundred and fifty men who
burnt incense. (<span id="xxiv.ii-p4.2"></span>[Nu
16:31-35](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#031)<span
id="xxiv.ii-p4.2"></span>.) See Parkhurst on <span
id="xxiv.ii-p4.3"></span>המר. Bishop Horsley, who concurs with Parkhurst
in the supposed allusion, translates *chasms of the yawning earth*,
observing that he cannot otherwise than by this periphrasis express the
idea of the word <span id="xxiv.ii-p4.4"></span>מהמרות

<span id="fn_227"></span>[228](cc12023.htm#fr_227) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p10"></span> “The desires which the wicked have for my
destruction.” — *Phillips*.

<span id="fn_228"></span>[229](cc12023.htm#fr_228) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xxiv.ii-p13.1"></span>Car il
pourreit estre que l’ordre des mots seroit renverse, et que le nombre
singulier seroit mis pour le pluriel, en ce sens,” etc. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_229"></span>[230](cc12023.htm#fr_229) <span
id="xxiv.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xxiv.ii-p14"></span> “The meaning of the verse may be, that
the mischief designed by the wicked against others shall fall on their
own head, as <span id="xxiv.ii-p14.1"></span>[Ps
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017)<span id="xxiv.ii-p14.1"></span>,
‘his violence shall descend on his own head;’ or it may express the
leader of the hostile party, as Saul or Doeg, in the case of David being
here the speaker.” — *Phillips*.

<span id="fn_230"></span>[231](cc12023.htm#fr_230) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p3"></span> <span id="xxiv.iii-p3.1"></span>איש is
the word for man in both these clauses.

<span id="fn_231"></span>[232](cc12023.htm#fr_231) <span
id="xxiv.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xxiv.iii-p7"></span> “*A man, of tongue*, *i.e*., of evil
tongue; a slanderer or detractor.” — *Phillips*. The Bible translation
renders the phrase “an evil speaker;” and the Chaldee Paraphrase has
“the man of detraction, with a three-forked tongue;” because such a man
wounds *three* at once — the receiver, the sufferer, and himself.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 141](cc12024)
