[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12032)  [Next](cc12034) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xxxiv"></span>

<span id="xxxiv-p1"></span>PSALM 150.

<span id="xxxiv-p2"></span>The argument of this Psalm is the same with
that of the former.

<span id="xxxiv-p3"></span>Hallelujah.

<span id="xxxiv.i"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p1"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
150:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/psa150.htm#001)<span id="xxxiv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise God in his sanctuary: praise
him in the firmament of his power. **2.** Praise him in, his might;
praise him for the plenitude of his greatness. **3.** Praise him with
sound of trumpet,  <span id="fr_305"></span>[306](#fn_305) praise him
with psaltry and harp. **4.** Praise him with timbrel  <span
id="fr_306"></span>[307](#fn_306) and pipe,  <span
id="fr_307"></span>[308](#fn_307) praise him upon chords,  <span
id="fr_308"></span>[309](#fn_308) and the organ.  <span
id="fr_309"></span>[310](#fn_309) **5.** Praise him upon cymbals of
sound, praise him upon cymbals of jubilation  <span
id="fr_310"></span>[311](#fn_310) **6.** Whatsoever breathes, let it
praise God. Hallelujah.

<span id="xxxiv.i-p9"></span> 

<span id="xxxiv.i-p10"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p11"></span>**1.** *Praise God in his sanctuary.* This
psalm in general commends the spiritual worship of God, which consists
in sacrifices of praise. By the *sanctuary* there is little doubt that
heaven is here meant, as is often the case elsewhere. The second clause
is exegetical, for the same thing is repeated. But for sanctuary we read
<span id="xxxiv.i-p11.1"></span>רקיע, *rekia,* that is, *the expanse of
heaven,* to which is added the epithet of *power,* because there we have
a proof of the matchless power of God, so that we cannot look to the
heavens without being lost in admiration. As to the interpretation which
some give — Praise God, ye angels who inhabit the heavens, and ye men
who dwell under the firmament, it is forced and unnatural; for the
Psalmist, in order to awaken men who grow languid in God’s praises, bids
them lift their eyes towards the heavenly sanctuary. That the majesty of
God may be duly reverenced, the Psalmist represents him as presiding on
his throne in the heavens; and he enlarges upon the same truth in the
second verse, celebrating his power and his greatness, which he had
brought under our notice in the heavens, which are a mirror in which
they may be seen. If we would have our minds kindled, then, to engage in
this religious service, let us meditate upon his power and greatness,
which will speedily dispel all such insensibility. Though our minds can
never take in this immensity, the mere taste of it will deeply affect
us. And God will not reject such praises as we offer according to our
capacity.

<span id="xxxiv.i-p12"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p13"></span>**3.** *Praise him with sound of trumpet.*
I do not insist upon the words in the Hebrew signifying the musical
instruments; only let the reader remember that sundry different kinds
are here mentioned, which were in use under the legal economy, the more
forcibly to teach the children of God that they cannot apply themselves
too diligently to the praises of God — as if he would enjoin them
strenuously to bring to this service all their powers, and devote
themselves wholly to it. Nor was it without reason that God under the
law enjoined this multiplicity of songs, that he might lead men away
from those vain and corrupt pleasures to which they are excessively
addicted, to a holy and profitable joy. Our corrupt nature indulges in
extraordinary liberties, many devising methods of gratification which
are preposterous, while their highest satisfaction lies in suppressing
all thoughts of God. This perverse disposition could only be corrected
in the way of God’s retaining a weak and ignorant people under many
restraints, and constant exercises. The Psalmist, therefore, in
exhorting believers to pour forth all their joy in the praises of God,
enumerates, one upon another, all the musical instruments which were
then in use, and reminds them that they ought all to be consecrated to
the worship of God.

<span id="xxxiv.i-p14"></span><span id="xxxiv.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p15"></span>**6.** *Whatever breathes, etc.* As the
word <span id="xxxiv.i-p15.1"></span>נשמה, *neshamah,* means *breath,*
or *blowing,* and whatever is animate, or breathes, the words may be
extended to every kind of living creatures, as we have seen in the
preceding psalms that the declaration of God’s praises is assigned even
to things wanting intelligence. But as men exclusively are often meant
under the name of “flesh,” so we may very well suppose that the words
have reference here to men, who, although they have vital breath in
common with the brute creation, obtain by way of distinction the name of
breathing, as of living creatures. I am led to think this for the
following reason: As yet the Psalmist has addressed himself in his
exhortations to the people who were conversant with the ceremonies under
the law, now he turns to men in general, tacitly intimating that a time
was coming when the same songs, which were then only heard in Judea,
would resound in every quarter of the globe. And in this prediction we
have been joined in the same symphony with the Jews, that we may worship
God with constant sacrifices of praise, until being gathered into the
kingdom of heaven, we sing with elect angels an eternal hallelujah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_305"></span>[306](cc12033.htm#fr_305) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p3"></span> “The trumpets of the last Temple were
probably formed after the ancient model; and as these are represented
among the spoils of that Temple on the Triumphal Arch of Titus at Rome,
we are enabled to see that they were long straight trumpets, of a form
which has always been and continues to be common... Trumpets and horns
are the only instruments concerning which any directions are given in
the law. ‘In the infancy of a state,’ says Burney, ‘a nation has but
little leisure for cultivating music any otherwise than as it is
connected with religious rites and the military art;’ and it is thus
that he accounts for the fact, that (with the exception of Miriam’s
timbrel) no instruments but horns and trumpets are noticed in the Law.
And, indeed, it may be said that they are scarcely mentioned as
*musical* instruments, but as suited to and employed for making signals,
calls, and conveying instructions during the religious solemnities, and
in the field of war... It is clear, however, that trumpets and cornets
were introduced into the musical choirs in the time of David; while they
still continued to be employed in their former service. The following
particulars concerning the use of trumpets in the Temple will be useful,
and are collected chiefly from Lightfoot’s ‘Temple Service.’ The
trumpets were sounded exclusively by the priests who stood not in the
Levitical choir, but apart and opposite to the Levites, on the other
side of the altar, both parties looking towards it—the priests on the
west side, and the Levites on the east. The trumpets did not join in the
concert; but were sounded during certain regulated pauses in the vocal
and instrumental music ”—*Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible.*.

<span id="fn_306"></span>[307](cc12033.htm#fr_306) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p4"></span> See footnote 293, <span
id="xxxiv.i-p4.2"></span>[Psalm
149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003)<span id="xxxiv.i-p4.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_307"></span>[308](cc12033.htm#fr_307) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p5"></span> See footnote 292, <span
id="xxxiv.i-p5.2"></span>[Psalm
149:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#003)<span id="xxxiv.i-p5.2"></span>.

<span id="fn_308"></span>[309](cc12033.htm#fr_308) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p5.3"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p6"></span> The original word is <span
id="xxxiv.i-p6.1"></span>במנים “This word occurring nowhere else, it is
impossible to ascertain what kind of instrument this was, but as
Edwards, upon the authority of Rabbi Hannase makes, it a *stringed*
instrument, and the word is probably derived from <span
id="xxxiv.i-p6.2"></span>מנה*, to number*, probably it was so called
from the extraordinary number of strings which it had; and perhaps it
was the *decachord*, mentioned in <span id="xxxiv.i-p6.3"></span>[Ps
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002)<span id="xxxiv.i-p6.3"></span>,
which, having ten strings, might be called Minim, <span
id="xxxiv.i-p6.4"></span>κατ ἐξοχὴν, as consisting of the greatest
number of strings in use among the Jews.” — *Dimock.*

<span id="fn_309"></span>[310](cc12033.htm#fr_309) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p6.5"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p7"></span> The Hebrew name is <span
id="xxxiv.i-p7.1"></span>עגב, *ougab*. This instrument is equal in
antiquity to the <span id="xxxiv.i-p7.2"></span>כנור, *kinnor*, both
being mentioned in <span id="xxxiv.i-p7.3"></span>[Ge
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021)<span id="xxxiv.i-p7.3"></span>,
as the invention of Jubal. These are the two first musical instruments
the invention of which is recorded in Scripture, and the only ones
mentioned before the deluge. Subsequently they are almost always
mentioned in connection with each other. The *ougab* was not that
complicated instrument which goes by the name of the *organ* in the
present day. Calmet supposes it to have been a flute which consisted of
a number of pipes, of unequal thickness and length, set close or joined
together, which gave harmonious sound when blown into, by moving them
successively under the lower lip. Such is the common opinion, and there
seems no ground to dispute its correctness. This instrument was the
small organ or <span id="xxxiv.i-p7.4"></span>*syrinx*, or <span
id="xxxiv.i-p7.5"></span>*fistula Panis* of antiquity; its invention
having been ascribed to Pan, the great sylvan god, who was usually
figured with the instrument in his hands. According to the fable, he
formed it of reeds which grew by the river, and played upon it while his
goats were feeding on the banks; which shows that it was regarded as
properly a pastoral instrument, and as such it seems to be mentioned by
Job. (<span id="xxxiv.i-p7.6"></span>[Job
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#011),
[12](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#012)<span id="xxxiv.i-p7.6"></span>.)
The principle of its construction is so simple, that it is among the
most widely diffused of musical instruments. It is in common use in the
island of New Amsterdam, in the South Seas, as flutes and drums have
been found in Otaheite and New Zealand, an uncontestable proof that
these are instruments which tribes the most barbarous and the most
remote from each other naturally invent. The number of tubes, as
represented on ancient monuments, varies from seven to eleven.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[311](cc12033.htm#fr_310) <span
id="xxxiv.i-p7.7"></span>

<span id="xxxiv.i-p8"></span> Of the Hebrew musical instrument called
<span id="xxxiv.i-p8.1"></span>צלצל, *tsiltel,* or “cymbal,” as Calvin
here renders it, and as it is rendered in the Septuagint and Vulgate,
two kinds are here mentioned — <span id="xxxiv.i-p8.2"></span>צלצלים,
“*tsiltelim*,” or, “cymbals of sound,” and “*tsiltelim*,” or “*cymbals*
of jubilation.” The specific difference between these two sorts of the
same instrument is not accurately marked. The latter were probably of a
larger size than the farmer, or made of such a shape or of such metals
as to emit a louder sound. The former are translated by French and
Skinner, “the soft cymbal.” The literal translation of the Hebrew is,
“cymbals of hearing,” i.e., say these critics, “cymbals which when
struck do not overpower the voices of the singers.” They translate the
latter, “the loud cymbals.” The ancient cymbals were two convex or
hollow plates of brass or other metal, as silver or copper, made in the
form of cups, which were held in each hand, and which being struck
against each other produced a sharp clanging. sound. Some, however,
think that the word *tsiltzel* exclusively denotes the *sistrum*, and
that cymbals, properly speaking, are denoted by the word <span
id="xxxiv.i-p8.3"></span>שלישים *shalishim*, in <span
id="xxxiv.i-p8.4"></span>[1Sa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#006)<span id="xxxiv.i-p8.4"></span>,
which is, equally with the other, rendered <span
id="xxxiv.i-p8.5"></span>*cymbala* by the Septuagint and the Vulgate,
and which our authorized version translates “instruments of music.” It
is difficult to decide as to these two opinions; but it seems admitted
on all hands that both cymbals and sistrums were in use among the Jews.
The sistrum was a concave plate of sonorous metal, and of an oval
configuration, crossed by bars of the same metal with reverted ends.
These bars moved freely in the holes through which they passed, and when
the instrument was shaken by the handle to which it was fixed, the
reverted ends striking upon the body of the instrument produced the
sound. It had generally three or four transverse bars. It was much used
by the Egyptians in their religious services, and actual specimens of it
of an ancient date have been discovered. See volume 3

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Translation of the Psalms](cc12034)
