[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12001)  [Next](cc12003) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="iii"></span> <span id="iii.i"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p1"></span><span id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:121-128](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#121)<span
id="iii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p2"></span>**121.** <span id="iii.i-p2.1"></span>ע I
have done judgment and righteousness: give me not up to my oppressors.
**122.** <span id="iii.i-p2.2"></span>ע Become surety for thy servant
for good, that the proud may not oppress me. **123.** <span
id="iii.i-p2.3"></span>ע My eyes have failed for thy salvation, and for
thy righteous word.  <span id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) **124.** <span
id="iii.i-p3.1"></span>ע Deal with thy servant according to thy
goodness, and teach me thy statutes. **125.** <span
id="iii.i-p3.2"></span>ע I am thy servant, give me understanding, that I
may learn thy testimonies. **126.** <span id="iii.i-p3.3"></span>ע It is
time for thee, O Jehovah! to be doing for they have destroyed thy law.
**127.** <span id="iii.i-p3.4"></span>ע And therefore I have loved thy
statutes above gold,  <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2) yea even above
the most fine gold  <span id="fr_3"></span>[4](#fn_3) **128.** <span
id="iii.i-p5.3"></span>ע Therefore I have esteemed all thy commandments
to be altogether right, and have hated every way of lying.

<span id="iii.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="iii.i-p7"></span><span id="iii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p8"></span>**121.** *I have done judgment and
righteousness.* The Prophet implores the help of God against the wicked
who troubled him, and he does so in such a manner as at the same time to
testify that the harassing treatment he received from them was on his
part altogether undeserved. If we would have God to come down to succor
us, it becomes us to see to it that we meet him with the testimony of a
good conscience. As He everywhere promises his aid to the afflicted who
are unrighteously oppressed, it is no superfluous protestation which the
Prophet makes, that he had not provoked his enemies, but had restrained
himself from all injury and wrong-doing, and had not even attempted to
requite evil for evil. In asserting that he had at all times *done
judgment,* he means that whatever rite wicked practiced, he steadfastly
persevered in following after integrity, and never turned aside from
what was just and right in any of his public or private transactions.

<span id="iii.i-p9"></span><span id="iii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p10"></span>**122.** *Become surety for thy servant for
good.* This prayer is almost similar to that of the preceding verse; for
I prefer translating the Hebrew verb <span id="iii.i-p10.1"></span>ערוב,
*arob,* by *Become surety for,* to rendering, as others do, *Delight thy
servant in good,* or *Make thy servant to delight in good* According to
this second version, the words are a prayer that God would rejoice his
servant with his benefits. There is a third translation, by which they
become a prayer that God would inspire his heart with the love and
desire of rectitude; for true perfection consists in our taking pleasure
in justice and uprightness. But as from the last clause of the verse it
is obvious that David here desires succor against his enemies, the verb
*Become surety* is the more appropriate rendering  <span
id="fr_4"></span>[5](#fn_4) Lord, as if he had said, since the proud
cruelly rush upon me to destroy me, interpose. thyself between us, as if
thou weft my surety. The letter <span id="iii.i-p11.4"></span>ל,
*lamed,* which signifies *for,* is not indeed prefixed to the noun, but
this is no valid objection to our translation, as that letter is often
understood. It is a form of expression full of comfort, to represent God
as performing the office of a surety in order to effect our deliverance.
He is said metaphorically to become surety for us, just as if, on
finding us indebted in a large sum of money, he discharged us of the
obligation, by paying down the money to our creditor. The prayer is to
this effect, That God would not suffer the wicked to exercise, their
cruelty against us at their pleasure, but that he would interpose as a
defender to save us. By these words the Prophet intimates, that he was
in extreme danger, and that he had nothing else left him in which to
hope but the help of God.

<span id="iii.i-p12"></span><span id="iii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p13"></span>**123.** *My eyes have failed for thy
salvation.*  <span id="fr_5"></span>[6](#fn_5) In the first; place he
testifies, that he had been afflicted with severe troubles, and that not
for a short time only, but for a period so protracted as might have
exhausted his patience and occasioned despondency. But so far was this
from being the effect they produced, that he declares that in all these
long and wearisome conflicts his heart had never sunk into despair. We
have before explained *failing for salvation* as denoting that although
there was no prospect of an end to his calamities, and although despair
presented itself on every side, yet he strove against temptation even to
the fainting of his soul. Should we understand the past tense of the
verb as put for the present, in which sense it seems to be employed, the
Prophet in that case intimates, that his eyes fail him not because they
become fatigued, but Because through earnest looking they contract as it
were a dimness, and that yet he does not cease to wait continually for
the salvation of God. In short, the failing of his eyes indicates
perseverance combined with severe and arduous effort, and it is opposed
to the momentary ardor of those who immediately faint, if God does not
grant their requests. This expression also denotes a painful
earnestness, which almost consumes all the senses. As to the term
*salvation,* he does not limit it to one kind of help, but comprehends
under it the continual course of God’s grace, until he put his believing
people in the possession of *complete* salvation. He expresses the
manner in which he waited for salvation, which was by depending upon
God’s word in which two things are to be attended to, first, that we can
only be said to wait for salvation from God, when, confiding in his
promises, we actually betake ourselves to him for protection; and
secondly, that we then only yield to God the praise of salvation, when
we continue to keep our hope firmly fixed on his word. This is the way
in which He is to be sought; and although he may conceal from our view
the working of his hand, we ought to repose in his bare promises. This
is the reason why David calls God’s word *righteous.* He would hereby
confirm his faith in the truth of the divine promises for God in
promising liberally does not cherish in his people delusive
expectations.

<span id="iii.i-p15"></span><span id="iii.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p16"></span>**124.** *Deal with thy servant according to
thy goodness.* The two clauses of this verse must be read correctly; for
he does not first separately desire God to deal well with him, and next
desire him to be his master and teacher. He rather beseeches him in the
exercise of that goodness and mercy, which he is wont to display towards
all his people, to instruct him in his law. The object of the Prophet’s
request then is, that God would teach him in his statutes. But he begins
with the divine mercy, employing it as an argument to prevail with God
to grant him what he desires. This prayer then must be resolved thus:
Lord, deal gently with me, and manifest thy goodness towards me by
instructing me in thy commandments. Our whole happiness undoubtedly
consists in our having that true wisdom which is to be derived from the
word of God; and our only hope of obtaining this wisdom lies in God’s
being pleased to display his mercy and goodness towards us. The Prophet,
therefore, magnifies the greatness and excellence of the benefit of
being instructed in the divine law, when he requests that it may be
bestowed upon him as a free gift.

<span id="iii.i-p17"></span><span id="iii.i-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p18"></span>**125.** *I am thy servant, give me
understanding.* Here the prayer of the preceding verse is repeated. The
repetition shows how ardently he wished the blessing prayed for, and how
earnest and importunate he was in pleading with God for it. By the words
he expresses still more plainly in what way it is that God teaches his
own people — that he does so by illuminating with sound knowledge their
understandings, which otherwise would be blind. It would profit us
little to have the divine law sounding in our ears, or to have it
exhibited in writing before our eyes, and to have it expounded by the
voice of man, did not God correct our slowness of apprehension, and
render us docile by the secret influence of his Spirit. We are not to
suppose that David advances any meritorious claims before God when he
boasts of being his servant. Men, indeed, commonly imagine that when we
are previously well prepared, God then adds new grace, which they term
*subsequent grace.* But the Prophet, so far from boasting of his own
worth, rather declares how deep the obligations were under which he lay
to God. It is not in the power of any man to make himself a servant of
the Most High, nor can any man bring anything of his own as a price with
which to purchase so great an honor. Of this the Prophet was well aware.
He knew that there is not one of the whole human family who is worthy of
being enrolled among that order; and therefore he does nothing more than
adduce the grace he had obtained, as an argument that God according to
his usual way would perfect what he had begun. In a similar manner he
speaks in <span id="iii.i-p18.1"></span>[Ps
116:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#006)<span id="iii.i-p18.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.i-p19"></span>“I am thy servant and the son of thine
handmaid:”

<span id="iii.i-p20"></span>in which place it is abundantly manifest
that he does not boast of his services, but only declares that he is one
of the members of the Church.

<span id="iii.i-p21"></span><span id="iii.i-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p22"></span>**126.** *It is time for thee, O Jehovah! to
be doing.* It being the object of the Prophet to imprecate upon the
impious and wicked the vengeance which they have deserved, he says, that
the fit time for executing it had now arrived, inasmuch as they had
carried to a great extent their wanton forwardness against God. The
general verb *doing* is more emphatic than if one more specific had been
used. The language is as if he had said, that God would seem to delay
too long, if he did not now execute the office of a judge. It is the
peculiar work of God to restrain the wicked, and even to punish them
severely when he finds that their repentance is utterly hopeless. If it
is alleged, that this prayer is inconsistent with the law of charity, it
may be replied, that David here speaks of reprobates, whose amendment is
become desperate. His heart, there is no doubt, was governed by the
spirit of wisdom. Besides, it is to be remembered, that he does not
complain of his own private wrongs. It is a pure and honest zeal which
moves him to desire the destruction of the wicked despisers of God; for
he adduces no other reason for the prayer, than that the wicked
*destroyed God’s law.* By this he gives evidence, that nothing was
dearer to him than the service of God, and that nothing was held by him
in higher recommendation than the observance of the law. I have already
repeatedly warned you, in other places, that our zeal is forward and
disordered whenever its moving principle is a sense of our own personal
injuries. It is, therefore, to be carefully noticed, that the Prophet’s
grief proceeded from no other cause than that he could not endure to see
the divine law violated. In short, this is a prayer that God would
restore to order the confused and ruinous state of things in the world.
It remains for us to learn from David’s example, whenever the earth is
fraught and defiled with wickedness to such a degree that the fear of
him has become almost extinct, to call upon him to show himself the
maintainer of his own glory. This doctrine is of use in sustaining our
hope and patience whenever God suspends the execution of his judgments
longer than we would incline. Previous to his addressing himself to God,
the Prophet adopts it as a principle, that, although God may seem for a
time to false no notice of what his creatures do, yet he never forgets
his office, but delays the execution of his judgments for wise reasons,
that at length he may execute them when the seasonable time arrives.

<span id="iii.i-p23"></span><span id="iii.i-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p24"></span>**127.** *And therefore I have loved thy
statutes above gold.* This verse, I have no doubt, is connected with the
preceding; for otherwise the illative particle *therefore* would be
without meaning. Viewing it in this connection, I understand the
Psalmist as intimating, that the reason why he esteemed God’s law as
more valuable than gold and precious stones, was because he had fixed in
his mind a thorough persuasion of the truth, that although God may
connive for a time at wickedness, the making havoc of all uprightness
and equity will not always remain unpunished. Yea, the more he saw the
wicked outrageously breaking forth into wickedness, the more was he
incited by a holy indignation burning in his heart, to love the law.
This is a passage deserving of special attention, for the baneful
influence of evil example is well known, every man thinking that he may
lawfully do whatever is commonly practiced around him. Whence it comes
to pass, that evil company carries us away like a tempest. The more
diligently then ought we to meditate on this doctrine, That when the
wicked claim to themselves an unbridled liberty, it behoves us to
contemplate with the eyes of faith the judgments of God, in order to our
being thereby quickened to the observance of the divine law. If
attention to this doctrine has been needful from the beginning, at the
present day it is necessary to exert ourselves, that we may not be
involved in violating the law of God with the wicked conspiracy which
almost the whole world have formed to violate it. The more outrageously
the wicked vaunt themselves, let our veneration for and our love of the
divine law proportionally increase.

<span id="iii.i-p25"></span><span id="iii.i-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p26"></span>**128.** *Therefore I have esteemed all thy
commandments to be altogether right*  <span id="fr_6"></span>[7](#fn_6)
This verse, like the preceding, is connected with the 26th, and the
connection may be brought out by observing, that the Prophet, waiting
patiently for God’s judgments, and also earnestly calling for their
infliction, had subscribed to the law of God in every particular, and
embraced it without a single exception — and moreover, that he hated
every false way. Literally, it is *all the commandments of all;* but the
words *of all* are to be referred to things and not to persons, as if he
had said, that he approved of all the laws which God had ordained,
whatever they enjoined.  <span id="fr_7"></span>[8](#fn_7) A similar
form of expression occurs in <span id="iii.i-p28.2"></span>[Eze
44:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#030)<span id="iii.i-p28.2"></span>,
“all oblations of all things” — that is to say, whatever kind of
oblations men offer. The Prophet has not laid down this sentiment in
such express terms without good reason; for there is nothing to which we
are naturally more inclined than to despise or reject whatever in God’s
law is not agreeable to us. Every man, according as he is tainted with
this or that particular vice, would desire their the commandment which
forbids it were razed out of the law. But we cannot lawfully make any
addition to it, or take away anything from it; and since God has joined
his commandments together by a sacred and inviolable bond, to separate
any one of them from the rest is altogether unwarrantable. We perceive
then how the Prophet, inspired with a holy jealousy for the law,
contended against the wicked rebellion of those who despised it. And
assuredly, when we see that the ungodly mock God with such effrontery,
at one time rising up audaciously against him, trod at another
perverting every part of the law, it becomes us to be the more inflamed
with zeal, and to be the more courageous in maintaining the truth of
God. The extreme impiety of our age especially demands of all the
faithful that they should exercise themselves in this holy zeal. Profane
men strive to outdo one another in scornfully aspersing the doctrine of
salvation, and endeavor to bring God’s sacred Word into contempt by
their derisive jeers. Others pour forth their blasphemies without
intermission. We cannot, therefore, avoid being chargeable with the
crime of treacherous indifference, if our hearts are not warmed with
zeal, and unless we burn with a holy jealousy. The Prophet not merely
says, that he approved of God’s law wholly and without exception, but he
adds, *that he hated every way of lying,* or *every false way.* And,
undoubtedly, no one subscribes in good earnest to the law of God, but he
who rejects all the slanders by which the wicked taint or obscure the
purity of sound doctrine. *By way of lying,* the Prophet doubtless means
whatever is opposed to the purity of the law, intimating that he
detested all corruption’s which are contrary to the Word of God.

<span id="iii.ii"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p1"></span><span id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:129-136](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#129)<span
id="iii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p2"></span>**129.** <span id="iii.ii-p2.1"></span>פ Thy
testimonies are marvelous; therefore my soul hath kept them. **130.**
<span id="iii.ii-p2.2"></span>פ The entrance of thy words is light,
which giveth understanding to the little ones. **131.** <span
id="iii.ii-p2.3"></span>פ I opened my mouth and panted, because I loved
thy commandments. **132.** <span id="iii.ii-p2.4"></span>פ Look upon me,
and be merciful to me, according to thy judgment towards them that love
thy name. **133.** <span id="iii.ii-p2.5"></span>פ Direct my steps
according to thy word, and let no iniquity have  <span
id="fr_8"></span>[9](#fn_8) dominion in me. **134.** <span
id="iii.ii-p3.1"></span>פ Deliver me from the oppression of men; and I
will keep thy precepts. **135.** <span id="iii.ii-p3.2"></span>פ Make
thy face to shine upon thy servant; and teach me thy statutes. **136.**
<span id="iii.ii-p3.3"></span>פ Rivers of waters run from my eyes,
because they have not kept thy law.

<span id="iii.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.ii-p5"></span><span id="iii.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p6"></span>**129.** *Thy testimonies are marvelous.* I
have given this translation to avoid an ambiguous form of expression.
The Prophet does not. simply mean, that the doctrine of the law is
wonderful, but that it contains high and hidden mysteries. Accordingly
he declares, that the sublime and admirable wisdom which he found
comprehended in the divine law led him to regard it with reverence. This
is to be carefully marked, for the law of God is proudly despised by the
great majority of mankind, when they do not duly taste its doctrine, nor
acknowledge that God speaks from his throne in heaven, that, the pride
of the flesh being abased, he may raise us upward by the apprehension of
faith. We also gather from this passage, that it is impossible for any
man to keep the law of God from the heart, unless he contemplate it with
feelings of reverence: for reverence is the beginning of pure and right
subjection. Accordingly, I have said that many despise God’s Word,
because they think it inferior to the acuteness of their own
understandings. Yea, many are led to break forth more audaciously into
this heaven-daring contempt, from the vanity of showing their own
ingenuity. But, although worldly men may flatter themselves in that
proud disdain of the divine law, yet the commendation which the Prophet
pronounces upon it still holds true, that it comprehends mysteries which
far transcend all the conceptions of the human mind.

<span id="iii.ii-p7"></span><span id="iii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p8"></span>**130.** *The entrance of thy word is
light.* The amount is, that the light of the truth revealed in God’s
word, is so distinct that the very first sight of it illuminates the
mind. The word <span id="iii.ii-p8.1"></span>פתח *pethach,* properly
signifies *an opening,*  <span id="fr_9"></span>[10](#fn_9) but
metaphorically it is taken for *a gate.* Accordingly the old translator
has rendered it *beginning,* which is not improper, provided it is
understood of the rudiments or first elements of the divine law. It is
as if the Prophet had — “Not only do those who have attained an accurate
acquaintance with the whole law, and who have made the study of it the
business of their lives, discern there a clear light, but also those who
have studied it even very imperfectly, and who have only, so to speak,
entered the porch.” Now we must reason from the less to the greater. If
tyroes and novices begin to be enlightened at their first entrance, what
will be the case when a man is admitted to a full and perfect knowledge?

<span id="iii.ii-p10"></span>In the second clause the Prophet unfolds
his meaning more fully. By *little ones* he denotes such as neither
excel in ingenuity nor are endued with wisdom, but rather are unskilled
in letters, and unrefined by education. Of such he affirms that, as soon
as they have learned the first principles of the law of God, they will
be endued with understanding. It ought to have a most powerful influence
in exciting in us an earnest desire to become acquainted with the law of
God, when we are told that even those who, in the estimation of the
world, are fools, and contemptible simpletons, provided they apply their
minds to this subject, acquire from it wisdom sufficient to lead them to
eternal salvation. Although it is not given to all men to attain to the
highest degree in this wisdom, yet it is common to all the godly to
profit so far as to know the certain and unerring rule by which to
regulate their life. Thus no man who surrenders himself to the teaching
of God, will loose his labor in his school, for from his first entrance
he will reap inestimable fruit. Meanwhile we are warned, that all who
follow their own understanding, wander in darkness. By affirming that
*the little ones are enlightened,* David intimates, that it is only when
men, divested of all self confidence, submit themselves with humble and
docile minds to God, that they are in a proper state for becoming
proficient scholars in the study of the divine law. Let the Papists
mock, as they are accustomed to do, because we would have the Scriptures
to be read by all men without exception; yet it is no falsehood which
God utters by the mouth of David, when he affirms that the light of his
truth is exhibited to fools. God will not, therefore, disappoint the
desire of such as acknowledge their own ignorance, and submit themselves
humbly to his teaching.

<span id="iii.ii-p11"></span><span id="iii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p12"></span>**131.** *I opened my mouth and panted.*
 <span id="fr_10"></span>[11](#fn_10) By these words the Psalmist would
have us to understand that he was inflamed with such love to and longing
for the divine law, that lie was unceasingly sighing after it. In
comparing himself to such as are hungry, or to such as burn with
parching thirst, he has used a very appropriate metaphor. As such
persons indicate the vehemence of their desire by opening the mouth, and
by distressful panting, as if they would suck up the whole air, even so
the Prophet affirms that he himself was oppressed with continual
uneasiness. The opening of the mouth, then, and the drawing of breath,
are. set in opposition to a cold assent to the word of God. Here the
Holy Spirit teaches with what earnestness of soul the knowledge of
divine truth is to be sought. Whence it follows, that such as make
little or no proficiency in God’s law, are punished by their own
indolence or carelessness. When David affirms that he panted
continually, he points out not only his ardor but also his constancy.

<span id="iii.ii-p14"></span><span id="iii.ii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p15"></span>**132.** *Look upon me, and be merciful to
me*. In this verse he beseeches God to have a regard to him: as he is
accustomed always to look to those who are his people. The Hebrew word
<span id="iii.ii-p15.1"></span>משפט *mishpat,* translated *judgment,*
signifies in this passage, as in many others, *a common rule,* or
*ordinary usage.*  <span id="fr_11"></span>[12](#fn_11) He next adds the
purpose for which he desires that God would look upon him, namely, that
he may be relieved from his miseries. This, then, is the prayer of an
afflicted man, who, when apparently destitute of all help, and unable to
come to any other conclusion than that he is neglected and forsaken of
God, yet reflects with himself, that, for God to forsake him, was
foreign to his nature and to his usual manner of procedure. It is as if
he had said — Although I can perceive no token of thy favor, yea,
although my condition is so wretched and desperate, that, judging
according to sense and reason, I deem that thou hast turned the back:
upon me; yet, as from the beginning of the world to the present day,
thou hast testified, by numberless proofs, that thou art merciful to thy
servants, I beseech time that, acting according to this rule, thou
wouldst now exercise the like loving-kindness towards me. It is to be
particularly noticed, lest those whom God does not immediately answer
may become discouraged, that the Prophet had been long oppressed by
miseries, without any prospect of relief. Yet it is at the same time to
be observed, that the Prophets sole ground of confidence in asking this
from God is his free goodness. Whence we gather that, although he was a
man of eminent sanctity, yet the undeserved grace of God was his only
refuge. With respect to the word *judgment,* let us learn from the
Prophet’s example to acquaint ourselves with the nature of God, from the
various experiences we have had of it that we may have certain evidence
that he is merciful to us. And, in truth, were not his grace known to us
from the daily experience we have of it, which of us would dare to
approach him? But if our eyes are not blind, we must perceive the very
clear testimonies by which he fortifies our faith, so that we need not
doubt that all the godly are the objects of his regard; only we must
endeavor to be among the number of those *who love his name.* By this
title is meant genuine believers; for those who only slavishly fear God
are not worthy of being reckoned among his servants. He requires a
voluntary obedience from us, so that nothing may be more delightful to
us than to follow whithersoever he calls us. It is, however, at the same
time to be observed, that this love proceeds from faith; yea, the
Prophet here commends the grand effect of faith, by separating the
godly, who lean upon the grace of God, from worldly men, who, having
given their hearts to the enticements of the world, never lift up their
minds towards heaven.

<span id="iii.ii-p17"></span><span id="iii.ii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p18"></span>**133.** *Direct my steps according to thy
word.* By these words he shows, as he has often done before in other
places, that the only rule of living well is for men to regulate
themselves wholly by the law of God. We have already repeatedly seen in
this Psalm, that so long as men allow there-selves to wander after their
own inventions, God rejects whatever they do, however laborious the
efforts they may put forth. But as the Prophet declares that men’s lives
are then only framed aright when they yield themselves wholly to the
obeying of God, so, on the other hand, he confesses that to do this is
not within their own will or power. God’s law, it is evident, will not
make us better by merely prescribing to us what is right. Hence the
outward preaching of it is compared to a dead letter. David, then, well
instructed in the law, prays for an obedient heart being given him, that
he may walk in the way set before him. Here two points are particularly
deserving of our notice — first, that God deals bountifully with men,
when he invites them to himself by his word and doctrine; and, secondly,
that still all this is lifeless and unprofitable, until he govern by his
Spirit those whom he has already taught by his word. As the Psalmist
desires not simply to have his steps directed, but to have them directed
to God’s word, we may learn that he did not hunt after secret
revelations, and set the word at nought, as many fanatics do, but
connected the external doctrine with the inward grace of the Holy
Spirit; and herein consists the completeness of the faithful, in that
God engraves on their hearts what he shows by his word to be right.
Nothing, therefore, is more foolish than the fancy of those who say,
that in enjoining upon men what lie would have them to do, God estimates
the strength which they have to perform it. In vain does divine truth
sound in our ears, if the Spirit of God does not effectually pierce into
our hearts. The Prophet confesses that it is to no purpose for him to
read or hear the law of God, unless his life is regulated by the secret
influence of the Holy Spirit, that he may thus be enabled to walk in
that righteousness which the law enjoins. In the second clause he
reminds us how necessary it is for us to be continually presenting this
prayer at the throne of grace, acknowledging that he is the bond-slave
of sin until God stretch forth his hand to deliver him. *direct* me,
says he, *that iniquity may not have dominion in me.*  <span
id="fr_12"></span>[13](#fn_12) So long, then, as we are left to
ourselves, Satan exercises’, over us his despotic sway uncontrolled, so
that we have not power to rid ourselves of iniquity. The freedom of the
godly consists solely in this — that they are governed by the Spirit of
God, and thus preserved from succumbing to iniquity, although harassed
with hard and painful conflicts.

<span id="iii.ii-p20"></span><span id="iii.ii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p21"></span>**134.** *Deliver me from the oppression of
men.* When recounting what had befallen himself, the Prophet shows, by
his own example, that all the godly are exposed to rapine and
oppression, and that, like sheep in the mouths of wolves, they will be
inevitably destroyed unless God defend them. As very few are governed by
the Spirit of God, it is no wonder if all love of equity is banished
from the world, and if all men are found everywhere rushing into all
kinds of wickedness, some impelled by cruelty,  <span
id="fr_13"></span>[14](#fn_13) and others devoted to fraud and deceit.
When, therefore, the Prophet saw that he was overwhelmed on all sides
with injuries, he betook himself to God as his deliverer. By the word
*deliver* he intimates, that unless he is preserved in a wonderful
manner, it is all over with him. In the second clause, he engages that
he will not prove ungrateful for his deliverance: *And I will keep thy
precepts* Nothing more effectually strengthens us, in an earnest desire
and endeavor to follow after integrity and righteousness, than when we
find by experience, that God’s defense is of more value to us than all
the unlawful helps to which worldly men unusually have recourse. We are
taught from this passage, that when engaged in contest with the wicked,
we ought not to suffer our minds to be actuated by malice, but that,
however violently and unjustly they may assault us, we should rest;
contented with the delivers. nee which God bestows, and with that alone;
and again, that every instance in which we experience the grace of God
in delivering us, should be a spur to incite us to follow after
uprightness. He delivers us for no other end, but that the fruits of our
deliverance may be manifested in our life; and we are too perverse if
that experience is not sufficient to convince us, that all who persevere
in the unfeigned fear of God, will always abide in safety by his aid,
although the whole world may be against them.

<span id="iii.ii-p23"></span><span id="iii.ii-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p24"></span>**135.** *Make thy face to shine upon thy
servant.* There is here the repetition of a prayer which we have several
times met with before in this Psalm. The Prophet intimates, that he
regarded nothing as of more importance than rightly to understand the
divine law. When he beseeches God *to make his face to shine upon his
servant,* he, in the first place, seeks to win the fatherly favor of God
— for nothing is to be hoped for from Him unless we have an interest in
his favor — but he at the same time, shows the greatness of the
blessing. There is no testimony of the love of God, as if he had said,
which I am more desirous to obtain than to be enabled to make progress
in his law. Whence we gather, as I have lately observed, that he
preferred divine truth to all the possessions of the world. Would to God
that this affection were vigorous in our hearts! But that which the
Prophet extols so highly, is neglected by the great proportion of
mankind. If individuals are to be found stimulated by this desire, we
see them presently falling back to the Measurements of the world, so
that there are very few, indeed, who renouncing all other desires, seek
earnestly with David to become acquainted with the doctrine of the law.
Besides, as God vouchsafes this privilege only to those whom he has
embraced with his fatherly love, it is proper for us to begin with this
prayer, That he would make his face to shine upon us. This form of
expression, however, conveys something more — it implies, that it is
only when God illumines the minds of his believing people with the true
knowledge of the law, that he delights them with the beams of his favor.
It often happens that, even in regard to them, God’s countenance is
overcast with clouds in this respect, namely, when he deprives them of
tasting the sweetness of his word.

<span id="iii.ii-p25"></span><span id="iii.ii-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p26"></span>**136.** *Rivers of waters run from my
eyes.*  <span id="fr_14"></span>[15](#fn_14) Here David affirms that he
was inflamed with no ordinary zeal for the glory of God, inasmuch as he
dissolved wholly into tears on account of the contempt put upon the
divine law. He speaks hyperbolically; but still he truly and plainly
expresses the disposition of mind with which he was endued; and it
corresponds with what he says in altogether place, “The zeal of thine
house hath eaten me up.” (<span id="iii.ii-p27.1"></span>[Ps
69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009)<span id="iii.ii-p27.1"></span>.)
Wherever the Spirit of God reigns, he excites this ardent zeal, which
burns the hearts of the godly when they see the commandment of the Most
High God accounted as a thing of nought. It is not enough that each of
us endeavor to please God; we must also desire that his law may be held
in estimation by all men. In this way holy Lot, as the Apostle Peter
testifies, vexed his soul when he beheld Sodom a sink of all kinds of
wickedness. (<span id="iii.ii-p27.2"></span>[2Pe
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#008)<span id="iii.ii-p27.2"></span>.)
If, in former times, the ungodliness of the world extorted from the
children of God such bitter grief, so great is the corruption into which
we at this day are fallen, that those who can look upon the present
state of things unconcerned and without tears, are thrice, yea four
times, insensible. How great in our day is the frenzy of the world in
despising God and neglecting his doctrine? A few, no doubt, are to be
found who with the mouth profess their willingness to receive it, but
scarcely one in ten proves the sincerity of his profession by his life.
Meanwhile countless multitudes are hurried away to the impostures of
Satan and to the Pope; others are as thoughtless and indifferent about
their salvation as the lower animals;  <span
id="fr_15"></span>[16](#fn_15) and many Epicureans openly mock at all
religion. If there is, then, the smallest portion of piety remaining in
us, full rivers of tears, and not merely small drops, will flow from our
eyes. But if we would give evidence of pure and uncorrupted zeal, let
our grief begin at ourselves — at our seeing that we are yet far from
having attained to a perfect observance of the law; yea, that the
depraved lusts of our carnal nature are often rising up against the
righteousness of God.

<span id="iii.iii"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p1"></span><span id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:137-144](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#137)<span
id="iii.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p2"></span>**137.** <span id="iii.iii-p2.1"></span>ץ O
Jehovah! thou art righteous, and thy judgments are right. **138.** <span
id="iii.iii-p2.2"></span> ץThou hast commanded righteousness in thy
testimonies, and truth greatly. **139.** <span id="iii.iii-p2.3"></span>
ץMy zeal hath consumed me, because my adversaries have forgotten thy
words. **140.** <span id="iii.iii-p2.4"></span>ץ Thy word is exceedingly
refined, and thy servant hath loved it. **141.** <span
id="iii.iii-p2.5"></span> ץI am insignificant and despised; I have not
forgotten thy commandments. **142.**<span id="iii.iii-p2.6"></span>ץ Thy
righteousness is an everlasting righteousness; and the law is truth.
**143.**<span id="iii.iii-p2.7"></span>ץ Trouble and anguish have come
upon me; but thy commandments are my delight. **144.** <span
id="iii.iii-p2.8"></span> ץThe righteousness of thy testimonies endereth
for ever; give me understanding and I shall live.

<span id="iii.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.iii-p4"></span><span id="iii.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p5"></span>**137.** O *Jehovah! thou art righteous.*
The Prophet yields to God the praise of righteousness, and also
acknowledges that it is to be found in his law. Some understand
*judgments* as referring to those infliction’s by which God chastises
the sins of men; but this does not seem so fitly to agree with the scope
of the passage. Besides, as the adjective <span
id="iii.iii-p5.1"></span>ישר*, yashar,* translated *right,* is put in
the singular number with the word *judgments,* the sentence should be
explained thus that there is not any one of the judgments of God which
is not right. Should we be inclined to take <span
id="iii.iii-p5.2"></span>ישר as a substantive, the sense will be almost
the same. All men indeed grant that God is righteous; but the Prophet
has expressed more than the common sort of men, yea than the whole
world, perceive in reference to this subject; for in designating God
*righteous,* he means, that as soon as we depart from Him, we will not
find a particle of righteousness anywhere else. When he adds that the
evidence and testimony of this righteousness are to be seen in the law,
he teaches us that God is robbed of his praise, if we do not subscribe
to all his commandments. To the same purpose is the following verse,
which declares that God has taught in his law full and perfect
righteousness and truth. The adverb, <span id="iii.iii-p5.3"></span>מאד,
*meod,* which signifies *greatly,* is with more propriety connected with
the nouns than with the verb *commanded;* inasmuch as it was God’s
design to exhibit in the law a perfect rule of righteousness. The
doctrine of the law is honored with these encomiums, that all of us may
learn to derive wisdom from it, and that no man may devise for himself
any other standard of rectitude or righteousness than that which is
exhibited in the law; a very necessary lesson, since every man would
willingly frame for himself a new pattern or standard of righteousness.

<span id="iii.iii-p6"></span><span id="iii.iii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p7"></span>**139.** *My zeal hath consumed me.*  <span
id="fr_16"></span>[17](#fn_16) The Psalmist speaks of his persecutors,
by whom it is certain he had been subjected to much trouble. But
although they were virulent and cruel towards him, he avows that it was
not so much his own private wrongs which offended him as the violation
of God’s law; yea rather, that he was so consumed with grief on that
account as not to be affected at all with his own individual troubles.
This is an example from which much profit may be derived. We are too
tender and delicate in bearing wrongs; and hence it is that if we are
but touched with a finger, we are instantly inflamed with anger, whilst
at the same time we are but coldly affected at the most grievous
offenses committed against God. But if we are animated with the zeal
that inspired the Prophet it will carry us away to another kind of
sorrow, which will take entire possession of our souls.

<span id="iii.iii-p9"></span><span id="iii.iii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p10"></span>**140.** *Thy word is exceedingly
refined.* In this verse he intimates that the cause of his zeal was the
love which he bore to heavenly doctrine. For to be displeased with or
severely to condemn the contempt of divine truth, unless we are bound to
it by the cords of love, is pure hypocrisy. And he affirms that his love
to God’s word was not a rash, or a blind and inconsiderate affection,
but that he loved it, because like gold or silver which has been
refined, it was pure and free from all dregs and dross. This is the idea
contained in the metaphorical term <span
id="iii.iii-p10.1"></span>צרופה*, tseruphah,* translated *refined;*
 <span id="fr_17"></span>[18](#fn_17) and though it seems to be
commonplace, yet, vindicating God’s word from all perverse and malicious
judgments, it expresses graphically the true obedience of faith. How few
are there who are not guilty, either by their distrust, or waywardness,
or pride, or voluptuousness, of casting upon God’s word some spot or
stain! The flesh then being so rebellious, it is no small commendation
of revealed truth, when it is compared to gold well refined, so that it
shines pure from all defilement. Farther, it serves not a little to show
the truth of this testimony, that the Prophet confirms it by his own
experience. The more effectually to repress the foolish rashness with
which we are chargeable whenever we imagine that there is any fault in
God’s word, he declares that in commending it he gives utterance to the
unfeigned feeling of his heart, having experienced a blissful pleasure
in that purity of which he speaks.

<span id="iii.iii-p14"></span><span id="iii.iii-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p15"></span>**141.** *I am, insignificant and
despised.* The meaning is, that although he was tried with poverty and
many other calamities, he steadily persevered in the exercise of true
godliness, and in the observance of the law. On that account, as he
states, he was despised by wicked men. Every man gives praise to God
just in proportion as he is gorged with his benefits; and very few will
be found applying their minds to the service of God, unless they have
all their wishes gratified. Hence it comes to pass that hypocrites, as
long as they are pampered to the full, accumulate riches and increase in
power, are very lavish in praising God. But let them be treated in some
degree roughly, and immediately the blessed name of God is heard of no
more. Since then men are ordinarily mercenary in serving God, let us
learn from the Prophet’s example that true godliness is disinterested,
so that when under its influence we *cease* not to praise God, although
he may afflict us with adversity and make us despised in the eyes of the
world. These upbraiding words of Christ in <span
id="iii.iii-p15.1"></span>[Joh
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026)<span id="iii.iii-p15.1"></span>,
ought, no doubt, to be carefully attended to,

<span id="iii.iii-p16"></span>“Ye seek me, not because ye saw the
miracles, but because ye did eat of the loaves, and were filled.” (<span
id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>[Joh
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#026)<span id="iii.iii-p16.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.iii-p17"></span>The persons then who serve God ingenuously
and sincerely, are such as continue steadfast. in his fear, although
their condition in this world may be mean and despised; in short, they
are such as seek not their reward on earth, but through heat and cold,
poverty and danger, slanders and mockeries, persevere with unwearied
steps in the course of their warfare.

<span id="iii.iii-p18"></span><span id="iii.iii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p19"></span>**142.** *Thy righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness.* Here the law of God is honored by the
additional encomium, that it is everlasting righteousness and truth; as
if it had been said, that all other rules of life, with whatever
attractions they may appear to be recommended, are but a shadow, which
quickly vanishes away. The Psalmist, no doubt, indirectly contrasts the
doctrine of the law with all the human precepts which were ever
delivered, that he may bring all the faithful in subjection to it, since
it is the school of perfect wisdom. There may be more of plausibility in
the refined and subtle disquisition’s of men; but there is in them
nothing firm or solid at bottom, as there is in God’s law. This firmness
of the divine law he proves in the following verse from one instance —
the continual comfort he found in it when grievously harassed with
temptations. And the true test of the profit we have reaped from it is,
when we oppose to all the distresses of whatever kind which may straiten
us, the consolation derived from the word of God, that thereby all
sadness may be effaced from our minds. David here expresses something
more than he did in the preceding verse; for there he only said that he
reverently served God, although from his rough and hard treatment he
might seem to lose his labor; but now when distressed and tormented, he
affirms that he finds in the law of God the most soothing delight, which
mitigates all grief’s, and not only tempers their bitterness, but also
seasons them with a certain sweetness. And assuredly when this taste
does not exist to afford us delight, nothing is more natural than for us
to be swallowed up of sorrow. Nor ought we to omit noticing the form of
expression which the Prophet employs, by which he teaches, that although
lie was besieged and shut up on all sides, he found a remedy
sufficiently powerful in improving the consolation offered him by the
word of God. As this could not be true of the bare commandments, which
so far from remedying our distresses, rather fill us with anxiety, there
is no doubt that under the word *commandments* there is comprehended by
the figure synecdoche, the whole doctrine of the law, in which God not
only requires what is right, but in which also calling his elect ones to
the hope of eternal salvation, he opens the gate of perfect happiness.
Yea, under the term *law* are comprehended both free adoption, and also
the promises which flow from it.

<span id="iii.iii-p20"></span><span id="iii.iii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p21"></span>**144.** *The righteousness of thy
testimonies endureth forever.* The Psalmist repeats what lie had already
before stated, that there is a great dissimilarity between the
righteousness of God’s testimonies and man’s inventions; the splendor of
the last quickly vanishing away, whereas the other continues steadfast
for ever. He repeats this twice; for although the world is forced to
attribute the praise of righteousness to the law of God, yet the
majority of mankind are carried away after their own speculations, so
that there is nothing more difficult than to hold us fast in our
obedience to God. David’s drift is to show that everlasting
righteousness is not comprehended elsewhere than in God’s law, and that
it is in vain to seek for it anywhere else; and there is accordingly
here laid down a clearer definition of righteousness, which is, that
righteousness consists in our keeping ourselves within the bounds of the
law. As to the last clause of the verse, *Give me understanding and I
shall live,* I read it in connection with the preceding clause; for
although David desires to have his mind enlightened by God, yet he does
not conceive of any other way by which he was to obtain an enlightened
understanding than by his profiting aright in the study of the law.
Farther, he here teaches, that men cannot, properly speaking, be said to
live when they are destitute of the light of heavenly wisdom; and as the
end for which men are created is not that, like swine or asses, they may
stuff their bellies, but that they may exercise themselves in the
knowledge and service of God, when they turn away from such employment,
their life is worse than a thousand deaths. David therefore protests
that for him to live was not merely to be fed with meat and drink, and
to enjoy earthly comforts, but to aspire after a better life, which he
could not do save under the guidance of faith. This is a very necessary
warning; for although it is universally acknowledged that man is born
with this distinction, that he excels the lower animals in intelligence,
yet the great bulk of mankind, as if with deliberate purpose: stifle
whatever light God pours into their understandings. I indeed admit that
all men desire to be sharp-witted; but how few aspire to heaven, and
consider that the fear of,God is the beginning of wisdom. Since then
meditation upon the celestial life is buried by earthly cares, men do
nothing else than plunge into the grave, so that while living to the
world, they die to God. Under the term *life,* however, as I have
elsewhere said, the Prophet denotes the utmost he could wish. Lord, as
if he had said, although I am already dead, yet if thou art pleased to
illumine my mind with the knowledge of heavenly truth, this grace alone
will be sufficient to revive me.

<span id="iii.iv"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p1"></span><span id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:145-152](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#145)<span
id="iii.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p2"></span>**145.** **ק** I have cried with my whole
heart; answer me, O Jehovah! and I will keep thy statutes. **146.**
**ק** I have called upon thee; save me, and I will keep thy testimonies.
**147.** **ק** I have prevented the twilight,  <span
id="fr_18"></span>[19](#fn_18) and have cried: I have looked up to thy
word. **148.** **ק** My eyes have prevented the night-watches, to
meditate upon thy word. **149.** **ק** Hear my yoke, O Jehovah!
According to thy mercy, quicken me according to thy judgment. **150.**
**ק** The pursuers of malice have drawn near; they have departed from
thy law. **151.** **ק** Thou, O Jehovah! art near; and all thy
commandments are truth. **152.** **ק** I have known from thy testimonies
from the beginning that thou hast established them for ever.

<span id="iii.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="iii.iv-p5"></span><span id="iii.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p6"></span>**145** *I have cried with my whole heart.*
This verse may be so read and connected as that in the end of it the
Psalmist may show what he desired in crying;  <span
id="fr_19"></span>[20](#fn_19) and thus the meaning would be, that as he
was inflamed with an intense desire to keep the law, he continually made
supplication to God on that subject. But the subsequent verse compels us
to take a different view, for the same thing is, no doubt, there again
repeated. The Prophet then requests that God would hear him; and in
token of his gratitude he promises to keep God’s commandments. He simply
uses the indefinite term *cry;* and thus he does not express what the
prayers were which he offered up to God, but only shows, that while the
children of this world are distracted by a multiplicity of objects, he
directed all the affections of his heart exclusively to God, because he
depended solely on him. As the world is compelled to acknowledge that
God is the author of all good things, many formal prayers proceed from
that principle. It was the consideration of this which led David to
affirm that he prayed with his whole heart. When he shall have obtained
his requests, he proposes to himself the glory of God as his end,
resolving to devote himself with so much the more ardent affection to
the work of serving him. Although God declares that he is served aright
by the sacrifice of praise, yet David, to distinguish himself from
hypocrites who profane the name of God by their cold and feigned
praises, with good reason declares that he will give thanks by his life
and works.

<span id="iii.iv-p8"></span>In the following verse he makes no new
statement; but he speaks more expressly. In the first place, he says
that he cried to God; and next he adds, that he commended his welfare to
Him by prayer; thereby intimating that whether he was in safety, or
whether imminent danger threatened him with death, he uniformly reposed
upon God, being fully persuaded that the only way in which he could
continue safe was by having him for the guardian and protector of his
welfare.

<span id="iii.iv-p9"></span><span id="iii.iv-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p10"></span>**147.** *I have prevented the twilight.*
The Hebrew noun <span id="iii.iv-p10.2"></span>נשף*, nesheph,* is in
this place improperly translated by *crepusculum, twilight;* for it
rather signifies the dawn of morning. But as the Latin’s derive the word
*crepusculum,* from *creperus,* which signifies *doubtful* or
*uncertain,* so that it may signify the doubtful and intermediate time
between light and darkness, I have not been particularly nice in the
selection of the term only let my readers understand that the evening
twilight commencing with sunset is not here denoted, but the imperfect
light which precedes the rising of the sun. David then expresses the
most eager haste when he says, that he prevented the dawn of the morning
by his prayers. The verb *cry* always conveys the idea of earnestness;
referring, as it does, not so much to the loudness of the voice as to
the vehemency and ardor of the mind. In mentioning his haste, his object
is the better to set forth his perseverance; for he tells us, that
although he betook himself to prayer with such promptitude, yet he did
not immediately become weary of that exercise, like the unbelieving,
who, if God does not suddenly grant them their requests, murmur and
complain against him. Thus, in conjoining patience of hope with
earnestness of desire, he shows what is the true manner of praying; even
as Paul, in <span id="iii.iv-p10.3"></span>[Php
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p10.3"></span>,
when he exhorts us to

<span id="iii.iv-p11"></span>“let our requests be made known unto God
with thanksgiving,” (<span id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>[Php
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006)<span id="iii.iv-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.iv-p12"></span>admonishes us, while engaged in the
exercise of prayer, to bridle our turbulent affections, because one of
the ends of prayer is to nourish our hope. Nor is the mention made of
*the word* in the close of the verse superfluous; for it is only by
having the Word of God continually before our eyes, that we can bridle
the wanton impetuosity of our corrupt nature.

<span id="iii.iv-p13"></span><span id="iii.iv-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p14"></span>**148.** *My eyes have prevented the night
watchers.*  <span id="fr_20"></span>[21](#fn_20) The Psalmist here
intimates, that he was more sedulously intent on meditating upon the law
of God than watchmen of the night were to keep watch. Others are of
opinion, that the verb <span id="iii.iv-p18.1"></span>שוח, *suach,* is
put for *to discourse.* If this opinion is admitted, the sense will be,
that the Prophet, not from ostentation, but for the welfare of his
brethren, was so desirous of communicating instruction, that he gave
himself no rest. The word *meditate* is, however, more appropriate in
this place; for the night is an unseasonable time for discoursing upon
the law of God; but at that season, when alone, he silently recalled to
his memory what he had previously learned, so that he passed no part of
the night without meditating upon the law.

<span id="iii.iv-p19"></span><span id="iii.iv-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p20"></span>**149.** *Hear my voice, O Jehovah!
according to thy mercy.* In the first place he declares, that the
goodness of God was the only ground of his hope of being heard by him.
Whatever blessings the saints may plead for in prayer, their opening
argument must be the free and unmerited grace of God. Nor is the term
*judgments*  <span id="fr_21"></span>[22](#fn_21) in the second clause
to be taken in a different sense. As God has revealed his goodness in
his word, his word is the source from which we must derive our assurance
of his goodness. The Prophet, then, sensible that he had need of the
divine mercy, betook himself directly to the word, in which God, sweetly
alluring men to himself, promises that his grace will be ready and open
for all. That each, therefore, may be confidently persuaded that God
will be merciful to him in particular, let him learn from the example of
the Prophet to entreat God to show himself such as he has promised to
be. Some expound the word *judgments* by *manner* or *custom*;  <span
id="fr_22"></span>[23](#fn_22) because, God’s usual way is to deal
graciously with all his people. I would not altogether reject this
exposition; but I think it is harsh and foreign to the scope of the
text, while the meaning which I have adduced comes out very naturally.
Moreover, he desires *to be quickened,* to testify that even in the,
midst of life he is dead, except in so far as he is sustained by the
power of God. And assuredly, all who are duly acquainted with their own
infirmity, esteeming their life as nothing, will crave to be quickened
every moment. It is also to be added, that God often so exercised his
servant, that with good reason he might send up his prayers, as it were,
out of the sepulcher, to be restored from death to life.

<span id="iii.iv-p23"></span><span id="iii.iv-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p24"></span>**150.** *The pursuers of malice have drawn
near.* As the Hebrew word <span id="iii.iv-p24.1"></span>רודפי
*rodphee,* translated *the pursuers of,* is put in the construct. state,
that is to say, as it is so related to the word <span
id="iii.iv-p24.2"></span>זמה, *zimmah,* rendered *wickedness,* that in
Latin the latter would be put in the genitive ease, I expound the clause
as denoting that they draw near to do mischief. I wonder what could move
interpreters to translate — The *pursuers have approached,* or *drawn
near to wickedness;* which the idiom of the language will not admit, to
say nothing of the fact that <span id="iii.iv-p24.3"></span>זמה,
*zimmah,* signifies. rather *perversity* or *malice,* than *wickedness.*
David therefore says, that those who are vehemently bent on malice are
pursuing him close behind, and that they rush upon him with such
violence in order to do him mischief, as plainly to indicate that they
are far off from God’s law, since they east far from them all regard to
uprightness and equity. It was a most wretched condition for him to be
in, to behold his enemies, who had shaken off all fear of God and
reverence for his law, ready with uplifted hand to smite him to death,
had not God been near to defend him, as he adds in the subsequent verse
—

<span id="iii.iv-p25"></span><span id="iii.iv-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p26"></span>**151.** *Thou, O Jehovah! art near.* He
encourages himself from the consolatory consideration, that God, when he
sees his own people sore pressed, comes forward. seasonably to afford
them succor; even as Paul on this subject says,

<span id="iii.iv-p27"></span>“Be not over-careful, the Lord is at hand,
let your moderation be known to all men ”*  
*(<span id="iii.iv-p27.2"></span>[Php
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005)<span id="iii.iv-p27.2"></span>)

<span id="iii.iv-p28"></span>The concluding sentence of the verse is to
this effect, That God never forsakes nor disappoints his people in their
necessity, because he is true to his promises; and in them he assures
us, that the welfare of his people will always be the object of his
care. That therefore we may be fully persuaded that the hand of God is
always ready to repulse the assaults of our enemies, let us retain a
settled belief of the truth, that he does not in vain promise in his
word to be the guardian of our welfare.

<span id="iii.iv-p29"></span><span id="iii.iv-p29.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p30"></span>**152***. I have known from thy
testimonies*  <span id="fr_23"></span>[24](#fn_23) *from the beginning.*
Others here translate, *I* *have known long ago of thy testimonies.*
 <span id="fr_24"></span>[25](#fn_24) This translation I would not
directly reject; but I am more inclined to retain the sense which I have
given, namely, That the Prophet not only knew the everlasting
steadfastness which characterizes the testimonies of God; but that he
had also derived this knowledge from the testimonies themselves. When
the Hebrews would express the meaning conveyed by the Latin preposition
*de,* they frequently use the particle <span
id="iii.iv-p33.3"></span>מן, or the letter <span
id="iii.iv-p33.4"></span>ב, *beth.* He therefore says, that he had
learned from God’s testimonies, or had been taught by them, that *they
are established for ever*  <span id="fr_25"></span>[26](#fn_25) This
indeed is the chief point of faith, That the word of God is not only
distinguished for fidelity and steadfastness for a time, but that it
continues unchangeable for ever. Were it otherwise, it could not include
within it the hope of eternal salvation. That the assurance of this
immutabiliy of God’s word may be rooted in our minds, the inward
revelation of the Holy Spirit is indeed necessary; for until God seal
within us the certainty of his word, our belief of its certainty will be
continually wavering. Yet the Prophet, not without cause, affirms, that
he learned this truth from the word; for when God shines into us by his
Spirit, he at the same time causes that sacred truth which endures for
ever to shine forth in the mirror of his word.

<span id="iii.v"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p1"></span><span id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:153-160](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#153)<span
id="iii.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p2"></span>**153.** **ר** Behold my affliction, and
rescue me: for I have not forgotten thy law. **154.** **ר** Debate my
cause, and redeem me: quicken thy according to thy word. **155.** **ר**
Safety is far from the wicked; because they have not sought thy
statutes. **156.** **ר** O Jehovah! Thy tender mercies are many: quicken
me according to thy judgments. **157.** **ר** My persecutors and
oppressors are many:  <span id="fr_26"></span>[27](#fn_26) I have not
swerved from thy testimonies. **158.** **ר** I saw the perfidious, and
chid them; because they have not kept thy word. **159.** **ר** Behold O
Jehovah! how have loved thy commandments: quicken me according to thy
loving kindness. **160.** **ר** The beginning \[literally, the head
 <span id="fr_27"></span>[28](#fn_27) \] of thy word is truth; and all
the judgment of thy righteousness is everlasting.

<span id="iii.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.v-p6"></span><span id="iii.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p7"></span>**153.** *Behold my affliction and rescue
me.* The Psalmist teaches by his own example that those who are devoted
to the service and fear of God, must not be discouraged though they are
not rewarded for it in this world. Their condition upon earth is one of
warfare, and therefore they should not be dismayed by diversity, but
rather rest satisfied with the consolatory consideration, that the gate
of prayer is open to them. Yet the Prophet does not boast of his,
endeavors to keep the law, as if he would have God to pay him wages for
his service, but only to show that he was one of God’s servants, just as
he has spoken of his hope that he was so in other places. This reason,
*for I have not forgotten thy law,* on account of which he beseeches God
to consider his affliction and to rescue him, is peculiarly forcible in
the present case; for it is an evidence of no ordinary courage when,
instead of being led away from the fear of God by adversity, we wrestle
against temptations and seek him even when he seems purposely to drive
us away from him.

<span id="iii.v-p8"></span><span id="iii.v-p8.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p9"></span>**154.** *Debate thy cause, and redeem me.*
In this verse David specifics the kind of his affliction, which was the
wrongful and harassing treatment which he met with at the hands of evil
and unprincipled men. The reading literally is, *Plead my cause,* which
is the same thing as to undertake a cause, or to take the charge of
defending one in judgment, or to maintain the right of the oppressed. In
the first place the Prophet in invoking God to defend his cause, shows
that he is wrongfully oppressed, either by violence, calumnies, or
crafty policies; and in seeking *to be redeemed,* he intimates that he
was unable to make any resistance, or that he was so entangled in their
snares, as to have no remaining hope except in the deliverance of God.
In the second clause the letter <span id="iii.v-p9.1"></span>ל*, lamed,*
seems to be taken for the letter <span id="iii.v-p9.2"></span>כ*, caph,*
the mark of similitude,  <span id="fr_28"></span>[29](#fn_28) as would
appear from his having used a little before (<span
id="iii.v-p10.5"></span>[Ps
119:149](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#149)<span id="iii.v-p10.5"></span>)
a similar form of prayer. Again, as David here complains that he is held
as it were in fetters by his enemies, unless he is delivered by the hand
of his Redeemer, he with good reason beseeches God to restore him to
life; for he who is rims abased is like a person dead. It is also aptly
added *according to thy word;* for it is from the promises which God
makes in his word of becoming our deliverer that the hope of life shines
upon us. Whence the Prophet, when earnestly desiring to be brought from
darkness to light, sustains and encourages himself by the word. If a
different sense is preferred, then David is not to be understood as
simply asking that life may be given him, but as praying for spiritual
life, that he may be encouraged to exercise faith, to cultivate the fear
of God, and to cherish the desire of living a holy life.

<span id="iii.v-p11"></span><span id="iii.v-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p12"></span>**155** *Safety is far from the wicked.*
Fully persuaded that the world is governed by the secret providence of
God, who is a just judge, the Prophet draws from that source the
doctrine, That the wicked are far removed from safety, and safety from
them. Hence proceeds the confidence of prayer; for as God is turned away
from the despisers of his word, so he is ready to succor his servants.
It is to be noticed, that when the Prophet saw that his enemies were
elated by their prosperity, he on the contrary lifted up his heart by
faith that thus he might come to the settled persuasion that all their
delights were cursed and tended to destruction. Whenever then the wicked
prosper in the world according to their wishes, so that being pampered
to the full they exult in their own fatness, let us learn, in order to
defend ourselves, to lay hold upon this buckler which the Holy Spirit is
holding out to us, namely, that they shall at length miserably perish,
because they seek not the commandments of God. From this we draw a
contrary doctrine, That although genuine believers, whilst they walk
sincerely in the fear of God may be as sheep appointed to the slaughter,
yet their salvation, which is under the special care and protection of
God’s secret providence, is just at hand. In this sense the Prophet adds
in the following verse,

<span id="iii.v-p13"></span><span id="iii.v-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p14"></span>**156.** *O Jehovah,! thy tender mercies are
many;* as if he had said that no offenders are safe but those who betake
themselves to the divine mercy. Farther, to encourage himself to
approach God with the greater confidence, he not only says that God is
merciful, but he mightily magnifies and extols his compassion’s. From
this we gather that he was so contented with them, as not to seek any
aid from his own merits. It is however at the same time to be noted,
that the Prophet was far from being lightly troubled with many
temptations, seeing he was forced to oppose to them this vast abundance
of mercy. It makes little difference whether we read *great* or *many*
The prayer which follows, *Quicken me according to thy judgments,* I
explain as referring to the promises. The original word for *judgment*
is by some translated *manner* or *custom;* but I have already shown
above that such a translation is less suitable than the other. The
Prophet then again confirms the truth, That life cannot be hoped for or
asked from God, unless hope is produced by his word; and he often
repeats this truth, because it is one of which we are marvelously
forgetful. But that we may boldly appropriate to ourselves all the grace
which God promises to his servants, let the doctrine of the great and
manifold tender mercies of God be ever present to our thoughts. If we
imagine that God makes his promises because he is bound to do it, or
because we have deserved it, doubting or mistrust will steal upon our
minds, which will shut the gate against our prayers. But if we are
thoroughly persuaded that the sole cause by which God is moved to
promise us salvation is the mercy inherent in his own nature, we will
approach him without hesitation or doubt, because he has bound himself
to us of his own accord.

<span id="iii.v-p15"></span><span id="iii.v-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p16"></span>**157.** *My persecutors and oppressors are
many.* The Psalmist here as in other places testifies, that although lie
had been provoked by many injuries, yet he had not departed from the
right way; which, as I have elsewhere observed, was an evidence of great
and singular constancy. It is an easy matter to act well when we are
among the good; but if wicked men afflict us, if one man openly assault
us by force, if another rob us of our property, if a third circumvent us
by wiles, and a fourth attack us by calumnies, it is difficult for us to
persevere in our integrity, and we rather begin to howl among the
wolves. Besides, the license which is allowed them of doing what they
please without the fear of being punished, is a powerful engine for
shaking our faith, because, when God thus winks at the wicked, he seems
to abandon us for a prey. The Prophet therefore, by *God’s testimonies,*
means not only the rule of holy and righteous living, but also the
promises. Lord, as if he had said, I have not turned away from the path
of integrity, although the conduct of the wicked has presented me with a
temptation to do so; nor have I shaken off nay confidence in thy grace,
but have waited patiently for thy succor. Both these are necessary. For
although he who has suffered wrongs may contend against the malice of
his enemies by his well — doing, and may refrain from every act of
retaliation, yet, provided he does not depend wholly upon God,. this
uprightness will not be sufficient to save him. Not that any man behaves
himself in a manner so moderate, except he who leans upon God and waits
upon him as his deliverer; but granting that such could be the ease,
there would not be sufficient power in this half virtue to save him. The
salvation of God is reserved for the faithful who ask it in the exercise
of lively faith. And whoever, persuaded that God will be his deliverer,
pillars and supports his mind on the divine promises, will endeavor also
to overcome evil with good.

<span id="iii.v-p17"></span><span id="iii.v-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p18"></span>**158.** *I saw the perfidious and child
them.* In this verse the Psalmist proceeds yet farther, declaring that
he was inflamed with a holy zeal when he saw the law of God despised by
the wicked. Expositors are not however agreed as to one word in the
text, namely the verb <span id="iii.v-p18.1"></span>אתקוטטה*,
ethkotatah,* which we have rendered *chid,* some deriving it from <span
id="iii.v-p18.2"></span>קוט, *kut,* which often signifies *to debate* or
*contend with,* it being in the conjugation *hithpael,* while others
derive it from <span id="iii.v-p18.3"></span>קטט *karat,* which
signifies *to kill* or *to destroy.* I adopt the former interpretation,
because it is more generally received among the learned, and is most
appropriate. The Prophet then teaches that he was inflamed with such
zeal for the law of God that he could no longer endure the impious
mockery directed against it. The verb *debate* may however be understood
as well of the vexation or anger which he felt in himself, as of the
rebuke which he openly administered to the despisers of God; and
therefore some translate it, *I shuddered,* or *I was grieved*  <span
id="fr_29"></span>[30](#fn_29) Nor assuredly will any person enter into
debate with others for maintaining the glory of God, but he who is first
chafed within himself, and has been grieved at heart; even as on the
other hand, after this holy indignation there almost always follows
transitive action; that is to say, it passes from the thought to the
effect.  <span id="fr_30"></span>[31](#fn_30) In short, we are
admonished by the example of the Prophet, that we ought to feel such
displeasure at the contempt of God’s word as that our heart grows hot
even to chiding. In the first place, then, let grief affect us inwardly;
and next, whenever opportunity shall present itself, let; us strenuously
endeavor to repress the forwardness and pride of the wicked, and let us
not hesitate to do so from the fear of provoking their resentment
against us.

<span id="iii.v-p21"></span><span id="iii.v-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p22"></span>**159.** *Behold, O Jehovah how I have loved
thy commandments.* What I have state before must be remembered — that
when the saints speak of their own piety before God they are not
chargeable with obtruding their own merits as the ground of their
confidence; but they regard this as, a settled principle, that God, who
distinguishes his servants from the profane and wicked, will be merciful
to them because they seek him with their whole heart. Besides, an
unfeigned love of God’s law is an undoubted evidence of adoption, since
this love is the work of the Holy Spirit. The Prophet, therefore,
although he arrogates nothing to himself, very properly adduces his own
piety for the purpose, of encouraging himself to entertain the more
assured hope of obtaining his request, through the grace of God which he
had experienced. At the same time we are taught that there can be no
true keeping of the law but what springs from free and spontaneous love.
God demands voluntary sacrifices, and the commencement of a good life is
to love him, as Moses declares, (<span id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>[De
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012)<span id="iii.v-p22.1"></span>,)

<span id="iii.v-p23"></span>“And now, O Israel! what doth the Lord
require of thee,  
but to love him.”

<span id="iii.v-p24"></span>The same thing is also repeated in the
summary of the law: (<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>[De
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)<span id="iii.v-p24.1"></span>,)
“Thou shalt love the Lord thy God.” For this reason David has previously
stated, that the law of God was not only precious but also delightful to
him. Now as in keeping the law it behoves us to begin with voluntary
obedience, so that nothing may delight us more than the righteousness of
God, so on the other hand, it must not be forgotten that a sense of the
free goodness of God and of his fatherly love is indispensably necessary
in order to our hearts being beheld to this affection. So far are the
bare commandment’s from winning men to obey them, that they rather
frighten them away. Hence it is evident, that it is only when a man
shall have tasted the goodness of God from the teaching of the law, that
he will apply his heart to love it in return. The frequency with which
the Prophet repeats the prayer, *that God would quicken him,* teaches us
that he knew well the frailty of his own life, so that in his estimation
men live only in so far as God every moment breathes life into them.
Besides, it is probable that he had been continually besieged by many
deaths, to the end he might the more earnestly betake himself to the
fountain of life. He again rests his faith upon the goodness of God as
its foundation — *quicken me according to thy loving-kindness* — from
which we perceive how far he was from boasting of his own merits when he
protested in the preceding sentence that he loved God’s law.

<span id="iii.v-p25"></span><span id="iii.v-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p26"></span>**160.** *The beginning of thy word is
truth.* The design of the Prophet it is not difficult to perceive; but
the words admit of being understood in two ways. Some interpret the noun
*beginning* as denoting that the truth of God shines forth conspicuously
in his word, immediately when we enter for the first time upon the study
of it, so that this entrance may justly be called the beginning of the
word. This sentence contains the profitable doctrine, that if we are
finished with eyes of understanding, we will no sooner cast our eyes
upon heavenly doctrine than the truth of it will meet our view. Others,
however, give a different explanation, and perhaps with no less
propriety, eliciting this sense, That the word of God has been from the
beginning certain and infallible truth, and will continue so even to the
end. These two clauses hang very well together — that God has been true
to his word from the beginning, and that he will continue to be so
everlastingly and immutably. The interpretation which refers the word
*judgment* to the works of God and not to his doctrine, I would not
altogether condemn, yet it is not in harmony with the context. Let us
then retain this sense, That from the time when God began to speak he
has always been faithful to his promises, and has never disappointed the
hope of his people; and that the course of this faithfulness has been so
uniform, that from the beginning even to the end his word is true and
faithful.

<span id="iii.vi"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p1"></span><span id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:161-168](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#161)<span
id="iii.vi-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p2"></span>**161.** **ש** Princes have persecuted me
without a cause; yet my heart hath beer, afraid at thy word **162.**
**ש** I have rejoiced at thy word as one who hath found great spoil.
**163.** **ש** I have hated and abhorred deceit; but I have loved thy
law. **164.** **ש** Seven times a day have I praised thee, because of
thy righteous judgments.  <span id="fr_31"></span>[32](#fn_31) **165.**
**ש** Great peace have them that love thy law, and there will be no
stumbling-block for them.  <span id="fr_32"></span>[33](#fn_32) **166.**
**ש** Jehovah I have waited for thy salvation and have done thy
commandments. **167.** **ש** My soul hath kept thy testimonies, and I
have loved them exceeding. **168.** **ש** I have kept thy commandments
and thy testimonies; for all my ways are before thee.

<span id="iii.vi-p5"></span> 

<span id="iii.vi-p6"></span><span id="iii.vi-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p7"></span>**161** *Princes have persecuted me without
a cause.*  <span id="fr_33"></span>[34](#fn_33) Here the Psalmist,
informs us that sore and grievous as his temptation had been, he was
restrained by the fear of God from desiring to attempt anything unworthy
of the character of a godly man. We are prone to fall into despair when
princes who are armed with power to overwhelm us are hostile to and
molest us. The evil is also aggravated from the consideration that it is
the very persons who ought to be as bucklers to defend us, who employ
their strength in hurting us. Yea, when the afflicted are stricken by
those in high places, they in a manner think that the hand of God is
against them. There was also this peculiarity in the case of the
Prophet, that he had to encounter the grandees of the chosen people —
men whom God had placed in such honor-able stations, to the end they
might be the pillars of the Church. Some give, more restricted
exposition, which is, that David followed the exhortation of Christ in
<span id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>[Mt
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028)<span id="iii.vi-p8.1"></span>,

<span id="iii.vi-p9"></span>“Fear not them who kill the body, but are
not able to kill the soul. but rather fear him who is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell;”

<span id="iii.vi-p10"></span>a sentiment which although it had not as
yet been uttered by Christ’s mouth, ought nevertheless to have been
fixed in the hearts of all the godly. The sense, then, in their opinion
is, that the Prophet had not been turned aside from the fear of God by
any of the threatening or terrors of his enemies. But his commendation
of his own constancy is to be understood in a more extended sense than
this. The exhortation of Isaiah is well known,

<span id="iii.vi-p11"></span>“Neither fear ye their fear, nor be afraid;
sanctify the Lord of hosts himself; and let him be your fear, and let
him be your dread.” (<span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>[Isa.
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013)<span id="iii.vi-p11.1"></span>)

<span id="iii.vi-p12"></span>The Prophet in that place shows in general
what the weapons are, with which the faithful being armed will succeed
in vanquishing all the assaults of the world — he shows that they will
do so, provided they not only stand in awe of God, but also rest assured
that he will always be the guardian of their welfare, so that they may
cast all their cares upon him. Thus it will come to pass that, resting
contented with his protection, they will not turn aside to practice
whatever may be sinful to secure their safety. In like manner the
Prophet, in the passage before us, affirms that although being oppressed
by the wrongful violence of princes, he presented a sad spectacle, yet
he did not succumb, but considered what was lawful for him to do, and
did not attempt to rival their wicked practices, by repelling craft with
craft and violence with violence. In this text, as is evident from the
connection, *to be afraid at God’s word,* is to restrain one’s. self and
to attempt nothing which is unlawful. I have already said that the
adverb <span id="iii.vi-p12.1"></span>חנם, *hinnam, without a cause,* is
added for the sake of amplification; for the temptation was so much the
harder from the fact, that the tyrants, without cause and merely to
gratify their own wicked inclination, assaulted an innocent individual.
Men of a good disposition and of a noble mind, it is well known, are
more easily excited to anger when the object assaulted is one who has
done wrong to nobody. It was therefore a signal proof of self-control
for the Prophet to bridle himself by the word of God, that he might not
vie with others in evil doing, or, overcome with temptation, go out of
the place which had been assigned him in the social body. Let us then
learn to remain peaceable, although princes tyrannically abuse the power
which God has committed to them, lest by creating insurrection we break
in upon the peace and order of society.

<span id="iii.vi-p13"></span><span id="iii.vi-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p14"></span>**162.** *I have rejoiced at thy word as
one who hath found great spoil* No gain, it is well known, brings
greater joy than that which conquerors acquire from the spoil of their
enemies; for to the gain there is added the glory of triumph; and when
profit comes on a sudden, the delight experienced is from that
circumstance the greater. This is the reason why David compares the
knowledge he had obtained of heavenly doctrine with spoils rather than
with other riches; for by these words he intimates that his greatest joy
was derived from the word of God, to which no gain however desirable
could at all approach. From this was learn that he was contented with
the word of God as a thing in which was all his delight, and in which he
found solid felicity; which could not be, but, in the way of his first
withdrawing his heart from all depraved desires. Nor is it wonderful to
find David placing the whole sum of a happy life in the word of God, in
which he well knew the treasure of eternal life to be included and
offered to him by means of free adoption.

<span id="iii.vi-p15"></span><span id="iii.vi-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p16"></span>**163.** *I have hated and abhorred
deceit.* In this verse he declares more distinctly what I have adverted
to a little before, that he was cleansed from corrupt affections that he
might bestow upon the law of God such honor and estimation as it
deserved. Having elsewhere met with almost the same sentence, I shall
but briefly touch upon the reason why the Prophet affirms that *he hated
deceit* before he speaks of his love and devotedness to the law. As
hypocrisy is in the hearts of all men by nature, and as we are naturally
prone to vanity and deceitfulness, we ought diligently to labor to purge
our hearts, that the love of the law may reign in them. Now if the
beginning of a good life and the first point of righteousness is to hate
and abhor deceit, it follows that nothing is more excellent than
integrity; for unless that virtue hold the chief place, all the other
virtues speedily disappear. Nor is *abhorring* superfluously added to
*hating,* the design being to teach us that it is not enough to hate
falsehood with a common hatred, but that God’s children must hate it
with a deadly hatred. Now if the love of the law and the hatred of
falsehood are inseparably conjoined, it is a plain inference that all
who are not taught in the school of God are infected with deceit and
hypocrisy.

<span id="iii.vi-p17"></span><span id="iii.vi-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p18"></span>**164.** *Seven times a day have I praised
thee.* By the adverb *seven times,* the Prophet means that he was
continually or very often engaged in celebrating the praises of God;
just as it is said in <span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>[Pr
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016)<span id="iii.vi-p18.1"></span>,
“A just man falleth seven times,” when he often falls into divers
temptations.  <span id="fr_34"></span>[35](#fn_34) The phrase *the
judgments of God* being in many places taken for the punishments which
God inflicts upon sinners, and also sometimes applied in general to the
providence by which he governs the world, some understand the Prophet as
praising God because he affords such manifest proofs of his justice both
in punishing the wicked and in the whole government of the world. But I
rather agree with others who refer the phrase to the divine law; not
that I dislike the former interpretation, but because in this psalm the
great topic upon which the Psalmist chiefly insists is the commendation
of God’s law. The amount then is, that when David was assiduously
occupied in meditating upon the law of God, he found it distinguished by
so great perfection of righteousness and wisdom, that from time to time
he burst forth into the exercise of praise and thanksgiving. This
diligence in praising God shows that David not only spoke reverently and
honourably of the divine law, but that he accounted it an inestimable
boon conferred upon the human race. It was not simply admiration which
constrained him to this commendation, but a principle of gratitude; for
he saw that nothing more excellent could be bestowed upon men than their
being renewed to a blessed and an endless life by the incorruptible seed
of heavenly truth. Yet scarcely one in a hundred of those to whom God
offers this treasure puts himself to the trouble of giving God thanks
for it even in an ordinary manner. On the contrary, there reigns such
vile ingratitude everywhere in the world, that some scornfully reject
divine truth, and others despise or slight it, while others rail and
gnash their teeth against it if they find anything in it which does not
please them.

<span id="iii.vi-p20"></span><span id="iii.vi-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p21"></span>**165.** *Great peace have they who love
thy law.* If we take the word *peace* for a prosperous or happy
condition of life — a sense in which the Hebrews often employ it — the
word rendered *stumbling-block,* to correspond with it, will be used for
*adversity;* as if it had been said, that those who love God’s law shall
continually prosper and retain their position, although the whole world
should fall into ruins. But a different interpretation will be equally
appropriate, namely, that they have great peace, because, being
persuaded that both their persons and their life are acceptable to God,
they calmly repose themselves on a good conscience. This tranquil state
of conscience, this serenity of mind, is justly reckoned the chief point
of a happy life, that is to say it is so, when it proceeds from God’s
being reconciled to us, and from his fatherly favor shining in our
hearts. The Prophet justly teaches that we attain this peace from the
love of the law; for whoever would make it to depend upon anything else,
will be from time to time trembling at every little blast. If this sense
is adopted, the word *stumbling-block,* in the second clause, will
signify all the troubles and disquietudes of mind with which all who
lean not upon God’s word are miserably distressed and tormented, and
with which they are driven about either by their own depraved passions,
or by the caprice of other men. But in whatever way understand these two
words, *peace* and *stumbling-block,* the design of the Prophet will
remain the same, which is to show, that those who are not devoted to God
are miserable; for although they may applaud themselves for a time, yet
they will meet with many stumbling-blocks to drive them suddenly out of
their course. From the term *love,* we gather that this peace is not
acquired by a slavish observance of the law, but proceeds from faith;
for the law has no sweetness to attract us to it, unless it exhibit to
us God in the character of a father, and tranquilize our minds by the
assurance of eternal salvation. So far from enjoying peace, all worldly
men and despisers of God are justly punished by their own depravity and
obdurate rebellion; for each of them is his own executioner, and the
more fiercely they rage against the word of God, the sorer are they
tormented, until they bring upon themselves utter destruction. The
godly, it is true, are also tormented or distressed, but this inward
consolation wipes away all their sorrow, or, raising them up, enables
them to surmount all stumbling-blocks, or so relieves them, that they
faint not.

<span id="iii.vi-p22"></span><span id="iii.vi-p22.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p23"></span>**166** *O Jehovah! I have waited for thy
salvation.* It is not without cause that the Prophet often repeats this
sentence, which is in all men’s mouths, there being nothing easier than
to ascribe to God the praise and office of saving, while yet there is
hardly to be met with in the world a single example of steadfast hope,
when men come to wrestle with temptations for any length of time. From
the order of the words we learn, that if a man would keep himself in the
fear of God, and the love of the law, it is necessary for him, above all
things,  <span id="fr_35"></span>[36](#fn_35) to seek for salvation in
God. If faith in God’s grace be removed from our minds, or patience
shaken off, we will be carried away hither and thither, and will cease
any longer to cultivate godliness. The chief virtue of the faithful,
therefore, is a patient endurance of the cross and mortification by
which they calmly submit themselves to God; for so long as no adversity
happens to hypocrites, they seem, also to be well-affectioned to the
work of serving him. There are also other reasons why it behoves us to
keep our minds intent upon the salvation of God, if we desire to
regulate our life aright; for if the, allurements of the world hold us
in their snares, we will immediately become discouraged. The reason, as
we plainly see, why the hearts of the great majority fail, is because it
is difficult to believe assuredly that salvation is to be hoped for only
from the grace of God. That we may therefore persevere in serving God,
it is indispensable that faith shine on the future before us, and next,
that patience accompany us, to nourish within us the love of
righteousness. For, as we have said, our alacrity in persevering
proceeds from this, that with a patient spirit we suffer our salvation
to lie hidden in the bosom of God, and that we doubt not of his at
length, proving a faithful rewarder of all such as seek him, although he
may withdraw his favor from the eye of sense. In the subsequent verse
the Psalmist confirms this doctrine by other words, saying, *that he
kept God’s testimonies with his soul* By the word *soul* he expresses
still more forcibly than before, that he had the doctrine of the law
enclosed within the deepest recesses of his heart. The cause of this
peculiarly diligent keeping of the law, was the singular love which he
had to it, as he states in the concluding clause of the verse. He who by
constraint and in a slavish manner obeys the law, is so far from
receiving it into the secret habitation of his heart to keep it there,
that he would have it removed far away from him.

<span id="iii.vi-p25"></span><span id="iii.vi-p25.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p26"></span>**168.** *I have kept thy commandments and
thy testimonies.* What the Psalmist had expressed more strongly, he now
repeats more simply, adding there to reason. He abbreviates the
statement as made in the preceding verse only by here omitting the word
*soul,* which he there uses, whilst to *commandments* he joins
*testimonies,* in order the more distinctly to show that he does not
speak exclusively of the rule of an upright and holy life, but also
comprehends the whole covenant of salvation. And, assuredly, the
doctrine of the law could not be so sweet and attractive from its
commanding what is right, did it not at the same time exhibit the free
favor of God. The reason which the Prophet assigns for his keeping God’s
commandments and testimonies — *for all my ways are before thee*  <span
id="fr_36"></span>[37](#fn_36) — is to this effect, That the truth,
which he well knew, that nothing is hidden from God, served as a bridle
to keep him devoted to the cultivation of godliness; for if we live not
as under the omniscient inspection of God, the fickle lustfulness of the
flesh quickly carries us away now one way and now another. The meaning,
also, may be this — that he made God the arbiter and judge of his life;
for in Scripture language those are said *to walk before God,* who refer
all their actions to him, and, as it were, withdrawing themselves from
the sight of men, present themselves at his judgment-seat. In this way
he gives us to understand that he had endeavored not only to be free
from all fault and blame before men.. but also to offer to God a sound
and sincere heart. Whichever of these senses is adopted, he testifies
that it is only when we consider that we have to deal with God, who
searcheth the heart, and from whose eyes nothing is hidden, that we will
observe his law aright. This concluding clause may also be a form of
protestation; as if the Prophet had said, Lord, thou art the best
witness of the fidelity with which I have kept thy law, for nothing is
hidden from thee. But he seems rather to have intended to intimate that
the principle of his holy living, was his having consecrated his life to
God, and having kept his thoughts fixed on the diverse presence.

<span id="iii.vii"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p1"></span><span id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
119:169-174](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#169)<span
id="iii.vii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p2"></span>**169.** **ת** Let my cry come near b, to
thy presence, O Jehovah! Give me understanding according to thy word.
**170.** **ת** Let my prayer come into thy presence: deliver me
according to thy word. **171.** **ת** My lips shall speak praise, when
thou shalt have taught me thy statutes. **172.** **ת** My tongue shall
speak of thy word; for all thy commandments are righteousness. **173.**
**ת** Let thy hand be to succor me; for I have chosen thy commandments.
**174.** **ת** I have longed for thy salvation, O Jehovah and thy law
has been my delight. **175.** **ת** Let my soul live, and let it praise
thee; and let thy judgments succor me. **176.** **ת** I have wandered
like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I have not forgotten thy
statutes.

<span id="iii.vii-p3"></span> 

<span id="iii.vii-p4"></span><span id="iii.vii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p5"></span>**169.** *Let my cry come*  <span
id="fr_37"></span>[38](#fn_37) *near into thy presence.* The Psalmist
repeats the same sentiment which has already come under our notice —
that his chief desire, and what he, most of all pressed after, regarding
everything else as of secondary importance, was to make progress in the
study of the divine law. By the word *cry* he denotes earnestness. I am
anxious, as if he had said, above all things, and am chiefly inflamed
with this desire, (even as it is just and reasonable,) that the light of
understanding by which we excel the lower animals, and approach very
near to God, may be preferred by me to all earthly advantages. The
expression, *according to thy word,* may be understood in two ways. It
may denote that David besought God to impart to him understanding
according to his promise; or, as some explain it, it may intimate that
he desired to have his mind framed according to the rule of God’s word,
so that he might not be wise otherwise than according to the doctrine of
the law. This last sense would not be inappropriate, did not these words
in the following verse, *Deliver me according to thy word,* present an
objection to such an interpretation. Having no doubt that these two
sentences have a corresponding meaning — though at first. sight it is
more specious to understand David as praying to be made wise according
to the rule of the law — I rather incline to the other sense, That he
beseeches God to endue him with understanding, in fulfillment of his
promise. And whilst God liberally promises all blessings to his people,
to enlighten them by his Spirit, that they may excel in true and sound
wisdom, is justly entitled to be ranked among the chief of his promises.
This doctrine is profitable to us in many ways. In the first place we
are taught that nothing is more to be desired than to have God guiding
us by his light, that we may not be like brute beasts. In the second
place we are taught that this is the peculiar gift of the Holy Spirit;
for it would have been in vain for David to have besought. God to bestow
upon him that which he had naturally in himself, or which he might have
attained by his own painstaking. In the third place, what I have said
concerning the promise is to be attended to, to the end the faithful may
not hesitate to offer themselves to God to be enlightened by Him, who
declares that he will be the guide of the blind, and who refuses not to
be a master and teacher of little ones and of the humble.

<span id="iii.vii-p7"></span><span id="iii.vii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p8"></span>**170.** *Let my prayer come into thy
presence.* After having made supplication that the gift of right
understanding might be imparted to him, the Psalmist now implores God
for deliverance, by which he acknowledges that lie was continually
involved in multiplied dangers from which he found it impossible to
escape, unless God stretched forth his hand from heaven to his aid. We
know, indeed, that whenever any distress was pressing hard behind him,
he called upon God for succor; but as he does not here specify any
particular distress, I have no doubt that, in commending his life in
general terms to the protection of God, he thought again and again how
he was shut up on every side by innumerable deaths, from which lie could
not escape if God did not prove his continual deliverer. But this is an
inestimable comfort to us, that God assures us that in all dangers he
will be ready and prepared to help us.

<span id="iii.vii-p9"></span><span id="iii.vii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p10"></span>**171.** *My lips shall speak praise.*
David now shows in another way than in the preceding verse, how high a
privilege lie accounted it to be admitted by God among the number of His
disciples, and to profit aright in His school, by declaring that, if so
privileged, he will hasten forward to render thanks to him with fluent
tongue. The word <span id="iii.vii-p10.1"></span>נבע, *naba,* which he
employs, is a metaphor taken from the bubbling up of fountains, and
accordingly it signifies not simply *to speak,* but to pour forth speech
copiously. As therefore he a little before showed the earnestness of his
desire by praying, so now he affirms that his rejoicing will bear
testimony that he desires nothing more than to be thoroughly imbued with
heavenly truth. He again confirms the doctrine, That the way by which we
become truly wise is, first by submitting ourselves to the Word of God,
and not following our own imaginations; and, secondly, by God’s opening
our understanding and subduing it to the obedience of his will. He here
joins together both these truths — namely, that when God has set before
us His law, from which we are to learn what, ever is profitable for our
welfare, He, at the same time, teaches us inwardly. It were not enough
to have our ears stricken with the outward sound, did not God illuminate
our minds by the Spirit of understanding, and correct our obduracy by
the Spirit of docility. As the labor of teachers is to no purpose until
virtue and efficacy has been given to it.. so it is also to be noticed
that such as are truly taught of God, are not led away from the law and
the Scriptures by secret revelations, like some fanatics, who think that
they linger still at their A B C, unless disdainfully trampling under
foot the Word of God, they fly away after their own foolish fancies.

<span id="iii.vii-p11"></span><span id="iii.vii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p12"></span>**172.** *My tongue shall speak of thy
word.* Here the Psalmist says, that when he shall have profited in God’s
law he will also employ himself in teaching it to others. This order is
undoubtedly to be observed, That divine truth take root in our hearts
before we engage in the work of teaching it to others. Yet every man,
according to the measure of his faith, ought to communicate to his
brethren what he has received, that the doctrine, whose use and fruit
God ‘would have to be displayed for the common edification of the
Church, may not be buried. There is added the reason which ought to stir
up all the godly to declare the law of God — namely, because by this
means righteousness is spread abroad through the whole world. When the
Prophet honors the commandments of God with the title of
*righteousness,* he does not simply express his approbation of them, but
he indirectly shows, that, until this rule bear sway in governing
mankind, the whole world is one scene of sad and horrible confusion.
Yet, let my readers judge whether the word *answer* or *witness,* which
the Hebrew verb <span id="iii.vii-p12.1"></span>ענה, *anah,* properly
signifies, is not more suitable in this place than *speak;* bringing out
this sense — “My tongue shall bear witness or answer to thy word;
because the true knowledge of righteousness is to be sought only in the
word;” but in that case, it will be necessary to supply the letter <span
id="iii.vii-p12.2"></span>ל, *lamed, in* the word <span
id="iii.vii-p12.3"></span>אמרתך, *imrathecha,* that it may read — *to
thy word.*

<span id="iii.vii-p13"></span><span id="iii.vii-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p14"></span>**173.** *Let thy hand be to succor me.*
As he had devoted himself to the doctrine of the law, David requests
that the hand of God may be stretched forth for his aid. Farther, by
these words he declares, that those who yield themselves to God to be
governed by His word have continually need of His help. The more
sincerely any individual studies to be a good man, so much the more
numerous are the ways in which Satan troubles him, and so much the more
are the enemies multiplied who molest him on all sides. But when God
sees those who once embraced the truth of his word remaining steadfast
in their resolution, he is so much the more inclined to aid them. By the
word *choose* in the second clause, the Psalmist has expressed that
nothing had hindered him from devoting himself to the law of God. No man
will apply this mind to the love of the law without a great struggle,
since the thoughts of every man are drawn away to a variety of objects,
by the depraved affections of the flesh. This choosing then spoken of
shows that it is not through ignorance or an inconsiderate zeal that.
the children of God desire above all things heavenly doctrine; but as
they partake of the flexibility or pliancy of mind common to men, and
feel the various impulses of the flesh, they purposely subdue their
minds to the obedience of God.

<span id="iii.vii-p15"></span><span id="iii.vii-p15.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p16"></span>**174.** *I have longed for thy salvation,
O Jehovah!* Although all men desire to be in happy circumstances, and no
man avowedly repudiates God’s favor; yet so confused and uncertain are
the ideas which they entertain of that in which a life of happiness or
propriety consists, that very few are to be found directing their
aspirations to God. Some are carried away by their own ambition, some
are wholly possessed with avarice, and others burn with lust, all
imagining, that the farther they recede from God, everything will
prosper so much the better with them. In short, in proportion as each
man is desirous to be safe, in the same proportion does he provoke the
anger of God, by seeking the means of his safety in all directions. The
construction in the Hebrew text denotes steadfastness, or constancy of
desire; for literally it is, that He Had *longed for the salvation of
God,* and not that he only at the present time began to long for it. He
next expresses the manner in which we are patiently to long for
salvation; which is, by seeking consolation and relief in all our
calamities from the word of God; for whoever does not comfort himself by
a reliance on the grace promised in the word, will quail at the
slightest assault made upon him. The Prophet then wisely kept his
thoughts close upon the divine word, that he might not be turned away
from hoping for the salvation of God.

<span id="iii.vii-p17"></span><span id="iii.vii-p17.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p18"></span>**175.** *Let my soul live and let it
praise thee.* As the verbs are in the future tense, *shall live, shall
praise,* this sentence may be expounded thus: Lord, when thou shalt have
bestowed life upon me, I will endeavor, by celebrating thy praises, to
show that I am not ungrateful. If this sense is approved, the sentence
will be a kind of rejoicing, in which the Prophet, depending upon the
divine promises, confidently proclaims, that his life will continue in
safety. And, certainly, although our life is hidden under the shadow of
death, we may, nevertheless, boast that it is safe, because God is its
faithful guardian; and this assured confidence proceeds from his
quickening grace, which is offered to us in his word. Yet, as the
majority of Commentators translate these words in the optative mood, let
us follow the more generally received interpretation, which is, that
David in asking to have his life prolonged, shows, at the same time,
that the end for which he desired to live was, that he might exercise
himself in singing the praises of God, even as it is said in <span
id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>[Ps
115:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#018)<span
id="iii.vii-p18.1"></span>, “We who shall remain in life shall praise
Jehovah.” In the second clause it would be harsh to understand the word
*judgments* of the commandments, to which it does not properly belong to
give help. It seems then, that the Prophet, perceiving himself liable to
numberless calamities — even as the faithful, by reason of the unbridled
license of the wicked, dwell in this world as sheep among wolves, —
calls upon God to protect him in the way of restraining, by his secret
providence, the wicked from doing him harm. It is a very profitable
doctrine, when things in the world are in a state of great confusion,
and when our safety is in danger amidst so many and varied storms, to
lift up our eyes to the judgments of God, and to seek a remedy in them.
As, however, in this Psalm the word *judgments* is commonly referred to
God’s commandments, we may also fitly interpret it of them in this
place, so that the Prophet attributes to the word of God the office and
charge of giving succor; for God does not feed us with delusive
promises, but, whenever an emergency arises, confirms and ratifies his
word by giving some palpable manifestation of the operation of his hand.
Thus, when the Prophet calls the divine law to his help, lie pronounces
a singular encomium upon the efficacy of the divine word. If any would
prefer expounding the sentence of the keeping of the law, I offer no
objections. In this sense it is as if the Prophet had said, — O Lord,
let the uprightness which I have practiced, and the zeal with which I
have employed myself in keeping thy commandments, be a defense to me.

<span id="iii.vii-p19"></span><span id="iii.vii-p19.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p20"></span>**176.** *I have wandered like a lost
sheep.* He is not to be understood as here confessing his sins, — an
opinion erroneously held by many, — as if he had been drawn into the
trails of Satan; for this is inconsistent with the second clause, in
which he denies that he had forgotten God’s law. It is a poor solution
of this difficulty to say, that:, previous to the time of his calling,
he was a wandering sheep, but that from the time of his calling he was
devoted to godliness — or that in straying he was withheld by some godly
affection from utterly casting off the fear of God; for the same time is
undoubtedly referred to in both clauses. Again it is easy to gather,
that the two clauses of this verse ought to be connected together by
*although,* or *notwithstanding,* or some other such particle, as the
Latins call adversative,  <span id="fr_38"></span>[39](#fn_38) as if the
Prophet had said, Although I have wandered about like a lost sheep, yet
I have not forgotten the law of God. His meaning, I conceive, is, that
he wandered, because, being chased by the force and violence of his
enemies, he transported himself from place to place in great fear, in
quest of retreats in which he might hide himself. We know for certain,
that David was so hunted that in his exile he could nowhere find a
secure place. This similitude would therefore very properly apply to
him, because, although driven away and hunted after by his persecutors,
he yet never turned aside from the law of God. Moreover, as the wolves
pursued him everywhere, he prays God to bring him back and give him a
place of safety and tranquillity, that he may at length cease from any
longer wandering hither and thither, and being as a vagabond.  <span
id="fr_39"></span>[40](#fn_39) He had a very good ground for believing
that he would be heard in the fact, that although provoked by manifold
wrongs he yet never swerved from the fear of God — a statement which,
however, ought to be referred rather to the general course of his life
than to particular acts. Although when he fell into adultery he
continued for a time in a state of insensibility, yet it cannot be
denied that in his adversities he was restrained by a holy patience, so
as to persevere in following after righteousness.  <span
id="fr_40"></span>[41](#fn_40)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2](cc12002.htm#fr_1) <span
id="iii.i-p2.4"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p3"></span> Literally, “for the word of thy
righteousness.” Calvin understands it of the divine promises. Phillips
translates “for the word of thy justice,” “that is*,*” says he, “for the
sentence of justice. on my oppressors, as the first part of the verse
teaches; for the passing this sentence will be equivalent to the
granting the salvation which the Psalmist so ardently desired.”

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3](cc12002.htm#fr_2) <span
id="iii.i-p3.5"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p4"></span> “*Above gold.* <span
id="iii.i-p4.1"></span>מזהב*, mizahab,* more than *resplendent gold;*
gold without any stain or rust.” — Dr. *Adam Clarke*

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4](cc12002.htm#fr_3) <span
id="iii.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p5"></span> “<span id="iii.i-p5.1"></span>Ou,
marguerites.” — Fr. *marg.* “Or, pearls.” “<span
id="iii.i-p5.2"></span>ומפז, *umipaz, above solid gold;* gold separated
from the dross, perfectly refined.” — *Dr. Adam Clarke.*

<span id="fn_4"></span>[5](cc12002.htm#fr_4) <span
id="iii.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p11"></span> <span id="iii.i-p11.1"></span>ערב This verb
signifies *to be pleasant, acceptable.* So Bucer has translated the
first part of the verse, <span id="iii.i-p11.2"></span>*oblecta servum
tuum bono;* and indeed the Chaldee has given the same sense to the verb,
for it is rendered by <span id="iii.i-p11.3"></span>בסים, *make merry.*
But the other meaning which it has, viz. *to become surety,* is
evidently more suitable; for the expression *Be surety for thy servant
for good,* corresponds very well with the previous and subsequent
petitions, which are for deliverance from the hands of the enemy.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_5"></span>[6](cc12002.htm#fr_5) <span
id="iii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p14"></span> “In times of great sorrow, when the heart
is oppressed with care, and when danger threatens on every side, the
human eye expresses with amazing accuracy the distressing and anguished
emotions of the soul. The posture here described is that of an
individual who perceives himself surrounded with enemies of the most
formidable character, who feels his own weakness and insufficiency to
enter into conflict with them, but who is eagerly looking for the
arrival of a devoted and powerful friend, who has promised to succor him
in the hour of his calamity.” — *Dr.* *Morison.*

<span id="fn_6"></span>[7](cc12002.htm#fr_6) <span
id="iii.i-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p27"></span> Durell translates this verse — “For, as
much as I esteem all thy precepts, etc., therefore I hate,” etc.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8](cc12002.htm#fr_7) <span
id="iii.i-p27.1"></span>

<span id="iii.i-p28"></span> “*All the precepts of everything, i.e.,*
all precepts concerning all things. I embrace thy revealed Word, without
any exceptions. The Psalmist states, that he had most diligently applied
his mind to the consideration of all God’s commandments, the
circumstances and occasions on which they were given, and he observed
that they abounded in justice and holiness. Since, therefore, they are
all equally just and holy, whatsoever is contrary to them he regarded as
unjust, impure, false and detestable. Hammond remarks, that ‘the
reduplication of the universal particle <span id="iii.i-p28.1"></span>כל
is emphatic *all, even all;*’ and so the plain rendering is most
current, *all thy commandments, even all,* have I approved.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_8"></span>[9](cc12002.htm#fr_8) <span
id="iii.ii-p2.6"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p3"></span> In the French it is, “that no iniquity may
have,” etc.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[10](cc12002.htm#fr_9) <span
id="iii.ii-p8.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p9.1"></span>פתה
*pethach,* ‘the *opening* of thy words giveth light:’ when I open my
Bible to read, light springs up in my mind.” — Dr. *Adam Clarke.* The
corresponding word in Syriac signifies *to enlighten,* and in Arabic *to
explain.* Hence, in the opinion of some, <span
id="iii.ii-p9.2"></span>פתח, *pethach,* is the expounding of thy word.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[11](cc12002.htm#fr_10) <span
id="iii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p13"></span> The allusion, according to some, is to an
exhausted or thirsty traveler in hot countries, who gasps and pants for
the cooling breeze, or the refreshing fountain. According to others this
is a metaphor, taken from an exhausted animal in the chase, which runs
open-mouthed, to take in the cooling air, the heart beating high, and
the muscular force being nearly expended through fatigue. In either view
the language is extremely expressive, showing how intensely the Psalmist
longed for the refreshment and delight which an acquaintance with the
word of God affords. And if the “opening of God’s words,” mentioned in
the preceding verse, means the expounding of them, David here points out
his eager desire to hear God’s word expounded.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12](cc12002.htm#fr_11) <span
id="iii.ii-p15.2"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p16"></span> “*According to the custom, or usual mode
of acting.* So Luther — *as thou art accustomed to do,* etc. In <span
id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span>[Ge
40:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#013)<span id="iii.ii-p16.1"></span> —
‘Thou shalt deliver the cup, <span id="iii.ii-p16.2"></span>כמשפט,
*according to custom.*’”— *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_12"></span>[13](cc12002.htm#fr_12) <span
id="iii.ii-p18.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p19"></span> <span id="iii.ii-p19.1"></span>בי, *bi*,
IN *me.* Let me have no governor but God; let the throne of my heart be
filled by him, and none other. — *Dr. Adam Clark*

<span id="fn_13"></span>[14](cc12002.htm#fr_13) <span
id="iii.ii-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p22"></span> In the French version it is “avarice.”

<span id="fn_14"></span>[15](cc12002.htm#fr_14) <span
id="iii.ii-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p27"></span> *Rivers of waters* — that is, a great
profusion of tears. “The Orientals are in general very copious weepers;
and this strong hyperbole is still much employed among them to express
the highest degree of lamenting grief.” — Illustrated *Commentary upon
the Bible.*

<span id="fn_15"></span>[16](cc12002.htm#fr_15) <span
id="iii.ii-p27.3"></span>

<span id="iii.ii-p28"></span> “<span id="iii.ii-p28.1"></span>Les autres
s’endorment sans grand soin de leur salut comme bestes brutes.” — Fr

<span id="fn_16"></span>[17](cc12002.htm#fr_16) <span
id="iii.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p8"></span> “*Hath consumed me.* The strong term here
made use of corresponds very well with the forcible language of the
preceding verse. My zeal for thy word is so great, that when I see how
my enemies disregard it, I am overpowered by feelings of shame at their
neglect.” — *Phillips.*

<span id="fn_17"></span>[18](cc12002.htm#fr_17) <span
id="iii.iii-p10.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iii-p11"></span> Dr. Adam Clarke translates <span
id="iii.iii-p11.1"></span>צרופה, *tseruphah,* by *purification.* This
rendering conveys a beautiful idea. God’s word is not only *a purified
thing,* but *a thing that purifies.* It cleanses from sin every heart
with which it comes into contact.

<span id="iii.iii-p12"></span>“Now ye are clean,” said Christ,  
“by the word which I have spoken unto you.” (<span
id="iii.iii-p12.2"></span>[Joh
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#003)<span id="iii.iii-p12.2"></span>.)

<span id="iii.iii-p13"></span>This tendency of the word to impart a
measure of its own purity to such as yield to its influence, endears it
to all God’s people; and for this reason they make it the subject of
their constant meditation.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[19](cc12002.htm#fr_18) <span
id="iii.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p3"></span> The word which Calvin uses for “the
twilight” is “<span id="iii.iv-p3.1"></span>crepusculum.”

<span id="fn_19"></span>[20](cc12002.htm#fr_19) <span
id="iii.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p7"></span> According to this view, the last clause
would read, “that I may keep thy statutes.”

<span id="fn_20"></span>[21](cc12002.htm#fr_20) <span
id="iii.iv-p14.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p15"></span> The Hebrews divided the natural day into
three portions--morning, noon, and evening — which are mentioned by
David as seasons in which he engaged in prayer. (<span
id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>[Ps
55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017)<span id="iii.iv-p15.1"></span>.)
They also divided the night into three parts, called “watches,”
consisting of four hours each, and commencing at our six o’clock in the
evening. In <span id="iii.iv-p15.2"></span>[La
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p15.2"></span>,
we read of the first watch; or, as it is there designated, “the
beginning of the watches;” in <span id="iii.iv-p15.3"></span>[Jud
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p15.3"></span>,
of “the middle watch;” and in <span id="iii.iv-p15.4"></span>[Ex
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)<span id="iii.iv-p15.4"></span>,
of “the morning watch.” A similar division of the night seems to have
been made by other ancient nations, as appears from the references made
to it by Homer and the early Greek writers. The Greeks and Romans,
however, in improving their military discipline, afterwards divided the
night into four watches, each consisting of three hours; and when the
Jews fell under the dominion of the latter people, they adopted from
them this division of the night. Hence we read of “the fourth watch of
the night” in <span id="iii.iv-p15.5"></span>[Mt
14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025)<span id="iii.iv-p15.5"></span>.
And the four watches are mentioned together in <span
id="iii.iv-p15.6"></span>[Mr
13:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#035)<span id="iii.iv-p15.6"></span>:

<span id="iii.iv-p16"></span>“Watch ye therefore: for ye know not when
the master of the house cometh, at even, or at midnight, or at
cock-crowing,  
or in the morning.”

<span id="iii.iv-p17"></span>The time at which each of these four
watches began and ended is thus determined by Dr. Hales, who has written
elaborately on the subject: “1. <span id="iii.iv-p17.1"></span>Οψε, *the
late,* began at sunset, and ended with the third hour of the night,
including the evening-dawn, or twilight. It was also called <span
id="iii.iv-p17.2"></span>οψια ὡρα, *eventide,* <span
id="iii.iv-p17.3"></span>[Mr
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#011)<span id="iii.iv-p17.3"></span>;
or simply <span id="iii.iv-p17.4"></span>οψια, *evening*, <span
id="iii.iv-p17.5"></span>[Joh
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)<span id="iii.iv-p17.5"></span>,
etc. 2. <span id="iii.iv-p17.6"></span>Μεσονυκτιον, *the midnight,*
lasted from the third hour till midnight. 3. <span
id="iii.iv-p17.7"></span>Αλεκτοροφωνια, *the cock-crowing,* midnight
till the third hour after, or the ninth hour of the night. It included
the two cock-crowings, with the second or principal of which it ended.
4. <span id="iii.iv-p17.8"></span>Πρωι, *the early,* lasted from the
ninth to the twelfth hor of the night, or sunrise, including the
morning-dawn or twilight. It is also called <span
id="iii.iv-p17.9"></span>πρωια, *morning, or morningtide,* (<span
id="iii.iv-p17.10"></span>ὡρα being understood,) <span
id="iii.iv-p17.11"></span>[Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)<span id="iii.iv-p17.11"></span>,
etc.

<span id="iii.iv-p18"></span>“When the Psalmist here declares, that his
eyes prevented the nightwatches, we are to understand him as chiefly
referring to the middle and morning watches, which falling at that
period of the night when men in general are devoted to rest, envinced
the strength, fervour, and self-sacrificing character of his devotions.”
— *Dr. Morison.*

<span id="fn_21"></span>[22](cc12002.htm#fr_21) <span
id="iii.iv-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p21"></span> By “judgments,” Calvin means “God’s Word,”
as the reader will observe from what follows.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[23](cc12002.htm#fr_22) <span
id="iii.iv-p21.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p22"></span> Walford translates, “Revive me, e Jehovah!
according to thy wonted manner.”

<span id="fn_23"></span>[24](cc12002.htm#fr_23) <span
id="iii.iv-p30.1"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p31"></span> “<span id="iii.iv-p31.1"></span>De
testimoniis tuis.” — *Lat.*

<span id="fn_24"></span>[25](cc12002.htm#fr_24) <span
id="iii.iv-p31.2"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p32"></span> Walford’s rendering is, “I have known thy
testimonies long since.” Phillips translates “of old;” and gives this
explanation, “I have been acquainted with thy testimonies ever since I
have possessed any knowledge, i.e. as soon as I came to years of
reflection.

<span id="iii.iv-p33"></span>‘From a child thou hast known the holy
scriptures.’  
<span id="iii.iv-p33.2"></span>[2Ti
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#015)<span id="iii.iv-p33.2"></span>.”

<span id="fn_25"></span>[26](cc12002.htm#fr_25) <span
id="iii.iv-p33.5"></span>

<span id="iii.iv-p34"></span> *Thou hast established them for ever.*
That is, thy revelations are unalterable and everlasting, as the
attributes of their great Author, and can never fail those who rely upon
them, in time, or in eternity.” — *Warner* *on the Psalter.*

<span id="fn_26"></span>[27](cc12002.htm#fr_26) <span
id="iii.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p3"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p3.1"></span>Ou, forts
robustes ” — *Fr.* “Or, very strong.”

<span id="fn_27"></span>[28](cc12002.htm#fr_27) <span
id="iii.v-p3.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p4"></span> The word in the Hebrew text is <span
id="iii.v-p4.1"></span>ראש, *rash.* Dr. Adam Clarke suggests an
explanation, which is at least ingenious. The first word in the book of
Genesis is <span id="iii.v-p4.2"></span>בראשית, *bereshith,* “in the
beginning;” which is derived from <span id="iii.v-p4.3"></span>ראש*,
rash,* or *raash.* He therefore asks whether David in here calling the
<span id="iii.v-p4.4"></span>ראש of God’s word truth, may not refer to
<span id="iii.v-p4.5"></span>בראשית, the first word in the book of
Genesis? If so, the meaning is, Every word thou hast spoken from <span
id="iii.v-p4.6"></span>בראשית, the first in Genesis, to the end of the
law and the prophets, and all that thou wilt yet speak, are true and
shall have in due time their fulfillment.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[29](cc12002.htm#fr_28) <span
id="iii.v-p9.3"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p10"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p10.1"></span>La letre
<span id="iii.v-p10.2"></span>כ, <span id="iii.v-p10.3"></span>qui
signifie Sclon.” — Fr. “The letter <span id="iii.v-p10.4"></span>כ,
which signifies ‘According to.’”

<span id="fn_29"></span>[30](cc12002.htm#fr_29) <span
id="iii.v-p18.4"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p19"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p19.1"></span>Invasit me
horror.” — *Piscator.*

<span id="fn_30"></span>[31](cc12002.htm#fr_30) <span
id="iii.v-p19.2"></span>

<span id="iii.v-p20"></span> “<span id="iii.v-p20.1"></span>C’est a
dire, on vient de la pensee a l’effect.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_31"></span>[32](cc12002.htm#fr_31) <span
id="iii.vi-p2.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p3"></span> Literally, “Because of the judgments of thy
righteousness.”

<span id="fn_32"></span>[33](cc12002.htm#fr_32) <span
id="iii.vi-p3.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p4"></span> “*They have not any offense, i.e.* no
occasion to bring them into sin, but such as, with God’s Spirit
assisting them, they are enabled to overcome. The love of the law is a
security to them from the enticements of wickedness, by which others are
drawn aside from the path of rectitude, and are brought to ruin.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_33"></span>[34](cc12002.htm#fr_33) <span
id="iii.vi-p7.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p8"></span> “David was persecuted by Saul and his
associates ‘without a cause.’” — *Warner on the Psalter.*

<span id="fn_34"></span>[35](cc12002.htm#fr_34) <span
id="iii.vi-p18.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p19"></span> Among many other texts of Scripture which
might be quoted to show that the number seven is often used for many, or
an indefinite number, we may refer only to <span
id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span>[Ge 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#015)<span
id="iii.vi-p19.1"></span> and <span id="iii.vi-p19.2"></span>[Le
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018)<span id="iii.vi-p19.2"></span>.
Some of the Jewish Rabbies, however, affirm that David is here to be
understood literally, observing, that the devout Hebrews were accustomed
to praise God twice in the morning before reading the ten commandments,
and once after; twice in the evening before reading the same portion of
inspiration, and twice after; which makes up the number of seven times a
day.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[36](cc12002.htm#fr_35) <span
id="iii.vi-p23.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p24"></span> “<span id="iii.vi-p24.1"></span>Primum,”
*Lat* — “<span id="iii.vi-p24.2"></span>Devant toutes choses,” *Fr.*

<span id="fn_36"></span>[37](cc12002.htm#fr_36) <span
id="iii.vi-p26.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vi-p27"></span> “*All my ways are before thee*” The
meaning of this expression may be gathered from other scriptural
phrases: such as ‘walking before God;’ or ‘in his sight;’ which merely
signify to live holy and righteously, so as to be acceptable in his
sight. God is omniscient, and, consequently, ‘all the ways’ or actions
of men are ‘before him,’ or open to his knowledge and sight.” —
*Warner.*

<span id="fn_37"></span>[38](cc12002.htm#fr_37) <span
id="iii.vii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p6"></span> As has been observed by some critics, the
Psalmist’s *cry* for deliverance is here personified. He represents it
as if an intelligent being, and as sent up by him to heaven, there to
plead his cause in the presence of God. The same elegant poetical figure
is used in the following verse, and it is of frequent occurrence in the
Book of Psalms.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[39](cc12002.htm#fr_38) <span
id="iii.vii-p20.1"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p21"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p21.1"></span>En
apres, il est facile de recueillir, que les deux membres de ce propos se
doyvent lier ensemble par Combien, ou Ja soit, ou quelque autre telle
partieule que les Latins appellent adversative.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_39"></span>[40](cc12002.htm#fr_39) <span
id="iii.vii-p21.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p22"></span> “<span id="iii.vii-p22.1"></span>A ce
qu’a la fin il cesse de plus tracasser ca et la et estre comme
vagabond.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_40"></span>[41](cc12002.htm#fr_40) <span
id="iii.vii-p22.2"></span>

<span id="iii.vii-p23"></span> Before leaving this divine poem, to the
close of which we halve now arrived, there are a few remarks which may
be suggested upon a review of the whole. In the first place, it is
worthy of observation, that its alphabetical structure has been so
completely preserved, that not one of the initial letters in it has been
lost. notwithstanding its length and great antiquity, being older by
many ages than any of the celebrated writings of Greece and Rome. In the
second place, the wonderful perfection and yet connection of its various
parts is also deserving of attention. Wherever we begin we seem to be at
the commencement, and wherever we stop the sense is complete; and yet
the poem does not consist of detached sentences, but is a whole
consisting of many parts, all of which seem necessary to its perfection.
In the third place, the numerous apparent repetitions which occur in it
ought not to excite the prejudice of the reader. Although the frequent
recurrence of the same words may not have an effect altogether agreeable
upon fastidious ears, yet these words are so connected with others, as
to bring out new meanings and to suggest new trains of thought. Hence
the intelligent and pious student, instead of finding the sentences
tautological, will discover new sentiments welling out to preserve his
attention and to keep alive the flame of devotion. Walford, after
observing that some readers may think this poem singularly marked by
frequent repetitions, adds — “It is not my intention to write an essay
on this theme; and I shall therefore briefly say, that the implicitly of
ancient writings is one of their greatest charms. If the repetitions of
<span id="iii.vii-p23.1"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii-p23.1"></span>
create in it a blemish, it is one which the royal author of it shares in
common with the most illustrious poet of Pagan antiquity; and that if
simplicity and repetition are to be objected against David’s Ode, the
author of the Iliad and the Odyssey will hardly escape condemnation.” In
fine, the attentive reader must have observed the striking manner in
which this composition exhibits the workings of genuine godliness in the
regenerated soul. “I know of no part of the Holy Scriptures,” remarks
that eminent man, Jonathan Edwards, “where the nature and evidences of
true and sincere godliness are so fully and largely insisted on and
delineated as in <span id="iii.vii-p23.2"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000)<span id="iii.vii-p23.2"></span>.
The Psalmist declares his design in the first verses of the Psalm, keeps
his eye on it all along, and pursues it to the end. The excellency of
holiness is represented as the immediate object of a spiritual taste and
delight. God’s law — that grand expression and emanation of the holiness
of God’s nature and prescription of holiness to the creature — is all
along represented as the great object of the *love,* the complacence,
and the rejoicing of the gracious nature, which prizes God’s commands
‘above gold, yea, the finest gold,’ and to which they are ‘sweeter than
honey and the honey-comb.’” — *Edwards on the Religious Affections,*
part 3 section 3.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 120](cc12003)
