[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12007)  [Next](cc12009) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="ix"></span>

<span id="ix-p1"></span>PSALM 125

<span id="ix-p2"></span>As the faithful being mingled in this world with
the ungodly seem to be exposed to all the ills of life in the same
manner as other people, the Prophet, comparing them to Jerusalem, shows
that they are defended by an invincible bulwark. And if God at any time
suffer them to be plagued by the malice of the wicked, he exhorts them
to be of good hope. He however at the same time distinguishes between
true and false Israelites, that hypocrites may not apply to themselves
what is here said concerning the safety of the righteous.

<span id="ix-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="ix.i"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p1"></span><span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
125:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#001)<span id="ix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p2"></span>**1.** They who confide in Jehovah “are” as
mount Zion, “which” shall not be removed, “but” shall abide for ever.
 <span id="fr_80"></span>[81](#fn_80) **2.** As the mountains are round
about Jerusalem, so Jehovah round about his people, henceforth and for
ever.

<span id="ix.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="ix.i-p5"></span><span id="ix.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p6"></span>**1.** *They who confide in Jehovah are as
mount Zion.* The present Psalm differs from the preceding in this — that
while in the other it was said that the Church *had been preserved* by
the power of God, without any human means, the Holy Spirit, in the one
before us, teaches that *in the time to come* she shall always continue
in *perfect* safety, because she is defended by the invincible power of
God. When the Church is emblematically described by the situation of the
city of Jerusalem, the design of the Prophet is to encourage each of the
faithful to believe, that the safety promised in common to all the
chosen people belongs to him. But in exhibiting to the eyes a visible
image of the Church, he accommodates himself to the rudeness of those
who, detained by the dulness of the flesh, still continue settled down
in the earth. It ought then, in the first place, to be noticed, that to
those who may not sufficiently apprehend by faith the secret protection
of God, the mountains which environ Jerusalem are exhibited as a mirror,
in which they may see, beyond all doubt, that the Church is as well
defended from all perils, as if it were surrounded on all sides with
like walls and bulwarks. Moreover, it is profitable to know what I have
just now touched upon — that whenever God speaks to all his people in a
body, he addresses himself also to each of them in particular. As not a
few of the promises are extended generally to the whole body of the
Church, so many contemplate them as at a distance, as far removed from
them, and will not presume to appropriate them to themselves. The rule
here prescribed must therefore be observed, which is, that each apply to
himself whatever God promises to his Church in common. Nor does the
Psalmist without cause make Jerusalem a representation of the Church,
for the sanctuary of God and the ark of the covenant were there.

<span id="ix.i-p7"></span>With respect to the explanation of the words,
it is to be observed that the last two verbs of the first verse may be
understood in two ways. They may both be governed by Jerusalem as the
nominative. But some understand the first verb, <span
id="ix.i-p7.1"></span>לא ימוט al, *lo yimmot, shall not be removed,*
only as spoken of Jerusalem and the latter verb, <span
id="ix.i-p7.2"></span>ישב, *yesheb, shall abide,* as referring to the
faithful, so that according to this view there is a change of number,
which is very common among the Hebrews — the singular number, <span
id="ix.i-p7.3"></span>ישב, *yesheb,* being used instead of the plural,
<span id="ix.i-p7.4"></span>ישבו, *yeshbu.* And certainly the sentence
might not improperly be translated thus: *They who trust in Jehovah, as
mount Zion shall not be removed, shall dwell for ever,* or *continue
steadfast,* for the verb translated *to abide* is taken in this sense.
We now perceive the meaning of the Prophet, which is, that although the
world is subject to so many and so sudden changes as almost to put on a
new face every moment, and although the faithful are mingled with and
placed in the same external condition as others, yet their safety
continues steadfast under the invincible protection of God. Not that
they are permitted to dwell undisturbed and at ease; but because their
safety being under the guardianship of God is assaulted in vain; at
least they can never altogether fall, although they may stumble. But let
us notice that the word <span id="ix.i-p7.5"></span>הבמחים*,
habbtechim,* which signifies, *those who hope* or *wait for,* conveys an
implicit injunction to steadfastness of faith. Whoever, then, desires to
be sustained by the hand of God, let him constantly lean upon it; and
whoever would be defended by it, let him patiently repose himself under
it. When God suffers us to be often carried hither and thither, or
driven about like chaff by the wind, this comes to pass through our own
inconstancy — because we prefer fluttering in the air to fixing our
minds on the rock of his help. The similitude employed in the second
verse is abundantly plain, teaching us, that as the continuous chain of
mountains round about Jerusalem exhibits the appearance of walls, so God
encompasses the faithful by his power, to ward off from them all harm.
 <span id="fr_81"></span>[82](#fn_81) Similar forms of expression are
frequently to be met with in the Scriptures’ God often promises to be a
wall and a fore-wall to his people. But David, or whoever was the author
of the psalm, proceeds still farther, showing under the figure of
mountains the secret protection with which God defends his own people,
to the end that the ignorant and feeble-minded who are still held down
to the earth by their own dulness of understanding, aided by the sight
of the mountains, may raise their minds upwards to the conception and
contemplation of heavenly things.

<span id="ix.ii"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p1"></span><span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
125:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#003)<span id="ix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p2"></span>**3.** For the scepter  <span
id="fr_82"></span>[83](#fn_82) of the wicked shall not rest upon the lot
of the just, lest the just should put faith their hands to iniquity.
**4.** Do good, O Jehovah to the good, and to those who are upright in
their hearts. **5.** But those who turn aside into their crooked paths,
 <span id="fr_83"></span>[84](#fn_83) Jehovah will make them walk with
the workers of iniquity. But there shall be peace upon Israel.

<span id="ix.ii-p5"></span> 

<span id="ix.ii-p6"></span><span id="ix.ii-p6.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p7"></span>**3.** *For the scepter of the wicked shall
not rest upon the lot of the just.* This is, as it were, a correction of
the preceding sentence. The Psalmist had said that the hand of God was
extended on all sides to defend his Church. But as we are disposed to
draw the divine promises to our own advantage, in the way of
interpreting them as securing our exemption from all trouble, we are
here warned that the guardianship of God does not secure us from being
sometimes exercised with the cross and afflictions, and that therefore
the faithful ought not to promise themselves a delicate and easy life in
this world, it being enough for them not to. be abandoned of God when
they stand in need of his help. Their heavenly Father, it is true, loves
them most tenderly, but he will have them awakened by the cross, lest
they should give themselves too much to the pleasures of the flesh. If,
therefore, we embrace this doctrine, although we may happen to be
oppressed by the tyranny of the wicked, we will wait patiently till God
either break their scepter, or shake it out of their hands. It is a sore
temptation, I admit, to see the wicked exercising cruelty in the
heritage of the Lord, and the faithful lying extended beneath their
feet; but as God does not without just reason thus humble his people,
they should comfort themselves from the consideration suggested in the
text.

<span id="ix.ii-p8"></span>The reason is added why God will not suffer
the wicked always to triumph over the righteous — namely, lest the just,
overcome by temptation, abandon themselves wholly to sinning, a reason
which ought to be carefully marked. Hence we gather that God, from his
willingness to bear with our weakness, moderates our adversities.
Although, then, we may not possess in ourselves a sufficient amount of
fortitude and constancy to enable us to persevere in our duty for a
single moment, yet let this sentiment be present to our minds, That God
will take care that, broken as we may be by afflictions, we shall not
forsake his service. Were he even to afflict us without intermission
during the whole course of our life, the cross is doubtless always
profitable to us; for we see how indomitable is the rebellion of our
flesh, and with what vehement impetuosity it is continually boiling up;
yea, rather how it ceases not to kick amidst the very afflictions by
which it ought to be reduced to obedience. So much the more necessary
then is this lesson of instruction — that the Lord seasonably sets
limits to our temptations, because he knows that we are too feeble to
withstand them. Nor does the Prophet merely say, that the weak are in
danger of failing, but that even the just, who serve God in truth and
from the heart, and who are devoted to the cultivation of a holy life,
are in danger of sinking under the load. However vigorous, then, the
fear of God may be in our hearts, let us remember that we are not
endowed with adequate strength for enduring to the end, unless the Lord
have a regard to our infirmity. If the Holy Spirit makes this
declaration concerning the best champions, what will be the case as to
tyroes, who are as yet but imperfectly trained for the combat? It is
also proper to mark the form of speech employed — *lest they stretch
forth their hands;* by which it is intimated that the assaults of
temptations are so violent, that the hands of the just, which were
before, as we may say, bound, and whose motions were also framed and
regulated according to the will of God, being now, as it were, let
loose, apply themselves to the commission of sin without restraint.

<span id="ix.ii-p9"></span><span id="ix.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p10"></span>**4.** *Do good, O Jehovah to the good.* The
Prophet has already promised to all the faithful the seasonable help of
God; but still he has recourse to prayer, and that not without cause;
for although faith may sustain us, yet, as our carnal sense and reason
are wavering, we ought to mingle prayers for our confirmation. Let us
then follow this rule of the Prophet, who, having exhorted all the
faithful to cherish confidence, teaches them at the same time, that
instead of sitting in listless inactivity, they should betake themselves
to God, earnestly beseeching him by prayer, for what he has bidden them
hope for by his word. And assuredly the importance of using this remedy
is apparent from the consideration, that amidst the darkness of
afflictions, the aid of God is not discerned, but that he rather seems
to make no difference between the righteous and the wicked. Nor does the
Psalmist simply pray that God would deal graciously with the good, he
also defines the goodness by which they are characterized, as what
proceeds from sincere affection of heart. It would not be enough for the
children of God to abstain from all wrong-doing, were they not
distinguished by corresponding integrity of heart, or rather did it not
govern their whole life.

<span id="ix.ii-p11"></span><span id="ix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p12"></span>**5.** *But those who turn aside into their
crooked paths, etc*. As the participle <span
id="ix.ii-p12.1"></span>המטים, *hammattim,* is in the conjugation
*Hiphil,* it should, according to the rules of grammar, be rather
translated in an active sense — *those who cause to turn aside;* but it
being no uncommon thing for verbs in that conjugation to be taken in a
neuter sense, the, version which I have followed is probably the correct
one. Still, as the active signification is not less appropriate, I would
leave the reader freely to exercise his own judgment. The meaning is,
that God does not always connive at the wickedness of those who, while
boasting of a hollow and counterfeit profession, wander hither and
thither according to their own lust, or even corrupt the simple, and
draw them into the same excess of sinning with themselves. I have no
doubt that the Psalmist here speaks of hypocrites, who are so hardened
by temporary impunity, as to claim to. themselves a place among the
holiest of men, because God exercises forbearance towards them. Not only
do we see the good mingled with the bad in the world, but we also behold
on the barn-floor of the Lord the wheat lying hidden under the chaff and
refuse. In this dubious and confused state of matters, the bad are
elated with pride, as if they were among the best of God’s servants. We
ought therefore to pray that God would drag them into the light, and,
with the workers of iniquity, thrust them down into the punishment which
they have deserved. The consequence is that *peace,* which the Prophet
desires may be the privilege of Israel. He does not speak generally of
all the race of Abraham, according to the. flesh; he rather wishes that
the Church of God may be purged of hypocrites, who occupy a place in
her, until God lift up his hand to judgment. On this account I have
said, that the peace of the Church springs from this — that; God, while
executing his just vengeance upon reigned and counterfeit Israelites,
who rend and tear in pieces her bowels, gathers together the upright in
heart, and openly shows by his blessing the fatherly love which he bears
towards them.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_80"></span>[81](cc12008.htm#fr_80) <span
id="ix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p3"></span> The supplementary words in this verse marked
by inverted commas are taken from the French version.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[82](cc12008.htm#fr_81) <span
id="ix.i-p7.6"></span>

<span id="ix.i-p8"></span> From the mountains or hills which surrounded
Jerusalem, the Prophet Ezekiel (<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>[Eze
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003)<span id="ix.i-p8.1"></span>)
represents it under the image of a “cauldron.”

<span id="fn_82"></span>[83](cc12008.htm#fr_82) <span
id="ix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p3"></span> <span id="ix.ii-p3.1"></span>שבט If this
word be translated *rod,* then we understand the Psalmist to speak of
*the assaults* of the wicked upon the righteous; but as *the lot of the
righteous* evidently denotes their estates, possessions, etc., <span
id="ix.ii-p3.2"></span>שבט consequently seems employed as the emblem of
dominion, i.e. scepter. This notion of <span id="ix.ii-p3.3"></span>שבט
comports better with that of <span id="ix.ii-p3.4"></span> גורל\[the
word for *the lot of*\]; and so the sense of the whole expression is,
that the wicked shall not exercise dominion permanently over the
righteous; the scepter of the wicked *shall not rest,*” etc. —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_83"></span>[84](cc12008.htm#fr_83) <span
id="ix.ii-p3.5"></span>

<span id="ix.ii-p4"></span> “<span id="ix.ii-p4.1"></span>Ou, se
fourvoyent en leurs chemins obliques, ou, font fourvoyer.” — *Fr. marg.*
“Or, go astray in their crooked paths, or cause to go astray.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 126](cc12009)
