[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12017)  [Next](cc12019) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xix"></span>

<span id="xix-p1"></span><span id="xix-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#000)<span id="xix-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix-p2"></span>An exhortation to praise God, both for his
goodness specially shown to his chosen people, and for his power and
glory apparent in the world at large. A contrast is drawn between idols,
which had but a vain show of divinity, and the God of Israel, who had
established his claim to be considered the only true God by clear and
indubitable proofs, and this with the view of leading his people the
more cheerfully to praise him, and submit to his government.

<span id="xix-p3"></span>Halleluiah.

<span id="xix.i"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p1"></span><span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#001)<span id="xix.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise ye the name of Jehovah,  <span
id="fr_152"></span>[153](#fn_152) praise him, O ye servants of Jehovah!
**2.** Ye who stand in the house of Jehovah, and ye who stand in the
courts of the house of our God.  <span id="fr_153"></span>[154](#fn_153)
**3.** Praise God, for good is Jehovah: sing unto his name, for it is
pleasant. **4.** For God hath chosen Jacob  <span
id="fr_154"></span>[155](#fn_154) unto himself, and Israel for his
peculiar treasure.

<span id="xix.i-p6"></span> 

<span id="xix.i-p7"></span><span id="xix.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p8"></span>**1.** *Praise ye the name of Jehovah* Though
this Psalm begins almost in the same manner with the preceding, the
Psalmist would not appear to be addressing the Levites exclusively, but
the people generally, since the reasons given for praising God are
equally applicable to all God’s children. No mention is made of night
watching, or of their standing constantly in the Temple. But indeed, as
it was the special duty of the priests to take the lead in this
devotional exercise, to give out, if we might use such an expression,
and sing the praises of God before the people, there is no reason why we
should not suppose that they are primarily addressed, and stirred up to
their duty. We need only to examine the ‘words more closely in order to
be convinced that the people are included as next in order to the
priests.  <span id="fr_155"></span>[156](#fn_155) For the Psalmist
addresses the servants of God who *stand in the temple,* then those who
are *in the courts,* whereas no notice was taken of the courts in the
former Psalm. Mention seems to be made of *courts* in the plural number,
because the priests had their court; and then there was another common
to all the people, for by the law spoken of, (<span
id="xix.i-p9.2"></span>[Le 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#017)<span
id="xix.i-p9.2"></span>,) they were prohibited from entering the
sanctuary. To prevent any feeling of disgust which might arise from the
very frequent repetition of this exhortation to the praises of God, it
is only necessary to remember, as was already observed, that there is no
sacrifice in which he takes greater delight than the expression of our
gratitude. Thus, (<span id="xix.i-p9.3"></span>[Ps
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014)<span id="xix.i-p9.3"></span>,)

<span id="xix.i-p10"></span>“Sacrifice unto the Lord thanksgiving,  
and pay your vows to the Most High;”

<span id="xix.i-p11"></span>and, (<span id="xix.i-p11.1"></span>[Ps.
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012),
[13](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#013)<span id="xix.i-p11.1"></span>,)

<span id="xix.i-p12"></span>“What shal1 I render unto the Lord for all
his benefits? I will take the cup of salvation, and call upon the name
of the Lord.”

<span id="xix.i-p13"></span>Particular attention is to be paid to those
passages of Scripture which speak in such high terms of that worship of
God which is spiritual; otherwise we may be led, in the exercise of a
misguided zeal, to spend our labor upon trifles, and in this respect
imitate the example of too many who have wearied themselves with
ridiculous attempts to invent additions to the service of God, while
they have neglected what is of all other things most important. This is
the reason why the Holy Spirit so repeatedly inculcates the duty of
praise. It is that we may not undervalue, or grow careless in this
devotional exercise. It implies, too, an indirect censure of our
tardiness in proceeding to the duty, for he would not reiterate the
admonition were we ready and active in the discharge of it. The
expression in the end of the verse — *because it is sweet,* admits of
two meanings — that the name of God is sweet, as in the previous clause
it was said that God is good — or, that it is a sweet and pleasant thing
to sing’ God’s praises. The Hebrew word <span
id="xix.i-p13.1"></span>נעים *naim,* properly signifies *beautiful* or
*comely,* and this general signification answers best.  <span
id="fr_156"></span>[157](#fn_156)

<span id="xix.i-p15"></span><span id="xix.i-p15.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p16"></span>**4.** *For God hath chosen Jacob* Other
reasons are given afterwards why they should praise God, drawn from his
government of the world. But as it was only the children of Abraham who
were favored with the knowledge of God at that time, and were capable of
praising him, the Psalmist directs them to the fact of their \]roving
been chosen by God to be his peculiar people, as affording matter for
thanksgiving. The mercy was surely one of incomparable value, and which
might well stir them up to fervent gratitude and praise, adopted as they
were into favor with God, while the whole Gentile world was passed by.
The praise of their election is given by the Psalmist to God — a clear
proof that they owed the distinction not to any *excellency* of their
own, but to the free mercy of God the Father which had been extended to
them. He has laid all without exception under obligation to his service,
for

<span id="xix.i-p17"></span>“he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and
on the good.”  
(<span id="xix.i-p17.2"></span>[Mt
5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)<span id="xix.i-p17.2"></span>.)

<span id="xix.i-p18"></span>But he bound the posterity of Abraham to him
by a closer tie, such as that by which he now adopts men generally into
his Church, and unites them with the body of his only-begotten Son.
 <span id="fr_157"></span>[158](#fn_157)

<span id="xix.ii"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p1"></span><span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135:5-7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#005)<span id="xix.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p2"></span>**5.** For I know that Jehovah is great, and
our God above all gods. **6.** Whatsoever doth please him, Jehovah does
in heaven and in earth, in the sea, and in all deep places. **7.**
Causing the clouds to ascend from the end of the earth, he maketh
lightnings for the rain, bringing forth the wind out of his secret
places.  <span id="fr_158"></span>[159](#fn_158)

<span id="xix.ii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.ii-p5"></span><span id="xix.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p6"></span>**5.** *For I know that Jehovah is great* We
have here a general description of the power of God, to show the
Israelites that the God they worshipped was the same who made the world,
and rules over all according to his will, neither is there any other
besides him. He would not exclude others when he speaks of having known
himself the greatness of God, but is rather to be considered as taking
occasion from his own experience to stir up men generally to attend to
this subject, and awake to the recognition of what lies abundantly open
to observation. The immensity of God is what none can comprehend; still
his glory, so far as was seen fit, has been sufficiently manifested to
leave all the world without excuse for ignorance. How can one who has
enjoyed a sight of the heavens and of the earth shut his eyes so as to
overlook the Author of them without sin of the deepest dye? It is with
the view, then, of stirring us up more effectually, — that the Psalmist
makes reference to himself in inviting us to the knowledge of God’s
glory; or rather he reprehends our carelessness in not being alive
enough to the consideration of it. The second part of the verse makes
the truth of the observation which I have already stated still more
apparent, — that the Psalmist’s design was to retain the Israelites in
the service and fear of the one true God, by a declaration to the effect
that the God who cove-nanted with their Fathers was the same who created
heaven and earth, No sooner had he made mention of Jehovah than he adds
his being the God of Israel. It follows as a necessary consequence, that
all who depart from this God prefer a god who has no claim to the title,
and that Jews and Turks, for example, in our own day, are guilty of mere
trifling when they pretend to worship God the Creator of the world.
Where persons have diverged from the law and from the gospel, any show
of piety they may have amounts to a renunciation of the true God. The
Psalmist had, therefore, in his eye when he clothed God with a specific
title,, to limit the Israelites to that.God who was set forth in the
doctrine of the Law. If by <span id="xix.ii-p6.1"></span>אלהים,
*Elohim,* we understand the false gods of the Gentiles — the title is
given them only by concession, for it could not be properly assigned to
what are mere lying’ vanities; and the meaning is, that God’s greatness
altogether eclipses any pretended deity. But the expression would seem
to include the *angels,* as has been already observed, in whom there is
some reflection of divinity, as being heavenly principalities and
powers, but who are exalted by God, and assigned such a subordinate
place as may not interfere with his glory.  <span
id="fr_159"></span>[160](#fn_159)

<span id="xix.ii-p8"></span><span id="xix.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p9"></span>**6.** *Whatsoever doth please him, etc*.
This is that immeasurable greatness of the divine being, of which he had
just spoken. He not only founded heaven and earth at first, but governs
all things according to his power. To own that God made the world, but
maintain that he sits idle in heaven, and takes no concern in the
management of it, is to cast an impious aspersion upon his power; and
yet the idea, absurd as it is, obtains wide currency amongst men. They
would not say, perhaps, in so many words, that they believed that God
slept in heaven, but in imagining, as they do, that he resigns the reins
to chance or fortune, they leave him the mere shadow of a power, such as
is not manifested in effects; whereas Scripture teaches us that it is a
real practical power, by which he governs the whole world as he does
according to his will. The Psalmist expressly asserts every part of the
world to be under the divine care, and that nothing takes place by
Chance, or without determination. According to a very common opinion,
all the power necessary to be assigned to God in the matter, is that of
a universal providence, which I do not profess to understand. The
distinction here made between the heavens, earth, and waters, denotes a
particular governments. The term <span id="xix.ii-p9.1"></span>חפר*,
chaphets,* is emphatical. The Holy Spirit declares that he does
whatsoever pleases him. That confused sort of divine government which
many talk of, amounts to no more than a certain maintenance of order in
the world, without due counsel. No account whatever is made of his will
in this way, for will implies counsel and method. Consequently there is
a special providence exerted in the government of the various parts of
the world, there is no such thing as chance, and what appears most
fortuitous, is in reality ordered by his secret wisdom. We are not
called to inquire why he wills events which contradict our sense of what
his administration should be, but if we would not unsettle the very
foundations of religion, we must hold by this as a firm principle, that
nothing happens without, the divine will and decree.  <span
id="fr_160"></span>[161](#fn_160) His will may be mysterious, but it is
to be regarded with reverence, as the fountain of all justice and
rectitude, unquestionably entitled as it is to our supreme
consideration. For farther information upon this subject the reader may
consult <span id="xix.ii-p10.2"></span>[Psalm
115](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#000)<span id="xix.ii-p10.2"></span>.

<span id="xix.ii-p11"></span><span id="xix.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p12"></span>**7.** *Causing the clouds to ascend* The
Psalmist touches upon one or two particulars, in illustration of the
point that nothing takes place of itself, but by the hand and counsel of
God. Our understandings cannot comprehend a thousandth part of God’s
works, and it is only a few examples which he brings forward to be
considered in proof of the doctrine of a divine providence which he had
just announced. He speaks of *the clouds ascending from the ends of the
earth;* for the vapours which rise out of the earth form clouds, when
they accumulate more densely together. Now who would think that the
vapours which we see ascending upwards would shortly darken the sky, and
impend above our heads? It strikingly proves the power of God, that
these thin vapours, which steam up from the ground:, should form a body
over-spreading the whole atmosphere. The Psalmist mentions it as another
circumstance calling for our wonder, that *lightnings are mixed with
rain,* things quite opposite in their nature one from another. Did not
custom make us familiar with the spectacle, we would pronounce this
mixture, of fire and water to be a phenomenon altogether incredible.
 <span id="fr_161"></span>[162](#fn_161) The same may be said of the
phenomena of the winds. Natural causes can be assigned for them, and
philosophers have pointed them out; but the winds, with their various
currents, are a wonderful work of God. He does not merely assert the
power of God, be it observed, in the sense in which philosophers
themselves grant it, but he maintains that not a drop of rain falls from
heaven without a divine commission or dispensation to that effect. All
readily allow that God is the author of rain, thunder, and wind, in so
far as he originally established this order of things in nature; but the
Psalmist goes farther than this, holding that when it rains, this is not
effected by a blind instinct of nature, but is the consequence of the
decree of God, who is pleased at one time to darken the sky with clouds,
and at another to brighten it again with sunshine.

<span id="xix.iii"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p1"></span><span id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135:8-12](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#008)<span
id="xix.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p2"></span>**8.** He smote the first-born of Egypt,
from man to beast. **9.** He sent tokens and wonders in the midst of
thee, O Egypt! On Pharaoh, and on all his servants. **10.**. He smote
great nation, and slew mighty kings. **11.** Sikon king of the Amorites,
and Og king of Bashan, and all the kingdoms of Canaan.  <span
id="fr_162"></span>[163](#fn_162) **12.** And gave their land for an
heritage, an heritage to Israel his people.

<span id="xix.iii-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.iii-p5"></span><span id="xix.iii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p6"></span>**8.** *He smote the first-born of Egypt*
He now reverts to those more special benefits, by which God had laid his
Church and chosen people under obligation to his service. As it was the
Lord’s believing people only whom he addressed, the chief point singled
out as the subject of praise is God’s having adopted them, small as they
were in numbers, from the mass of the human family. Again, there was the
fact of his having set himself in opposition, for their sakes, to great
kingdoms and mighty nations. The wonderful works done by God in Egypt
and in Canaan were all just so many proofs of that fatherly love which
he entertained for them as his chosen people. It is not strictly
according to historic order to begin with mentioning the destruction of
the first-born of Egypt; but this is instanced as a memorable
illustration of the great regard God had for the safety of his people,
which was such that he would not spare even so mighty and wealthy a
nation. The scope of the passage is to show that God, in delivering his
people, had abundantly testified his power and his mercy.

<span id="xix.iii-p7"></span><span id="xix.iii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p8"></span>**10.** *He smote great nations* He comes
now to speak of the end for which God delivered them from their bondage.
He did not lead his people out of Egypt, and then leave them to wander
as they might, but brought them forth that he might settle them in the
promised inheritance. This the Psalmist mentions as another signal proof
of the favor of God, and his unwearied kindness to them; for having once
taken the children of Abraham. by the hand, he led them on, in the
continued exercise of his power, till he put them in possession of the
promised land. He takes occasion to extol God’s power, from the
circumstance that it was only after the slaughter of many enemies that
they came to the peaceable possession of the country. And it was a
striking illustration of the divine goodness to manifest this preference
for the Israelites, who were but a multitude of inconsiderable persons,
while those opposed to them were mighty kings and powerful nations.
Notice is taken of two kings, Sihon and Og, not as being more powerful
than the rest, but because shutting up the entrance to the land in front
they were the first formidable enemies met with  <span
id="fr_163"></span>[164](#fn_163) and the people, besides, were not as
yet habituated to war. As the crowning act of the Lord’s goodness, the
Psalmist adds, that the Israelites obtained firm possession of the land.
One has said —

<span id="xix.iii-p10"></span>“Non minor est virtus quam quaerere, parta
tueri,”

<span id="xix.iii-p11"></span>“It is no less an achievement to keep
possession than to acquire it;” and as the Israelites were surrounded
with deadly enemies, the power of God was very eminently displayed in
preserving them from ‘being rooted out and expelled again, an event
which must have repeatedly taken place, had they not been firmly settled
in the inheritance.

<span id="xix.iv"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p1"></span><span id="xix.iv-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#013)<span
id="xix.iv-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p2"></span>**13.** O Jehovah! thy name is for ever; O
Jehovah! thy memorial is from generation to generation. **14.** For
Jehovah will judge his people, and he will repent himself  <span
id="fr_164"></span>[165](#fn_164) concerning his servants.

<span id="xix.iv-p4"></span> 

<span id="xix.iv-p5"></span><span id="xix.iv-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p6"></span>**13.** *O Jehovah! thy name is for ever*
There are many reasons why the name of God ought always to be kept up in
the world, but here the Psalmist speaks more especially of that
everlasting praise which is due to him for preserving his Church and
people, the cause being immediately added — that *God will judge his
people* The whole world is a theater for the display of the divine
goodness, wisdom, justice, and power, but the Church is the orchestra,
as it were — the most conspicuous part of it; and the nearer the
approaches are that God makes to us the more intimate and condescending
the communication of his benefits, the more attentively are we called to
consider them. The term *judging* in the Hebrew expresses whatever
belongs to just and legitimate government,  <span
id="fr_165"></span>[166](#fn_165) the future tense denoting continued
action apparently, as it often does, so that what the Psalmist says is
tantamount to this — that God would always watch over and preserve his
people, and that being thus under God’s guardian care, they would be
placed in safety. Or we may suppose that the Psalmist employs the future
tense to teach us that, under affliction, we must have a sustained hope,
not giving way to despondency, though God may seem to have overlooked
and deserted us, since whatever temporary delays there may be of his
help, he will appear as our judge and defender at the proper season, and
when he sees that we have been sufficiently humbled. This may recommend
itself the more to be the true meaning, because the Psalmist seems to
allude to the expression of Moses, (<span id="xix.iv-p7.2"></span>[De
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036)<span id="xix.iv-p7.2"></span>,)
whose very words indeed, he quotes. As some alleviation under the divine
chastisements which the people would suffer, Moses foretold that God
would come forth as their judge, to help and deliver them when in
extremity. And this the writer of the present Psalm, whoever he may have
been, makes use of with a general application to the Church, declaring
that God would never allow it to be altogether destroyed, since upon the
event of its destruction he would cease to be a King. To propose
changing the tense of the verb into the past, and understand it of God
having shown himself to be the judge of his people against the
Egyptians, puts a feeble sense upon the passage, and one which does not
suit with the context, either of this Psalm or of the address of Moses.
The Hebrew verb <span id="xix.iv-p7.3"></span>נחם, *nacham,* means
either to *repent,* or to *receive comfort,* and both meanings answer
sufficiently well. On the,one hand, when God returns in mercy to his
people, though this implies no change in him, yet there is a change
apparent in the event itself. Thus he is said *to repent* when he begins
to show mercy to his people, instead of manifesting his displeasure in
just judgments against them. Again, he is said to *receive consolation,*
or to be appeased and reconciled towards his people, when in remembrance
of his covenant, which endures for ever, he visits them with everlasting
mercies, though he had corrected them for a moment. (<span
id="xix.iv-p7.4"></span>[Isa 54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008)<span
id="xix.iv-p7.4"></span>.) The meaning, in short, is, that the
displeasure of God towards his people is but temporary, and that, in
taking vengeance upon their sins, he remembers mercy in the midst of
wrath, as Habakkuk says. (<span id="xix.iv-p7.5"></span>[Hab
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#002)<span id="xix.iv-p7.5"></span>.)
Thus God is spoken of as man, manifesting a father’s affection, and
restoring his children, who deserved to have been cast off, because he
cannot bear’ that the fruit of his own body should be torn from him.
Such is the sense of the passage — that God has a compassion for his
people because they are his children, that he would not willingly be
bereaved of them and left childless, that he is placable towards them,
as being dear to him, and that having recoginsed them as his offspring,
he cherishes them with a tender love.

<span id="xix.v"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p1"></span><span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
135:15-21](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#015)<span id="xix.v-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p2"></span>**15.** The images of the nations are silver
and gold, the work of men’s hands. **16.** They have a mouth, and will
not speak: they have eyes, and will not see. **17.** They have ears, and
will not hear; also  <span id="fr_166"></span>[167](#fn_166) there is no
breath in their mouth. **18.** Like be they to them who make them,
whosoever trusteth in them. **19.** Bless Jehovah, O house of Israel!
bless Jehovah, O house of Aaron! **20.** Bless Jehovah, O house of Levi!
ye that fear Jehovah, bless Jehovah. **21.** Blessed be Jehovah out of
Zion, who dwelleth at Jerusalem. Hallelujah.  <span
id="fr_167"></span>[168](#fn_167)

<span id="xix.v-p5"></span> 

<span id="xix.v-p6"></span><span id="xix.v-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p7"></span>**15.** *The images of the nations,* etc. As
the whole of this part of the Psalm has been explained elsewhere, it is
needless to insist upon it, and repetition might be felt irksome by the
reader. I shall only in a few words, therefore, show what is the scope
of the Psalmist. In upbraiding the stupidity of the heathen, who thought
that they could not have God near them in any other way than by
resorting to idol worship, he reminds the Israelites of the signal mercy
which they had enjoyed, and would have them abide the more deliberately
by the simplicity and purity of God’s worship, and avoid profane
superstitions. He declares, that idolaters only draw down heavier
judgments upon themselves, the more zealous they are in the service of
their idols. And there is no doubt, that, in denouncing the awful
judgments which must fall upon the worshippers of false gods, it is his
object to deter such as had been brought up under the word of God from
following their example. In <span id="xix.v-p7.1"></span>[Psalm
115](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#000)<span id="xix.v-p7.1"></span> the
exhortation given is to trust or hope in the Lord; here, to bless him.
The Levites are mentioned in addition to the house of Aaron, there being
two orders of priesthood. Every thing else in the two Psalms is the
same, except that, in the last verse:, the Psalmist here joins himself,
along with the rest of the Lord’s people, in blessing God. He says, *out
of Zion,* for when God promised to hear their prayers from that place,
and to communicate from it the rich display of his favor, he thereby
gave good ground why they should praise him from it.  <span
id="fr_168"></span>[169](#fn_168) The reason is stated, that *he dwelt
in Jerusalem;* which is not to be understood in the low and gross sense
that he was confined to any such narrow residence; but in the sense,
that he was there as to the visible manifestation of his favor,
experience showing, that while his majesty is such as to fill heaven and
earth, his power and. grace were vouchsafed in a particular manner to
his own people.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_152"></span>[153](cc12018.htm#fr_152) <span
id="xix.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p3"></span> “Perhaps the original, <span
id="xix.i-p3.1"></span>הללו שם יהוה, *halelu et shem Jehovah,* should be
translated, *Praise ye the namee Jehovah:* that is, praise God in his
infinite essence, of being, holiness, goodness, and truth.”—Dr. *Adam
Clarke.*

<span id="fn_153"></span>[154](cc12018.htm#fr_153) <span
id="xix.i-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p4"></span> The words *ye who stand* we have supplied in
the second clause, as being necessary to bring out the sense which
Calvin attaches to it. The <span id="xix.i-p4.1"></span>בית יהוה “the
house of Jehovah,” mentioned in the first clause, remarks Men-dlessohn
in his Beor, is the place where the priests stood; whilst “the courts”
surrounding the temple, referred to in the second clause, were occupied
by the people when engaged in their public prayers.

<span id="fn_154"></span>[155](cc12018.htm#fr_154) <span
id="xix.i-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p5"></span> The name “Jacob” is here put by metonymy for
the posterity of Jacob, as is evident from the parallelism of the two
members.

<span id="fn_155"></span>[156](cc12018.htm#fr_155) <span
id="xix.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p9"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p9.1"></span>Et quand on
advisera de bien pres aux mots, on y trouvera que le peuple est adjoint,
etc.”—*Fr*.

<span id="fn_156"></span>[157](cc12018.htm#fr_156) <span
id="xix.i-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p14"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p14.1"></span>Signifie
proprement chose bien seante ou belle: et ce sens general convient
mieux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_157"></span>[158](cc12018.htm#fr_157) <span
id="xix.i-p18.1"></span>

<span id="xix.i-p19"></span> “<span id="xix.i-p19.1"></span>Comme c’est
aujourd’huy de tous ceux qu’il adopte en sa bergerie, et ente au corps
de son fils unique.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_158"></span>[159](cc12018.htm#fr_158) <span
id="xix.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p3"></span> The heathen who in ancient times worshipped
the elements, imagined them to possess the power of giving or
withholding rain at pleasure, Referring to this superstitious
imagination the Prophet Jeremiah (<span id="xix.ii-p3.1"></span>[Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022)<span id="xix.ii-p3.1"></span>)
reclaims that power as peculiar to God who made and governs the world.
“Are there among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause rain? Or
can the heavens give showers? Art thou not he, O Jehovah, our God?
Therefore we will wait upon thee; for thou hast made all these things.”
Among the Greeks and Romans Jupiter was armed with the thunder and the
lightning; and AEolus ruled over the winds. Here the Psalmist teaches us
to restore the celestial artillery to its rightful owner. The
description probably refers to the regular rainy season of autumn which
comes on towards the end of September; and Dr. Russell’s account of the
weather at Aleppo in that month may be quoted as illustrating the
particulars of the verse. “Seldom a night passes,” says he, “without
much lightning in the north-west quarter, but not attended with thunder;
and, when this lightning appears in the west or south-west points, which
is often followed with thunder, it is a sure sign of the approaching
rain. A squall of wind, and clouds of dust, are the usual forerunners of
these rains.” Thus God may be said to “make lightnings for the rain,”
inasmuch as the lightnings in the west and south-west points are, in the
East, the sure prognostics of rain; and the squalls of wind which bring
on these refreshing showers may be said to be brought for that purpose
from “God’s secret places.” From Dr. Russell’s representing “*clouds of
draft,*” as “the usual forerunners of these rains,” Harmer concludes
that <span id="xix.ii-p3.2"></span>נשאים*, nesiim,* which, in our
English Bible is rendered” vapours,” must mean, as they elsewhere
translate the word, “clouds.”

<span id="fn_159"></span>[160](cc12018.htm#fr_159) <span
id="xix.ii-p6.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p7"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p7.1"></span>Tellement
qu’il les embrasse et range en leur ordre, afin que sa grandeur ne soit
nullement obscurcie par eux.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_160"></span>[161](cc12018.htm#fr_160) <span
id="xix.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p10.1"></span>Neantmoins
si nous ne voulons arracher tons les rudimens de la vraye religion, ceci
doit demeurer ferme,” *etc*. — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_161"></span>[162](cc12018.htm#fr_161) <span
id="xix.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xix.ii-p13"></span> “<span id="xix.ii-p13.1"></span>*Si c*e
meslange du fen et de l’eau n’estoit cognu par usage, qui ne diroit que
c’est une merveille,” *etc.* — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_162"></span>[163](cc12018.htm#fr_162) <span
id="xix.iii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p3"></span> “Comp. <span
id="xix.iii-p3.1"></span>[Numbers
21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#000)<span id="xix.iii-p3.1"></span>;
<span id="xix.iii-p3.2"></span>[Deuteronomy
2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#000)<span id="xix.iii-p3.2"></span>: and
<span id="xix.iii-p3.3"></span>[Deuteronomy
3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#000)<span id="xix.iii-p3.3"></span>;
<span id="xix.iii-p3.4"></span>[Jos
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#007)<span id="xix.iii-p3.4"></span>,
etc. The chiefs of very small communities were in ancient times styled
kings; Sihon and Og are particularly enumerated as being (<span
id="xix.iii-p3.5"></span>[De 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)<span
id="xix.iii-p3.5"></span>; <span id="xix.iii-p3.6"></span>[Am
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009)<span id="xix.iii-p3.6"></span>) of
a gigantic race, of prodigious size and strength.” — *Cresswell.*

<span id="fn_163"></span>[164](cc12018.htm#fr_163) <span
id="xix.iii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iii-p9"></span> “<span id="xix.iii-p9.1"></span>Sed quia
praecluso terrae aditu in primis erant formidabiles.” — *Lat.* “<span
id="xix.iii-p9.2"></span>Mais pource qu’ils estoyent les plus a
redouter, a cause qu’ils tenoyent l’entree de la terre fermee.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_164"></span>[165](cc12018.htm#fr_164) <span
id="xix.iv-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p3"></span> “<span id="xix.iv-p3.1"></span>Ou, prendra
consolation.” — *Fr. Marg.* “Or, will take comfort.”

<span id="fn_165"></span>[166](cc12018.htm#fr_165) <span
id="xix.iv-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xix.iv-p7"></span> “<span id="xix.iv-p7.1"></span>Le mot de
*juger* selon les Hebrieux,, contient en soy toutes les parties d’un
juste et legitime gouvernement. — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_166"></span>[167](cc12018.htm#fr_166) <span
id="xix.v-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p3"></span> “Some persons take <span
id="xix.v-p3.1"></span>אף as the adverb in the sense of *even;* as
Kimchi; but the context, and also the corresponding passage in <span
id="xix.v-p3.2"></span>[Ps 115:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#006)<span
id="xix.v-p3.2"></span>, show that it has the signification of *nose*
<span id="xix.v-p3.3"></span>אין, because it is followed by <span
id="xix.v-p3.4"></span>יש, has merely the sense of *not.* (<span
id="xix.v-p3.5"></span>[1Sa 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#009)<span
id="xix.v-p3.5"></span>.) The meaning of this part of the verse is, that
the idols of the heathen have not even breath to pass through the mouth
and nostrils.” — *Phillips.* “<span id="xix.v-p3.6"></span>אף*:* I
strongly suspect that a passage beginning with this word (noses have
they) has fallen out of the text. It is found in one of Kennicotts MSS.,
and has been added in later times to the Septuagint.” — *Jebb’s
Translation of the Psalms,* etc., volume 1.

<span id="fn_167"></span>[168](cc12018.htm#fr_167) <span
id="xix.v-p3.7"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p4"></span> The hallelujah with which this Psalm in the
original text ends, has been transferred by the Septuagint to the title
of <span id="xix.v-p4.1"></span>[Psalm
136](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#000)<span id="xix.v-p4.1"></span>.

<span id="fn_168"></span>[169](cc12018.htm#fr_168) <span
id="xix.v-p7.2"></span>

<span id="xix.v-p8"></span> “<span id="xix.v-p8.1"></span>Quant et quant
aussi il donnoit occasion et matiere de luy chanter louanges.” — *Fr*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 136](cc12019)
