[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12013)  [Next](cc12015) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xv"></span>

<span id="xv-p1"></span>PSALM 131

<span id="xv-p2"></span>David, having it as his object in this Psalm to
encourage the people to fight strenuously under his banner, and to
exhort and excite the godly to acknowledge him as entitled to their
obedience, declares that he had always submitted himself to the guidance
of God, and had done nothing without his call and commission.

<span id="xv-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees of David.

<span id="xv.i"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p1"></span><span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001)<span id="xv.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p2"></span>**1.** O Jehovah! My heart has not been
elated, nor have mine eyes been lifted up, neither have I walked in
great matters, or in, things shut up from me.

<span id="xv.i-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.i-p4"></span><span id="xv.i-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.i-p5"></span>**1.** *O Jehovah! My heart has not been
elated* David had been made head over God’s people, and in order to
prove that he was their lawful prince, entitled to the allegiance of the
faithful, he is desirous to show that he had not been influenced, in
anything which he had attempted, by ambition or pride, but had submitted
himself with a quiet and humble spirit to the divine disposal. In this
he teaches us a very useful lesson, and one by which we should be ruled
in life — to be contented with the lot which God has marked out for us,
to consider what he calls us to, and not to aim at fashioning our own
lot ­ to be moderate in our desires, to avoid entering upon rash
undertakings, and to confine ourselves cheerfully within our own sphere,
instead of attempting great things. He denies that *his heart had, been
lifted up,* for this is the true cause of all unwarranted rashness and
presumption in conduct Is not pride what leads men, under the
instigation of their passions, to dare such presumptuous flights, to
hurry on recklessly in their course, and throw the whole world into
confusion? Were this loftiness of spirit checked, the consequence would
be, that all men would study moderation of conduct. His eyes were not;
lifted up; there were no symptoms of pride in his looks or gestures, as
elsewhere (<span id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>[Ps
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#028)<span id="xv.i-p5.1"></span>) we
find proud looks condemned. Something more than this, however, may be
intended, That while he put a restraint upon the risings of ambition in
his heart, he was careful that his eyes should not lend their assistance
to the heart in any covetous aspirations after greatness. All the
senses, in short, as well as his heart, were subjected to the restraints
of humility. In denying that *he walked in,* or *was conversant with,
great things,* he must be supposed to refer to the disposition or temper
of his soul. For, to hold as he did the office of a Prophet, to be
invested with regal dignity, nay, to sit upon the sacred throne of the
only-begotten Son of God, not to speak of other distinctions with which
he was honored above the generality of men, were great things. But the
expression was applicable, in so far as he strictly confined himself to
the one object of being serviceable to God and to the Church. Should any
still be inclined to lay an undue stress upon the word which is here
employed, I would observe that the words *from* or *above me,* at the
close of the verse, are to be considered as connected with what David
here says of great things, as well as of the things *shut up,* or
*hidden,* so that we may read I have *not walked in great things which
are above me.* The question, therefore, was not whether the lot of David
was mean or exalted; it is enough that he was careful not to pass beyond
the proper bounds of his calling. He did not think himself at liberty to
move one step unless called to it by God.

<span id="xv.i-p6"></span>His submission in such matters stands
contrasted with the presumption of those who, without any call from God,
hurry themselves into unwarrantable undertakings, and involve themselves
in duties which properly belong to others; for so long as we have a
clear call from God things cannot be said to be shut up or hidden from
us, or too great for us, provided we stand ready for all obedience; and,
on the other hand, those who yield themselves up to the influence of
ambition will soon lose themselves in a labyrinth of perplexity. We see
how God confounds the proud and boasted enterprises of the children of
this world. They run the full course of their wild career, they turn the
earth upside down at their pleasure, and put forth their hand in every
direction; they are filled with complacency at the thought of their own
talents and industry, and, in a moment, when all their plans have been
fully formed, they are entirely overthrown, because there is no solidity
in them. There are two different forms which the presumption of those
takes who will not submit to be humble followers of God, but must needs
run before him. Some rush forward with a reckless precipitancy, and seem
as if they would build to the skies; others do not so openly exhibit the
inordinateness of their desires, are slower in their movements, and
cautiously calculate upon the future, and yet their presumption appears
no less from the very fact, that, with a total oversight of God, as if
heaven and earth were subject to them. they pass their decree as to what
shall be done by them some ten or twenty years hereafter. These build,
as it were, in the deep sea. But never shall it come to the surface,
however extended may be the term of their lives; while those who, like
David, submit themselves to God, keeping in their own sphere, moderate
in their desires, will enjoy a life of tranquillity and assurance.

<span id="xv.ii"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p1"></span><span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
131:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#002)<span id="xv.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p2"></span>**2.** If I have not set, and quieted and my
soul like one that is weaned frown his mother, ­ My soul is over me as a
weaned child. **3.** Israel shall hope in Jehovah from henceforth, and
for ever.

<span id="xv.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xv.ii-p4"></span><span id="xv.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p5"></span>**2.** *If I have not set,* etc. He here
employs a figure which appropriately explains what he meant, and likens
himself to a weaned child; by which is intended, that he dismissed all
the anxieties which disquiet the man of ambition, and was willing to be
satisfied with small things. This assertion, which some might be
inclined to disbelieve, he makes with an oath, expressed in that
particular form of which I have elsewhere taken notice, in which the
imprecation is not directly brought forward, but left to be understood,
to teach us caution in the use of God’s name.  <span
id="fr_123"></span>[124](#fn_123) As to the words, *to set his soul like
a child,* is as if he had said, that he would frame it into such a
likeness. And this with the view, as *he declares,* of composing himself
to silence. For <span id="xv.ii-p6.2"></span>דוממתי *domaintee,* is
formed from <span id="xv.ii-p6.3"></span>דום *dum,* and has the active
sense of *reducing to silence.* The *quiet* of soul he alludes to is
opposed to those tumultuous desires by which many cause disquietude to
themselves, and are the means of throwing the world into agitation. The
figure of childhood is elsewhere used in another sense, to convey
reprehension. (<span id="xv.ii-p6.4"></span>[Isa
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#009)<span id="xv.ii-p6.4"></span>.)

<span id="xv.ii-p7"></span>“Whom shall I teach knowledge?  
them that are weaned from the milk? and drawn from the breasts?”

<span id="xv.ii-p8"></span>where the Prophet censures the people for
their slowness of apprehension, and being as incapable of profiting by
instruction as infants. In the passage now before us, what is
recommended is that simplicity of which Christ spake,

<span id="xv.ii-p9"></span>“Unless ye become like this little child, ye
shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of God.”  <span
id="fr_124"></span>[125](#fn_124) (<span id="xv.ii-p10.2"></span>[Mt
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003)<span id="xv.ii-p10.2"></span>)

<span id="xv.ii-p11"></span>The vain desires with which men are carried
away, originate in their seeking to be wise and careful above what is
necessary. David adds accordingly, *my soul over me is quieted,* not as
expressing the language of self-confidence, but speaking as if his soul
lay sweetly and peacefully on his bosom, undisturbed by inordinate
desires. He contrasts the wayward and tumultuous agitation which
prevails in those of a discontented spirit, with the peace which reigns
in the man who abides in the calling of the Lord. From the verse with
which the Psalm closes, we see the reason why David asserted his having
undertaken nothing in the spirit of a carnal ambition. He calls upon
Israel to *hope in the Lord,* words which must have been abrupt had it
not deeply concerned the common safety of the Church, to know that he
sat upon the throne of the kingdom by Divine appointment, in which case
the faithful would be certain of the bestowment of the promised
blessing. Our hope is of the right kind when we cherish humble and sober
views of ourselves, and neither wish nor attempt anything without the
leading and approbation of God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_123"></span>[124](cc12014.htm#fr_123) <span
id="xv.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xv.ii-p6.1"></span>אם-לא, A
formula of swearing which may be translated *surely* or *indeed.* I have
surely so disposed and disciplined my soul as to remove it from any
longing after great things, from any ambitious tendencies.” —
*Phillips.*

<span id="fn_124"></span>[125](cc12014.htm#fr_124) <span
id="xv.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xv.ii-p10"></span> Of all explanations the best is that of
considering the comparison to consist between the humbleness and
simplicity of the Psalmist’s mind, and that of a little child, in whom
there does not exist a sufficient consciousness to create an ambition
for any worldly object. The comparison is not with <span
id="xv.ii-p10.1"></span>יונק, a suckling; for it has a longing after the
mother’s breast, and, therefore, such a comparison would not be
appropriate. The same, indeed, may be said of a child who has only just
been weaned; for, in that stage, how often does it cry and mourn after
that of which it has been deprived, and the possession of which was just
before its chief pleasure? We therefore conclude, that the comparison is
intended to be with a child who has been weaned a sufficient time to
have forgotten its infantile nutriment, and who is not conscious of any
particular desires or cravings, and quietly resigns itself to its
mother’s care and training. — *Phillips.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 132](cc12015)
