[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12018)  [Next](cc12020) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xx"></span>

<span id="xx-p1"></span>PSALM 136

<span id="xx-p2"></span>The Psalmist reminds the Lord’s people, that
unless they were assiduous in his praises, they were chargeable with
defrauding him of what was justly due to him for his benefits. And, in
mentioning each benefit, he takes particular notice of the mercy of God,
to teach us how necessary it is to the proper celebration of his praises
that we own everything which we receive from him to be bestowed
gratuitously.  <span id="fr_169"></span>[170](#fn_169)

<span id="xx.i"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p1"></span><span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
136:1-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)<span id="xx.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p2"></span>**1.** Praise Jehovah, for he is good, for his
mercy endureth for ever. **2.** Praise the Cod of gods, for his mercy
endureth for ever. **3.**. Praise the Lord of Lords,  <span
id="fr_170"></span>[171](#fn_170) for his mercy endureth for ever.
**4**. Who alone hath done great wonders, for his mercy endureth for
ever, **5.** Who made the heavens by his wisdom, \[or, intelligently,\]
for his mercy endureth for ever. **6.** Who stretcheth out the earth
above the waters, for his mercy endureth for ever. **7.** Who made the
great lights, for his mercy endureth for ever. **8.** The sun for rule
by day, for his mercy endureth for ever. **9.** The moon and stars for
rule by night for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="xx.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xx.i-p5"></span><span id="xx.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p6"></span>**1.** *For his mercy,*  <span
id="fr_171"></span>[172](#fn_171) etc. The insertion of this clause
again and again in so many short and abrupt sentences, may seem a vain
repetition, but verses repeated by way of chorus are both allowed and
admired in profane poets, and why should we object to the reiteration in
this instance, for which the best reasons can be shown, Men may not deny
the divine goodness to be the source and Fountain of all their
blessings, but the graciousness of his bounty is far from being fully
and sincerely recognised, though the greatest stress is laid upon it in
Scripture. Paul in speaking of it, (<span id="xx.i-p7.8"></span>[Ro
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)<span id="xx.i-p7.8"></span>,)
calls it emphatically by the general term of the glory of God,
intimating, that while God should be praised for all his works, it is
his mercy principally that we should glorify. It is evident from what we
read in sacred history, that it was customary for the Levites. according
to the regulation laid down by David for conducting the praises of God,
to sing by response, “for his mercy endureth for ever.” The practice was
followed by Solomon in the dedication of the Temple, (<span
id="xx.i-p7.9"></span>[2 Chr. 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003),
[6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#006)<span id="xx.i-p7.9"></span>,) and
by Jehoshaphat in that solemn triumphal song mentioned in <span
id="xx.i-p7.10"></span>[2Ch 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021)<span
id="xx.i-p7.10"></span>, of the same book. \[Before proceeding to recite
God’s works, the Psalmist declares his supreme Deity, and dominion, not
that such comparative language implies that there is anything
approaching\] Deity besides him, but there is a disposition in men,
whenever they see any part of his glory displayed, to conceive of a God
separate from him, thus impiously dividing the Godhead into parts, and
even proceeding so far as to frame gods of wood and stone. There is a
depraved tendency in all to take delight in a multiplicity of gods. For
this reason, apparently, the. Psalmist uses the plural number, not only
in the word <span id="xx.i-p7.11"></span>אלהים*, Elohim,* but in the
word <span id="xx.i-p7.12"></span>אדונים*, Adonim,* so that it reads
literally, *praise ye the Lords of Lords:* he would intimate, that the
fullest perfection of all dominion is to be found in the one God.

<span id="xx.i-p8"></span><span id="xx.i-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p9"></span>**4.** *Who alone hath done great wonders*
Under this term he comprehends all God’s works from the least to the
greatest, that he may awaken our admiration of them, for notwithstanding
the signal marks of inconceivably great wisdom and divine power of God
which are inscribed upon them we are apt through thoughtlessness to
undervalue them. He declares that whatever is worthy of admiration is
exclusively made and done by God, to teach us that we cannot transfer
the smallest portion of the praise due to him without awful sacrilege,
there being no vestige of divinity in the whole range of heaven and
earth with which it is lawful to compare or equal him. He then proceeds
to praise the wisdom of God, as particularly displayed in the skill with
which *the heavens are framed,* giving evidence in a surprising degree
of the fine discrimination with which they are adorned.  <span
id="fr_172"></span>[173](#fn_172) Next he comes to speak of *the earth,*
that he may lead us to form a proper estimate of this great and
memorable work of God, stretching forth as it does a bare and dry
superficies above the waters. As these elements are of a spherical form,
the waters, if not kept within their limits, would naturally cover the
earth, were it not that God has seen fit to secure a place of habitation
for the human family. This philosophers themselves are forced to admit
as one of their principles and maxims.  <span
id="fr_173"></span>[174](#fn_173) The earth’s expanded surface, and the
vacant space uncovered with water, has been justly considered therefore
one of the great wonders of God. And it is ascribed to his mercy,
because his only reason for displacing the waters from their proper seat
was that regard which he had in his infinite goodness for the interests
of man.

<span id="xx.i-p12"></span><span id="xx.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p13"></span>**7.** *Who made the great lights, etc*. —
Moses calls the sun and moon the two great lights, and there is little
doubt that the Psalmist here borrows the same phraseology. What is
immediately added about the stars, is, as it were, accessory to the
others. It is true, that the other planets are larger than the moon, but
it is stated as second in order on account of its visible effects. The
Holy Spirit had no intention to teach astronomy; and, in proposing
instruction meant to be common to the simplest and most uneducated
persons, he made use by Moses and the other Prophets of popular
language, that none might shelter himself under the pretext of
obscurity, as we will see men sometimes very readily pretended an
incapacity to understand, when anything deep or recondite is submitted
to their notice. Accordingly, as Saturn though bigger than the moon is
not so to the eye owing to his greater distance, the Holy Spirit would
rather speak childishly than unintelligibly to the humble and unlearned.
The same remark may be made upon what the Psalmist adds regarding God’s
having assigned the sun and moon their respective parts, making the one
to *rule the day,* and the other *to rule the night,* by which we are
not to understand that they exercise any government, but that the
administrative power of God is very manifest in this distribution. The
sun in illuminating the earth through the day, and the, moon and stars
by night, may be said to yield a reverential homage to God.

<span id="xx.ii"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p1"></span><span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
136:10-16](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#010)<span id="xx.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p2"></span>**10.** Who smote the Egyptians in their
first-born, for his mercy endureth for ever. **11.** And brought out
Israel from, the midst of them, for his mercy endureth for ever: **12.**
With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm, for his mercy endureth
for ever. **13.** Who divided the Red Sea into divisions, for his mercy
endureth for ever, **14.** And made Israel to pass through the midst of
it, for his mercy endureth for ever. **15.** And cast Pharaoh and his
host headlong into the Red Sea, for his mercy endureth for ever. **16.**
And led his people through the wilderness, for his mercy endureth for
ever.

<span id="xx.ii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.ii-p4"></span><span id="xx.ii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p5"></span>**10.** *Who smote the Egyptians in, their
first-born* Some read *with their first-born,* but the other rendering
reads better. As we do not mean to sermonize upon the passage, it is
unnecessary to detain the reader here with many words, as nothing is
mentioned but what has been treated elsewhere. Only we may notice that
the Egyptians are well said to have been smitten in their first-born,
because they continued in their outrageous obstinacy under the other
plagues, though occasionally terrified by them, but were broken and
subdued by this last plague, and submitted. As it was not intended to
recount all the wonders successively done in Egypt, the whole is summed
up in one word when it is said, that he led his people forth from the
midst of it with a mighty and a stretched out arm. For pressed down as
they were on every side, it was only by a wonderful display of divine
power that they could effect an escape. The figure of *an outstretched
arm* is appropriate, for we stretch out the arm when any great effort is
required; so that this implies that God put forth an extraordinary and
not a common or slight display of his power in redeeming his people.
 <span id="fr_174"></span>[175](#fn_174)

<span id="xx.ii-p7"></span><span id="xx.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p8"></span>**13.** *Who divided the Red Sea* I have
already (<span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>[Ps
106:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#007)<span id="xx.ii-p8.1"></span>)
spoken of the word <span id="xx.ii-p8.2"></span>סוף, *suph,* and have
not therefore hesitated to render it *the Red Sea* The Psalmist speaks
of *divisions* in the plural number, which has led some Jewish authors
to conjecture that there must have been more passages than one — an
instance of their solemn trifling in firings of which they know nothing,
and of their method of corrupting the Scriptures entirely with their
vain fancies. ‘We may well laugh at such fooleries, yet we are to hold
them at the same time in detestation; for there can be no doubt that the
Rabbinical writers were led to this by the devil, as an artful way of
discrediting the Scriptures. Moses plainly and explicitly asserts that
the heaps of waters stood up on both sides, from which we infer that the
space between was one and undivided.  <span
id="fr_175"></span>[176](#fn_175) But as the people passed through in
troops, and not one by one, the pathway being so broad as to admit of
their passing freely men and women, with their families and cattle, the
Psalmist very properly mentions *divisions,* with a reference to the
people who passed through, this circumstance not a little enhancing the
mercy of God, that they saw large depths or channels dried up, so that
they had no difficulty in advancing in troops abreast. Another
circumstance which confirmed or enhanced the mercy shown, was, that
Pharaoh was shortly afterwards drowned; for the very different issue
proved that it could not be owing to any hidden cause of a merely
natural kind, that some should have perished, while others passed over
with entire safety. The distinction made afforded a conspicuous display
of God’s mercy in saving his people. Much is included in the single
expression that God was *the leader of his people through the
wilderness.* It was only by a succession of miracles of various kinds
that they could have been preserved for forty years in a parched
wilderness, where they were destitute of all the means of subsistence.
So that we are to comprehend, under what is here stated, the various
proofs of divine goodness and power which are mentioned by Moses as
having been vouchsafed, in feeding his people with bread from heaven —
in making water to flow from the rock — in protecting them under the
cloud from the heat of the sun — giving them a sign of his presence in
the pillar of fire — preserving their raiment entire — shielding them
and their little ones in their exile wanderings under tents of leaves,
 <span id="fr_176"></span>[177](#fn_176) with innumerable other
instances of mercy which must occur to the reader.

<span id="xx.iii"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p1"></span><span id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
136:17-26](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#017)<span
id="xx.iii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p2"></span>**17.** Who smote great kings, for his mercy
endureth for ever. **18.** And slew famous kings, for his mercy endureth
for ever. **19.** Sihon, king of the Amorites, for his mercy endureth
for ever. **20.** And Og, king of Bashan, for his mercy endureth for
ever. **21.** And gave their land for an heritage, for his mercy
endureth for ever. **22.** An heritage to Israel his servant., for his
mercy endureth for ever. **23.** Who remembered us in our humiliation,
for his mercy endureth for ever. **24.** And hath rescued us from our
oppressors, for his mercy endureth for ever. **25.** Who giveth food to
all flesh, for his mercy endureth for ever. **26.** Make acknowledgments
to the God of heavens, for his mercy endureth for ever.

<span id="xx.iii-p3"></span> 

<span id="xx.iii-p4"></span><span id="xx.iii-p4.1"></span>

<span id="xx.iii-p5"></span>**23.** *Who remembered us in our
humiliation* The six verses taken from the previous Psalm I pass over
without observation; and I shall only touch very briefly upon the
others, which do not need lengthened consideration. We may just observe
that the Psalmist represents every age as affording’ displays of the
same goodness as had been shown to their fathers, since God had never
failed to help his people by a continued succession of deliverances. It
was a more notable proof of his mercy to interpose for the nation at a
time when it was nearly overwhelmed by calamities, than to preserve it
in its entire state and under a more even course of affairs, there being
something in the emergency to awaken attention and arrest the view.
Besides, in all the deliverances which God grants his people, there is
an accompanying remission of their sins. In the close he speaks of the
paternal providence of God as extending not only to all mankind, but to
every living creature, suggesting that we have no reason to feel
surprise at his sustaining the character of a kind and provident father
to his own people, when he condescends to care for the cattle, and the
asses of the field, and the crow, and the sparrow. Men are much better
than brute beasts, and there is a great difference between some men and
others, though not in merit, yet as regards the privilege of the divine
adoption, and the Psalmist is to be considered as reasoning from the
less to the greater, and enhancing the incomparably superior mercy which
God shows to his own children.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_169"></span>[170](cc12019.htm#fr_169) <span
id="xx-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx-p3"></span> This Psalm is called by the Jews, the Great
Thanksgiving.

<span id="fn_170"></span>[171](cc12019.htm#fr_170) <span
id="xx.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p3"></span> “The three first verses of this Psalm contain
the three several names of the Deity, which are commonly rendered
*Jehovah, God,* and *Lord, re*spectively; the first having reference to
his essence as *self-existent,* and being his proper name; the second
designating him under the character of a Judge or of an all-powerful
being, if Aleim be derived from Al; and the third, *Adoni,* representing
him as exercising rule.” — *Cresswell.*

<span id="fn_171"></span>[172](cc12019.htm#fr_171) <span
id="xx.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p7"></span> Jebb observes, that “the 136th Psalm is
altogether peculiar in its construction, as it has the recurrence of the
same words, ‘For everlasting is his mercy,’ at the end of every
distich.” He adds, that “this elaborate artifice of construction seems
characteristic of that later period which comprised the captivity and
restoration;” although he at the same time admits, that it is to be
found in Psalms of an earlier date than the Baby-lonish captivity,
quoting a passage in the account of the dedication of Solomon’s Temple,
which informs us, that the whole choir of Israel united in praising God
“for he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever:” and observing that
this expression forms the.commencement of three other Psalms, the <span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>[Psalm 106](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#000)<span
id="xx.i-p7.1"></span>, <span id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>[Psalm
107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#000)<span id="xx.i-p7.2"></span>, and
<span id="xx.i-p7.3"></span>[Psalm
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="xx.i-p7.3"></span>. In
his remarks on the <span id="xx.i-p7.4"></span>[Psalm
119](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#000)<span id="xx.i-p7.4"></span>, after
adverting to the alphabetical character of that Psalm, he adds, “There
are other artifices of construction observable in the Psalms and Hymns
composed in these later ages of the Church. For example, that repetition
of the same words and clauses, and the frequent recurrence of a
characteristic word, so frequent in the Greater Hallel, \[from the <span
id="xx.i-p7.5"></span>[Psalm 111](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#000)<span
id="xx.i-p7.5"></span> to <span id="xx.i-p7.6"></span>[Psalm
118](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#000)<span id="xx.i-p7.6"></span>th,
inclusive,\] and in the Songs of Degrees: and in a continually recurring
burden, in each distich, as in the Song of the three Children, and <span
id="xx.i-p7.7"></span>[Psalm 136](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#000)<span
id="xx.i-p7.7"></span>, which latter is unique in the Psalter. It has
been the tendency of the poetry of most countries, in the progress of
time, to make its characteristic features depend less upon the exactness
of sentimental arrangement, and more upon some external artifice,
whether this be prosodial metre, alliteration, rhyme, assonance, or the
recurrence of a burthen. Now, though the poetry of the Scriptures,
because it was inspired, never declined from the perfection of its
sentimental construction, still those artificial contrivances,
practiced, indeed, in earlier times, seem to have been more prevalent at
the time of the captivity, and the time immediately following, than
heretofore. It was probably so ordained, for the purpose of assisting
the memories of the Jews, who at Babylon were excluded from the open
exercise of their religion, and from public teaching, and, therefore,
required more private helps, which could be more easily communicated
orally from parents to children, or from masters to disciples.” —
*Jebb’s Translation of the Psalms,* etc., volume 2.

<span id="fn_172"></span>[173](cc12019.htm#fr_172) <span
id="xx.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p10"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p10.1"></span>Les cieux sont
composez d’un si excellent et bel artifice, qu’ils crient que c’est
d’une facon admirable qu’ils ont este ornez d’une si plaisante
distinction.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_173"></span>[174](cc12019.htm#fr_173) <span
id="xx.i-p10.2"></span>

<span id="xx.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xx.i-p11.1"></span>De mettre ceci
entre lents principes et maximes.” — *Fr*.

<span id="fn_174"></span>[175](cc12019.htm#fr_174) <span
id="xx.ii-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p6"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p6.1"></span>Dieu en
deliverant son peuple n’a point monstre une petite puissance,” etc. —
*Fr*.

<span id="fn_175"></span>[176](cc12019.htm#fr_175) <span
id="xx.ii-p8.3"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p9"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p9.1"></span>Dont nous
pouvons bien recueillir que l’espace d’entre deux estoit sans aucune
separation.” — *Fr.*

<span id="fn_176"></span>[177](cc12019.htm#fr_176) <span
id="xx.ii-p9.2"></span>

<span id="xx.ii-p10"></span> “<span id="xx.ii-p10.1"></span>Sous des
logettes de feuilles.” — *Fr.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 137](cc12020)
