[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12011)  [Next](cc12013) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xiii"></span>

<span id="xiii-p1"></span>PSALM 129

<span id="xiii-p2"></span>This Psalm teaches, in the first place, that
God subjects his Church to divers troubles and affections, to the end he
may the better prove himself her deliverer and defender. The Psalmist,
therefore, recalls to the memory of the faithful how sadly God’s people
had been persecuted in all ages, and how wonderfully they had been
preserved, in order by such examples to fortify their hope in reference
to the future. In the second part, under the form of an imprecation, he
shows that the divine vengeance is ready to fall upon all the ungodly,
who without cause distress the people of God.

<span id="xiii-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees.

<span id="xiii.i"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p1"></span><span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
129:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#001)<span id="xiii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p2"></span>**1.** They have often afflicted me from my
youth, let Israel now say: **2.** They have often afflicted me from my
youth; but they have not prevailed against me. **3.** The ploughers have
plouched upon my back, and made long their furrows.  <span
id="fr_107"></span>[108](#fn_107) **4.** But Jellovah who is righteous,
hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked.

<span id="xiii.i-p4"></span> 

<span id="xiii.i-p5"></span><span id="xiii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p6"></span>**1.** *They have often afflicted me from my
youth.* This Psalm was probably composed at a time when the Church of
God, reduced to a state of extreme distress, or dismayed by some great
danger, or oppressed with tyranny, was on the verge of total
destruction. This conjecture, I conceive, is supported by the adverb of
time, *now,* which appears to me to be emphatic. It is as if the
Prophet; had said, When God’s faithful ones are with difficulty drawing
their breath under the burden of temptations, it is a seasonable time
for them to reflect on the manner in which he has exercised his people
from the beginning, and from age to age. As soon as God has given loose
reins to our enemies to do as they please we are distressed with sorrow,
and our thoughts are wholly engrossed with the evils which presently
harass us. Hence proceeds despair; for we do not remember that the
patience of the fathers was subjected to the like trial, and that
nothing happens to us which they did not experience. It is then an
exercise eminently fitted to comfort true believers to look back to the
conflicts of the Church in the days of old, in order thereby to know
that she has always labored under the cross, and has been severely
afflicted by the unrighteous violence of her enemies. The most probable
conjecture which occurs to me at present is, that this Psalm was written
after the Jews had returned from the Babylonish captivity, and when,
having suffered many grievous and cruel injuries at the hands of their
neighbors, they hadn’t length almost fainted under the tyranny of
Antiochus Epiphanes. In this dark and troublous state of matters, the
Prophet encourages the faithful to fortitude, nor does he address
himself to a few of them only, but to the whole body without exception;
and in order to their sustaining such fierce assaults, he would have
them to oppose to them a hope inspired by the encouraging consideration,
that the Church, by patient endurance, has uniformly proved victorious.
Almost every word is emphatic. *Let Israel now say*, that is, let him
consider the trials of the Church in ancient times, from which it may be
gathered, that the people of God have never been exempted from bearing
the cross, and yet that the various afflictions by which they have been
tried have always had a happy issue. In speaking of the enemies of
Israel simply by the pronoun *they,* without being more specific, the
Psalmist aggravates the greatness of the evil more than if he had
expressly named the Assyrians or the Egyptians. By not specifying any
particular class of foes, he tacitly intimates that the world is fraught
with innumerable bands of enemies, whom Satan easily arms for the
destruction of good men, his object being that new wars may arise
continually on every side. History certainly bears ample testimony that
the people of God had not to deal with a few enemies, but that they were
assaulted by almost the whole world; and farther, that *they* were
molested not only by external foes, but also by those of an internal
kind, by such as professed to belong to the Church.

<span id="xiii.i-p7"></span>The term *youth* here denotes their first
beginnings,  <span id="fr_108"></span>[109](#fn_108) and refers not only
to the time when God brought the people out of Egypt, but also to the
time when he wearied Abraham and the patriarchs during almost their
whole life, by keeping them in a condition of painful warfare. If these
patriarchs were strangely driven about in the land of Canaan, the lot of
their descendants was still worse during the time of their sojourning in
Egypt, when they were not only oppressed as slaves, but loaded with
every kind of reproach and ignominy. At their departure from that land
we know what difficulties they had to encounter. If in tracing their
history from that period we find seasons in which some respite was
granted them, *yet* they were not in a state of repose for any length of
time, until the reign of David. And although during his reign they
appeared to be in a prosperous condition, yet soon after troubles and
even. defeats arose, which threatened the people of God with total
destruction. In the Babylonish captivity, all hope being well-nigh
extinguished, they seemed as if hidden in the grave and undergoing the
process of putrefaction. After their return they obtained, with
difficulty, some brief intermission to take their breath. They were
certainly often put; to the sword, until the race of them was almost
wholly destroyed. To prevent it, therefore, from being supposed that
they had received only some slight hurt, they are justly said *to have
been afflicted;* as if the Prophet placed them before our eyes as it
were half-dead, through the treatment of their enemies, who, seeing them
prostrated under their feet, scrupled not to tread upon them. If we come
to ourselves, it will be proper to add the horrible persecutions, by
which the Church would have been consumed a thousand times, had not God,
by hidden and mysterious means, preserved her, raising her as it were
from the dead. Unless we have become stupid under our calamities, the
distressing circumstances of this unhappy age will compel us to meditate
on the same doctrine.

<span id="xiii.i-p11"></span>When the Prophet says twice, *they have
afflicted me, they have afflicted me*, the repetition is not
superfluous, it being intended to teach us that the people of God had
not merely once or twice to enter the conflict, but that their patience
had been tried by continual exercises. He had said that they had
commenced this conflict *from their youth,* intimating that they had
been inured to it from their first origin, in order to their being
accustomed to bear the cross. He now adds, that their being subjected to
this rigorous training was not without good reason, inasmuch as God had
not ceased, by a continued course, to make use of these calamities for
subduing them to himself. If the exercises of the Church, during her
state of childhood, were so severe, our effeminacy will be very shameful
indeed, if in the present day, when the Church, by the coming of Christ,
has reached the age of manhood, we are found wanting in firmness for
enduring trials. Matter of consolation is laid down in the last clause,
which informs us that the enemies of Israel, after having tried all
methods, never succeeded in realizing their wishes, God having always
disappointed their hopes, and baffled their attempts.

<span id="xiii.i-p12"></span><span id="xiii.i-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p13"></span>**3.** *The ploughers have ploughed upon my
back.*  <span id="fr_109"></span>[110](#fn_109) Here the Prophet, by an
apparent similitude, embellishes his preceding statement respecting the
grievous afflictions of the Church. He compares the people of God to a
field through which a plough is drawn. He says that the furrows were
made long, so that no corner was exempted from being cut up by the
ploughshare. These words vividly express the fact — that the cross has
always been planted on the back of the Church, to make long and wide
furrows.

<span id="xiii.i-p15"></span>In the subsequent verse a ground of
consolation under the same figure is subjoined, which is, that *the
righteous Lord hath cut asunder the cords of the wicked* The allusion is
to a plough, which, as we all know, is tied with cords to the necks of
the oxen. The language very aptly conveys the idea, that the wicked, —
since they would never have become tired or satiated in exercising their
cruelty, and also in consequence of their being well armed, — were
prepared to proceed farther, but that the Lord, in a way altogether
unexpected, repressed their fury, just as if a man should unyoke oxen
from the plough by cutting in pieces the cords and thongs which tied
them to it. Hence we perceive what is the true condition of the Church.
As God would have us contentedly to take his yoke upon us, the Holy
Spirit not unfitly compares us to an arable field, which cannot make any
resistance to its being cut, and cleaved, and turned up by the
ploughshare. Should any one be disposed to indulge in greater refinement
of speculation, he might say that the field is ploughed to prepare it
for receiving the seed, and that it may at length bring forth fruit. But
in my opinion the subject to which the Prophet limits his attention is
the afflictions of the Church. The epithet *righteous,* with which he
honors God, must, in a suitableness to the scope of the passage, be
explained as implying that, although God may seem to dissemble for a
time, yet he never forgets his righteousness, so as to withhold relief
from his afflicted people. Paul in like manner adduces the same reason
why God will not always suffer them to be persecuted,

<span id="xiii.i-p16"></span>“Seeing it is a righteous thing with God to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble you;  
and to you who are troubled rest with us.” (<span
id="xiii.i-p16.2"></span>[2 Thess.
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006),
[7](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007)<span id="xiii.i-p16.2"></span>,)

<span id="xiii.i-p17"></span>It is a point worthy of special notice,
that the welfare of the Church is inseparably connected with the
righteousness of God. The Prophet, also, wisely teaches us. that the
reason why the enemies of the Church did not prevail, was because God
brought to nothing their enterprises, and did not suffer them to go
beyond what he had determined in his own mind.

<span id="xiii.ii"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p1"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
129:5-8](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#005)<span id="xiii.ii-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p2"></span>**5.** All who hate Zion shall be
confounded, and turned backward. **6.** They shall be as the grass
 <span id="fr_110"></span>[111](#fn_110) of the housetops’, which is
withered before it comes forth: **7.** With which the mower hath not
filled his hand, nor the gleaner his bosom.  <span
id="fr_111"></span>[112](#fn_111) **8.** Neither have they who pass by
said, ­ The blessing of Jehovah be upon you: we bless you in the name of
Jehovah.  <span id="fr_112"></span>[113](#fn_112)

<span id="xiii.ii-p6"></span> 

<span id="xiii.ii-p7"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p8"></span>**5.** *All who hate Zion shall be
confounded, and tutored backward.* Whether we take this as a prayer or a
promise, the Prophet has a respect to the time to come. Since all the
verbs are in the future tense, it is certainly a very appropriate
interpretation to understand him as deriving from times past instruction
as to what is to be hoped for in future, even to the end. In whichever
way we understand the passage, he declares that the faithful have no
reason to be discouraged when they behold their enemies raised on high.
The grass which grows upon the house-tops is not, on account of its
higher situation, more valuable than the blade of corn which in the low
ground is trampled under foot; for although it stands elevated above
men’s heads, it is, in the first place, unprofitable; and secondly, it
quickly withers away.  <span id="fr_113"></span>[114](#fn_113) The verb,
**ףלש**, *shalaph,*  <span id="fr_114"></span>[115](#fn_114) which we
have translate *comes forth,* is by some rendered, *is plucked up.*
According to this translation the sense is, that without the hand or
labor of man the grass on the house-tops is dried up. But as the verb
properly signifies *to be brought forth,* or *to come forth,* the
meaning, in my opinion, is that the grass’. on the housetops, so far
from continuing long in a state of freshness, withers and perishes at
its first springing up, because it has no root under it, nor earth to
supply it with sap or moisture for its nourishment. Whenever, then, the
splendor or greatness of our enemies strikes us with fear, let us bring
to our recollection this comparison, that as the grass which grows upon
the house-tops, though high, is yet without root, and consequently of
brief duration, so these enemies, the nearer they approach the sun by
the height of their pride, shall be the sooner consumed by the burning
heat, since they have no root, it being humility alone which draws life
and vigor from God.

<span id="xiii.ii-p11"></span><span id="xiii.ii-p11.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p12"></span>**7** *With which the mower hath not
filled his hand.*  <span id="fr_115"></span>[116](#fn_115) We have here
an additional confirmation of the truth, that although the wicked mount
high or elevate themselves, and form an extravagant opinion of their own
importance, yet they continue mere grass, not bringing forth any good
fruit, nor reaching a state of ripeness, but swelling only with fresh
appearance. To make this obvious, the Psalmist sets them in opposition
to fruit-bearing herbs, which in valleys and low grounds produce fruit
for men. In fine, he affirms that they deserve to be hated or despised
of all, whereas commonly every one in passing by the corn fields blesses
them and prays for the harvest?  <span id="fr_116"></span>[117](#fn_116)
Farther, he has borrowed this illustration of his doctrine from the
affairs of ordinary life, we are taught that whenever there is a hopeful
prospect of a good harvest, we ought to beseech God, whose peculiar
province it is to impart fertility to the earth, that he would give full
effect to his blessing. And considering that the fruits of the earth are
exposed to so many hazards, it is certainly strange that we are not
stirred ‘up to engage in the exercise of prayer from the absolute
necessity of these to man and beast. Nor does the Psalmist, in speaking
of passers by blessing the reapers, speak exclusively of rite children
of God, who are truly taught by his word that the fruitfulness of the
earth is owing to his goodness; but he also comprehends worldly men in
whom the same knowledge is implanted naturally. In conclusion, provided
we not only dwell in the Church of the Lord, but also labor to have
place among the number of her genuine citizens, we will be able
fearlessly to despise all fire might of our enemies; for although they
may flourish and have a great outward show for a time, yet they are but
barren grass, on which the curse of heaven rests.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_107"></span>[108](cc12012.htm#fr_107) <span
id="xiii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p3"></span> “Targ. *lengthened out their ploughing,
i.e.,* gave us no rest from their slavery, for the longer the furrows
the more tedious is the labor of the oxen.” — *Bythner.*

<span id="fn_108"></span>[109](cc12012.htm#fr_108) <span
id="xiii.i-p7.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p8"></span> Hence it is said in <span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span>[Ho 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)<span
id="xiii.i-p8.1"></span> —

<span id="xiii.i-p9"></span>“When Israel was a *child,* then I loved
him,  
and called my son out of Egypt.”

<span id="xiii.i-p10"></span>Youth is in like manner ascribed to a
people, in <span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>[Isa.
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#012),
[15](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#015)<span id="xiii.i-p10.1"></span>;
<span id="xiii.i-p10.2"></span>[Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011)<span id="xiii.i-p10.2"></span>;
and <span id="xiii.i-p10.3"></span>[Eze
16:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#043)<span id="xiii.i-p10.3"></span>.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[110](cc12012.htm#fr_109) <span
id="xiii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.i-p14"></span> According to Archbishop Seeker, this
refers to severe scourging; and those who have witnessed this cruel
infliction tell us that the allusion is most expressive, the long weals
or wounds left by the scourges at each stroke being most aptly compared
either to furrows, or (as the original admits) to the ridges between the
furrows. With respect to the alleged incongruity of ploughing, and
making long furrows on the back, the Archbishop observes, “<span
id="xiii.i-p14.1"></span>*Lacerare* *et secare tercum* are Latin
phrases, and ploughing is not much stronger, to express a severe
scourging.” The language of the Psalmist may, however, without allusion
to any particular species of persecuting violence, be, as Calvin
understands it, simply a strong image of cruel oppression. “The
persecutors of Israel,” says Walford, “are compared to ploughmen;
because as they cut up, and as it were torture the surface of the earth,
so did the adversaries greatly and grievously distress these afflicted
people.”

<span id="fn_110"></span>[111](cc12012.htm#fr_110) <span
id="xiii.ii-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p3"></span> Fry reads “corn,” “<span
id="xiii.ii-p3.1"></span>חציר,” says he, “evidently includes corn as
well as grass.”

<span id="fn_111"></span>[112](cc12012.htm#fr_111) <span
id="xiii.ii-p3.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p4"></span> In the French version it is “<span
id="xiii.ii-p4.1"></span>son aisselle;” — “his arm-pit.”

<span id="fn_112"></span>[113](cc12012.htm#fr_112) <span
id="xiii.ii-p4.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p5"></span> “Here is an allusion to the custom of
blessing; the reapers at their work; as in that instance recorded in the
book of <span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>[Ru
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#004)<span id="xiii.ii-p5.1"></span>,
‘And behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem, and said unto the reapers, The
Lord be with you; and they answered him, The Lord bless thee.’” —
*Warner.* “Precisely the same customs of salutation which are here
indicated still prevail in Mohammedan Asia. Nearly the same form of
words, implying the blessing and peace of God, is retained, and the
neglect to give the salutation is still an indignity and an insult ” —
*Illustrated Commentary upon the Bible.*

<span id="fn_113"></span>[114](cc12012.htm#fr_113) <span
id="xiii.ii-p8.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p9"></span> “In Judea, the roofs of the houses are
flat, and covered with cement. On this the grass would not uncommonly
grow: but, being thin and weak, and its situation hot and exposed, it
was speedily ‘dried up and withered.’ The same sort of architecture, and
the same appearances, are common in the East at this day.” — *Warner.*

<span id="fn_114"></span>[115](cc12012.htm#fr_114) <span
id="xiii.ii-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p10"></span> <span id="xiii.ii-p10.1"></span>שלף
differently interpreted. By the greater number of persons it is
translated, *to extract, to pull out;* and thus it is used in <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.2"></span>[Ruth 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007),
[8](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#008)<span id="xiii.ii-p10.2"></span>,
and <span id="xiii.ii-p10.3"></span>[Joh
20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)<span id="xiii.ii-p10.3"></span>,
‘Before any one extracts the grass it withereth.’ The Septuagint has
<span id="xiii.ii-p10.4"></span>πρὸ τοῦ εκσπασθὢναι, and the Vulgate,
‘<span id="xiii.ii-p10.5"></span>priusquam evellatur.’ Our translators
have rendered <span id="xiii.ii-p10.6"></span>שקדמת שלף, ‘afore it
groweth up,’ in which they are supported by Aquila and Symmachus.
Theodoret observes that many MSS. of the Septuagint have <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.7"></span>ἐξανθὢναι for <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.8"></span>ἐκσπασθὢναι. In either case the sense is, that
the haters of Zion shall be exterminated by the just and wonderful
judgments of God, before they have time to accomplish their wicked
*intentions.*” — *Phillips.* “Parkhurst adopts Harmer’s opinion, that
the Hebrew verb in this place signifies, ‘to push out, unsheath, as corn
its ear.’ It appears nowhere else but in the sense of ‘unsheathing a
sword,’ or drawing off a shoe.’ The proper translation seems to be,
‘Which withereth before it unsheaths its ear.’ See Parkhurst on <span
id="xiii.ii-p10.9"></span>שלף.” — *Mant.*

<span id="fn_115"></span>[116](cc12012.htm#fr_115) <span
id="xiii.ii-p12.1"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p13"></span> “*Whereof* *the mower hath not filled his
hand,* etc. — i.e., It is too scanty to afford employment for a labourer
to gather it by the hand, or for a reaper, who uses a sickle, depositing
what he cuts in the fold of his garment, or as Le Clerc understands it,
under his left arm. The Psalmist in effect prays, that the enemies of
Israel may be reduced to such poverty, that none could become richer by
despoiling them: in a word, that they might be altogether despicable.
For *binding up the sheaves,* Hammond suggests, *gathereth the
handfuls,* with reference to the gleaner, <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span>[Ru 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#002)<span
id="xiii.ii-p13.1"></span> ” — *Cresswell.*

<span id="fn_116"></span>[117](cc12012.htm#fr_116) <span
id="xiii.ii-p13.2"></span>

<span id="xiii.ii-p14"></span> “<span id="xiii.ii-p14.1"></span>Au lieu
que chacun communement en passant par les bleds les benit, et prie pour
la moisson.” — Fr.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 130](cc12013)
