[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index) 
[Christianity](../../index)  [Calvin](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](cc12015)  [Next](cc12017) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Calvin's Commentaries, Vol. 12: Psalms, Part V*, tr. by John King,
\[1847-50\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="xvii"></span>

<span id="xvii-p1"></span>PSALM 133

<span id="xvii-p2"></span>A Psalm of thanksgiving for that holy concord
which prevailed in the nation, and which the Lord’s people are earnestly
exhorted to maintain.

<span id="xvii-p3"></span>A Song of Degrees of David.

<span id="xvii.i"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p1"></span><span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>[Psalm
133:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)<span id="xvii.i-p1.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p2"></span>**1.** Behold! how good, and how becoming,
that brethren  <span id="fr_141"></span>[142](#fn_141) should even dwell
together! **2.** Like the precious ointment upon the head, that
descendeth upon the beard, the beard of Aaron, which descendeth upon the
skirt of his garments.  <span id="fr_142"></span>[143](#fn_142) **3.**
Like the dew of Hermon,  <span id="fr_143"></span>[144](#fn_143) which
descendeth upon the mountains of Zion,  <span
id="fr_144"></span>[145](#fn_144) for there  <span
id="fr_145"></span>[146](#fn_145) Jehovah commanded the blessing, life
for evermore.

<span id="xvii.i-p8"></span> 

<span id="xvii.i-p9"></span><span id="xvii.i-p9.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p10"></span>**1.** *Behold how good,* etc. I have no
doubt that David in this Psalm renders thanks to God for the peace and
harmony which had succeeded a long and melancholy state of confusion and
division in the kingdom, and that he would exhort all individually to
study the maintenance of peace. This is the subject enlarged upon, at
least so far as the shortness of the Psalm admits of it. There was ample
ground to praise the goodness of God in the highest terms, for uniting
in one a people which had been so deplorably divided. When he first came
to the kingdom the larger part of the nation considered him in the light
of an enemy to the public good, and were alienated from him. Indeed so
mortal was the feud which existed, that nothing else than the
destruction of the party in opposition seemed to hold out the prospect
of peace. The hand of God was wonderfully seen, and most unexpectedly,
in the concord which ensued among them, when these who had been inflamed
with the most violent antipathy cordially coalesced. This  <span
id="fr_146"></span>[147](#fn_146) peculiarity in the circumstances which
called forth the Psalm has been unfortunately by interpreters, who have
considered that David merely passes a general commendation upon
brotherly union, without any such particular reference. The exclamation
with which the Psalm opens, *Behold!* is particularly expressive, not
only as setting the state of things visibly before our eyes, but
suggesting a tacit contrast between the delightfulness of peace and
those civil commotions which had well­nigh rent the kingdom asunder. He
sets forth the goodness of God in exalted terms, the Jews having by long
experience of intestine feuds, which had gone far to ruin the nation,
learned the inestimable value of union. That this is the sense of the
passage appears still further from the particle <span
id="xvii.i-p11.2"></span>גם, *gam,* at the end of the verse. It is not
to be understood with some, who have mistaken the sense of the Psalmist,
as being a mere copulative, but as adding emphasis to the context. We,
as if he had said, who were naturally brethren, had become so divided,
as to view one another with a more bitter hatred than any foreign foe,
but now how well is it that we should cultivate a spirit of brotherly
concord!

<span id="xvii.i-p12"></span>There can at the same time be no doubt;
that the Holy Ghost is to be viewed as commending in this passage that
mutual harmony which should subsist amongst all God’s children, and
exhorting us to make every endeavor to maintain it. So long as
animosities divide us, and heart­burnings prevail amongst us, we may be
brethren no doubt still by common relation to God, but cannot be judged
one so long as we present the appearance of a broken and dismembered
body. As we are one in God the Father, and in Christ, the union must be
ratified amongst us by reciprocal harmony, and fraternal love. Should it
so happen in the providence of God, that the Papists should return to
that holy concord which they have apostatized from, it would be in such
terms as these that we would be called to render thanksgiving unto God,
and in the meantime we are bound to receive into our brotherly embraces
all such as cheerfully submit themselves to the Lord. We are to set
ourselves against those turbulent spirits which the devil will never
fail to raise up in the Church, and be sedulous to retain intercourse
with such as show a docile and tractable disposition. But we cannot
extend this intercourse to those who obstinately persist in error, since
the condition of receiving them as brethren would be our renouncing him
who is Father of all, and from whom all spiritual relationship takes its
rise. The peace which David recommends is such as begins in the true
head, and this is quite enough to refute the unfounded charge of schism
and division which has been brought against us by the Papists, while we
have given abundant evidence of our desire that they would *coalesce*
with us in God’s truth, which is the only bond of holy union.

<span id="xvii.i-p13"></span><span id="xvii.i-p13.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p14"></span>**3.** *Like the precious ointment upon the
head.* We have here clear proof that David, as we have just said, holds
all true union among brethren to take its rise from God, and to have
this for its legitimate object, that all may be brought to worship God
in purity, and call upon iris name with one consent. Would the
similitude have been borrowed from holy ointment if it had not been to
denote, that religion must always hold the first place?  <span
id="fr_147"></span>[148](#fn_147) Any concord, it is thus insinuated,
which may prevail amongst men, is insipid, if not pervaded by a sweet
savor of God’s worship. We maintain, therefore, that men are to be
united amongst themselves in mutual affection, with this as the great
end., that they may be placed together under the government of God. If
there be any who disagree with these terms, we would do well rather to
oppose them strenuously, than purchase peace at the expense of God’s
honor. We must hold, that when mention is made of the Priest, it is to
intimate, that concord takes its rise in the true and pure worship of
God, while by the *beard and skirts of the garments,* we are led to
understand that the peace which springs from Christ as the head, is
diffused through the whole length and breadth of the Church. The other
figure, of the *dew* distilling upon Mount Zion and Hermon, denotes,
that a holy unity has not only a sweet savor before *God,* but is
productive of good effects, as the dew moistens the earth and supplies
it with sap and freshness. Moses, we know, said of Judea, that it was
not like Egypt fertilized by the overflowings of its river, but such as
drank daily of the rain of heaven. (<span id="xvii.i-p15.2"></span>[De
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p15.2"></span>.)
David suggests, that the life of man would be sapless, unprofitable, and
wretched, unless sustained by brotherly harmony. It is evident, that
mount Hermon must have been rich and fruitful, being famed amongst
places for pasture. Mountains depend principally for fertility upon the
dews of heaven, and this was shown in the case of mount Zion. David adds
in the close, that God commands his blessing where peace is cultivated;
by which is meant, that he testifies how much tie is pleased with
concord amongst men, by showering down blessings upon them. The same
sentiment is expressed by Paul in other words, (<span
id="xvii.i-p15.3"></span>[2Co
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011)<span id="xvii.i-p15.3"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p15.4"></span>[Php
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009)<span id="xvii.i-p15.4"></span>,)
“Live in peace, and the God of peace shall be with you.” Let us then, as
much as lies in us, study to walk in brotherly love, that we may secure
the divine blessing. Let us even stretch out our arms to those who
differ from us, desiring to bid them welcome if they will but return to
the unity of the faith. Do they refuse? Then let them go. We recognize
no brotherhood, as I have said already, except amongst the children of
God.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_141"></span>[142](cc12016.htm#fr_141) <span
id="xvii.i-p2.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p3"></span> The word *brethren* is not limited to those
who are descended from the same parents; it denotes such as are members
of the same community, profess the same holy religion, and are governed
by the same institutions. All the people of Israel are in the first
instance here addressed.

<span id="fn_142"></span>[143](cc12016.htm#fr_142) <span
id="xvii.i-p3.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p4"></span> Kimchi, Jarchi, and others, instead of “to
the *skirts,*” translate “to the *collar* of his garment.” This seems to
give the true meaning of the original, which implies that the head and
beard of Aaron only were anointed, and that the costly sacerdotal robes
were thus preserved from an unction, which must inevitably have spoiled
them. For an account of this ointment and of its sprinkling on Aaron,
and his sons, see <span id="xvii.i-p4.1"></span>[Exod.
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023),
[30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#030)<span id="xvii.i-p4.1"></span>;
<span id="xvii.i-p4.2"></span>[Le
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#012)<span id="xvii.i-p4.2"></span>.
When Aaron was consecrated High Priest the oil was poured on him, whilst
on the other priests it was only sprinkled.

<span id="fn_143"></span>[144](cc12016.htm#fr_143) <span
id="xvii.i-p4.3"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p5"></span> There is a mountain called Hermon, which is
the highest of the ridge of mountains designated Anti-Lebanon, and which
is situated in the northern border of the country beyond Jordan. This,
however, is not the mountain supposed to be here intended, but another
of the same name lying within the land of Canaan on the west of the
river Jordan. It is described by Buckingham as a range of hills running
for several miles east and west, and forming the southern boundary of
the plain of Esdraelon, overlooked in which Mount Tabor is situated.
Maundrell, who, in his journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem had a full view
of Tabor and Hermon at about six or seven hours’ distance to the
eastward, speaking of the copious dews which fell in that part of the
country, says, “We were sufficiently instructed by experience what the
Psalmist means by the dew of Hermon, our tents being as wet with it as
if it had rained all night.” — *Journey.*

<span id="fn_144"></span>[145](cc12016.htm#fr_144) <span
id="xvii.i-p5.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p6"></span> Calvin gives the construction of these
words as it is in the Hebrew text. But to make them intelligible
something must be supplied. As Hermon and Zion are many miles distant
from each other, it would be absurd to speak of the dews of the former
as falling on the latter, not to mention the difficulty of understanding
how the dew of one mountain can descend upon another. The translators of
our English Bible repeat the words *like the dew* before *which
descended;* and the insertion of this supplement is fully justified, as
it is the most natural way of bringing out an intelligent meaning.

<span id="fn_145"></span>[146](cc12016.htm#fr_145) <span
id="xvii.i-p6.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p7"></span> “The particles, <span
id="xvii.i-p7.1"></span>כי שם, refer not to Zion, but are put as
introducing the reason of the goodness spoken of in <span
id="xvii.i-p7.2"></span>[Ps 133:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#001)<span
id="xvii.i-p7.2"></span>, <span id="xvii.i-p7.3"></span>חיים.” —
*Phillips.* Others, as Lowth, maintain that <span
id="xvii.i-p7.4"></span> שםmust refer to Zion, and that to it the
blessing must also refer. “May not <span id="xvii.i-p7.5"></span> שםmean
the place wherever brethren dwell together in unity?” — *Archbishop
Seeker.*

<span id="fn_146"></span>[147](cc12016.htm#fr_146) <span
id="xvii.i-p10.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p11"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p11.1"></span>Les
expositeurs laissent passer cette cireonstanee, et mal, comme si David
louoit generalement, et sans son propre regard, le consentement
fraternel, etc.” ­ *Fr.*

<span id="fn_147"></span>[148](cc12016.htm#fr_147) <span
id="xvii.i-p14.1"></span>

<span id="xvii.i-p15"></span> “<span id="xvii.i-p15.1"></span>Car a quel
propos tireroit ­ il ceste similitude de l’huile sacree, sinon a ceste
fin clue la vraye religion tiene tousjours le premier lieu?” *­ Ft.*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalm 134](cc12017)
