[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tha06)  [Next](tha08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564599779/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Human Atmosphere*, by Walter J. Kilner, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

<span id="chap06"></span>

### CHAPTER VI

#### COMPLEMENTARY COLOURS

SOON after the discovery of the aura, a friend called attention to the
fact that if a light were gazed at, and the eyes were first turned to
one side and then the other of any person, the colours of the spectre
were often not identical. Having convinced himself that this peculiar
phenomenon did manifest itself, the writer thought it possible that the
apparition might be made an aid to diagnosis, but that for that purpose
investigations must be carried out methodically. Experiments were
commenced by gazing at gaslight, not that for a moment was it thought
that such a crude plan could be satisfactory, but in the hope that the
discovery of its defects might assist in future trials. It was noticed
that the resultant phantom was complex, as the main portion was of one
hue, and was surrounded by another entirely different. The inconvenience
of having to work with two or more colours was immediately apparent, and
this, coupled with another insurmountable difficulty arising from the
constant changes in the colours of the spectre, which were initiated by
the slight movements of the eyes for comparing the two sides of the
patient, caused accurate results to be impossible. It was also
recognized that if any benefits were to be derived from this process a
monochromatic image was essential. After many experiments it was
concluded that for obtaining this, pieces of paper of different colours
answered the purpose as well as any thing else, though they were
afterwards replaced to a great extent by transparent coloured screens,
which will be described later on.

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

This chapter will be devoted to the problem of the effect of the aura
upon complementary colours, than which a more extraordinary property can
hardly be conceived. The monochromatic spectre is modified by the aura
so that its colour is changed to a lighter or darker shade or its hue
altered under certain conditions. It is needless to say that the whole
topic is difficult and complicated, but the explanations that seem most
useful will be given. Some of the theories put forward may appear
far-fetched or even [heterodox](errata.htm#4.md); nevertheless they are
advanced for want of better hypotheses. As the subject is entirely
dependent upon colour vision, a few preliminary remarks will not be
superfluous.

One widely accepted theory postulates the existence of three sets of
colour-sensitive nerves in the eyes. White light is the outcome of an
equal stimulation of all the colour-sensitive nerves, or, perhaps, it
would be more accurate to say a stimulation proportionate to that which
occurs with sunlight. The withdrawal or weakening of the stimulus to any
set will produce a colour sensation which is thus derivable from the
excitation of one, two or all of these sets of nerves, either separately
or in combination. When more than one set of nerves are excited, they
are usually unequally stimulated.

The writer has for many years considered that each person has their own
proper primary colours, and accordingly sees a coloured object
differently to any one else, but as a result of education every one
calls the colour <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md) by the same name.
For instance, let two persons A and B look at an object of a colour
usually designated as a shade of yellow. This colour might

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

only stimulate one set of colour-sensitive nerves of A, and would be to
him a pure yellow. On the other hand, with B, not merely the
yellow-sensitive nerves be excited but to a slight extent the
blue-sensitive; he would see a greenish yellow tone. But as both A and B
have been taught that the colour is a certain shade of yellow, which,
whenever they see, they will call by the same name. Nevertheless if A
saw it with B's eyes he would designate it differently. Both would be
correct. It follows as a corollary, that each individual probably sees
in nature hues unlike those perceived by his neighbour. It is
unnecessary to enter into this matter more fully except to state that
the writer's primary colours are at the present time red, yellow, and
blue, although thirty years ago the blue discs were a purple-blue. It is
not proposed to consider any other theory, as this one will answer the
purpose of explaining the action of the complementary colours.

Putting aside all speculations, it will be found that when one set of
colour-sensitive nerves is exhausted to the utmost extent, the observer
will on necessity be temporarily to the corresponding colour blind. If
the red-sensitive be the nerves fatigued, he will be red-blind, although
still able to perceive all the colours that do not contain red; in
addition he will be able to see any colour that has an admixture of red,
but as if all the red has been removed. Taking a simple example, purple
would be more or less blue. This artificial colour-blindness evidently
causes the eyes to become hyper-sensitive to many colours and shades of
colours that do not contain red, as red helps to obscure a very faint
tinge of other hues. The following experiments have been tried by many
people, and will furnish a proof of the above remarks. When a band of
light tinged with carmine, is thrown upon a white screen from a magic
lantern, it will have a certain visibility, but should the observer
previously

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

look through a red or a blue glass at daylight for a minute or so, he
will see the band having more blue, or more red respectively, although,
perhaps, not quite as brilliant. Similar effects can be obtained after
the eyes have been fatigued by looking at a blue or a yellow strip of
paper (*vide ultra*), when the observer has for all practicable purposes
become temporarily blue-blind or yellow-blind. Were it possible for two
sets of colour-sensitive nerves to be inhibited for some short time, the
observer would be completely monochromatic. This extreme proceeding is
never requisite for the present investigations, and in practice it has
been found impossible by this method to induce total red, blue or yellow
blindness. However, the remark that "the eyes have become abnormally
sensitive to certain shades of colour" remains correct. It is quite
reasonable to suppose that this colour hyper-sensitiveness of the eyes
permits the rays of the aura which are probably ultra-violet, otherwise
invisible, to be perceived, and that this is one of the explanations why
the different coloured patches can be seen within the complementary
coloured bands.

In ill health, as will be noticed hereafter, the aura frequently
contains more yellow than during good health, and this colour is
especially pronounced in circumscribed areas from local disturbances.
These patches are usually seen as yellow places in the midst of the blue
complementary coloured band. The rationale of this
[phenomenon](errata.htm#5.md) is probably as follows: when the eyes have
become sufficiently fatigued for the successful induction of the blue
complementary coloured band, the yellow-sensitive nerves are only able
to convey to the brain sensations of that colour to a limited extent,
while they still retain their power intact for the shorter wave lengths
of the ultra-violet yellow. Possibly these latter exert a greater
influence from not being obscured by the more easily
[perceived](errata.htm#6.md) yellow of the ordinary visible solar spectrum.
Another

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

factor which very likely assists in the perception of the auric colours,
but to which too much importance must not be attached, is that the body
assumes as a whole the hues of the complementary coloured band and thus
affords a better contrast to the yellow or other colours the aura may
locally possess. (Page [170](tha08.htm#page_170)..md)

Every one knows that if he gazes intently for a short time at a coloured
object and then looks at the ceiling, or at a white screen, etc., he
will see on it a spectre of the same object similar in shape but of a
different hue. This secondary colour will for an equal amount of
stimulation always have the same tint, which is dependent upon the hue
of the object, and is termed complementary to the primary colour. For
example, after a yellow object, has been gazed at, the hue of the
virtual object will be blue, the exact tint being governed by the shade
of the yellow employed, and to a certain extent by personal
idiosyncracies.

When an investigator has looked at a yellow object sufficiently long,
the time varying accordingly to the brightness of the light, and the
steadfastness of the gaze, etc., he will always see the after-image at
first of the same blue tint, but this will gradually become lighter, and
will more frequently blend with red, turning purple or plum coloured. In
these cases the complementary colour always includes a red tint,
although it is at first masked by the intensity of the blue colour.

Should he, however, at first see a plum or purple coloured phantom, he
may be sure that his eyes have not been adequately fatigued by the
original yellow colour, or else that there is a larger amount of white
light in the room than usual. These modifications show the advisability
of being conversant with the varying tints the spectre undergoes, but at
the same time they do not make ali the difference that was at one time
imagined. After a short time the phantom will vanish, but will be sure
to return with an altered

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

hue. This secondary change may as a rule be neglected, because the
employment of the complementary colour is rarely continued sufficiently
long for its advent. However, the secondary changes may at times be
useful, as the following instance exemplifies.

After the examination of a woman by means of the complementary colours
had been completed and the blind drawn up, in full daylight while the
writer was speaking to her, a new after-image became visible upon her
body, and in the middle of the band there was a yellow mark about the
size of a shilling on the upper part of the left mamma about two inches
from the sternum. It had been overlooked in the prior examination. The
spot was quite invisible directly the coloured band had disappeared, but
as soon as the eyes had been re-influenced in the ordinary manner for
obtaining the complementary coloured bands, the patch became again
perceptible and very distinct. Here was an unrehearsed effect which up
to the present has never been repeated.

One other self-evident inference still remains, viz., that when the
background is not white the complementary colours will not always appear
in their true shades, but as if blended with the hue of the background.

Since these complementary colours are entirely subjective, they will
receive the names of pigments which afford the best matches, these being
sufficiently accurate for all descriptive purposes. After a large number
of experiments had been made with the colours usually termed primary,
the conclusion arrived at was, that they did not give such good results
as mixed ones. As a consequence of the trials, the following colours
have been chosen as the most useful.

<div align="center">

|     |               |                       |                |
|-----|---------------|-----------------------|----------------|
| 1\. | Gamboge,      | complementary colour, | Prussian Blue. |
| 2\. | Antwerp Blue  | „                     | Gamboge.       |
| 3\. | Carmine,      | „                     | Green.         |
| 4\. | Emerald Green | „                     | Carmine.       |

</div>

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

Each observer should it possible select by experiment what colour or
colours suit him best.

In routine work, use can be made of strips of coloured paper three
inches long and three quarters of an inch in width with a black dot in
the centre, pasted on black board. Experience has shown that this is the
largest size that can be conveniently employed, since a longer object
does not yield the complementary colour perfect to the ends. With a
patient standing a few feet in front of the observer, one of these
strips will give a band of the complementary colour which, when used
transversely, will be wider than the body, allowing the ends that are
projected on each side beyond the body to be compared with one another,
and also with the central portion of the body itself.

In winter or foggy weather, especially in London, the difficulty of
using paper strips for obtaining the subjective complementary colours is
great, and it is occasionally impossible to make a thorough examination
from the inordinate time required, which is exceedingly trying to both
the investigator and the patient. To overcome this defect an apparatus
has been devised, which can be used in daylight or, in an emergency,
even by gaslight. It consists of a cylindrical mask about six inches
long and five in width, with one end shaped to fit the face, while the
other has a revolving cap in which there is an oblong slit three
quarters of an inch in breadth. The slit can thus be turned either
horizontally or vertically to the eyes at pleasure. Behind the slit is
placed a piece of ground glass, and at the back of this again a
transparent screen, which may be either a cell containing a fluid, or
else a piece of stained glass. The mask ought to be blackened inside or
else lined with velvet. A small mark can be made on the ground glass to
act in a similar way as the dot on the coloured papers. The distance
between the eyes and the screen will be about

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

correct for emmetropic sight, but for presbyopia and myopia the reading
glasses worn by the observer will be needed. The writer's personal
apparatus has a removable diaphragm with lenses of the same focal length
as the spectacles he usually employs. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md)

To use the apparatus, it is only necessary to hold it in front of and
close to the face, and to gaze at the light, keeping the eyes fixed on
the mark on the ground glass. In a few seconds the eyes will have become
sufficiently affected, and the complementary coloured band can be
perceived in the same manner as if the coloured papers had been used.
The apparatus requires more skill in using than the coloured papers, as
the screen needs alterations in depth of colour according to the
brightness of the light.

As soon as the patient is ready for examination, he should stand in
front of a white background opposite the light and illuminated evenly
all over. Should there be any shadows on the background they must be
made to correspond on the two sides. Preferably the light should be
brighter than when the aura itself is being inspected, but almost always
it will be necessary for one blind to be partially or wholly drawn down.
After everything has been properly arranged, the observer must look at
the sky through the transparent screen in the mask, or stare at one of
the coloured paper strips, keeping his eyes fixed on the dot from twenty
to thirty seconds according to the brightness of the light.

When coloured strips are used a brilliant light is required, so it will
be necessary to pull aside the blind to allow the paper to be fully
illuminated. The observer then turns towards the patient and looks at
some pre-determined spot on the median line of the body, when, if used
transversely, the complementary

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

coloured band will be seen reaching across the body and extending to the
background on either side, the whole being simultaneously visible. He is
thus enabled to notice variations in the shades of the colour in every
part of the band. The tints of the extensions of the band prolonged
beyond the trunk can be compared with each other, but of course not with
the portion on the body itself. The above-mentioned method, although
simple, requires a considerable amount of practice, and the mastery of
one or two details, trifling in themselves, will assist greatly in speed
and comfort. First, while looking at the coloured strip, it is
indispensable to fix the eyes on one particular spot and keep this in
exact focus the whole time, as unless this is properly done there will
be blurring and an increase of time needed for obtaining the requisite
effect. A slight exercise of will is required for this, but practice
will soon make the effort almost involuntary. Secondly, a novice often
experiences a difficulty in keeping his eyes on a given place on the
patient's body, owing to the proneness of the complementary coloured
band to wander, often out of the field of vision, and for the eyes to
follow it, thus completely destroying the value of the observation. When
the habit of keeping the eyes stationary on one point has been acquired,
the complementary coloured band will remain fairly motionless, and
should it move away will return to its proper position of its own
accord. As dexterity can only be attained by exercise, it is a good plan
to train the eyes upon some inanimate object before proceeding to the
examination of the human subject.

For the future, unless otherwise specified, the yellow strip of paper
with its blue complementary coloured band will be the colour implied,
and also for the sake of brevity, the letters c.c. will be employed
instead of "complementary colour," and p.c. will indicate the colour of
the strip itself.

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

As there are natural variations in the colour of the skin, and shadows
on the body of a patient, the observer ought to notice every
modification, however insignificant, before inspection with the c.c.
band. With care, judgment, and a little experience, most of the
difficulties from these causes will disappear. In its simplest form the
c.c. band projected upon the body of a person in good health will be
equal in tint all over, if due allowance has been made for any
variations in the colour of the skin, and the extensions of the band
beyond the body will generally correspond in hue with each other.

When the extensions of the c.c. band show on a healthy subject a tint on
one side unlike that of the other, the difference is rarely great. This
dissimilarity of shade is the simplest form of alteration of the c.c.
band, and may only be the consequence of improper lighting; however, all
doubt can be dissipated by turning the patient completely round, when,
if correct, the different tints will have changed places, this being
proof positive that the alteration depends upon the aura itself.

Another very characteristic effect can often be elicited as
follows:—note which extension of the blue band has the deeper shade;
then gaze at the blue p.c. strip of paper to induce a yellow c.c. band.
More frequently than not the latter will have a lighter shade where the
blue c.c. band was darker, and *vice versa*.

An occasional change in the c.c. band, when projected upon the body of a
patient who at the time is not in good health, and standing with his
face Jo the observer, is for one side of the body to be darker than the
other. When this happens, the shades may blend gradually into one
another, or a sharp line of demarcation may divide them. In the majority
of instances when the division is sharply defined, it will take place at
the median line of the body, but there are many exceptions to the rule,
and the line of separation may

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

occur at any distance to the right or left. If the c.c. band (on one
side of the body light and on the other dark), be continued beyond the
body, the extension on the light side will invariably have a paler shade
than the extension of the dark portion of the band. This change seldom
if ever occupies the whole of the trunk, and occurs most frequently
between the levels of the mammæ and umbilicus. Sometimes one thigh has a
different shade to the other. The dark part generally overlies a
deranged portion of the body, and it will be found that this place is
absolutely of a deeper hue than the rest of the band. On the other hand
the affected portion of the body may cause the c.c. band to become
lighter, instead of darker.

There is another variation slightly different, but much more common, in
which instead of the c.c. band across half the body being changed in
shade, a patch either large or small is lighter or darker than the rest
of the band which surrounds it. When the patch is large it occasionally
takes the outline of an organ in whole or in part. The smaller patches,
not exceeding an inch or two in diameter, do not in themselves determine
what organ is affected, though they generally point to some disease or
local disturbance and almost invariably to the seat of pain or
tenderness.

A third constantly occurring alteration of the c.c. band consists of
patches or spots of a colour different to that of the rest of the band.
Some shade of yellow seems the most frequent, and the interpretation,
with very few exceptions, is that the patient has at the time, or has
had recently, pain and tenderness at that place. The colour does not
necessarily denote anything abnormal, as it has often been seen on the
epigastrium when there has been no dyspepsia to account for it, and it
is then apparently dependent upon active digestion of food partaken a
short time previous to inspection. Elsewhere it generally points to some
pathological change.

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

Four p.c. strips of coloured papers or four transparent screens have
been chosen, each possessing advantages not presented by the others.
These advantages seem to be generally dependent upon obscure causes
connected with the patient. For ordinary observations the p.c. strip
giving rise to the blue c.c. band is the most useful, and generally the
only one needed, since it is more sensitive to changes than the yellow
c.c. band, which is as its complementary especially valuable as a
control to the blue c.c. hand, if the change in tint be only slight.
There are, however, occasions when it is better to work with the yellow
c.c. band rather than the blue. Perhaps the most sensitive of all the
c.c. bands is the green, but unfortunately it does not undergo so many
variations as the blue, and the changes are more fleeting in character.
In cases of doubt, its delicacy of action will determine a question of
fine differences of colour. The choice of the colour for the c.c. band
is usually unimportant, when it is borne in mind that occasionally owing
to individual idiosyncrasies better results can be obtained with one
colour than with another.

A prolonged examination will fatigue the observer's eyes, and as no
amount of will power can render any assistance, he must either leave off
the inspection for a few minutes or else change the c.c. band. The
former, when possible, is preferable, as the latter is only a makeshift
to be used when time is of consequence. The opposite c.c. band will then
be the best to employ.

A most pertinent question and one most difficult to answer now arises.
What is it that causes the band to be altered in colour? In the first
place for reasons already stated, it seems more than probable that the
eyes of the observer are hyper-sensitive to certain colours after gazing
at one of the p.c. strips of coloured paper, and can differentiate tints
so nearly alike as would baffle ordinary perception. Next,
theoretically,

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

there seem to be five agencies that can alter the shade of the c.c.
band; firstly the skin; secondly the thickness of the aura; thirdly a
change in the texture of the aura; fourthly the colour of the aura; and
lastly

rays.

Each of these propositions will be considered in turn. After making all
possible allowances for any variations in tints than can be appreciated
in the ordinary manner, it is quite within the bounds of reason to
imagine that there may exist hues in the skin that can be distinguished
only under exceptional circumstances. This has been kept constantly in
mind and instances have been sought for that would settle the question,
but up to the present time without any success, so that although
possible, this agency must be so extremely rare as to be negligible. One
fact that especially militates against the skin being the cause of the
change, is that when the c.c. band is discoloured up to the edge of the
body, the extension will be in like manner affected, being lighter or
darker as the case may be. Under no circumstances can the latter change
be due to the influence of the skin, consequently there is nothing to
which it can be attributed except the aura, although it hardly seems
possible that such a transparent, colourless, almost invisible cloud
should have so powerful an action upon the c.c. bands.

Secondly is the thickness of the aura competent to induce any change in
the c.c. band? As the aura is composed of highly attenuated material
(the word is used advisedly), it would be necessary to acquire an
enormous thickness before any perceptible alteration could be produced.
Everything points to a negative answer to this proposition. One case
illustrates the fact in the strongest manner. A woman, when standing
sideways to the observer, showed an aura in front of the abdomen quite
four times as wide as by the thorax, yet when she turned facing, no
difference

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

could be detected either directly or with the c.c. band, which was
uniform in colour over both the thorax and abdomen. Pregnancy supplies
analogous cases, as the aura is in front of the abdomen much wider than
before the thorax. Never has this extra breadth been observed to make
any change in the shade of the c.c. band unless accompanied by some
alteration in colour or texture.

The first two theoretical agencies that might cause a change in the
shade of the c.c. band have thus been discounted, and there remains a
third and fourth, which offer better chances for a solution of the
problem.

Thirdly, can an alteration in the texture of the aura induce a
sufficient change in the c.c. band to account for variations in their
tints? When the writer first began to employ the c.c. bands, he imagined
that after gazing at the p.c. strip of coloured paper and then exploring
the body through the light dicyanin screen, he was able to distinguish
shades of colour better than without the intervention of the screen, and
consequently this method was habitually used. Unfortunately this was a
mistake, as it led to patches that could be seen discoloured without the
intervention of a screen, being attributed entirely to an alteration of
the texture of the aura, consequently giving a greater prominence to
that condition than it merited. It is highly probable that in the
majority of instances an alteration of the texture and chromatic changes
go hand in hand. There remain, however, cases in which no traces of
colour can be detected, so that modification of the texture of the aura
is the only explanation left. If with each of the c.c. bands employed in
succession the patch continues to be either darker or lighter than the
surrounding tint of the band, the presumption is that the change of the
shade is the result of some peculiarity in the texture of the aura. On
the other hand, should one of the

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

bands show a light patch which appears dark with the rest of the bands,
then it is likely that there is some other change. (See page
[155](#page_155)..md) It is quite on the *tapis* that two of the bands may
disclose a light patch which others show dark. This probably means that
the patch is caused by two auric colours, which primarily due to
ultra-violet radiations, for some reason do not blend in the ordinary
manner. A good illustration as to what may be taken as an alteration of
texture producing a dark patch, is as follows:

<span id="case28">Case 28</span>. C., a man fifty-three years old, was
inspected in October, 1914. He was not really strong, but made the most
out of every ailment. He had just recovered from an attack of lumbago
brought on by rowing when not accustomed to that exercise, and
afterwards getting a chill. He had been subject to indigestion and also
addicted to taking too much alcohol. His aura had a blue-grey colour.
The outer which was quite plain and distinct, had a breadth of eight
inches by the side of the head, four and a half by the trunk, five at
the back, and three by the thighs and legs. The inner aura was below the
average in clearness, about three inches wide, granular at the small of
the back, and also by the right hypochondrium as he stood sideways, but
otherwise healthy. *All the four c.c. bands showed a dark patch* on the
back, over the two lower dorsal and all the lumbar vertebræ, which
reached to about two inches from the edge of the body on each side. This
patch did not seem to be derived from any local colouration of the aura,
as tested by the c.c. bands, so that there was nothing to which it could
be assigned except the texture. In front with the blue c.c. band there
was a dark patch over the liver, and a yellow one over the epigastrium.
He had pain and tenderness in all these places. As he stood facing the
observer with his arms akimbo, when the aura in the interspaces between
the body and the arms was examined by means of the coloured screens, no
yellow

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

was found. Had this colour been seen, probably the patch on the back
would, although dark with the blue c.c. band, have looked lighter with
the yellow.

A patch may be produced by two or more colours. A good-sized patch was
seen on the sacrum of a patient of a pinkish hue when the blue c.c. band
was used. As the colour was uncommon, this area was examined with three
other c.c. bands. With the yellow it looked rather darker than the rest
of the band. It certainly was not a pure yellow, as it con-tailed a
mixture of other colours, that could not be dissociated. With the red
and green bands the colour was red; the tint differed in the two
instances, but it was impossible to decide the particulars of the
variation. Each band also made a slight alteration in the size and shape
of the spot.

The only feasible explanation was, that the patch was multi-coloured,
being composed of two, if not of more, colours (certainly red and yellow
were there), and that the different c.c. bands resolved them. Unless the
pink patch consisted of ultra-violet rays, its appearance in the red and
the green bands would be incomprehensible.

When using the blue c.c. band it is not an uncommon occurrence to meet
with dark and yellow patches upon the same person, but light patches
accompanying the yellow are infrequent. On only one occasion have there
been seen, when using the blue c.c. band, yellow dark and light patches
on the same individual. The patient was a hysterical lady, of whose case
a description is given in another chapter.

The pathological alteration of the texture that gives rise to a dark
patch in the aura when seen by the aid of the c.c. band, always
consists, so far as his been noticed up to the present time, of a
coarsely granular state of the inner aura, but it is undecided whether
the outer aura assists in any way. In no instance where the blue c.c.
band has been employed and a

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

light patch become visible, has it been possible to exclude all
chromatic alterations of the aura, so as to be fairly confident that the
change was wholly due to a textual modification. Theoretically an
alteration of the substance may have taken place, but it is extremely
difficult to obtain unequivocable proof of it, as the observer's eyes so
often become tired before the examination is completed, and besides,
patients naturally object to a too prolonged inspection, having usually
come not for experimental but for diagnostic purposes.

The fourth agent, viz., the colour of the aura, has a much surer
foundation, as patches of different colours to the surrounding c.c. band
are being constantly perceived. When employing the blue c.c. band,
yellow is the commonest colour, and next in frequency an indefinite
pink. The shades of the yellow range from a transparent lemon to the
darkest shade of Roman ochre. Besides a pink which varies a good deal,
there are a number of hues that defy description, as they are evidently
mixtures of ultra-violet colours. If these colours are naturally but
merely locally present in the aura, an explanation is needed why they
cannot be perceived except during the use of the c.c. bands. This has
been partially given on page [151](#page_151.md). On rare occasions it has
been possible to detect them in the aura over (not by the side of), the
body, but never as yet sufficiently distinct to describe. It is quite
possible that better trained or more peculiarly adapted eyes may have
the power of resolving them. At one time it was thought possible that
the use of coloured screens might have revealed these patches without
having to resort to the tedious process of partially colour-blinding the
eyes. There was nothing but failure for reasons given a little later on.

In [chapter iv](tha05.htm#chap04.md)., when discussing the likelihood of a
secondary spectrum, an account was given of the inspection of the aura
in the interspaces between the

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

body and the arms of persons when standing facing the observer with
their arms akimbo. The results are extremely interesting, but the
discrepancies so great as to render impossible any attempt to tabulate
them in a useful form. However, when the aura is investigated through
the different coloured screens, two important facts stand out: First,
during good health a blue tint is predominant. Secondly, during
indifferent health the aura constantly has an addition of yellow.

In good health the aura as a rule retains its natural colour, blue or
blue-grey as the case may be, when examined through the yellow or orange
screens, but it generally receives a tinge of red or violet when very
dark screens of these colours are employed. With the green screen the
natural hue remains, or else the aura becomes a pure blue. The action of
the blue screen when dark is not that which would have been naturally
expected. as it almost always causes the aura to assume a blue colour of
a different quality and not resembling that of the screen. At times when
seen through any of the coloured screens, this blue may be mixed without
blending with red, yellow, or green, but they are seldom distinct. The
auras of patients who are constitutionally weak, who have been
debilitated from any cause whatever, or who are ill at the time of
examination, are commonly more or less changed when looked at through
the different screens, for the most part by the addition of red, yellow,
or green, either singly or together. The yellow is rarely absent and
generally predominates over the other colours. It may be a bright
yellow, but the worse the health the patient has, the more nearly the
hue approaches to the deepest shade of Roman ochre.

The blue screen is the most useful, and the only one needed to show the
yellow when time is of importance, but when possible all the screens
ought to be employed, as sometimes very bizarre effects are obtained.
The

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

aura in the interspace between the arm and the trunk may be altogether
blue, but usually the inner aura has a different shade to the outer,
being as a rule darker or warmer. The inner may be yellow while the
outer remains blue. A further variation is for the outer aura to exhibit
an admixture of yellow or to be entirely yellow. The outer aura never
contains yellow as long as the inner continues blue, nor is this colour
ever more pronounced in the former than in the latter, so that it may be
safely inferred that the inner aura becomes yellow more often and to a
greater extent than the outer. It has been remarked elsewhere that the
inner is the part of the aura that is most frequently changed locally,
and in consequence very liable to assume a yellow hue in patches.

When an observer is investigating the aura in the interspaces between
the arms and the body for colour, he is working under advantageous
conditions, including besides a greater depth of the aura, a black
background, but when examining the yellow patches on the body the
conditions are by no means as favourable, because the body makes an
inferior background, so that a yellow patch is harder to see, and
consequently can only be detected by sensitive processes. This is the
reason why too much importance should not be attached to the hue the
body takes from the c.c. band. (See page [144](#page_144).md).

On various occasions when using the transparent screens for the
inspection with the complementary colours, the band instead of being
projected directly on the body, had the appearance of being advanced
several inches in front of the patient, and if horizontal, seemed curved
towards the observer. This phenomenon has always occurred unexpectedly,
and the writer has never been able to induce it voluntarily by focusing
his eyes on a plane in front of the patient, nor when it once presents
itself, is he able to throw the bands back on the body, without gazing
through the

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

p.c. screen again to induce a fresh after-image. This peculiar type of
image, moreover, is quite useless, as the c.c. band, instead of being
sharply defined, has always a weird and foggy look and never showed the
slightest sign of any patch.

As the complementary colours are invisible in midair, and require a
background for their perception, their appearance a little distance in
front of the body of a patient has a peculiar interest. It proves that
there must be some substance allied to a vapour or a gas which
constitutes a background. There is only one thing that this background
can possibly be, viz., the aura.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[142:\*](tha07.htm#fr_11.md) A simple test for
obtaining one's own personal primary colours is to press the closed eye,
when there will be generally seen small yellow dots covering the whole
field of vision. Intermingling with these are much larger discs of blue,
and lastly red points intermediate in size between the yellow and blue
discs. The yellow are the most numerous, the blue next in number, and
the red fewer and far more difficult to obtain.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[148:\*](tha07.htm#fr_12.md) The distance between
the eyes and the screen is rather less than the ordinary reading
distance, producing a slight strain of the eyes which has been found
beneficial in practice.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VII. The Outer Aura In Disease](tha08.md)
