[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tha04)  [Next](tha06) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/1564599779/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The Human Atmosphere*, by Walter J. Kilner, \[1920\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

<span id="chap04"></span>

### CHAPTER IV

#### OPTICAL PROBLEMS

THE human aura is invisible in total darkness, and can best and most
easily be seen in a dim light, when the eyes are in an incompletely dark
adapted state. As this condition is of great importance in relation to
various problems that will require discussion, a short and concise
account of it will not be out of place. Without taking into
consideration any except the most elementary physiological facts, it is
well known that in the normal and healthy eye the iris is contracted
more or less in proportion to the brilliance of the light. (Changes
relating to accommodation will not be referred to here.) The aperture of
the pupil is consequently small and allows external objects to be
focused as sharply as possible on the fovea. This part of the retina is
composed of cones which- are colour-sensitive to all the rays of the
ordinary visible solar spectrum. Mixtures of these rays in certain
proportions will cause the sensation of white light, while light of a
single wave length or of mixtures of wave lengths other than in
proportion to produce white light, cause colour-sensations.

In the dark adapted state the iris becomes more dilated and the eye more
sensitive to slight changes of illumination. The larger pupil also
permits more light to pass, which of itself is an advantage in a dim
light, but what is still more important it allows a larger portion of
the retina to be illuminated. This fresh portion of the retina differs
from the fovea inasmuch as it contains a great number of rods far

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

outnumbering the cones as the periphery is reached. The rods are
considered colour-blind and their stimulation only produces a grey
sensation. They are acted upon chiefly by *the shorter and more
refrangible rays*. In the dark adapted state the point of maximum
luminosity has been *removed towards the violet* end of the spectrum to
the yellow-green.

It is highly important to determine, if possible, how the dicyanin
screen enables the aura to be perceived. The solution of this question
depends partly upon the attributes of the aura itself, but to a still
greater extent upon the action exerted upon the chemical upon the eyes.

On one occasion before systemic examinations of the auras .had been
undertaken, a lady wished to see the haze round the arm and hand. A dark
blue screen was given to her to look through at the light, but after
using it she was quite unable to see the aura. In the meantime it had
been noticed that a methylene blue screen had inadvertently been handed
to her. She was allowed to use it without being informed of the mistake,
because this was regarded as a good test of the comparative value of the
two screens. She afterwards looked at the light through the proper
screen, and immediately the blinds had been regulated, could detect the
aura. Twice again at different times has the methylene blue screen been
unconsciously substituted for a dicyanin one, and it has also been tried
intentionally several times and always found inert.

Reichenbach, in his "Researches on Magnetism," gives instances of over
fifty sensitives who were able to see light proceeding from magnets,
etc., in total darkness. Unless all these people were frauds (and there
is no reason to class them as such), they must either have possessed
very acute sight, which enabled them to detect an illumination too faint
to produce any sensation in ordinary men and women, or else

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

that the quality of their sight was different, and permitted them to
descry phenomena usually invisible. This latter supposition is probably
correct, the force emanating from magnets, etc., producing vibrations
situate at some distance beyond the ordinary visible Solar Spectrum. The
same, too, may be true of the human aura. One reason for coming to the
above conclusion is, that if the effective undulations are identical
with those at any part of the visible spectrum, there should be a large
number of people with sufficiently acute vision to have observed so
remarkable a phenomenon at the poles of a magnet and the somewhat
similar appearances here referred to as the aura. This argument will be
still further strengthened if it can be proved that clairvoyants do not
possess more than the average acuteness of vision for all ordinary
purposes. A clairvoyant was consulted and kindly replied that "the gift
was in no way connected with the ordinary sight," and in fact that some
clairvoyants have inferior ordinary vision. Under these circumstances it
may be safely concluded, that individuals who can see the human aura and
the haze round magnets, etc., obtain their powers, not from keenness of
sight, but from ability to see rays not included in the ordinary visible
spectrum.

If some people are able to distinguish undulations outside the usual
visible spectrum, there would seem to be no particular reason why, by
the aid of some apparatus, or even by treatment of the eyes, others
should not be able to do the same. This is exactly what is claimed for
dicyanin.

Although from the very first it was recognized that dicyanin exerted a
peculiar influence upon the organs of sight, yet for a long time the
part of the eyes affected and the nature of the change brought about
remained utterly incomprehensible, and any attempt at an explanation can
even now be only hypothetical.

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

Nine or ten years ago, when the writer was investigating by mechanical
means forces emanating from the body, a beam of light reflected from a
small movable mirror (similar to those used for galvanometers) upon a
scale was employed, and as it was necessary to read accurately the
deflection at a distance of eight feet, use was made of a pair of opera
glasses that required to be racked out to the full extent for clear
vision. One day some years later, happening to look through the glasses,
he found to his surprise that they did not need the same extension for
perfect vision, even though the object was only half the distance away.
The only feasible explanation that can be offered for this occurrence,
is that the focal length of his eyes had in. some manner been shortened
virtually or absolutely, and as no other cause was forthcoming, the
effect could only be attributed to the constant peering through the
dicyanin screen. That some alteration has taken place in his eyes, is
confirmed by the fact that the time of the visual examination of the
aura was commenced (over ten years ago), the writer was contemplating
buying stronger spectacles, which, as he ceased to be troubled by his
sight, he forgot to do and he has not done to the present day, moreover
his reading distance has actually diminished, though accommodation, of
course, has not improved.

Shortly after this discovery, a friend, a medical man, mentioned that a
gentleman to whom he had been showing the aura by means of the dicyanin
screen, did not need glasses for reading or writing for over twenty-four
hours afterwards, although previously he could not distinguish print
properly without their aid. These two cases led to the conclusion that
it was quite possible that the dye might to some degree affect a number
of people in a similar manner, and might perhaps furnish at least a
partial explanation of the occular changes required before

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

the aura can be seen. But before describing the experiments undertaken
to put this idea to the test, it may be remarked that several other
instances have been met with where persons after using dicyanin screens
have taken up a hook or paper and have proffered the information that
they were able to see the print without glasses better than they could
ordinarily. The two following are amongst the first recorded cases. A
lady, while her husband was talking, took up a book and exclaimed "that
she could read it quite easily without spectacles," which, by the way,
she had left at home, "a thing she had not been able to do for years."
In the second instance, a medical man, after an allusion to the property
of dicyanin under discussion, tried to read a newspaper without glasses.
In general, he could only accomplish this when he held the paper out at
full arm's length, but now he found that he was able to read it when
held six to eight inches nearer.

Every person who has remarked upon his or her sight being temporarily
improved, was presbyopic, though not to any great extent. The effect has
never been noticed in emmetropia or myopia.

As it seemed impossible that coloured screens could influence
accommodation, all experiments were conducted from the point of view of
the other functions of the eyes. For this purpose a microscope was used,
on which the fine adjustment lowered or raised the objective 1/100 of an
inch for each revolution. The wheel was divided into ten parts, so that
each division corresponded to 1/1000 of an inch. In [table
3](tha05.htm#tab03) this unit is denoted by the letters mi
(mille-inches). The lowest eyepiece and the inch and a half objective
were employed. Screens were prepared by filling glass cells with weak
aqueous solutions of different dyes—carmine, K yellow, methylene blue,
and gentian violet respectively. The exact depth of the colours seemed
immaterial provided they permitted sufficient illumination

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

of the object on the stage, but this condition unfortunately introduced
a disturbing factor, viz., the large amount of white light which passed
through the screens.

The procedure adopted was as follows: The observer focused a selected
bristle of the proboscis of a blow-fly (the object used) as sharply as
possible by means of the coarse adjustment, the fine adjustment being
placed at zero. Directly a sharp image had been obtained, he looked away
for a second or two and then glanced at the object as quickly as he
could, to determine whether the focus was correct. Further adjustment
was made if required. This was done two or three times to ensure the
elimination of accommodation effects.

A coloured screen was then inserted between the mirror and the object.
The bristle had now to he focused a second time. This time the fine
adjusting screw alone was used, with the same precautions as before.
This procedure was repeated with each filter-screen in turn, the
position of the fine adjusting wheel being noted for every observation
and the results recorded.

The observer next looked at the light through the deep dicyanin screen
for about thirty seconds, and then repeated the whole series of
observations, focusing the object first in white light, and afterwards
through each filter-screen in rotation.

The following is a detailed account of one experiment. The experimenter
(A in the table) taking the precautions mentioned above, focused the
bristle with the coarse adjustment, the fine adjusting standing at zero.
The result was called O. A yellow screen was then placed under the
object, which remained in perfect focus. Result O. The filter was then
changed for a red one. The bristle was no longer in focus, to rectify
which the wheel had to be turned one tenth of a revolution in the
direction that lifted the objective

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

away from the object. The result was designated -1 mi. A blue screen was
now inserted, and the fine adjusting wheel had to be rotated one
division from zero in the opposite direction. This made the objective
approach the slide, and the effect was termed +1 mi. With the violet
filter sharp definition was not attained until the wheel had been turned
two further divisions, altogether three tenths of a revolution, or +3
mi.

The observer next peered through the dark dicyanin screen at the light
for about thirty seconds, and then refocused the object without the
intervention of any screen, when it was found necessary to lower the
objective +2.5 divisions from zero, which result was duly recorded. The
red, yellow, blue and violet screens were then inserted in turn, but
between each trial the observer looked at the light through the dark
dicyanin screen for a few seconds. The resultant figures were for red +1
mi., yellow +1 mi., blue +2 mi., and violet +3.5 mi. This observer was
tested on three separate occasions, and the readings obtained showed no
variations.

Most of the observers in these experiments were medical men, and every
one was experienced in the use of the microscope. Only those results
(fifty in number) which passed the strictest tests as detailed above
were kept. One or two observers did not take sufficient pains, but the
cause of most failures was the difficulty in overcoming accommodation.
During each series of experiments the focus of the microscope was
purposely disturbed two or three times, when practicable, without the
knowledge of the observer, and unless the re-adjustes completely
coincided with the original readings, the series was rejected.
Consequently not more than one series out of every three or four was
accepted.

It was interesting to notice that the greater the alteration of the
focus required after looking through

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

the dicyanin screen, the more easily was the aura perceived. In no case
when the change for white light after the use of the dicyanin screen
exceeded that requisite after the insertion of the blue screen alone,
was there the slightest difficulty in seeing the aura. When the dicyanin
produced a less effect than did the blue screen, the more nearly the
readings approximated, the more readily did the observer perceive the
aura. If a microscope be used for ascertaining whether a person is
likely to see the aura easily, it will be unnecessary to traverse the
whole series of tests. The following procedure will be quite sufficient:
First focus the object in ordinary light, next with a blue screen
beneath the object, and lastly again in daylight after looking through
the dicyanin screen. Unfortunately, however, this method can rarely be
employed, as few people are sufficiently conversant with the use of the
instrument.

Some observers find it difficult to obtain a good definition when the
violet screen is beneath the object. The trouble is due to the fact that
the dye (gentian violet) used gives two bright bands with spectroscope,
with one maximum between 4,000 λ and 4,500 λ, and the other between
6,500 λ and 7,000 λ <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2). (*Vide* Mees’
"Atlas of Absorption Spectra.") The colours being so far apart in the
spectrum are antagonistic to one another. The violet screen has only
been retained for convenience, as very little importance can be placed
upon results obtained by its aid. It ought to be borne in mind that the
violet in the spectrum consists of wave lengths adjacent to each other,
while all the violet pigments and dyes are merely mixtures of red and
blue.

In table 3 the first three series were obtained by observers who were
under the age of forty, the next three between forty and sixty, and the
third over the

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

<span id="tab03"></span>

### TABLE III

<div align="center">

|     |       |       |        |       |        |
|-----|-------|-------|--------|-------|--------|
|     | WHITE | RED   | YELLOW | BLUE  | VIOLET |
| A   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +1    | +3     |
|     | +2.5  | +1    | +1     | +2    | +3.5   |
| B   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +2    | +4     |
|     | +3    | +1.75 | +2     | +2    | +4.5   |
| C   | 0     | -1.5  | 0      | +2.5  | +2.5   |
|     | +2.5  | +0.5  | 0      | +2.5  | +2.5   |
| D   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +1    | +3     |
|     | +1    | +0.75 | +0.75  | +1.5  | +3.5   |
| E   | 0     | -1.5  | 0      | +1.75 | +1.75  |
|     | +2    | +0.5  | +0.5   | +1.75 | +1.75  |
| F   | 0     | 0     | +1     | +1    |        |
|     | +2.5  | +1    | +1     | +3    |        |
| G   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +1.5  |  +2    |
|     | +1    | -0.5  | 0      | +2    | +2     |
| H   | 0     | 0.75  | 0      | +1.75 | +1.75  |
|     | +1    | +0.25 | +0.75  | +2    | +2     |
| I   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +1    |        |
|     | +1.5  | +0.5  | 0      | +1    |        |
| J   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +2.5  |        |
|     | +2    | 0     | +1     | +2.5  |        |
| K   | 0     | -1    | 0      | +2.5  |        |
|     | +6.5  | +2.25 | +5.25  | +6    |        |
| L   | 0     | -1    | +0.09  | +2.4  |        |
|     | +2.25 | +07   | +1     | +2.8  |        |

</div>

age of sixty. The tenth observer was a medical student whose
accommodation was temporarily suppressed by atropine, the eleventh that
of a clairvoyant. The last readings are the means of fifty cases. The
upper reading of each series is before, and the lower after looking at
the light through the dicyanin screen. The figures explain why persons
over the age of fifty years have greater difficulty of seeing the aura
at their early trials than younger people.

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

The eleventh case is extremely interesting as the observer was a
clairvoyant, and the writer was especially gratified at meeting her,
because he had often wondered how far clairvoyant's eves differed from
the normal in ordinary respect. [Fortunately](errata.htm#0) this lady
was quite expert with the microscope and was painstaking. Her husband
was the possessor of a very fine instrument which she was in the habit
of using. It will be noted that before looking through the dicyanin
screen, the coloured filters under the microscopic object only produced
the average effect upon her eyes. The dicyanin had, however, a greater
influence than in any other instance met with before or since. This was
the lady previously referred to as being able to see better without her
glasses than she had done for years. (Page [61](#page_61).)

In order to appreciate these experiments to the full extent, it is
necessary to recall a few details of elementary physics. Ordinary
daylight is well known to consist of undulations in the ether of
different wave lengths. The visible solar spectrum is divided into six
main divisions (purposely omitting indigo), viz., red, orange, yellow,
green, blue and violet. If a quartz prism be used there is a portion of
the spectrum lying beyond the violet named the lavender-grey, which some
people cannot see. The intensity of the luminous spectrum in daylight is
greatest near the yellow region, from which point it gradually
diminishes towards the red and violet ends. There is no physical reason
why the yellow should be more energetic than any other colour of the
spectrum, and the cause is purely physiological.

Although full of marvels the human eye is by no means a faultless
optical instrument. It is imperfectly corrected for chromatic
aberration, since the various colours come to a focus on different
planes. The red being the least refrangible, has its focus furthest
from, and the violet nearest, the lens. The

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

focus of the yellow is about midway between the red and the violet, and
in the normal eye the yellow rays fall exactly on the retina, while the
other colours come to a focus a little in front or behind it. Correction
is arranged for in the brain centres. Since the red rays are focused
behind the retina, the lens would have to be moved slightly forwards in
order to make them fall exactly on the retina. This is equivalent to
moving the objective of the microscope a little further from the object.
The blue and the violet rays on the other hand would require the lens to
be shifted nearer the retina, tantamount to bringing the object glass
closer to the object.

Thus when the object has been first focused in white light, and again
after the coloured filters have been inserted beneath the object one
after another, it will be necessary to move the objective further from
the slide for the less and nearer for the more refrangible rays.

Now to return to the dicyanin screen. Before looking at the light
through this screen in the experiments just detailed, red was the only
colour negative to the white and yellow, while the blue and violet were
positive. In the series fully described the observer A, after having
peered through the dicyanin screen, found red, yellow and blue all
negative, while the violet remained positive but only to a small extent.
This becomes more evident if + 2.5 mi. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[\*](#fn_3) be deducted from each of the figures,
making the corrected readings for red -1.5 mi., yellow -1.5 mi., blue
-0.5 mi., and the violet -1 mi. These experiments prove that some
alteration has taken place in the eye equivalent to a lengthening of the
eye, or a shortening of the principal focus, which enables presbyopics
to *read without glasses*. It would also appear that white and yellow
rays, at or near the

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> D line, come to a
focus at the true principal focus of the normal eye; in the eyes after
exposure to the dark dicyanin screen, rays on the violet side, probably
in the yellow-green or green, come to a focus at that point, and thus
possibly the phenomenon is associated with the extension of the visual
powers into the regions of the spectrum beyond the usual limits. The
impression induced upon the sensitized eye by a visible aura, etc.,
might then be the result, at least partially, of the action of
ultra-violet rays. This, too, would be the explanation of the colour
variations and changes as seen with or without screens or complementary
coloured bands. Great support is given to this hypothesis by the fact
that the greater the alteration produced by a dicyanin screen in the
focusing test of the microscope, the easier it is to see the aura.

It is evident from these experiments that dicyanin has the power of
shortening the focus of the eye, yet there are very great difficulties
in determining the way this is achieved. Accommodation, as it apparently
remains unaltered, seems to take no part in the transaction, and as yet
no test has been devised, the question must be treated entirely
theoretically. For this purpose the eye has to be considered under three
different aspects, viz., the physical, the chemical and the nervous.

The equivalent of shortening the principal focus of the eye can be
obtained by:—

1\. Increase of the curvature of the cornea or lens. This proposition is
so improbable that it requires no consideration.

2\. By the increase of the refractive index of the media.

If the change be due to this cause, the fluid media will be the most
likely parts to be affected.

a\. By the increase of solids in solution.

b\. By a greater tension.

c\. By a chemical change in the substance.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

a\. The first of these assumptions could not take place during the short
time of peering through the screen.

b\. The second would be merely an incipient glaucoma, and the repetition
of the sensitizing of the eye might cause all the inconvenience of this
disease. As no stage of this affection affords symptoms at all similar
to those produced by dicyanin, this proposition gives no help.

c\. It thus seems that a chemical change is the only possible
explanation of the production of an increase of the refractive index.
What the alteration consists of cannot be imagined, but that a true
modification has really taken place is strengthened by the peculiarities
in the colour perception as will be considered later on.

Even though it is unreasonable to imagine that a shortening of the focus
of the eye can be accomplished directly through nervous agency, yet
there is good cause to suppose that dicyanin exerts an influence upon
the nervous system of the eye; either on the retina or the central
ganglia, separately or in conjunction. Comparison between the two
following experiments, one diminishing and the other adding to the
efficiency of the eye, is instructive.

Exp. 1. Let a person look at a primary coloured band as directed in
chapter vi, only colour-blinding one eye instead of two. If he then
looks at a white screen with both eyes the complementary coloured band
is visible. If he closes the unaffected eye the spectre still remains.
If he shuts the colour-blinded eye no complementary coloured band can be
observed.

Exp. 2. A lady who had never seen the aura tried to detect it under the
most favourable conditions of light and background, but completely
failed. One eye was sensitized with dicyanin in the usual manner, while
the other was closed. The result was that she could immediately see the
aura when looked for with

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

both eyes. It was equally plain when she closed the non-sensitized eye.
When she used the latter alone she could see the aura, but not so
distinctly. After peering through the dicyanin screen at the light with
both eyes, each eye was equally perceptive.

Exp. 3. A, failed to see the aura, but after sensitizing one eye by
means of the dicyanin screen, he found both eyes were equally efficient,
although not quite to the same extent as when he had subsequently peered
through the screen with both eyes in the ordinary manner.

Exp. 4. P, was unable to perceive the aura. After sensitizing one eye
only with the dicyanin screen, she remained incapable of detecting it,
when either using one or both eyes. After looking at the light through
the same screen in the ordinary manner with both eyes, she obtained the
power of seeing the haze.

Exp. 5. G K, looked for the aura but could not sec the slightest sign of
it. He then looked at the light with his right eye for about thirty
seconds through the dicyanin screen, while he closed and covered the
left. Directly afterwards he could distinguish the aura with his left
eye, but it was not quite as distinct as when the right eye was used
alone. Sensitizing both eyes increased the efficiency slightly.

These experiments have been repeated several times with the similar
results.

The inferences from these experiments are intricate and very difficult
to interpret. The only explanation that seems to be forthcoming is that
the observer has naturally a slight power of the perception of the aura,
but so slight as to be latent until it has been aroused by some outside
stimulation. This idea is strengthened to some extent by a lady who
tried to see the aura without having peered through the dicyanin screen
and completely failed. However, she persevered for some ten minutes,
when she said that she thought she

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

could see the haze but was uncertain whether the impression was not
merely imagination. Her eyes were then influenced by the dicyanin screen
when she could immediately distinguish the aura plainly, there being no
difference to what she had noticed before except in distinctness.

The next step is the consideration of the conditions in which the aura
can be seen. The most favourable is a dim light (not complete darkness),
which is also best suited for practical work. The haze can often be seen
round any part of the human body against a dark background in ordinary
daylight when viewed through coloured screens.

The depth of shade required for these screens is dependent upon the
brightness of the light. Advantage of this method has been taken for the
examination of the inner aura through the red or carmine screen.
([Chapter iii](tha04.htm#chap03).) Many screens of different colours
have been experimented with in order to obviate, if possible, the
necessity of a dark room, but none have been found to be sufficiently
satisfactory. Taking all in all, a dark blue screen is most efficient
for seeing the outer aura, but it does not reveal the peculiarities of
the inner aura as plainly as the red. Some people can see the aura in
ordinary daylight to a greater or less extent.

The inference that can be drawn from the above statements is that a dark
adapted state of the eye is not an absolute necessity for the perception
of the aura, but that this phenomenon can be far better observed when
the eye has been partially reduced to this condition. It must be borne
in mind that the need of a dim light may be partially due to the
delicacy of the aura, whose visibility is destroyed by a bright light.

It is well recognized that an object that affords only a slight colour
stimulus, when first seen in the incomplete adapted state, is grey and
gradually

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

becomes coloured. The progressive development of colour depends upon the
advance towards complete adaptation or on an increasing strength of
colour stimulus. This tallies with the appearance of the aura, which at
first looks grey and then shows an addition of some colour, usually blue
or green.

It was mentioned a little time ago that one of the effects dicyanin had
had upon the eyes was to confer the power of perceiving ultra-violet
rays, and this supposition will be still strengthened by the study of
the auric colours, which will now be done.

For our present purpose it is immaterial whether the undulations of
different wave lengths are discriminated in the nerve centres, or
whether they are separated in the retina by the nerve-endings of the
fibres which convey the stimulus to and originate in the brain the
perception of light, or by fluorescence of the media of the eyes.

These colours must be fully studied. Screens are necessary for their
investigation, and it has been ascertained by experiment that deeply
coloured ones are to be preferred, as by using them a fair amount of
light may be allowed in the room; otherwise the exact depth of colour is
of no consequence. The screens employed are:—

<div align="center">

|        |           |               |                                                          |
|--------|-----------|---------------|----------------------------------------------------------|
| Red    | made with | a solution of | carmine. (The same as used for defining the inner aura.) |
| Orange | „         | „             | yolk yellow.                                             |
| Yellow | „         | „             | K yellow.                                                |
| Green  | „         | „             | napthol green.                                           |
| Blue   | „         | „             | methylene blue.                                          |
| Violet | „         | „             | gentian violet.                                          |

</div>

Other dyes will answer just as well.

Before considering the effects of these screens upon the aura, it will
be advisable to say a few words about their action under ordinary
circumstances.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

According to a widely accepted theory, the eyes possess three sets of
colour-sensitive nerves, that are excited by red, yellow, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[\*](#fn_4) and blue respectively, and all other
colours are perceived as a consequence of excitation of two or more of
these nerves in varying degrees simultaneously.

The spectrum of ordinary daylight decomposed by means of a prism
consists of a vast number of undulations of different wave lengths, that
produce rainbow hues (the visible portion of the solar spectrum),
besides many others that are commonly invisible. From a physical point
of view the undulations of each colour and each shade of colour are
quite distinct, and the notion of primary and secondary colours is
entirely physiological. While slight variations exist in different
individuals, yet for all practical purposes the spectral colours about
Frauenhofer's lines B.D. and F. (about 6900λ, 5900λ, and 4870λ,
respectively), may be regarded as the three primaries with sufficient
accuracy for the following speculations.

Suppose a ray of light consisting of undulations of 6900λ, or
thereabouts enters the eyes, it will influence the red-sensitive nerves
most, and will appear to the observer, red. As the wave lengths become
smaller, say about 6400λ, they will stimulate both the red and the
yellow-sensitive nerves, giving rise to the sensation of orange. The
wave lengths when reduced to about 5900λ, will be seen as yellow. In
like manner as the undulations lessen gradually in size from 5900λ, to
4870λ, the observer will perceive yellow-green, blue-green, and lastly
blue one after the other. Indigo will be left out. Subsequently a most
interesting colour will be reached, viz., violet which roughly extends
from 4200λ, to 3950λ. These rays not only excite the blue-sensitive
nerves, but also stimulate the red-sensitive ones. *Thus at one end of
the visible solar* 

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

*spectrum there exist red rays that excite the red-sensitive nerves to a
greater or less extent, and at the other end there are undulations
composed of very different wave lengths, that influence the same
red-sensitive nerves, although in the intermediate parts of the spectrum
as the wave lengths diminish the stimulation of the red-sensitive nerve
endings lessens until it practically ceases*.

When a quartz prism is used to decompose sunlight, a lavender grey
colour is found beyond the violet. The visibility of this portion is
probably due to fluorescence of the media of the eye, when the shorter
invisible wave lengths are converted into longer and visible wave
lengths. Beyond these again are undulations which cannot be detected by
the unaided eye.

As a possible explanation of the visibility of the aura and of the
various colour phenomena associated with it, the writer would suggest
that the dicyanin screen brings about some change in the eyes, so that
sensations not merely of light but also of colour, may to some extent be
evoked by at any rate parts of the ultra-violet spectrum. It is not
difficult to conceive that under such circumstances by an extension of
the processes which occur at the violet end of the ordinary visible
spectrum, when the red-sensitive nerve endings of the retina are again
and with diminishing wave lengths increasingly stimulated, there might
occur a more or less complete repetition of the spectral colour series
probably greatly modified in many respects. In short a *second, higher
spectrum*. Violet bears the same relationship to blue and ultraviolet
red as orange does to the red and yellow.

Coloured objects reflect hues differing from those of the spectrum,
inasmuch as the colours perceived may be the outcome of a combination of
the various parts of the spectrum, on account of certain undulations
being absorbed from white light. The reflected rays are rarely simple,
being usually mixed with white light, because the object is generally
unable to absorb

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the whole of any one set of waves contained in the light falling on it.
For instance, a green object may reflect:

1\. Undulations of green only.

2\. Undulations of blue and yellow mixed.

3\. Either 1 or 2 with the addition of white light. The resulting shade
of green perceived being dependent upon the sum total of the action upon
all the colour-sensitive nerves.

When objects are examined through various coloured screens, should the
colour of the object and the screen differ only in shade, the former
will appear darker or lighter in hue as the latter is paler or darker.
If the object and screen are of the same colour and shade, the object
will remain unaltered in hue. (See page [38](tha03.htm#page_38).) Should
the screen and the object be of different colours, according to the
depth of the former, the latter will become much darker, or may be
changed in hue from the admixture of the two colours. For example take a
yellow object. This will look dark approaching to black if the screen be
a very deep blue, while if light, it will change in colour, becoming
greenish from the intermingling of the blue and yellow.

Almost every observer after using the dark dicyanin screen sees the aura
as a blue or blue-grey mist. The question arises whether this blue
colour is due to wave lengths of about 4200λ, or belonging to a region
beyond the ordinary visible spectrum. If the former it must be due to
ordinary reflected light, and should follow the ordinary laws when
examined through the coloured screens; if the latter some departure from
the usual appearances might not unreasonably be expected.

The investigation demands that the observer should be able to detect the
aura without using the pale dicyanin screen; have no deficiency of
colour vision; and be capable of describing accurately the colours

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

he sees; consequently an artist, if able to perceive the aura, is the
ideal person. It is curious that when examining the aura through the
various screens, no two experimenters give identical names to the
colours they see. The cause may be sometimes due to imperfections in
their descriptive powers, as the colours are constantly weird and almost
indescribable, but the discrepancies at other times are so pronounced
that it is impossible to doubt that their visual organs were differently
affected, although under ordinary circumstances colours are correctly
named. The weird effects seem frequently to be produced by the
non-blending of two or more colours seen simultaneously. For instance
blue and yellow are often seen as blue and yellow, not green as might be
anticipated; and red and blue do not necessarily make a violet or
purple. In some cases it is likely that a partial combination does take
place, complicating matters still more, so that blue and yellow not only
appear separately but also as mixed as green, making a strange jumble of
colours.

These peculiar impressions may be explained by supposing that as whereas
the sensations due to simultaneous stimulation by yellow and blue are
combined into green by the brain, the colours seen in relation to the
aura being outside ordinary experience are recognized with the curious
results already mentioned.

An artist's model stood in front of a black background, with her hands
on her hips and her elbows extended, while the auras in the interspaces
between the arms and body were examined. O, an artist by profession,
when not using any screens, described the aura as a haze of which the
colour was a blue and grey. The appearance was the same throughout the
spaces, except the part nearest the body (evidently the inner aura),
which was rather more pronounced. He next examined the aura through

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

coloured screens, and the results are tabulated in series 1 of [table
4](tha05.htm#tab04). (pages [80](#page_80) and [81](#page_81)). The
model was then asked if she could change the colour on the left side to
red. She succeeded only in producing a red-grey colour. Afterwards in
like manner a very good blue was produced on the right side. Through the
screens O saw the hues mentioned in series 2 and 3 of the table. The
model next tried to produce a yellow on the right side, but the
resultant colour being unstable was not very useful for a series of
tests. However, it appeared a warm green through the first screen
employed, which happened to be a yellow. It frequently occurs that a
change in the colour of the aura when brought about by voluntary
efforts, is not sustained sufficiently long to allow of complete
examination through all the screens.

At various times in connection with similar experiments the writer has
inspected this woman's aura through coloured screens. The results are
given in series 4 to 7 of the table. Series 8 and 9 are the colours
recorded by Q, and the writer, which without the intervention of any
screen appeared a liquid French ultramarine.

The other examples in the table were chosen to illustrate the colours
seen during health. During illness alterations of the colours of the
aura when viewed through different coloured screens, especially the blue
one, are very frequent, and in a large proportion of cases some shade of
yellow is present.

The above observations suffice to show that the natural hue of the aura
remains a blue when looked at through a yellow screen, instead of
following the common rule of becoming a green; that yellow in some shade
is constantly perceived when a dark blue or a violet is employed—an
impossibility under ordinary circumstances. Again when by voluntary
effort on the part of the subject the aura has been changed in hue, the
colours seen through the screens do not

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

coincide with those that might naturally have been expected.

These investigations confirm the view that a radical change in the
visual apparatus is brought about by the dicyanin screens. In connection
with the above experiments the following points should be particularly
noted:—

1\. The comparative ease with which the colours of the aura could be
changed to blue or green.

2\. The difficulty this subject experienced in producing a yellow, and
the instability of the result.

3\. The [bizarre](errata.htm#1) effects found on the examination of the
green aura with screens.

During the examination of patients, several women, but no man, have been
able to change the colours of their auras to a greater or less extent,
some quite easily, who with a little practice could have given
invaluable assistance. Most of these persons had an excitable
temperament. Unfortunately all of them were unavailable for experimental
purposes as none of them were artist's models.

The explanation of the aura is full of difficulties, some of which
vanish immediately auto-luminosity has been conceded.

Elsewhere (page [51](tha04.htm#page_51)), it has been stated that the
aura cannot be seen in complete darkness, and consequently is not
self-luminous in the ordinary acceptation of the word. This statement
requires qualification, and a criticism of the meaning of the term
self-luminous. In general, the phrase "auto-luminous," denotes that an
object can be seen in the dark through some inherent or acquired
property of emitting rays roughly speaking between 7500λ, and 4000λ, the
range of the ordinary visible solar spectrum. If, however, the substance
emanates rays of say, 3500λ, which are usually quite invisible, it will
be classed among the objects that are not self-luminous. If the human
eye can by some means or other

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

be enabled to see these rays, then the substance would be defined as
auto-luminous; consequently the term resolves itself into a
physiological conception. Should these postulates be admitted, it seems
easy to advance a step further, and to conceive that an object may emit
rays which would be visible if they were in sufficient abundance to act
as an effective stimulus. Since appropriate stimulation may render
effective a stimulus otherwise subliminal, and such a result appears to
have been obtained in the case under discussion, whatever the nature of
the rays concerned, the aura may be conceived as being auto-luminous in
this strictly limited sense.

The position of the aura is as follows:—

The aura appears as a faint cloud whose structure and distribution is
determined by forces emanating from the body and which becomes visible
in a dim diffused light.

As soon as a certain change in the eye has been brought about by the use
of dicyanin screens, the aura can be seen. It is suggested that the
alteration is in the direction of retinal sensitisation to ultraviolet
light.

The aura cannot be discerned in total darkness, therefore it either does
not produce rays which can be recognized by the eye, or if it does they
are not sufficiently abundant to cause effective stimulation.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span> <span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

<span id="tab04"></span>

### TABLE IV

#### COLOUR OF AURAS EXAMINED WITH AND WITHOUT COLOURED SCREENS

<div align="center">

<table data-border="1">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
<col style="width: 12%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>COLOUR OF AURA</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>RED SCREEN</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>ORANGE SCREEN</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>YELLOW SCREEN</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>GREEN SCREEN</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>BLUE SCREEN</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>VIOLET SCREEN</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>1</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue with a little grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>0A. Carmine<br />
1A. Carmine</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue<br />
Warmer blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue Darker blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue Purple</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Brilliant Orange</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Purple Dark yellow</p>
<p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>2</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish grey by voluntary effort</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>0A<br />
1A</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Mauve<br />
Mauve</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Carmine Bluish red</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Unable to tell the colour</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Purple blue Orange</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Violet Plum</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>3</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bright blue by voluntary effort</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>0A<br />
1A</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue<br />
Red</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Orange Yellow Blue (Not combined)</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue<br />
Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Plum<br />
Plum</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>4</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bluish grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Plum</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow ochre</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>5</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bright blue by voluntary effort</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Red Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Red Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Dirty yellow ochre</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>6</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow by voluntary effort</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow with red tinge</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>7</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green by voluntary effort</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Red</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>8</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Very fine blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Dull carmine<br />
     The</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bluish grey<br />
inner aura the same—</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow<br />
only darker.</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish blue</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>9</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Very fine blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Carmine</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bluish violet</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>10</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Grey Peculiar</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Grey hardly grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p> </p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Ochre</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>11</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Greenish grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish green</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Greenish yellow</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Greenish yellow</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow and peculiar blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow Green Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Purple</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>12</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue with a little grey</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Carmine Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow Green</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green Yellow Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Grey? Yellow</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Violet Green</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td data-valign="top"><p>13</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Bluish green and white</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Red Green</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Red. Green (Opaque)</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green with a little blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green with a little blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green with a little blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p>14</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Peculiar blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Reddish blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Orange blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellowish blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Green</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Yellow Blue</p></td>
<td data-valign="top"><p>Blue</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

### APPENDIX. CHAPTER IV

FROM the commencement of the recent calamitous war, it has been
impossible to obtain any dicyanin, and at the present time the
probability of a further supply seems to be very remote. It was formerly
made in Germany, and the demand for it has always been limited, so that
there does not appear to be any likelihood that the new dye works will
attempt this particular compound until the more marketable colours have
been produced to their full extent.

It is unreasonable to suppose that the properties attributed to dicyanin
should be confined to a single dye, and probably others more or less
efficient may be discovered amongst those that will be produced as soon
as conditions become more settled. The necessary experiments must be
made by other workers, as the author feels on account of age and growing
infirmities unable to undertake them. He, however, thinks a few hints
about the procedure may be useful.

First of all it is to be expected that a suitable dye will be found
amongst those of a blue colour, and especially those which transmit the
shorter wave lengths of the spectrum in the greatest abundance, with the
least amount of the longer.

In the search of a suitable dye he would suggest the use of a microscope
in a manner similar to that described on page [62](#page_62), but the
process may be considerably curtailed. Suppose the same microscopic
power and the same object be employed, it would only be necessary to
accurately focus a bristle of the blowfly's proboscis in ordinary
daylight, using the coarse adjustment, which must not be altered again.
For

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

the next step the observer should gaze at the light for from half to one
minute through a screen containing a moderately dark solution of the dye
to be tested. After this he should focus the bristle a second time with
the fine adjustment. Should no alteration in the focus be required,
probably the dye will prove useless for the purpose on hand, but should
it be necessary to lower the objective towards the slide by two or more
divisions on the wheel, then the dye may be practically tested by using
it instead of dicyanin before looking at the aura. No further
experiments should be carried out on the same day.

N.B.—It is extremely necessary that the plan mentioned on page
[62](#page_62) for obtaining the accuracy of the focus and eliminating
the effects of accommodation should be strictly adhered to. A little
practice makes this quite easy to perform.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[64:\*](tha05.htm#fr_2) λ is the symbol for
Angstrom's unit, viz., 10<sup>-16</sup> metre, or one-tenth millionth of
a millimetre.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[67:\*](tha05.htm#fr_3) +2.5 mi is the amount of
adjustment required to bring the object into focus again in the white
light after peering through the dicyanin screen.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[73:\*](tha05.htm#fr_4) For the reason of
choosing yellow instead of green see [chapter vi](tha07.htm#chap06).
page [141](tha07.htm#page_141).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter V. The Effects of the Different Forces Upon the
Aura](tha06)
