[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moq02)  [Next](moq04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662324/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysteries of the Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

### The Hieroglyphical Interpretation of the Hebrew Alphabet. <span id="fr_0"></span>[\*](#fn_0.md)

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0" width="75%">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top" width="655"><p>Some men strive after wealth; some would like to be strong and healthy; others again wish for fame and renown. But the wise ones apply their hearts to knowledge, so that knowing, they may understand the purpose of their lives and work out their destiny before the night cometh.</p>
<p>—<em>From the Writings of Moses Maimonides</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

### ‏א‎ A

—<span class="smallcaps">Aleph</span>.—Man himself as a collective
unity, a principal, the lord and master of the earth. The universal man,
and the human genre. Esoterically, unity, the central point, the
abstract principle of a thing; as a sign it expresses power, stability,
and continuity; the superlative, a kind of an article, as a prefix
rendering the meaning more serious and enhancing its significance.

Its arithmetical value is 1.

### ‏ב‎ B

—<span class="smallcaps">Beth</span>.—The mouth as man's organ of
speech, his interior, and his habitation; it denotes virility, paternal
protection, and interior action, and movement. It is the integral and
indicative article of the Hebrew language.

This letter in conjunction with the one preceding it—*Aleph*—forms all
ideas of progress, of graduated advance, the passage from one state into
another = locomotion.

Its arithmetical number is 2.

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

### ‏ג‎ G

—<span class="smallcaps">Gimel</span>.—The throat, and everything that
is hollow. It denotes every kind of opening, outlet, canal, and all
manner of things concave, hollow, and profound, it expresses organic
covering, and serves to produce all derived ideas of the bodily organism
and its actions.

Its arithmetical number is 3.

### ‏ד‎ D

—<span class="smallcaps">Daleth</span>.—Signifies breast, bosom. It is
the emblem of the universal quaternary, that is the origin of all
physical existence. Symbolically: every nourishing substance, and
abundance of possessions.

It expresses division, and things divisible. Chaldaic: an article of a
very distinctive nature.

Its arithmetical number is 4.

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

### ‏ה‎ H

—<span class="smallcaps">Hai</span>.—Everything that vitalizes, *i.e.*,
air, life, and being. It is the symbol of universal life, and represents
the breath of man, the spirit, and the soul. Everything that vivifies.
Life, and the abstract idea of being. It is an article, especially
emphasizing and giving prominence to objects, and persons.

Its arithmetical number is 5.

### ‏ו‎ W

—<span class="smallcaps">Waw</span>.—Signifies the eye of man and
becomes the symbol of light; it also represents the ear and becomes the
symbol of the sound of the air, the wind. In its quality as a consonant
it is the emblem of water, and represents the taste, and the appetite.
As a grammatical sign it is considered to be the image of mystery most
profound, and most incomprehensible, the symbol of the knot that unites,
and of the point which separates Being and Non-being.

Its arithmetical value is 6.

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

### ‏ז‎ Z

—<span class="smallcaps">Zain</span>.—Signifies whistling, and applies
to all piercing noises which penetrate the air and reflect themselves in
it. As a symbol it is represented by a stroke, a dash, and an arrow.
Everything that tends to a given point. As a grammatical sign it is the
abstract image of a tie which connects things with one another.

Its arithmetical number is 7.

### ‏ח‎ CH

—<span class="smallcaps">Cheth</span>.—Signifies the principle of vital
aspiration and is the symbol of elementary existence. It represents the
field of man, his labour, and everything that requires an effort on his
part; his care, his solicitude. As a grammatical sign it holds a middle
place between the sign of life absolute and the sign of relative life.
It also is the image of equilibrium, and of equality, and attaches
itself to all ideas of effort and of normal action.

Its arithmetical number is 8.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

### ‏ט‎ T

—<span class="smallcaps">Teth</span>.—Signifies an asylum, a refuge,
which man provides for himself for his protection. As a grammatical sign
it denotes resistance and shelter. Its esoteric meaning is that of a
hiding wall erected to guard something precious, and a watch over a dear
object in the midst of danger.

Its arithmetical number is 9.

### ‏י‎ J

—<span class="smallcaps">Yod</span>.—Signifies all manifested power. It
represents the hand of man, his pointing finger. As a grammatical sign
it denotes potential manifestation in contradistinction to actual, and
also intellectual duration and eternity. As a consonant it is of
inferior value and means only material duration. Plato thought it
designated everything tender or delicate.

Its arithmetical number is 10.

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

### ‏כ‎ Q

—<span class="smallcaps">Kaaw</span>.—Signifies every subject that is
hollow in general, and the half closed hand of man in particular. As a
grammatical sign it is the symbol of reflection and assimilation, and
typifies the assimilative nature and the passing life.

It is a kind of mould, receiving and communicating indifferently all
forms. The movement which it expresses is that of similitude and of
analogy.

Its arithmetical number is 20.

### ‏ל‎ L

—<span class="smallcaps">Lamed</span>.—Signifies extension. As a
symbolical image it represents the arm of man, and the wing of a bird;
everything that extends or elevates itself, displaying its proper
nature. It denotes a movement of extension, of direction, expressing
reunion, coincidence, dependence, and possession.

Its arithmetical number is 30.

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

### ‏מ‎ M

—<span class="smallcaps">Mem</span>.—Signifies woman. It is the symbolic
image of man's mother and companion. Everything that is fruitful and
formative. Employed as a grammatical sign it denotes maternity, external
and passive action. Placed at the beginning of words it expresses that
which is local, and plastic, while at the end, it becomes the collective
sign. It develops a being in infinite space as much as its nature
permits, or it unites through abstraction one or two of the same
species. It is the extractive article, and is used to designate an
action divided in its essence, or something taken out from a number of
similar things.

Its arithmetical number is 40.

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

### ‏נ‎ N

—<span class="smallcaps">Mm</span>.—Signifies the son of man, every
being that is individualized, and distinctive. At the end of a word it
denotes augmentation and extension. It has the double virtue of
recoiling upon itself, and of spreading out. At the commencement of a
word it expresses the former, while as a final it signifies the latter.

Its arithmetical number is 50.

### ‏ס‎ S

—<span class="smallcaps">Samech</span>.—Signifies to hiss. It is
considered to be the type of a bow and esoterically represents the great
cosmic bow, the string of which hisses in the hands of mankind. As a
grammatical sign it is the circular movement having a definite relation
to the limited circumference of every sphere.

Its arithmetical number is 60.

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

### ‏ע‎ E

—<span class="smallcaps">Aim</span>.—Signifies hearing. It represents
the ear of man, and its interior parts, and is the symbol of all noises,
and indistinguishable sounds. Everything that is devoid of harmony. It
typifies the cavity of the chest.

As a grammatical sign it stands for the material sense, the image of
emptiness and nothingness. It is used to describe everything crooked,
low and perverse.

Its arithmetical number is 70.

### <span class="smallcaps">Pei</span>, ‏פ‎ <span class="smallcaps">or P, meaning the Open Mouth, Value</span> 80.

The symbol of expression, that through which man makes himself known in
the outer world, hence the literal meaning, mouth; the Second Race of
Man.

The outlet; the outward and visible means for the Spirits'
manifestation.

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Tzaddi</span>, ‏צ‎ <span class="smallcaps">or Tz, literal meaning Fish Hook or Dart. Value 90</span>.

Esoterically relating to accomplished ends and the later Third Race.

The double [hermaphrodite](errata.htm#1.md) Caduceus.

The sign of protection and signifies guidance from above. God's favor
shown to the Disciple on the Path.

### <span class="smallcaps">Q-oph or Coo-eph</span>. ‏ק‎ <span class="smallcaps">or Q, Value 100</span>.

Literally the *Ape*, the sign of nature's submerged stratum; the
Subliminal consciousness. The evolutionary stage which is behind us.

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Reisch</span>, ‏ר‎ <span class="smallcaps">R, Value 200, literally Meaning Head</span>.

Symbol of the Fifth Race, determination and progress, individual
movement.

Independence, self-help, self-initiated endeavor.

Direction, a center of generating motion starting of its own accord.

### ‏ש‎ SH

—<span class="smallcaps">Shein</span>.—Signifies light movement, and
sweet sounds.

Esoterically it symbolizes that part of a bow from which the arrow darts
hissing. It is the sign of relative duration and of the movement
appertaining to it.

At the commencement of a verb it gives it double power of conjunction.

Its arithmetical number is 300.

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

### ‏ת‎ TAU

—<span class="smallcaps">Taw</span>.—Signifies reciprocity. The ancient
Egyptians regarded this letter as a symbol of the universal soul.

It stands for sympathy, and for perfection, of which it is the emblem.

Its arithmetical number is 400.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:\*](moq03.htm#fr_0.md) This interpretation of the
hieroglyphic meaning of the Hebrew letters is taken from a very rare and
valuable manuscript in possession of Mr. Gewurz. He has in preparation a
larger work, on "The Restoration of the Hebrew Language," into which
this manuscript will be embodied. Those who are interested in ancient
languages, and the lovers of the Hebrew tongue especially, will find
this larger work a great help in their studies. Mr. Gewurz has already
devoted to it over ten years of untiring labour, but it may take another
year till it is complete.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Explanatory Note on the Letters](moq04.md)
