[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moq06)  [Next](moq08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662324/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysteries of the Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

### Initiation according to the Qabalah, from a Scientific and Philosophical Point of View. <span id="fr_1"></span>[\*](#fn_1.md)

Various explanations of the way of initiation have been given to the
world which appeal to those who are purely upon the line of
devotion—*i.e.*, to the Bhaktis, but we must remember that the man of
knowledge, the Gnani, plays an important part in this, our Fifth Race.
To the scientific or philosophical mind an explanation must be given
which will appeal especially to the intellect, not, let it be noted, to
the hard materialistic mind, but to the true intellect which has sensed
the right path and knows of the Goal to which it leads. For this
explanation we have to turn again to the Qabalist who has already been
of such service to us in our study.

\*         \*         \*         \*

The scientific mind of this age requires a logical and well-reasoned
foundation for

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

every statement that claims his attention. Credence is given to naught
but the senses and their testimony. Even in the realms of psychology and
metaphysical research, the man of scientific mind clings to this rule
and demands compliance with his own conditions.

Naturally the Pilgrim on the Path to the Masters finds himself at a loss
to reconcile the man of science, with his cold calculating mind and
relentlessly exacting methods, to a manner of procedure which, even in
its incipiency requires as a *sine qua non*, an article not to be found
in the average scientist's stock-in-trade. This article is nothing else
but the faith of a little child. Fortunately this does not sound as
ridiculous now as it would have some fifty years ago. A great number of
men distinguished for their learning and sound knowledge are very far
from being strangers to the spirit and things spiritual. (If perhaps
there be a few materialists who treat with scorn the dictum laid down as
to the necessity of clearing the mind of all preconceived notions when
confronted with new and strange teachings or happenings, to such it
should

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

be said that their great prophet Huxley himself laid down the same rule
as regards materialistic science). To this daily growing number these
words may carry a message. Its source is the heart, the seat of Love,
but the channel by which it has been conveyed is reason, the discerner:
it makes its appeal to the heart, but it does not wish to evade the
criterion of strict scientific discernment.

The Astral or Water initiation, the purpose of which is to call the
attention of the disciple to the gulf fixed before him, is the lowest of
all save that of the initiation of Earth, which, however, is rather a
basis of operations than an initiation *per se*. It detaches the student
from earthly things only so far as his active participation in the
grosser joys and carnal pleasures is concerned. It does not yet touch
his mind and his craving for these things—far from it. The fire of
desire only gains momentum and the fierceness of passion shows itself in
all its primeval vehemence whenever one turns to Yoga in earnest and is
about to pass the Water initiation as we have termed it.

Tremendous are the consequences and

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

far-reaching the importance of the disciples’ conduct during this period
of his trial. If he obeys and renders all allegiance to his Teachers,
the heavier blows may be kept from him, but woe, a thousand times woe
unto him if he takes it lightly and casts longing looks behind him upon
his past mode of life, no Teacher cart then help him and no Master can
save him.

The entrance to this path and the passing of this initiation are solemn
facts in Nature and cannot be trifled with any more than the burning
fire or the exploding dynamo. He who disregards the laws governing the
inner life after entering the Sanctuary, pays for his disobedience not
only by loss of bodily life, but by injury and possible loss of his
mental and moral life which is a far more terrible lot than any mere
physical dissolution.

To set one's foot upon the path and then to hesitate is to be lost
indeed. To doubt the Powers is to perish. But the well-prepared and
obedient aspirant, of a childlike heart and of single mind need have no
such fears. Those that are for him are stronger than those that are
against him,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and the multitude of witnesses always encompassing and watching the
budding *chela* will hasten to his help whenever needed. There is indeed
but one thing for the probationer to know who has been declared fit and
ready for the task, for the arduous uphill climb to the Summit. He has
to realize the position in which he has placed himself, with one foot
upon the base of the mountain and the other hanging over the abyss of
*avidya*. He cannot, nay, dare not, turn back for there is no foothold,
so he has to fling himself bodily upon the base of the mountain clinging
tightly thereto with all his might, holding on like grim death. This is
his first trial and yet it is the most important and reflects in a way
the last one, for here lie must exert his whole strength for the victory
gained thereby will carry him on to the summit if only Ire keep to the
narrow way and follow the landmarks and signs left by those who in
former times trod this same weary path.

Guided by these realizations and firmly established in his faith, the
Path to the heights is now open to the pilgrim and nothing can turn him
away from the main

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

road leading to the ultimate fruition of all his travail except his own
wavering and inconstant nature. The lesson, therefore, which the Astral
or Water initiation is to teach is nothing less and nothing more than
purification on the one hand and faith on the other. Briefly, it is a
process of detachment, resignation and the cultivation of an implicit
trust in what was hitherto only a tentative enterprise. Prior to the
aspirant's entrance upon the Astral Plane and experiences, the body, the
lower nature and mundane cares were his chief concern in life; teachings
and self-knowledge came in as a kind of pleasantry or hobby, good enough
for recreation, but now these things that were first must become the
last and the last become the first.

A line of demarcation, invisible to ordinary sight but none the less
substantial and real, divides the Astral from the Mental, the water from
the air, which is symbolized by the horizon. The dwellers on the mental
plane, to which we, as far as our mind-bodies are concerned, belong,
have dominion and power over the two lower planes given them as their
natural heritage from

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

the Cosmic Lords, consequently man as mind is the ruler and can control
all the astral elements. Seeing that the astral is the birthplace and
scope of desire, it follows that man, if he will, can, in the exercise
of his natural sovereignty, subdue every one of them. His inclination
towards them is due solely to the non-use of this prerogative, and he is
like unto a King or an Emperor who is determined in his actions by the
momentary disposition of his subordinates. But the King is a King if he
only knew it. What deprives him of his power is his ignorance of his
real capacity. What makes man yield to his passion is likewise his
ignorance that he himself is its origin and procreator and in virtue of
that can command its cessation.

Now a breach of the law on the astral plane, wrong though it may be,
cannot by any stretch of imagination be compared in its bearing and
influence to a breach of the law on the plane of mind. The unlawfulness
of a mental plane act is so serious and its effects so far-reaching that
punishment must be not only swifter, but more drastic also. This leads
to the conclusion that sin

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

by a man awakened on the mental plane must always be visited upon him in
the direst possible manner, because if that were not so the man would
readily fall a prey to the Brothers of the Shadow and abuse his powers
against the Good Law.

Powers and gifts without the corresponding virtues and devotion, can
lead only to the left-hand Path and to ultimate destruction. In the
infinite mercy, therefore, the Masters of the great White Lodge whenever
They choose a disciple lead him in the first place into such conditions
that will weed out all the excrescences of this Kamic and Manasic
principles, which is equivalent to saying that he will be "smashed-up"
and so humiliated that he will not be likely again to fall into the
snares of the invisible enemies in his subsequent career.

When the disciple is thus guided by experience and trained by time and
sorrow, he is preparing his spiritual weapons for the coming battle. He
is evolved by our old friend Pain and made strong by our dear brother
Anguish. There need be no feeling of shame and no trace of remorse in
his mind at the remembrance of former

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

failings, for it has all been necessary and he would never be where he
is nor what he is but for these past things of which he is now utterly
ashamed.

We evolve from worm to angel and must do many things over and over
again. These bring in their train the disgust of the Self which is of
the nature of Light, with its lower instruments, and flinging them away
sets our faces towards the brightness which is the entrance to the Path
proper.

The spiral law governing cyclic evolution receives at this stage of the
disciple's career a new impulse from the "Intelligible Sphere." Here
everything is governed by pure reason, and an entity moving in this
orbit must comply with the law of the sphere, else it would not only
destroy its own life but affect harmfully the existence and usefulness
of neighboring worlds. This holds good of the individual disciple and of
his planetary correspondence. It is of not much account if a man makes a
mistake ere he reaches this point, but it is equivalent to a cosmic
crime and as disastrous in its consequences if a mistake is made having
arrived thus far. This is the reason that

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

the Great Teachers from time immemorial put so much emphasis upon the
need of purgation before the Path proper may be entered upon by the
disciple. Ceasing to be an arbitrary factor in his and other people's
lives, he becomes so much law-governed in his most minute movements of
thought and as much prompted in his centres of action as are the laws of
magnetism and electricity.

Hydrogen and Oxygen and any of Nature's minute phenomena are none of
them moved by arbitrary impulse; the law that presides at their
evolution and directs their mode of life and activity is, in its
essential nature, the same as the everlasting laws that are the
foundation of a Solar System, and (for all we may know) of the greater
systems which in their turn embrace and comprehend what to us is the
vastest expanse to be found within the boundaries of infinity.

The bubbles of air and drops of water and grains of sand, as well as the
mighty Devas ruling great plants, are all manifestations of the Great
Law which we call God. It is only man who has been pushed out from the
normal course of evolution between

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

the animal and the angelic stages in order to suppress the former and
unfold the latter in his constitution.

As soon as man acknowledges the Light of the Self as his true guide, and
with undying love that neither rests nor hastes, works with the Law, he
attracts in virtue of his striving all the affinities corresponding to
his own nature from the higher spheres, and on the fruitful foundation
of these affinities he mounts upwards to the great Fountain of Eternal
Truth. He is helped by what we call invisible helpers, because the
lenses of our mind are so focussed as to consider the things and beings
that are most real to be invisible. Supported by these guides and pushed
onward by the unfailing law, his mental initiation is going on smoothly
and peaceably until it leads him to the shore where darkness is not and
where the promised reward of a full revelation is near at hand.

The Teacher is about to reveal himself and that great coining event is
casting its shadow before him. Peace, perfect peace, is falling now upon
the hitherto harassed soul and the sweetest consummation of

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

æons of struggle expands the heart that has been broken, and prepares
with its inexpressible joy and indescribable awe the Temple for the
indwelling of the Most Holy One that is to take possession of him. The
benediction of the Master draws him into the interior sanctuary and
announces the coming of the Lord himself. This is the mental initiation.

The central point of the grand synthesis comprising the initiation on
all planes is the *Jiva-atma* in its highest aspect. Its triple nature,
that of knowledge, being, and bliss, is progressing towards its ultimate
sublimation and absolute freedom from the bonds of *Maya* while
undergoing the outlying trials and ordeals. Advancing on the crest of
the wave which is raised by the evolutionary tide, the soul loses all
its hold on matter in any shape or form. Even thought (which is only a
finer form of matter) must now be considered to be a form of bondage,
and every impact from the mental plane must be scrutinized and most
closely examined as to its nature and mission.

To the ordinary mind, even of cultured

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

people, thought is so much identified with self that any mental movement
within them is looked upon as the guidance of the Self. This is why they
get angry when their wills are thwarted and their desires contravened.
Taking their mind to be themselves, their spirit rushes out against the
supposed enemy who dared to frustrate that which the mind had planned.
The disciple, distinguishing between the eternal and evanescent, knowing
the mind to be as unreal as the lower manifestations which he has
already conquered, cannot by any possible chance get angry or wish ill
to his opponents, no matter whether his grievance be real or fancied.
The knower of Truth is far above the mind and its complications and has
actually nothing to lose or gain, nobody to attack and nobody to defend,
least of all himself. There may arise exceptional occasion when, for the
sake of "younger souls" and their evolution, a defense may be made by an
Occultist against slander where others are concerned with him, but this
is a razor-edged path and needs careful treading.

When the disciple has mastered these

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

lessons and does not rush out any longer in self-defense so far as
action is concerned, he has still to follow up this conquest by the
additional and let it be confessed more difficult one of conquering the
mind's savage progeny. For no sooner has the victory been attained on
the outer plane than the Powers of the Air, as They are called, announce
Their advent and throw into the face of the daring aspirant the
challenge for a new battle. It is now that he must, in the language of
the Alchemists, put a fiery sentinel at the door of his mind, with a
flaming sword in its hand, asking every newcomer, "who goes there?"

This is the critical point, where it is finally decided if that part of
the mind called *Antakarana*, meaning "before the causal," shall be
saved from the wreckage of the lower personality or share its fate. The
*Antakarana*, being the bond of union between the waking mind and the
Higher consciousness, must at the final rupture of the lower and the
higher, be either joined to the latter or disintegrate into its
component parts by being drowned in the universal group-spirit governing
the lower mind of

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

collective humanity at the present.

Those who transcend the personality and the passions completely can
recover even here and now, in these bodies of flesh, the consciousness
of the Higher Self, but those who are unable to soar so high, either by
reason of their past Karma or because of present disabilities, cannot
catch a glimpse of the hidden glory and must content themselves with the
ordinary life and the ordinary progress of humanity in general. But
those who have won the victory and scaled the heights, they return to
testify to the Light, the brightness of which has left its reflection
upon their faces.

We can see their shining auras and their glorified countenances, for
they, without ceasing to be children of the earth, have become
naturalized citizens of the celestial realms. They are now the
twice-born sons and daughters of the Father of Lights, whose limitless
splendor must remain a mystery to the world at large to the end of time.
This is the Buddhic initiation.

The ultimate end of Science is to explain the facts of Nature. How does
Science accomplish this? By generalization and

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

deduction, which means the ranging of the newly discovered fact or the
newly revealed truth at the side of facts already known and truths
already familiar to man. But in the nature of things Science must stop
somewhere because the latest fact to which she appeals requires a
further generalization in order to account for its own origin.
Scientific methods lead thus to metaphysics, and the basis of all
scientific research is the trinity of time and space and matter, which,
according to the latest dicta of the savants, are themselves mental
conceptions. Now, seeing that these fundamental conceptions of time and
space which form the warp and woof are essentially spiritual notions and
beyond the material grasp of the unenlightened scientists who see
nothing beyond the knife and scalpel, it naturally follows that the
subject cognising these must he above and independent of them.

Prior to this stage, man can never think of anything except it is, was,
or will be. Likewise can we never think of anything which does not
occupy any space at all, or being devoid of all matter whatever. But the
*Atmic* consciousness when fully awake

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

in us needs no such support to substantiate the operation of its
interior sight. It works on the formless plane, and its experiences are
so far removed from our earthly ones that any terms we may use for their
description must necessarily be as inadequate as are our minds in
comparison to the fully enlightened divine soul.

However, the imperfection of the instrument does not detract from the
excellence of the master, and the insufficiency of temporary channels
does not lessen the fulness of the eternal fountain. In like manner does
the shortness of our sight and the narrowness of our horizon leave
untouched the limitlessness of the Divine Wisdom and of the great ranges
it provides for the exercise of its perfected children among whom the
soul at this stage of development takes her rightful place.

These truths were known to all Initiates of ancient times as they are
now being revived and proclaimed anew to a doubting world, they are all
founded upon the same principle on which the Cosmos itself is founded,
namely, Love. But while being rooted and grounded in the very nature of

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

things, and identical with the Self in all creatures, they are—we must
not forget—meant to be revealed to the few only, the majority of the
race being as yet insufficiently prepared for them.

Love, the motive power of all that lives and breathes, must be the
guiding star of every disciple who has entered and is making progress
upon the Path. It is not only his safety valve at every step of the way,
but serves also to fathom the depths of the water surrounding him during
his voyage to the other shore. The storms and the winds threatening his
tiny barque which he calls Individual Life may often be of such
vehemence that constant reliance and steadily increasing faith in the
Powers above are needed in order to insure the firmness of his anchorage
whenever he tries to find a haven of refuge. The rage of the waves
environs the disciple continually, the subtlety of their onslaught is
beyond the description of words, it varies with each case and is adapted
to everyone's Karmic needs. It is only faith and hope and love which can
save the disciple from destruction. His enemies are many and mighty,

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

their number and their power keep increasing as he nears the goal, and
his only chance of escape from their jaws is to hide himself in the
bosom whither naught that is evil can follow him, the bosom of the
Eternal Father and Mother—God.

But love, the well-known panacea for all ills of mind and spirit, has
been too often looked upon as a sort of goody goodiness which means half
weakness and half fear, and it is this which has robbed it of all the
precious fruit it otherwise would have produced for those who worshiped
at its shrine.

It is the purpose of these pages to show that love is not a concession
of the weaker to the stronger, or a baseless surrender of privilege by
the stronger for the unmerited benefit of the weaker, but rather the
outcome of the spirit's own unfoldment within man and a proof of the
awakening of the slumbering "Lord of lords" within his breast. It is the
merit of this exposition to which we humbly call the attention of the
intelligent reader, that the subject of all subjects, *viz*., *Love*, is
treated at the same time in a rational and methodical, logical and
scientific manner.

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

To the doubting world this may still be fancy and childish talk, but we
can wait patiently until the doubters grow in knowledge and the
gainsayers increase in insight. In the measure that wisdom is being
justified of its children, in the course of time these truths will
become common knowledge and be no more doubted or wondered at than is at
present the beneficial influence of fresh air and its efficiency in the
healing of bodily ills.

The Alchemists, who will forever remain our philosophers, friends and
guides in these matters, knew long ago that the whole universe is one
homogeneous whole and that we, being members of one another, serve our
ends best by living for others.

Sacrifice, therefore, is the highest form of life and self-renunciation
the highest form of self-realization. The proofs adduced in favor of
this conclusion are so numerous and so substantial as to amount to
nothing less than a mathematical demonstration.

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

SILENCE

*The worthiest method of praising God is—to be silent*. (The Qabalah.)

<div align="center">

<table data-border="0">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 100%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td data-valign="top"><p><em>Wisdom ripens into silence<br />
  When she grows more truly wise<br />
And she wears a mellow-sadness<br />
  In her heart and eyes.</em></p>
<p><em>Wisdom ripens into silence<br />
  And the lesson she does teach<br />
Is that life is more than language<br />
  And that thought is more than speech</em>.</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[31:\*](moq07.htm#fr_1.md) The following teaching is
taken down verbatim from Mr. Gewurz's dictation *while in a
semi-entranced condition*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I. The Qabalah](moq08.md)
