[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](moq09)  [Next](moq11.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0911662324/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Mysteries of the Qabalah*, by Elias Gewurz, \[1922\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

### CHAPTER III.

#### EXAMPLES OF PERMUTATION AND NUMERICAL VALUATION.

In ancient times the world was not so overburdened with literature as in
the unfortunate present, when millions of books which all treat of the
same unimportant matters, things which come and go, mere illusions of
the moment, are produced in such numbers. In those days man depended
more upon the oral teachings and when ready received his due from a
teacher to whom he was led often seemingly by chance. The method of
teaching followed was generally the Qabalistic one of using the sacred
scrolls, upon which were written glyphs and symbols, and upon this
foundation building up a solid structure of knowledge which there is
nothing in the modern world to excel. The teachings related to the
Macrocosmos, the large world or the Universe, and to the Microcosmos,
the reflection of that larger world, called Man. From the teachings
hidden in these glyphs

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

and symbols a universal science may be obtained, as is agreed by all who
have studied these things, notably by H. P. Blavatsky, a science which
treats of the Becoming of the Universe, of flux and efflux of Manvantara
and Pralaya, from the generation of the "Gods" to the perfection of man.

One of the methods used to unravel the mysteries hidden in these sacred
writings or scrolls is that of Temura or permutation, the anagrammatical
method of changing the position of the letters forming a word to create
a new word which explains the original. A striking example of this
method, which should be of interest to all who are concerned with occult
development and to those who are interested in the writings of the
Alchemists, is the following:

The writers on Alchemy speak of a mysterious substance to which no name
is given. It is said to be the cheapest thing in the world and costs
<span class="smallcaps">nothing</span>, it cannot be bought, but is
actually given "for nothing" to all who are entitled to it. What is this
mysterious thing? Let the Qabalist answer. It is <span
class="smallcaps">grace</span>.

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

This strange teaching was known ages before the Alchemists gave it out
to their disciples, being hidden in the sacred writings of old, to be
discovered by this method of Temura or permutation. Let us endeavour to
gain some idea as to the method of giving out the hidden wisdom in the
days of old.

The Hebrew word MChN, Mechein, meaning literally "from grace," has six
permutations of great significance, *viz*., MChN, "from grace," MNCh,
"from the one who rests," CHMn, meaning "rich oil," NChM, "to comfort,"
NMCh, "to obliterate," and finally, ChNM, "for nothing."

In these permutations is hidden a teaching of the deepest significance.

He who has passed through the fires of life and seen the emptiness of
carnal things, of things transitory, those things which at the utmost
last but for a life-time, even if that limit be reached, he who has
reached this stage becomes MNCh, *the one who rests* from action. He has
discovered after bitter lessons, after repeated trials and tests, that
all mundane things are useful only because of the lessons which they
teach the Soul.

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having thus
learned from long experience that nothing in the world of man may bind
him, he becomes MNCh. He goes out into the world a disciple doing the
work of his Master, doing his Master's will, seeking to bring anew to
earth the mighty truths so long hidden from a materialistic world,
seeking ever to serve his brethren unto whom the same light has not yet
been vouchsafed, ever in the midst of great activity, yet himself
inactive within. Whatever storm there may be without, however much it
may pour with hailstones, however fearful the lightning and thunder in
the world of man, he stands calmly by, ready to serve those who are sent
to him, ready to do the will of God, for he has learned from the Silence
and become MNCh.

Thus, he acquires GRACE, MChN, that grace which is his due through
resting from effort, whilst ever in the midst of the fight.

This <span class="smallcaps">grace</span>, or MChN, is like unto "rich
oil," which is ChMN, pouring down upon him, anointing him and opening up
a wider field of consciousness to him, which tells of perfect unity and
at-one-ment, that plane or condition of being known in the East

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

as the Buddhic and spoken of in the West as Cosmic Consciousness.
Entering into this condition of Buddhic consciousness through the
anointing, all his doubts and fears are dispelled. Never again can he
complain that there is no purpose in life, nevermore will he rail at the
gods for the faults of man, for now he <span
class="smallcaps">knows</span>, he realises and understands the <span
class="smallcaps">reason</span>, and sees the Purpose shining even in
the darkest night of misery. Thus knowing much he is enabled to forgive
all, and sets his feet firmly upon the path of Attainment.

Henceforth, as the looks around him and studies the Sacred Scriptures
written in the hearts of men, he sees nothing evil, except in a relative
sense. There are only lessons to be learned and a <span
class="smallcaps">something</span> beyond all forms which is Real and
Everlasting. Nothing that is human is evil in his sight, nothing that is
human is wrong, there is no sin but what he might himself have
committed, no stage but what he himself has passed in his upward climb
and knowing the effect of these lessons upon himself he realises that
all is for the best and that God in truth, is indeed in his heaven, and
that

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

all is, as the poet says, right with the world.

The word NChM, "to comfort," shews us that after arriving at this stage
the man is comforted with the knowledge gained, comforted by the Divine
*Grace* which through resting he has attained. And now a new stage has
been reached shewn in the word NMCh, meaning "to obliterate," the lower
man is *obliterated* and the god appears in all his glory. It is now
that the disciple attains to perfection and receives the great Arcanum,
the true Philosopher's Stone which is given him literally "for nothing"
(CHNM). He brings with him only <span class="smallcaps">grace</span>
(MChN), which permuted is ChNM, meaning literally "for nothing."

This then is the meaning of the Alchemists when they assert that the,
sacred fire cannot be bought but is to be had "for nothing," but this
"nothing" is a very precious "something," for it is <span
class="smallcaps">grace</span> without which no man can safely be
entrusted with the Grand Secret.

We may read the lessons contained in these Temuras in a shorter way
thus:—

The <span class="smallcaps">grace</span> of God is like unto <span
class="smallcaps">rich oil</span> pouring out from the Heavens, coming
"to

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

comfort" the "one who rests" from strife and serving "to obliterate" all
evil, so that <span class="smallcaps">nothing</span> is left but the
Perfected One, the Tahar or Arhat.

This is an illustration of the method called Temura. Let us now study
that of Gematria or numerical valuation and [incidentally](errata.htm#5.md)
learn the secret of the wonderful number thirty-three, a secret
especially interesting to Freemasons.

The struggler, the disciple, it is well known, has to be thrown down
into the Pit into the depths of matter, to learn the lessons which only
can be learned through bitter experience. In the midst of his trials
when for a time the Light is shut out from him he cries aloud: "Woe is
me, *my pain* is greater than I can bear."

This pain is felt only by the lower man who is being crushed and the
teacher reminds the disciple of this and instructs him by means of the
perfect number *thirty-three*.

The value of the Hebrew word KABI which means "my pain" is exactly
thirty-three, the number well-known to Occultists and Free-Masons. Why
is this called the

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

*perfect* number? How many Free-masons can answer? Few indeed of those
who specialise in the "fourth degree," the banqueting degree, in any
case, can throw even a faint glimmer of light upon the subject. Oh! that
we might be permitted to pour the "*Chochmah Nistorah*" into the empty
Masonic vessels and purify the Craft of its defilements. Idol with feet
of clay! Let us leave the proud holders of this degree in the hands of
the earth-spirit who will awaken them all in good time.

KABI then, which means "my pain" is numerically thirty-three and
contains a teaching well worth of study. When the teacher hears this cry
and recognises the man as an aspirant, when the disciple thinks that his
pain is too great to be borne then is help vouchsafed him. He is
instructed to *centre himself in God* to rise from the *Pit* into which
he has been thrown.

The word BAL which means "in God" has the same numerical value (33) as
KABI (my pain). We see that the symbol of the Higher Self (A) is
centered in this word pointing out to the disciples the goal to which he
must attain.

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

When this centring has been effected the disciple is told that now he
will have to meet his real Self and become one with his Father, the
Master within. "*In God*" says the Teacher, "shalt thou find *thy
Father*, through *pain* and by the destruction of pain shalt thou rise
from the *Pit*."

The word *pain* as we have seen it is numerically 33. From this we get
the word BAL *in God*, also 33. *In God* the *Father* is to be found, by
union the Self is to be known, as we see by changing the letters to
those of the same numerical value, *viz*., ABIKh, literally *thy Father*
(33).

These lessons learned, the disciple rises from the *Pit* and having
become one with God returns to the *Mount* from whence he came and
receives the Law as all true Initiates have to do. Then it is said that
*he will live* for ever.

These teachings are also found in studying the perfect number 33, for
not only does it refer to the *Pain* of the Disciple, the *Father*, the
*centring* of the self *in God* but it shows us that the man returns to
the heights after these struggles and really begins to live in *the
eternal*. The word GL means

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *Mountain* and has
the numerical value of 33, whilst YChIH has the same value and means *he
will live* (in the eternal).

Thus in this number 33 is hidden the secret which tells how the risen
one escapes for ever from the connection which he has been forced to
make with Asmodeus and enters into that state in which Goodness and
Light are predominating characteristics. Anything the treader of the
Path possesses of these qualities is owing to individual advancement,
but the popular or uninstructed world is not yet out of the hands of
Asmodeus nor likely to be for ages to come. From all these teachings we
should learn infinite patience and tolerance with our less progressed
brothers, remembering the jewels from the Hall of Wisdom as set down in
*Light on the Path*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Literature of the Qabalah Throughout the Ages](moq11.md)
