[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th105)  [Next](th107.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

### III

#### THOTH THE MASTER OF WISDOM

##### THOTH (TEḤUTI)

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> present chapter will be devoted to a
brief consideration of the nature, powers, and attributes of the divine
personification Thoth (Teḥuti), the Master of Wisdom and Truth, on the
ground of pure Egyptian tradition. As I have unfortunately no sufficient
knowledge of Egyptian, I am not in a position to control by the texts
the information which will be set before the reader; it will, however,
be derived from the works of specialists, and mainly from the most
recent study on the subject, the two sumptuous volumes of Dr E. A.
Wallis Budge, the keeper of the Egyptian and Assyrian antiquities in the
British Museum.

First of all, however, let us see what the German scholar Pietschmann
has had to say on Thoth in his monograph specially devoted to
Thrice-greatest Hermes according to Egyptian, Greek, and Oriental
traditions. <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59.md)

The first part of Pietschmann’s treatise, in which he seems to be
content, as far as his own taste and feeling are concerned, to trace the
original of the grandiose concept of the Thrice-greatest to the naïve
conception of an “ibis-headed moon-god,” is devoted to the consideration
of what he calls the god Teχ-Ṭeḥuti among

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

the Egyptians. Why Pietschmann should have chosen this double form of
the name for his sub-title is not very clear. The variants appear to be
Teḥ, Teḥu, Teḥut, and Teḥuti—of which it would seem that the Greek form
Thoth is an attempt to transliterate Teḥut. There are, however, it may
be remarked, no less than eighteen variants of the name found in Greek
and Latin. I should thus myself be inclined to use the form Teḥut if it
were permissible; but of this I am not quite sure, as the weak-sounding
though undoubtedly more common form Teḥuti, is usually employed by
scholars. As, however, Teḥuti, to my ears at any rate, is not a very
dignified sounding cognomen, I shall use the Greek form Thoth as being
the more familiar to English readers.

##### THOTH ACCORDING TO PIETSCHMANN

Horapollo tells us that the ibis was the symbol of Thoth as the “master
of the heart and reason in all men,” <span id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_60.md)
though why this was so must remain hidden in the mystery of the “sacred
animals,” which has not yet to my knowledge been in any way explained.

And as Thoth, the Logos, was in the hearts of all, so was he the heart
of the world whose life directed and permeated all things. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[2](#fn_61.md)

Thus the temple, as the dwelling of the God, was regarded as a model of
the world, and its building as a copy of the world-building. And just as
Thoth had ordained measure, number, and order in the universe, so was he
the master-architect of temple-building and of all the mystic monuments.
Thus, as the ordering world-mind, a text addresses Thoth as follows:

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

“Thou art the great, the only God, the Soul of the Becoming.” <span
id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_62.md)

To aid him in the world Thoth has a spouse, or syzygy, Nehe-māut. She
is, among the Gnostics, the Sophia-aspect of the Logos. She is
presumably the Nature of our Trismegistic treatises. Together Thoth and
Nehe-māut are the initiators of all order, rule, and law in the
universe.

Thus Thoth is especially the representative of the Spirit, the Inner
Reason of all things; he is the Protector of all earthly laws, and every
regulation of human society. <span id="fr_63"></span>[2](#fn_63.md) Says a
text:

“His law is firmly established, like that of Thoth.” <span
id="fr_64"></span>[3](#fn_64.md)

As representative of the Reason immanent in the world, Thoth is the
mediator through whom the world is brought into manifestation. He is the
Tongue of Rā, the Herald of the Will of Rā, <span
id="fr_65"></span>[4](#fn_65.md) and the Lord of Sacred Speech. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[5](#fn_66.md)

“What emanates from the opening of his mouth, that cometh to pass; he
speaks, and it is his command; he is the Source of Speech, the Vehicle
of Knowledge, the Revealer of the Hidden.” <span
id="fr_67"></span>[6](#fn_67.md)

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

Thoth is thus the God of writing and all the arts and sciences. On a
monument of Seti I. he is called “Scribe of the nine Gods.” He writes
“the truth of the nine Gods,” and is called “Scribe of the King of Gods
and men.”

Hence he is naturally inventor of the hieroglyphics, and patron and
protector of all temple-archives and libraries, and of all scribes. At
the entrance of one of the halls of the Memnonium at Thebes, the famous
“Library of Osymandias,” called “The great House of Life,” we find Thoth
as “Lord in the Hall of Books.” <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68.md)

In the Ebers papyrus we read: “His guide is Thoth, who bestows on him
the gifts of his speech, who makes the books, and illumines those who
are learned therein, and the physicians who follow him, that they may
work cures.”

We shall see that one of the classes of priests was devoted to the
healing of the body, just as another was devoted to the healing of the
soul.

These books are also called “The Great Gnoses of Thoth.” <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69.md) Thoth was thus God of medicine, but not so
much by drugs as by means of mesmeric methods and certain “magic
formulæ.” Thus he is addressed as “Thoth, Lord of Heaven, who givest all
life, all health.” <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70.md)

##### THE THREE GRADES OF THE EGYPTIAN MYSTERIES

Moreover, Thoth was also Lord of Rebirth: <span
id="fr_71"></span>[4](#fn_71.md) “Thou hast given life in the Land of the
Living; Thou hast

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

made them live in the Region of Flames; Thou hast given respect of thy
counsels in the breasts and in the hearts of men—mortals, intelligences,
creatures of light.”

The Land of the Living was the Invisible World, a glorious Land of Light
and Life for the seers of ancient Egypt. Mortals, Intelligences,
Creatures of Light, were, says Pietschmann, the “three grades of the
Egyptian mysteries.” <span id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72.md) These grades
were, one may assume from our treatises: (1) Mortals—probationary pupils
who were instructed in the doctrine, but who had not yet realised the
inner vision; (2) Intelligences—those who had done so and had become
“men,” that is to say who had received the “Mind”; (3) Beings (or Sons)
of Light—those who had become one with the Light, that is to say those
who had reached the *nirvāṇic* consciousness.

So much for what Pietschmann can be made to tell us of Thoth as
Wisdom-God among the Egyptians.

##### THOTH ACCORDING TO REITZENSTEIN

To the information in Pietschmann may be added that which is given by
Reitzenstein in the second of his two important studies, *Zwei
religionsgeschichtliche Fragen nach ungedruckten Texten der Strassburger
Bibliothek* (Strassburg, 1901). This second study deals with
“Creation-myths and the Logos-doctrine,” the special Creation-myths
treated of being found in a hitherto unpublished Greek text, which hands
on purely Egyptian ideas in Greek dress and with Greek god-names, and
which is of great interest and importance for the general subject of
which our present studies form part.

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

The writer of this cosmogonical fragment was a priest or prophet of
Hermes, and Hermes plays the most important part in the creation-story.
Reitzenstein then proceeds to show that in the oldest Egyptian cosmogony
the cosmos is brought into being through the Divine Word, which Thoth,
who seems to have originally been equated with the Sun-god, speaks
forth. This gives him the opportunity of setting down the attributes
ascribed to Thoth in Egypt in pre-Greek times. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73.md) As, however, the same ground is covered
more fully by Budge, we will now turn to his *Gods of the Egyptians, or
Studies in Egyptian Mythology* (London, 1904), vol. i. pp. 400 ff., and
lay under contribution the chapter entitled “Thoth (Teḥuti) and Maāt,
and the other Goddesses who were associated with him,” as the most
recent work on the subject by a specialist in Egyptological studies,
whose opinions, it is true, may doubtless on many points be called into
question by other specialists, but whose *data* must be accepted by the
layman as based on prolonged first-hand study of the original texts. In
using the material supplied by Dr Budge, however, I shall venture on
setting it forth as it appears to me—that is to say, with the ideas
awakened in my own mind by the study of his facts.

##### THOTH ACCORDING TO BUDGE

In the Hymns to Rā in the Ritual or *Book of the Dead,* and in works of
a similar nature, we find that Thoth and Maāt stand one on either side
of the Great God in his Boat, and that their existence was believed to
be coeval with his own. Maāt is thus seen to be the feminine
counterpart, syzygy or *shakti,* of Thoth, and her name is associated
with the idea of Truth and

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Righteousness—that
which is right, true, real, genuine, upright, righteous, just,
steadfast, unalterable.

##### HIS DEIFIC TITLES

From the inscriptions of the later dynastic period, moreover, we learn
that Thoth was called “Lord of Khemennu (Hermopolis), Self-created, to
whom none hath given birth, God One.” He is the great Measurer, the
Logos, “He who reckons in Heaven, the Counter of the Stars, the
Enumerator of the Earth and of what is therein, and the Measurer of the
Earth.”

He is the “Heart of Rā which cometh forth in the form of the God Thoth.”

As Lord of Hermopolis, where was his chief shrine, and of his temples in
other cities, he was called “Lord of Divine Words,” “Lord of Maāt,”
“Judge of the two Combatant Gods”—that is, of Horus and Set. Among other
titles we find him called “Twice-great,” and “Thrice-great.” “From this
last,” says Budge, “were derived the epithets ‘Trismegistus’ and
‘Termaximus’ of the classical writers.” We, however, doubt if this is
so, and prefer the explanation of Griffith, as we shall see later on.

In addition to these deific titles, which identify him with the Logos in
the highest meaning of the term, he was also regarded as the Inventor
and God of all arts and sciences; he was “Lord of Books,” “Scribe of the
Gods,” and “Mighty in speech”—that is to say, “his words took effect,”
says Budge; his was the power of the “Spoken Word,” the Word whose
language is action and realisation. He was said to be the author of many
of the so-called “funeral works” by means of which the “deceased” gained
everlasting life. These books were, however, rather in their origin
sermons of

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

initiation for living men, setting forth the “death unto sin and the new
birth unto righteousness.” Thus in the *Book of the Dead* he plays a
part to which are assigned powers greater than those of Osiris or even
of Rā himself.

##### HIS SYMBOLS AND NAME

He is usually depicted in human form with the head of an ibis, or
sometimes as an ibis; but why he is so symbolised remains a mystery even
unto this day. It is also of little purpose to set down the emblems he
carries, or the various crowns he wears, without some notion of what
these hidden symbols of a lost wisdom may purport. The meanings of these
sacred signs were clear enough, we may believe, to those who were
initiated into the “Language of the Word”; to them they revealed the
mystery, while for the profane they veiled and still veil their true
significance.

Teḥuti, the Egyptian name of Thoth, it has been suggested, is to be
derived from *teḥu,* the supposed oldest name of the ibis in Egypt; the
termination *ti* thus signifying that he who was thus called possessed
the powers and qualities of the ibis.

But if this is the true derivation, seeing that Teḥuti in his highest
aspect is a synonym for the Logos of our system at the very least, I
would suggest that we should rather exalt the “ibis” to the heavens than
drag down the sublime concept of that Logos to considerations connected
with a degenerate fowl of earth, and believe that the Egyptians chose it
in wisdom rather than folly, as being some far-off reflection of a
certain Great Bird of the Cosmic Depths, a member of that circle of
Sacred Animals of which the now conventional Signs of the Zodiac are but
faint sky-glyphs.

But the derivation of the name Teḥuti which seems

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

to have been favoured by the Egyptians themselves was from *tekh,* which
usually means a “weight,” but is also found as the name of Thoth
himself. Now the determinative for the word *tekh* is the sign for the
“heart”; moreover, Horapollo (i. 36) tells us that when the Egyptians
wish to write “heart” they draw an ibis, adding, “for this bird was
dedicated to Hermes (Thoth) as Lord of all Knowledge and Understanding.”
Is it possible, however, that in this Horapollo was either mistaken or
has said less than he knew; and that the Egyptians once wrote simply
“heart” for Thoth, who presided over the “weighing of the heart,” but
subsequently, in their love of mystery, and owing to the name-play,
substituted the bird *tekh* or *teknu,* which we know closely resembled
the ibis, for the more sacred symbol?

The now commonest name for Thoth, however, is Egy. *hab,* Copt, *hibōi,*
Gk. *ibis*; and it is the white ibis (*Abû Hannes*) which is the *Ibis
religiosa,* so say Liddell and Scott. Another of the commonest symbolic
forms of Thoth is the dog-headed ape. Thus among birds he is glyphed as
the ibis, among animals as the cynocephalus. The main apparent reason
for this, as we shall see later on, is because the ibis was regarded as
the wisest of birds, and the ape of animals. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[1](#fn_74.md)

In the Judgment Scene of the *Book of the Dead* the dog-headed ape (Āān)
is seated on the top of the beam of the Balance in which the heart of
the deceased is weighed; his duty apparently is to watch the pointer and
tell his master Thoth when the beam is level. Brugsch has suggested that
this ape is a form of Thoth

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

as God of “equilibrium,” and that it elsewhere symbolises the equinoxes;
but this does not explain the ape. Thoth is indeed, as we have seen, the
Balancer—“Judge of the two Combatant Gods,” <span
id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_75.md) Horus and Set; he it is who stands at the
meeting of the Two Ways, at the junction of Order and Chaos; but this by
no means explains the puzzling cynocephalus. It was in one sense
presumably connected with a certain state of consciousness, a reflection
of the true Mind, just as were the lion and the eagle (or hawk); it
“mimicked” that Mind better than the rest of the “animals.”

Horapollo (i. 16), basing himself on some Hellenistic sources, tells us
that the Egyptians symbolised the equinoxes by a sitting cynocephalus.
One of the reasons which he gives for this is delightfully
“Physiologic”; he tells us that at the equinoxes once every two hours,
or twelve times a day, the cynocephalus micturates. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_76.md) From this as from so many of such tales we
learn what the “sacred animal” did in heaven, rather than what the
physical ape performed on earth. (*Cf.* R. 265, n. 3.)

##### THE SHRINE OF THOTH

“The principal seat of the Thoth-cult was Khemennu, or Hermopolis, a
city famous in Egyptian mythology as the place containing the “high
ground on which Rā rested when he rose for the first time.”

Dare I here speculate that in this we have the mountain of our “Secret
Sermon on the Mountain,”

<span id="page_57">p. 57</span>

and that it was in the Thoth mystery-tradition of Hermopolis that the
candidates for initiation were taught to ascend the mountain of their
own inner natures, on the top of which the Spiritual Sun would rise and
rest upon their heads “for the first time,” as Isis says in our “Virgin
of the World” treatise?

##### THOTH AND HIS COMPANY OF EIGHT

At Khemennu <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77.md) Thoth was regarded as
the head of a Company of Eight—four pairs of divinities or divine
powers, each a syzygy of male and female powers, positive and negative,
active and passive, the oldest example of the Gnostic Ogdoad.

This was long ago the view of Brugsch, and it is now strongly supported
by Budge, on the evidence of the texts, as against the opinion of
Maspero, who would make the Hermopolitan a copy of the Heliopolitan
Paut, or Company, which included Osiris and Isis. Budge, however,
squarely declares that “the four pairs of gods of Hermopolis belong to a
far older conception of the theogony than that of the company of gods of
Heliopolis.”

If this judgment is well founded, we have here a most interesting
parallel in the Osirian type of our Trismegistic literature, in which
Osiris and Isis look to Hermes (Thoth) as their teacher, as being far
older and wiser than themselves.

The great struggle between Light and Darkness, of the God of Light and
the God of Darkness, goes back to the earliest Egyptian tradition, and
the fights of Rā and Āpep, Ḥeru-Behuṭet and Set, and Horus, son of Isis,
and Set, are “in reality only different versions of one and the same
story, though belonging

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

to different periods.” The Horus and Set version is apparently the most
recent. The names of the Light God and Dark God thus change, but what
does not change is the name of the Arbiter, the Mediator, “whose duty it
was to prevent either God from gaining a decisive victory, and from
destroying one another.” This Balancer was Thoth, who had to keep the
opposites in equilibrium.

##### THE HOUSE OF THE NET

The name of the Temple of Thoth at Khemennu, or the City of Eight, was
Ḥet Ȧbtit, or “House of the Net”—a very curious expression. From Ch.
cliii. of the Ritual, however, we learn that there was a mysterious Net
which, as Budge says, “was supposed to exist in the Under World and that
the deceased regarded it with horror and detestation. Every part of
it—its poles, and ropes, and weights, and small cords, and hooks—had
names which he was obliged to learn if he wished to escape from it, and
make use of it to catch food for himself, instead of being caught by
‘those who laid snares.’”

Interpreting this from the mystical standpoint of the doctrine of
Rebirth, or the rising from the dead—that is to say, of the spiritual
resurrection of those who had died to the darkness of their lower
natures and had become alive to the light of the spiritual life, and
this too while alive in the body and not after the death of this
physical frame—I would venture to suggest that this Net was the symbol
of a certain condition of the inner nature which shut in the man into
the limitations of the conventional life of the world, and shut him off
from the memory of his true self. The poles, ropes, weights, small
cords, and hooks

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

were symbols of the anatomy and physiology, so to say, of the invisible
“body” or “carapace” or “egg” or “envelope” of the soul. The normal man
was emeshed in this engine of Fate; the man who received the Mind
inverted this Net, so to speak, transmuted and transformed it, so that
he could catch food for himself. “Come ye after me and I will make you
fishers of men.” The food with which the “Christ” nourishes his “body”
is supplied by men.

Thus in a prayer in this chapter of the Ritual we read: “Hail, thou ‘God
who lookest behind thee,’ <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78.md) thou ‘God
who hast gained the mastery over thine heart,’ <span
id="fr_79"></span>[2](#fn_79.md) I go a-fishing with the cordage \[? net\]
of the ‘Uniter of the earth,’ and of him that maketh a way through the
earth. <span id="fr_80"></span>[3](#fn_80.md) Hail ye Fishers who have
given birth to your own fathers, <span id="fr_81"></span>[4](#fn_81.md) who
lay snares with your nets, and who go round about in the chambers of the
waters, take ye not me in the net wherewith ye ensnare the helpless
fiends, and rope me not in with the rope wherewith ye roped in the
abominable fiends of earth, which had a frame which reached unto heaven,
and weighted parts that rested upon earth.” <span
id="fr_82"></span>[5](#fn_82.md)

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

And in another chapter (cxxxiii.) the little man says to the Great Man
within him: “Lift thyself up, O thou Rā, who dwellest in this divine
shrine; draw thou unto thyself the winds, inhale the North wind, and
swallow thou the *beqesu* of thy net on the day wherein thou breathest
Maāt.”

“On the day wherein thou breathest Maāt” suggests the inbreathing or
inspiration of Truth and Righteousness, the Holy Ghost, or Holy Breath
or Life, the Spouse of the Ordering Mind or Logos. The winds are
presumably the four great cosmic currents of the Divine Breath, the
North wind being the “down-breath” of the Great Sphere.

The term *beqesu* has not yet been deciphered (can it mean knots?); but
the swallowing of the Net seems to suggest the transformation of it,
inwardly digesting of it, in such a fashion that the lower is set free
and becomes one with the higher.

And that this idea of a net is very ancient, especially in its
macrocosmic significance, is evidenced by the parallel of the Assyrian
and Babylonian versions of the great fight between the Sun-god Marduk
and the Chaotic Mother Tiamat and her titanic and daimonic powers of
disordered motion and instability—both Egyptian and Babylonian
traditions probably being derived from some primitive common source.

“He (Marduk) set lightning in front of him, with burning fire he filled
his body. He made a net to enclose the inward parts of Tiamat, the Four
Winds he set so that nothing of her might escape; the South wind and the
North wind, and the East wind and the West

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

wind, he brought near to the net which his father Anu had given
him.” <span id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_83.md)

Now in the Hymns of the popular Hermes-cult found in the Greek Magic
Papyri, one of the most favourite forms of address to Hermes is “O thou
of the four winds.” Moreover, we may compare with the rope with which
the Fishers “rope the abominable fiends of earth,” the passage of
Athenagoras to which we have already referred, and in which he tells us
concerning the Mysteries that the mythos ran that Zeus, after
dismembering his father, and taking the kingdom, pursued his mother Rhea
who refused his nuptials. “But she having assumed a serpent form, he
also assumed the same form, and having bound her with what is called the
‘Noose of Hercules’ (τῷ καλουμένῳ Ἡρακλειωτικῷ ἄμματι), was joined with
her. And the symbol of this transformation is the Rod of Hermes.”

Here again it is the symbolic Caduceus that represents the equilibrium
between the opposed forces; it is the power of Thoth that binds and
loosens; he holds the keys of heaven and hell, of life and death. It is
further quite evident that Athenagoras is referring to a Hellenistic
form of the Mysteries, in which the influence of Egypt is dominant. The
“Noose of Hercules” is thus presumably the “Noose of Ptah.” Now Ptah is
the creator and generator, and his “Noose” or “Tie” is probably the
Ankh-tie or symbol of life, the familiar *crux ansata,* of which the
older form is a twisted rope, probably representing the binding together
of male and female life in generation. Ptah is also the God of Fire, and
we should not forget that it is Hephaistos in Greek myth who catches
Aphrodite and Ares in a Net which he has cunningly contrived—at which
the gods laughed in High Olympus.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

In the list of titles of the numerous works belonging to the cycle of
Orphic literature, one is called *The Veil* (Πέπλος) and another *The
Net* (Δίκτυον). <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_84.md)

In the Panathenæa the famous Peplum, Veil, Web, or Robe of Athena, the
Goddess of Wisdom, was borne aloft like the sail of a galley; but this
was the symbol only of the Mysteries. Mystically it signified the Veil
of the Universe, studded with stars, the many-coloured Veil of
Nature, <span id="fr_85"></span>[2](#fn_85.md) the famous Veil or Robe of
Isis, that no “mortal” or “dead man” has raised, for that Veil was the
spiritual nature of the man himself, and to raise it he had to transcend
the limits of individuality, break the bonds of death, and so become
consciously immortal.

Eschenbach <span id="fr_86"></span>[3](#fn_86.md) is thus quite correct
when, in another of its aspects, he refers this Veil to the famous Net
of Vulcan. Moreover Aristotle, quoting the Orphic writings, speaks of
the “living creature born in the webs of the Net”; <span
id="fr_87"></span>[4](#fn_87.md) while Photius tells us that the book of
Dionysius Ægeensis, entitled *Netting,* or *Concerning Nets* (Δικτυακά),
treated of the generation of mortals. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[5](#fn_88.md) And Plato himself likens the intertwining
of the nerves, veins, and arteries to the “network of a basket” or a
bird-cage. <span id="fr_89"></span>[6](#fn_89.md)

All of which, I think, shows that Thoth’s Temple of the Net must have
had some more profound significance in its name than that it was a
building in which “the emblem of a net, or perhaps a net itself, was
venerated,” as Budge lamely surmises.

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

##### THOTH THE LOGOS

But to resume. We have seen that Thoth was considered to be the “heart”
and “tongue” of Rā the Supreme—that is, not only the reason and mental
powers of the god Rā, and the means whereby they were translated into
speech, but rather the Controller of the life and Instrument of the
utterance of the Supreme Will; He was the Logos in the fullest sense of
that mysterious name, the Creative Word. He it is who utters the “words”
whereby the Will of the Supreme is carried into effect, and his
utterance is that of Necessity and Law; his “words” are not the words of
feeble human speech, but the compelling orders of the Creative Will.

“He spoke the words which resulted in the creation of the heavens and
the earth, and he taught Isis the words which enabled her to revivify
the dead body of Osiris, in suchwise that Osiris could beget a child by
her; and he gave her the formulæ which brought back her son Horus to
life after he had been stung to death by a scorpion.”

All of which, I believe, refers microcosmically to the mystery of the
resurrection from the dead, by the power of the Logos. “Osiris” must die
before he can be raised, and beget a son, who is himself, by immaculate
conception within his own spiritual nature. “Horus” must be poisoned to
death by the scorpion of “Typhon” before he can be raised by the baptism
of the pure waters of Life.

##### THE WORDS OF THOTH

Thoth’s “knowledge and powers of calculation measured out the heavens
and planned the earth, and

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

everything which is in them; his will and power kept the forces in
heaven and earth in equilibrium; it was his skill in celestial
mathematics which made proper use of the laws (*maāt*) upon which the
foundation and maintenance of the universe rested; it was he who
directed the motions of the heavenly bodies and their times and seasons;
and without his words the gods, whose existence depended upon them,
could not have kept their place among the followers of Rā”—but would
presumably have disappeared into another universe.

Thoth is the Judge of the dead, the Recorder and Balancer of all
“words,” the Recording Angel; for the testing of the soul in the Balance
of the Hall of Osiris is called the “weighing of words” and not of
“actions.” But these “words” were not the words a man uttered, nor even
the “reasons” he thought he had for his deeds, but the innermost
intentions of his soul, the ways of the will of his being.

This doctrine of “words” as expressions of will, however, had, in
addition to its moral significance, a magical application. “The whole
efficacy of prayer appears to have depended upon the manner and tone of
voice in which the words were spoken.”

It was Thoth who taught these words-of-power and how to utter them; he
was the Master of what the Hindus would call *mantra-vidyā,* or the
science of invocation or sacred chanting. These *mantrāḥ* were held in
ancient Egypt, as they were and are to-day in India, and elsewhere among
knowers of such matters, of special efficacy in affecting the “bodies”
and conditions of that fluid nature which exists midway between the
comparative solidity of normal physical nature and the fixed nature of
the mind.

These “words” were connected with vital “breath” and the knowing use of
it; that is to say, they were

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

only really efficacious when the spoken words of physical sound
corresponded naturally in their vowels and consonants, or their fluid
and fixed elements, with the permutations and combinations of the inner
elements of Nature; they then and only then were *maā* or true or
authentic or real—that is to say, they were “words-of -power” in that
they compelled matter to shape itself according to true cosmic notions.

Thus in a book called *The Book of Breathings,* it is said: “Thoth, the
most mighty God, the Lord of Khemennu, cometh to thee, and he writeth
for thee *The Book of Breathings* with his own fingers. <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_90.md) Thus thy soul shall breathe for ever and
ever, and thy form shall be endowed with life upon earth, and thou shalt
be made a God, along with the souls of the Gods, and they shall be the
heart of Rā \[for thee\], and thy members shall be the members of the
Great God.”

##### THOTH AND THE OSIRIFIED

In the Ritual we learn of the services which Thoth performs for
“Osiris,” that is for the Osirified, for he repeats them for every man
who has been acquitted in the Judgment. Of three striking passages
quoted by Budge, we will give the following as the most comprehensible,
and therefore the seemingly most important for us. It is to be found in
Ch. clxxxiii. and runs as follows, in the words placed in the mouth of
the one who is being resurrected into an Osiris.

“I have come unto thee, O son of Nut, Osiris, Prince of everlastingness;
I am in the following of God Thoth, and I have rejoiced at everything
which he hath done for thee. He hath brought unto thee sweet air for thy
nose, and life and strength for thy beautiful face, and

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

the North wind which cometh forth from Tem for thy nostrils. . . . He
hath made God Shu to shine upon thy body; he hath illumined thy path
with rays of splendour; he hath destroyed for thee \[all\] the evil
defects which belong to thy members by the magical power of the words of
his utterance. He hath made the two Horus brethren to be at peace for
thee; <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91.md) he hath destroyed the storm
wind and the hurricane; he hath made the Two Combatants to be gracious
unto thee, and the two lands <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92.md) to be
at peace before thee; he hath put away the wrath which was in their
hearts, and each hath become reconciled unto his brother.”

##### THOTH THE MEASURER

Budge then proceeds to give the attributes of Thoth as connected with
time-periods and the instruments of time, the sun and moon. As
Ȧāh-Teḥuti, he is the Measurer and Regulator of times and seasons, and
is clearly not the Moon-god *simply*—though Budge says that he clearly
is—for Thoth as Ȧāh is the “Great Lord, the Lord of Heaven, the King of
the Gods”; he is the “Maker of Eternity and Creator of Everlastingness.”
He is, therefore, not only the Æon, but its creator; and that is
something vastly different from the Moon-god.

##### THE TITLE “THRICE-GREATEST”

On p. 401 our authority has already told us that one of the titles of
Thoth is “Thrice-great,” and that the Greeks derived the honorific title
Trismegistus from this; but on p. 415 he adds: “The title given to him
in some inscriptions, ‘three times great, great’

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> \[that is,
greatest\], from which the Greeks derived their appellation of the god ὁ
τρισμέγιστος, or ‘ter maximus,’ has not yet been satisfactorily
explained, and at present the exact meaning which the Egyptians assigned
to it is unknown.”

If this title is found in the texts, it will settle a point of long
controversy, for it has been strenuously denied that it ever occurs in
the hieroglyphics; unfortunately, however, Dr Budge gives us no
references. To the above sentence our distinguished Egyptologist appends
a note to the effect that a number of valuable facts on the subject have
been collected by Pietschmann in the book we have already made known to
our readers. We have, however, not been able to find any valuable facts
in Pietschmann which are in any way an elucidation of the term
Thrice-greatest; but to this point we will return in another chapter.

##### THE SUPREMACY OF THOTH

The peculiar supremacy ascribed to Thoth by the Egyptians, however, has
been amply demonstrated, and, as the great authority to whom we are so
deeply indebted, says in his concluding words: “It is quite clear that
Thoth held in their minds a position which was quite different from that
of any other god, and that the attributes which they ascribed to him
were unlike the greater number of those of any member of their companies
of gods. The character of Thoth is a lofty and a beautiful conception,
and is, perhaps, the highest idea of deity ever fashioned in the
Egyptian mind, which, as we have already seen, was somewhat prone to
dwell on the material side of divine matters. Thoth, however, as the
personification of the Mind of God, and as the all-pervading, and
governing, and directing power

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

of heaven and earth, forms a feature of the Egyptian religion which is
as sublime as the belief in the resurrection of the dead in a spiritual
body, and as the doctrine of everlasting life.”

Thoth is then the Logos of God, who in his relation to mankind becomes
the Supreme Master of Wisdom, <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_93.md) the
Mind of all masterhood.

We will now turn to one whose views are considered heterodox by
conservative and unimaginative critics, <span
id="fr_94"></span>[2](#fn_94.md) who confine themselves solely to
externals, and to the lowest and most physical meanings of the
hieroglyphics—to one who has, I believe, come nearer to the truth than
any of his critics, and whose labours are most highly appreciated by all
lovers of Egyptian mystic lore.

##### THE VIEWS OF A SCHOLAR-MYSTIC

The last work of W. Marsham Adams <span id="fr_95"></span>[3](#fn_95.md)
deserves the closest attention of every theosophical student. Not,
however, that we think the author’s views with regard to a number of
points of detail, and especially with regard to the make-up of the Great
Pyramid, are to be accepted in any but the most provisional manner, for
as yet we in all probability do not know what the full contents of that
pyramid are, only a portion of them being known to us according to some
seers. The chief merit of the book before us is the intuitional grasp of

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

its author on the general nature of the mystery-cultus, as derived from
the texts, and especially those of the Ritual or the so-called *Book of
the Dead,* as Lepsius named it, setting a bad fashion which is not yet
out of fashion. The Egyptian priests themselves, according to our
author, called it *The Book of the Master of the Secret House,* the
Secret House being, according to Adams, the Great Pyramid, otherwise
called the “Light.”

##### THE SPIRITUAL NATURE OF THE INNER TRADITION OF EGYPTIAN WISDOM

In his Preface the author gives us clearly to understand that he regards
the Wisdom of Egypt as forming the main background of some of the
principal teachings of Early Christianity; and that this view is
strongly confirmed by a careful study of the Trismegistic literature and
its sources, will be made apparent in the course of our own labours. But
before we proceed to quote from the former Fellow of New College,
Oxford, whose recent death is regretted by all lovers of Egypt’s Wisdom,
we must enter a protest.

Mr Adams has severely handicapped his work; indeed, he has destroyed
nine-tenths of its value for scholars, by neglecting to append the
necessary references to the texts which he cites. Such an omission is
suicidal, and, indeed, it would be impossible for us to quote Mr Adams
were it not that our Trismegistic literature permits us—we might almost
say compels us—to take his view of the spiritual nature of the inner
tradition of Egyptian Wisdom. Not, however, by any means that our author
has traversed the same ground; he has not even mentioned the name of the
Thrice-greatest one, and seems to have been ignorant of our treatises.
Mr Adams claims to have arrived at his

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

conclusions solely from the Egyptian texts themselves, and to have been
confirmed in his ideas by personal inspection of the monuments. In fact,
he considers it a waste of time to pay attention to anything written in
Greek about Egyptian ideas, and speaks of “the distortion and
misrepresentation wherein those ideas were involved, when filtered
through the highly imaginative but singularly unobservant intellect of
Greece.” <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96.md) Thus we have a writer
attacking the same problem from a totally different standpoint—for we
ourselves regard the Greek tradition of the Egyptian Gnosis as a most
valuable adjunct to our means of knowledge of the Mind of Egypt—and yet
reaching very similar conclusions.

##### THE HOLY LAND OF EGYPT AND ITS INITIATES

The Holy Land of those who had gone out from the body, watered by the
Celestial Nile, the River of Heaven, of which the earthly river was a
symbol and parallel, was divided into three regions, or states: (1)
Rusta, the Territory of Initiation; (2) Aahlu, the Territory of
Illumination; and (3) Amenti, the Place of Union with the Unseen
Father. <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97.md)

“In the religion of Egypt, the deepest and most fascinating mystery of
antiquity, the visible creation, was conceived as the counterpart of the
unseen world. <span id="fr_98"></span>[3](#fn_98.md) And the substance
consisted not of a mere vague belief in the life beyond the grave, but
in tracing out the Path whereby the Just, when the portal of the tomb is
lifted up, <span id="fr_99"></span>[4](#fn_99.md) passes through the
successive stages of

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Initiation, of
Illumination, and of Perfection, necessary to fit him for an endless
union with Light, the Great Creator.” <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100.md)

Thus we are told that at a certain point in Aahlu, the Territory of
Illumination, the Osirified, the purified soul, has achieved the
“Passage of the Sun”—that is to say, has passed beyond the mortal
mind-plane; he opens the Gates of the Celestial Nile and receives the
Atf-crown of Illumination, “fashioned after the form of the Zodiacal
light, the glory of the supreme heaven.” This is presumably the “crown
of lives” referred to in our sermons, which he receives in the sphere
called “Eight,” and with which he goes to the Father.

The Guide and Conductor through all these grades was Thoth the Eternal
Wisdom; <span id="fr_101"></span>[2](#fn_101.md) and we are told that:

##### THOTH THE INITIATOR

“Thoth the Divine Wisdom, clothes the spirit of the Justified <span
id="fr_102"></span>[3](#fn_102.md) a million times in a garment of true
linen, <span id="fr_103"></span>[4](#fn_103.md) of

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

that substance, that is to say, which by its purity and its brilliancy
reminds us of the mantles, woven out of rays of light, wherewith the sun
enwraps the earth afresh each day as she rotates before him; just as the
soul of man is invested with new radiance each time that he turns to the
presence of his Creator.” Again, “in the harmonious proportion of the
universe,” the Egyptians saw “the Eternal Wisdom, Thoth, ‘the Mind and
Will of God.’” <span id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104.md)

We have seen that Pietschmann considers the original of Thoth, the God
of Wisdom, to be nothing more than the ibis-headed moon-god, thus
intentionally deriving the origin of the Great Initiator from what he
considers to be the crude beginnings of primitive ideas. But Thoth was
the Great Reckoner, the Recorder of the Balance of Justice, the Teller
of the Kārmic Scales. Now the mortal time-recorder for the Egyptians was
the moon, “for if we consider the motion of the moon relatively to the
sun, we shall find that the time that it takes in covering a space equal
to its own disc is just an hour. . . . Now, that measure of the ‘Hour’
was peculiarly sacred in Egypt; each of the twenty-four which elapse
during a single rotation of the earth being consecrated to its own
particular deity, twelve of light and twelve of darkness. ‘Explain the
God in the hour,’ is the demand made of the adept in the Ritual when
standing in the Hall of Truth. And that God in the hour, we learn, was
Thoth, the ‘Lord of the Moon and the Reckoner of the Universe.’” <span
id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105.md)

Again, with regard to the moon-phases, the first day of the lunar month
was called “the conception of the moon,” the second its “birth,” and so
on step by step till it was full. Now the time of all lower initiations
was the full moon. Thus “in the lunar representations

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

on the walls of the temple of Denderah we have fourteen steps leading up
to the fifteenth or highest, whereon was enthroned Thoth, the Lord of
the Moon.” <span id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106.md)

For some such reasons was Thoth called Lord of the Moon, not that the
moon gave birth to the idea of Thoth. We must not seek for the origin of
the Wisdom-tradition in its lower symbols. For in the inscription on the
coffin of Ankhnes-Ra-Neferab—that is of her “whose life was the Sacred
Heart of Ra”—we read: “Thy name is the Moon, the Heart of Silence, the
Lord of the Unseen World” <span id="fr_107"></span>[2](#fn_107.md)—of the
space “as far as the moon,” or the “sublunary region,” as the old books
say, the first after-death state, where souls are purified from earthly
stains.

##### SOME OF THE DOCTRINES OF INITIATION

The end set before the neophyte was illumination, and the whole cult and
discipline and doctrines insisted on this one way to Wisdom. The
religion of Egypt was essentially the Religion of the Light.

But “most characteristic of all was the omnipotent and all-dominating
sense of the fatherhood of God, producing the familiar and in some
respects even joyous aspect which the Egyptians imparted to the idea of
death.” And “to the sense which the priests at least possessed, both of
the divine personality and of their own ultimate union with the personal
deity \[the Logos\], far more probably than to any artificial pretension
to a supposed exclusiveness, may be ascribed the mystery enshrouding
their religion.” <span id="fr_108"></span>[3](#fn_108.md)

And as Light was the Father of the Religion of Illumination, so was
Life, his consort or syzygy, the Mother of the Religion of Joy. “Life
was the centre,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

the circumference, the totality of Good. Life was the sceptre in the
hand of Amen; life was the richest ‘gift of Osiris.’ ‘Be not ungrateful
to thy Creator,’ says the sage Ptah-Hotep, in what is perhaps the oldest
document in existence, ‘for he has given thee life.’ ‘I am the Fount of
Light,’ says the Creator in the Ritual. ‘I pierce the Darkness. I make
clear the Path for all; the Lord of Joy.’” <span
id="fr_109"></span>[1](#fn_109.md) Or again, as the postulant prays to the
setting sun: “O height of Love, thou openest the double gate of the
Horizon.” <span id="fr_110"></span>[2](#fn_110.md)

Here we have the full doctrine of the Light and Life which is the
keynote of our treatises. Again, the doctrine of the endless turning of
the spheres, which “end where they begin,” in the words of “The
Shepherd,” is shown in the great fourth year festival of Hep-Tep or
“Completion-Beginning,” when “the revolution and the rotation of our
planet were simultaneously completed and begun afresh.” <span
id="fr_111"></span>[3](#fn_111.md)

##### THE TEMPLES OF INITIATION

That the ancient temples of initiation in Egypt were models of the
Sophia Above, or of the “Heavenly Jerusalem,” to use a Jewish Gnostic
term, or, in other words, of the Type of the world-building, we may well
believe. Thus it is with interest that we read the remarks of Adams on
the temple of Denderah (or Annu), rebuilt several times according to the
ancient plans, and an important centre of the mystery-cultus. The temple
was dedicated to Hat-Hor, whose ancient title was the Virgin-Mother.

“In the centre of the temple is the Hall of the Altar, with entrances
opening east and west; and beyond it lies the great hall of the temple
entitled the Hall of

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

the Child in his Cradle, from whence access is obtained to the secret
and sealed shrine entered once a year by the high priest, on the night
of mid-summer.” <span id="fr_112"></span>[1](#fn_112.md)

There were also various other halls and chambers each having a
distinctive name, “bearing reference, for the most part, to the
Mysteries of the light and of a divine Birth.” We have such names as:
Hall of the Golden Rays, Chamber of Gold, Chamber of Birth, Dwelling of
the Golden One, Chamber of Flames.

Now as the famous planisphere of Denderah—a wall-painting transferred
bodily from the temple to Paris, early in the last century—“contains the
northern and southern points, we are enabled to correlate the parts of
that picture with the various parts of the temple, and thereby to
discover a striking correspondence between the different parts of the
inscription and the titles of the chambers and halls occupying relative
positions.” <span id="fr_113"></span>[2](#fn_113.md)

Thus we have in the planisphere corresponding to the halls and chambers
such names as: Horus, the Entrance of the Golden Heavens, the Golden
Heaven of Isis, Horizon of Light, Palace Chamber of Supreme Light,
Heavenly Flame of Burning Gold. “And as the chief hall of the temple was
the Hall of the Child in his Cradle, so the chief representation on the
planisphere is the holy Mother with the divine Child in her arms.”

##### THE MYSTERY OF THE BIRTH OF HORUS.

Now the great mystery of Egypt was the second birth, the “Birth of
Horus.” In “The Virgin of the World,” a long fragment of the lost
Trismegistic treatise, “The Sacred Book,” preserved by Stobæus, Isis
says to Horus: I will not tell of this birth; I

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

must not, mighty Horus, reveal the origin of thy race, lest men should
in the future know the generation of the Gods. Of the nature of this
rebirth we are familiar from our treatises. But in spite of such clear
indications the mystery of the Golden Horus has not yet been revealed.

In another passage from the same book Isis declares that the sovereignty
or kingship of philosophy is in the hands of Harnebeschenis. This
transliterated Egyptian name is given by Pietschmann <span
id="fr_114"></span>[1](#fn_114.md) as originally either *Hor neb en χennu*
(Horus the Lord of Xennu), or as *Hor nub en χennu* (the Golden Horus of
Xennu). His hieroglyph was the golden hawk, who flies nearest the sun,
and gazes upon it with unwinking eyes, a fit symbol for the new-born,
the “man” illuminate.

Indeed, says Adams, “throughout the sacred writings of Egypt, there is
no doctrine of which more frequent mention is made than that of a divine
birth.” <span id="fr_115"></span>[2](#fn_115.md)

In what circle of ideas to place the Birth of Horus the theosophical
student may perhaps glean by reversing the stages given in the following
interesting passage of our author:

“In the Teaching of Egypt, around the radiant being, which in its
regenerate life could assimilate itself to the glory of the Godhead, was
formed the ‘khaibit,’ or luminous atmosphere, consisting of a series of
ethereal envelopes, at once shading and diffusing its flaming lustre, as
the earth’s atmosphere shades and diffuses the solar rays. And at each
successive transformation (Ritual, lxxvii-lxxxvii.) it descended nearer
to the moral \[? normal\] conditions of humanity. From the *form of the
golden hawk,* the semblance of the absolute divine substance of the one
eternal self-existent being, it passes to the ‘Lord of Time,’ the image
of the Creator,

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

since with the creation time began. Presently it assumes the *form of a
lily,* the vignette in the Ritual representing the head of Osiris
enshrined in that flower; the Godhead manifested in the flesh coming
forth from immaculate purity. ‘I am the pure lily,’ we read, ‘coming
forth from the lily of light. I am the source of illumination and the
channel of the breath of immortal beauty. I bring the messages; Horus
accomplishes them.’ Later the soul passes into the *form of the uræus,*
‘the soul of the earth.’ . . . And finally it assumes the *semblance of
a crocodile*; becoming subject, that is, to the passions of humanity.
For the human passions, being part of the nature wherein man was
originally created, are not intrinsically evil but only become evil when
insubordinate to the soul.” <span id="fr_116"></span>[1](#fn_116.md)

##### “THE BOOK OF THE MASTER”

And not only was the Deity worshipped as the Source of Light and Life,
but also as the Fount of Love. “I am the Fount of Joy,” says the Creator
in the Ritual, and when the Atf-crown of illumination is set upon the
head of the triumphant candidate after accomplishing the “Passage of the
Sun,” as referred to above, the hymn proclaims that “north and south of
that crown is Love.” <span id="fr_117"></span>[2](#fn_117.md) Into this
Love the catechumen was initiated from the Secret Scroll, whose name is
thus given in one of the copies: “This Book is the Greatest of
Mysteries. Do not let the eye of anyone look upon it—that were an
abomination. ‘The Book of the Master of the Secret House’ is its
name.” <span id="fr_118"></span>[3](#fn_118.md)

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

The whole conception of the doctrine exposed in its chapters is
instruction in Light and Life.

But are we to suppose that the majority were really instructed in this
wisdom?—for we find it customary to wrap up some chapters of this Secret
Scroll with almost every mummy. By no means. It seems to me that there
are at least three phases in the use of this scripture, and in the
process of degeneration from knowledge to superstition which can be so
clearly traced in the history of Egypt. First there was the real
instruction, followed by initiation while living; secondly, there was
the recitation of the instruction over the uninitiated dead to aid the
soul of the departed in the middle passage; and thirdly, there was the
burying a chapter or series of chapters of the *Book of the Master* as a
talisman to protect the defunct, when in far later times the true
meaning of the words written in the sacred characters had been lost,
though they were still “superstitiously” regarded as magical “words of
power.”

The recitation of some of the chapters over the dead body of the
uninitiated, however, is not to be set down as a useless “superstition,”
but was a very efficacious form of “prayers for the dead.” After a man’s
decease he was in conscious contact with the unseen world, even though
he may have been sceptical of its existence, or at any rate unfit to be
taught its real nature, prior to his decease. But after the soul was
freed from the prison of the body, even the uninitiated was in a
condition to be instructed on the nature of the path he then perforce
must travel. But as he could not even then properly pronounce the
“words” of the sacred tongue, the initiated priest recited or chanted
the passages.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

##### THE STEPS OF THE PATH

“For the doctrine contained in those mystic writings was nothing else
than an account of the Path pursued by the Just when, the bonds of the
flesh being loosed, he passed through stage after stage of spiritual
growth—the Entrance on Light, the Instruction in Wisdom, the Second
Birth of the Soul, the Instruction in the Well of Life, the Ordeal of
Fire, and the Justification in Judgment; until, illumined in the secret
Truth and adorned with the jewels of Immortality, he became indissolubly
united with Him whose name, says the Egyptian Ritual, is Light, Great
Creator.” <span id="fr_119"></span>[1](#fn_119.md)

It should, however, be remembered that this must not be taken in its
absolute sense even for the initiate, much less for the uninitiated. For
even in the mystic schools themselves, as we may see from our treatises,
there were three modes in which knowledge could be communicated—“By
simple instruction, by distant vision, or by personal
participation.” <span id="fr_120"></span>[2](#fn_120.md) For indeed there
were many phases of being, many steps of the great ladder, each in ever
greater fullness embracing the stages mentioned, each a reflection or
copy of a higher phase.

Thus, for example, “the solemn address, described in the
*Sai-an-Sinsin,* of the ‘Gods in the House of Osiris,’ followed by the
response of the ‘Gods in the House of Glory’—the joyous song of the holy
departed who stand victorious before the judgment-seat, echoed
triumphantly by the inner chorus of their beloved who have gone before
them into the fullness of life” <span
id="fr_121"></span>[3](#fn_121.md)—must be taken as indicative of several
stages. Such, for instance, as the normal union of the man’s
consciousness with that

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

of his higher ego, after exhausting his spiritual aspirations in the
intermediate heaven-world—this is the joining the “those-that-are” of
“The Shepherd” treatise, in other words, the harvest of those past lives
of his that are worthy of immortality; or again the still higher union
of the initiated with the “pure mind”; or again the still sublimer union
of the Master with the nirvāṇic consciousness; and so on perchance to
still greater Glories.

Thus we are told that the new twice-born, on his initiation, “clothed in
power and crowned with light, traverses the abodes or scenes of his
former weakness, there to discern, by his own enlightened perception,
how it is ‘Osiris who satisfies the balance of Him who rules the
heavens’; to exert in its supernal freedom his creative will, now the
lord, not the slave of the senses; and to rejoice in the just suffering
which wrought his Illumination and Mastery.” <span
id="fr_122"></span>[1](#fn_122.md)

But higher and still higher he has yet to soar beyond earth and planets
and even beyond the sun, “across the awful chasms of the unfathomable
depths to far-off Sothis, the Land of Eternal Dawn, to the Ante-chamber
of the Infinite Morning.” <span id="fr_123"></span>[2](#fn_123.md)

##### AN ILLUMINATIVE STUDY

Many other passages of great beauty and deep interest could we quote
from the pages of Marsham Adams’ illuminative study, but enough has been
said for our purpose. The Wisdom of Egypt was the main source of our
treatises without a doubt. Even if only one-hundredth part of what our
author writes were the truth, our case would be established; and if
Egypt did not teach this Wisdom, then we must perforce bow

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

down before Mr Adams as the inventor of one of the most grandiose
religions of the universe. But the student of inner nature knows that it
is not an invention, and though, if he be a scholar at the same time, he
cannot but regret that Mr Adams has omitted his references, he must
leave the critics to one or other of the horns of the dilemma; they must
either declare that our author has invented it all and pay homage to
what in that case would be his sublime genius, or admit that the ancient
texts themselves have inspired Mr Adams with these ideas. And if this be
a foretaste of what Egypt has preserved for us, what may not the future
reveal to continued study and sympathetic interpretation!

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_59"></span>[47:1](th106.htm#fr_59.md) *Hermes Trismegistos,
nach ägyptischen, griechischen und orientalischen Überlieferungen*
(Leipzig, 1875).

<span id="fn_60"></span>[48:1](th106.htm#fr_60.md) πάσης καρδίας καί
λογισμοῦ δεσπότης, p. 40, ed. Leemans.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[48:2](th106.htm#fr_61.md) *Der Gott, “der in
pantheistischer Anschauungsweise die ganze Welt belehrend durchdrang,*”
writes Pietschmann, p. 14.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[49:1](th106.htm#fr_62.md) Pleyte, *Zeitschrift für
ägyptische Sprache und Alterthumskunde,* 1867, 10. The text is taken
from a papyrus in the Leyden Museum.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[49:2](th106.htm#fr_63.md) See Pietschmann, p. 15.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[49:3](th106.htm#fr_64.md) From an ostrakon in the
Louvre, De Horrack, *Zeitschrift für ä S. u. A.,* 1868, 2. And again at
Denderah, the King is said to “establish the laws like Thoth the
twice-great one.” See Dümichen, *ibid.,* 1867, 74.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[49:4](th106.htm#fr_65.md) Lepsius, *Erster
Götterkreis,* Taf. 1, 2. Text S. 181.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[49:5](th106.htm#fr_66.md) Brugsch, *Wörterbuch,*
803, and many other references.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[49:6](th106.htm#fr_67.md) For a long list of
references, see Pietschmann *in loco*. I have so far cited some of these
references to show that the statements of Pietschmann are based upon
very ample authority. In what follows, however, these references may be
omitted as they are not owing to my own industry, and the scholar can
obtain them from Pietschmann’s book for himself.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[50:1](th106.htm#fr_68.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 16.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[50:2](th106.htm#fr_69.md) Compare this title, *die
grossen Erkentnisse des Teḥuti,* with the Coptic Codex Brucianus—*Voici
le livre des gnoses de l’Invisible divin*.” Amélineau, *Notice sur le
Papyrus gnostique Bruce,* p. 83 (Paris, 1891). See also Carl Schmidt,
*Gnostische Schriften in koptischer Sprache aus dem Codex Brucianus*
(Leipzig, 1892).

<span id="fn_70"></span>[50:3](th106.htm#fr_70.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 20.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[50:4](th106.htm#fr_71.md) *Herr der Metempsychose*
(Lord of Palingenesis), says Pietschmann, p. 23.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[51:1](th106.htm#fr_72.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 24 n.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[52:1](th106.htm#fr_73.md) *Op. cit.,* pp. 71 ff.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[55:1](th106.htm#fr_74.md) And this is the case
with the latter even to-day, where in the Sudan the natives “believe
that its intelligence is of the highest order, and that its cunning is
far superior to that of man.” (*Op. cit.,* i. 21.)

<span id="fn_75"></span>[56:1](th106.htm#fr_75.md) This is one of the most
interesting of his titles: “Judge of the Reḥeḥui, the Pacifier of the
Gods, who dwelleth in Unnu” (Hermopolis). (Op. cit., i. 405.)

<span id="fn_76"></span>[56:2](th106.htm#fr_76.md) This must have been the
mystery folk-tale circulated by the priests, for Marius Victorinus
repeats it (Halm, *Rhet. Lat. Min.,* p. 223), and it is preserved in the
*Physiologos* (xlv. p. 275—Lauchert).

<span id="fn_77"></span>[57:1](th106.htm#fr_77.md) Which means “City of the
Eight \[Gods\].” (*Op. cit.,* i. 113.)

<span id="fn_78"></span>[59:1](th106.htm#fr_78.md) Perhaps suggesting
two-faced or Janus-like—before and behind, without and within. With
this, however, may be compared the symbolic headdress or mask worn by
the virgin Korē (Proserpina) in the Eleusinian Mysteries; she had,
Athenagoras (xx. 292) tells us, “two ordinary eyes, and two in her
forehead, with her face at the back of her neck.”

<span id="fn_79"></span>[59:2](th106.htm#fr_79.md) Suggesting Thoth.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[59:3](th106.htm#fr_80.md) Suggesting the power of
him who can either wrap the Net round the man or open it in a new
direction, so that the man can “pass right through his body,” as Hermes
says to Tat in one of our Sermons.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[59:4](th106.htm#fr_81.md) Suggesting “Christs” who
have given birth to their Father, the Mind, in their hearts.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[59:5](th106.htm#fr_82.md) The fiends of a once
mighty frame suggest beings of a daimonic nature. Perhaps there is a
formal distinction intended by the epithet “helpless” and “abominable,”
corresponding with the rational and irrational aspects of the soul as
set forth in our sermons.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[61:1](th106.htm#fr_83) King (L. W..md),
*Babylonian Religion,* p. 71.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[62:1](th106.htm#fr_84.md) See my *Orpheus*
(London, 1896), pp. 39 and 44 ff.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[62:2](th106.htm#fr_85.md) *Cf.* Philo, *De Som.,*
i. (v. 92—Pfeiff)—τὸ παμποίκιλον ὔφασμα τουτονὶ τὸν κόσμον.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[62:3](th106.htm#fr_86) Eschenbach (A. C..md),
*Epigenes de Poesi Orphica* (Nürnberg, 1702), p. 51.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[62:4](th106.htm#fr_87.md) *De Gen. Anim.,* II. i.
613C.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[62:5](th106.htm#fr_88.md) *Bibl,* clxxxv.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[62:6](th106.htm#fr_89.md) *Tim.,* 1079F.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[65:1](th106.htm#fr_90.md) The symbol of his
actualising power.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[66:1](th106.htm#fr_91.md) Showing that Set is
Horus in his form of darkness.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[66:2](th106.htm#fr_92.md) Mystically, the upper
and lower kingdoms in man.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[68:1](th106.htm#fr_93.md) “Thoth the Wise” of the
“Inscription of London” § 4 (R. 64), to which we shall refer later on.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[68:2](th106.htm#fr_94.md) See the reviews on the
below-mentioned work in *The Athenæum* of 31st December 1898, and *The
Academy* of 31st December 1898 and 7th January 1899.

<span id="fn_95"></span>[68:3](th106.htm#fr_95.md) *The Book of the Master,
or The Egyptian Doctrine of the Light born of the Virgin Mother*
(London, 1898)—a sequel to his study entitled *The House of the Hidden
Places, a Clue to the Creed of Early Egypt from Egyptian Sources*
(London, 1895).

<span id="fn_96"></span>[70:1](th106.htm#fr_96.md) *Op. cit.,* pref. v.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[70:2](th106.htm#fr_97.md) *Op. cit.,* 13. Compare
with this the three grades of Initiation given by Pietschmann (p. 24
n.), as cited above, p. 51.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[70:3](th106.htm#fr_98.md) The image-doctrine of
our treatises.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[70:4](th106.htm#fr_99.md) This is an error; true
*initiation* consisted in the fact that cosmic consciousness was
realised in the body, while a man still lived. This consciousness
naturally included the after-death consciousness as part of its content.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[71:1](th106.htm#fr_100.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 24.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[71:2](th106.htm#fr_101.md) *Op. cit.,* pp. 14,
15.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[71:3](th106.htm#fr_102.md) That is, he who has
the “balanced” nature.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[71:4](th106.htm#fr_103.md) In my *Did Jesus Live
100 B.C.?*—in treating of the Elxai tradition and the wild statements of
the puzzled and puzzling Epiphanius, I asked: “May there not have been a
mystery-teaching behind the beautiful historicised story of the sisters
Mary and Martha, and of Lazarus, their brother, who was ‘raised from the
dead’ after being ‘three days’ in the grave? Was not Lazarus raised as a
‘mummy’ swathed in grave-clothes?” In this connection it is interesting
to find Tertullian (*De Corona,* viii.; Oehler, i. 436) referring to the
“linen cloth” with which Jesus girt himself in John xiii. 4, 5, as the
“proper garment of Osiris.” The proper garment of Osiris at one stage
consisted most probably of the symbolic linen wrappings of the “mummy.”

<span id="fn_104"></span>[72:1](th106.htm#fr_104.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 23.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[72:2](th106.htm#fr_105.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 30.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[73:1](th106.htm#fr_106.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 194.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[73:2](th106.htm#fr_107.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 161.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[73:3](th106.htm#fr_108.md) *Op. cit.,* pp. 18,
20.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[74:1](th106.htm#fr_109.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 36.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[74:2](th106.htm#fr_110.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 153.

<span id="fn_111"></span>[74:3](th106.htm#fr_111.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 37.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[75:1](th106.htm#fr_112.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 71.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[75:2](th106.htm#fr_113.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 75.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[76:1](th106.htm#fr_114.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 44.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[76:2](th106.htm#fr_115.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 89.

<span id="fn_116"></span>[77:1](th106.htm#fr_116.md) *Op. cit.,* pp. 163,
164.

<span id="fn_117"></span>[77:2](th106.htm#fr_117.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 95.

<span id="fn_118"></span>[77:3](th106.htm#fr_118.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 96. The
title seems to be found only in the latest recension of the twenty-sixth
Saite dynasty—the time of our King Ammon—but certainly no better one can
be suggested.

<span id="fn_119"></span>[79:1](th106.htm#fr_119.md) *Op. cit.,* pp. 103,
104.

<span id="fn_120"></span>[79:2](th106.htm#fr_120.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 148.

<span id="fn_121"></span>[79:3](th106.htm#fr_121.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 120.

<span id="fn_122"></span>[80:1](th106.htm#fr_122.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 185.

<span id="fn_123"></span>[80:2](th106.htm#fr_123.md) *Op. cit.,* p. 186.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. The Popular Theurgic Hermes-Cult in the Greek Magic
Papyri](th107.md)
