[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th110)  [Next](th112.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

### VIII

#### PHILO OF ALEXANDRIA AND THE HELLENISTIC THEOLOGY

##### CONCERNING PHILO AND HIS METHOD

<span class="smallcaps">Seeing</span> that a study of the Trismegistic
literature is essentially a study in Hellenistic theology, no
introduction to this literature would be adequate which did not insist
upon the utility of a careful review of the writings of Philo, the
famous Jewish Hellenist of Alexandria, and which did not point to the
innumerable parallels which are traceable between the basic principles
of the Jewish philosopher-mystic and the main ideas embodied in our
tractates. To do this, however, in detail would require a volume, and as
we are restricted to the narrow confines of a chapter, nothing but a few
general outlines can be sketched in, the major part of our space being
reserved for a consideration of what Philo has to say of the Logos, or
Divine Reason of things, the central idea of his cosmos.

In perusing the voluminous writings <span
id="fr_603"></span>[1](#fn_604.md) of our witness, the chief point on which
we would insist at the very outset, is that we are not studying a novel
system devised by a single mind, we are not even face to face with a new
departure in method, but that the writings

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

of our Alexandrian <span id="fr_604"></span>[1](#fn_605.md) came at the end
of a line of predecessors; true that Philo is now, owing to the
preservation of his writings, by far the most distinguished of such
writers, but he follows in their steps. His method of allegorical
interpretation is no new invention, <span
id="fr_605"></span>[2](#fn_606.md) least of all is his theology.

In brief, Philo is first and foremost an “apologist”; his writings are a
defence of the Jewish myths and prophetic utterances, interpreted
allegorically, in terms not of Hellenic philosophy proper, but rather of
Hellenistic theology, that is, of philosophy theologised, or of theology
philosophised; in other words, in the language of the current cultured
Alexandrian religio-philosophy of his day.

As Edersheim, in his admirable article, <span
id="fr_606"></span>[3](#fn_607.md) says, speaking

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

of this blend of the faith of the synagogue with the thinking of Greece:
“It can scarcely be said that in the issue the substance and spirit were
derived from Judaism, the form from Greece. Rather does it often seem as
if the substance had been Greek and only the form Hebrew.”

But here Edersheim seems to be not sufficiently alive to the fact that
the “Greek thinking” was already in Hellenistic circles strongly
theologised and firmly wedded to the ideas of apocalypsis and
revelation. How, indeed, could it have been otherwise in Egypt, in the
face of the testimony of our present work?

Philo, then, does but follow the custom among the cultured of his day
when he treats the stories of the patriarchs as myths, and the literally
intractable narratives as the substance of an ethical mythology. It was
the method of the religio-philosophy of the time, which found in
allegorical interpretation the “antidote of impiety,” and by its means
unveiled the supposed under-meaning (ὑπνόια) of the myths.

The importance of Philo, then, lies not so much in his originality, as
in the fact that he hands on much that had been evolved before him; for,
as Edersheim says, and as is clear to any careful student of the
Philonean tractates: “His own writings do not give the impression of
originality. Besides, he repeatedly refers to the allegorical
interpretation of others, as well as to canons of allegorism apparently
generally recognised. He also enumerates differing allegorical
interpretations of the same subjects. All this affords evidence of the
existence of a school of Hellenist \[Hellenistic, rather\]
interpretation” (p. 362).

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

But this does not hold good only for the interpretation of “the myths of
Israel” by Hellenistic Jews; it holds good of the whole cultured
religious world of the time, and pre-eminently of the Hellenistic
schools of every kind in Egypt. In brief, Philo’s philosophy was often
already philosophised myth before he ingeniously brought it into play
for the interpretation of Hebrew story.

In short, the tractates of Philo and our Trismegistic sermons have both
a common background—Hellenistic theology or theosophy. Both use a common
language.

Philo, of course, like the rest of his contemporaries, had no idea of
criticism in the modern sense; he was a thorough-going apologist of the
Old Covenant documents. These were for him in their entirety the
inerrant oracles of God Himself; nay, he even went to the extent of
believing the apologetic Greek version to be literally inspired. <span
id="fr_607"></span>[1](#fn_608.md)

Nevertheless he was, as a thinker, confronted with the same kind of
difficulties as face us to-day with immeasurably greater distinctness.
The ideas of God, of the world-order, and of the nature of man, were so
far advanced in his day beyond the frequently crude and repugnant
representations found in the ancient scriptures of his people, that he
found it impossible to claim for them on their surface-value the
transcendency of the last word of wisdom from God to man, at anyrate
among the cultured to whom he addressed himself. These difficulties he
accordingly sought to remove by an allegorical interpretation, whereby
he read into them the views of the highest philosophical and religious
environment of his time.

Having no idea of the philosophy of history, or of the history of
religion, or of the canons of literary

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

criticism, as we now understand these things, he never stopped to
enquire whether the writers of the ancient documents intended their
narratives to be taken as myths embodying an esoteric meaning; much less
did he ask himself, as we ask ourselves to-day, whether these writers
had not in all probability frequently written up the myths of other
nations into a history of their own patriarchs and other worthies; on
the contrary, he relieved them of all responsibility, and entirely
eliminated the natural human element, by his theory of prophecy, which
assumed that they had acted as impersonal, passive instruments of the
Divine inspiration.

But even Philo, when he came to work it out, could not maintain this
absolutism of inspiration, and so we find him elsewhere unable to
ascribe a consistent level of inspiration to his “Moses,” who of course,
in Philo’s belief, wrote the Pentateuch from the first to the last word.
Thus we find him even in the “Five Fifths” making a threefold
classification of inspiration: (i.) The Sacred Oracles “spoken directly
of God by His interpreter the prophet”; (ii.) Those prophetically
delivered “in the form of question and answer”; and (iii) Those
“proceeding from Moses himself while in some state of inspiration and
under the influence of the deity.” <span id="fr_608"></span>[1](#fn_609.md)

But what is most pleasant is to find that Philo admitted the great
philosophers of Greece into his holy assembly, and though he gives the
pre-eminence to Moses, yet it is, as it were, to a first among equals—a
wide-minded tolerance that was speedily forgotten in the bitter
theological strife that subsequently broke forth.

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

##### THE GREAT IMPORTANCE OF HIS WRITINGS

But what makes the writings of our Alexandrian so immensely important
for us is, that the final decade of his life is contemporary with the
coming into manifestation of Christianity in the Græco-Roman world owing
to the energetic propaganda of Paul.

Philo was born somewhere between 30 and 20 B.C., and died about 45 A.D.
There is, of course, not a single word in his voluminous writings that
can in any way be construed into a reference to Christianity as
traditionally understood; but the language of Philo, if not precisely
the diction of the writers of the New Testament documents, has
innumerable points of resemblance with their terminology; for the
language of Hellenistic theology is largely, so to speak, the common
tongue of both, while the similarity of many of their ideas is
astonishing.

Philo, moreover, was by no means an obscure member of the community to
which he belonged; on the contrary, he was a most distinguished ornament
of the enormous Jewish colony of Alexandria, which occupied no less than
two out of the five wards of the city. <span
id="fr_609"></span>[1](#fn_610.md) His brother, Alexander, was the head of
the largest banking firm of the capital of Egypt, which was also the
intellectual and commercial centre of the Græco-Roman world. Indeed,
Alexander may be said to have been the Rothschild of the time. The
operations of the firm embraced the contracting of loans for the
Imperial House, while the banker himself was a personal friend of the
Emperor, and his sons intermarried with the family of the Jewish King
Agrippa.

Philo, himself, though he would have preferred the solitude of the
contemplative life, took an active part

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

in the social life of the great capital; and, at the time of the
greatest distress of his compatriots in the city, when they were
overwhelmed by a violent outbreak of anti-semitism, their lives in
danger, their houses plundered, and their ancient privileges
confiscated, it was the aged Philo who was chosen as spokesman of the
embassy to Caius Caligula (A.D. 40).

Here, then, we have a man in just the position to know what was going on
in the world of philosophy, of letters, and religion, and not only at
Alexandria, but also wherever Jewish enterprise—which had then, as it
now has, the main commerce of the world in its hands—pushed itself. The
news of the world came to Alexandria, and the mercantile marine was
largely owned by Hebrews.

Philo is, therefore, the very witness we should choose of all others to
question as to his views on the ideas we find in our Trismegistic
tractates, and this we may now proceed to do without any further
preliminaries.

##### CONCERNING THE MYSTERIES

Speaking of those who follow the contemplative life, <span
id="fr_610"></span>[1](#fn_611.md) Philo writes:

“Now this natural class of men \[lit. race\] is to be found in many
parts of the inhabited world; for both the Grecian and non-Grecian world
must needs share in the perfect Good.” <span
id="fr_611"></span>[2](#fn_612.md)

In Egypt, he tells us, there were crowds of them in every province, and
they were very numerous indeed about Alexandria. Concerning such men
Philo tells us elsewhere:

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

“All those, whether among Greeks or non-Greeks, who are practisers of
wisdom (ἀσκηταὶ σοφίας), living a blameless and irreproachable life,
determined on doing injury to none, and on not retaliating if injury be
done them,” avoid the strife of ordinary life, “in their enthusiasm for
a life of peace free from contention.”

Thus are they “most excellent contemplators of nature (θεωροὶ τῆς
φύσεως) and all things therein; they scrutinise earth and sea, and air
and heaven, and the natures therein, their minds responding to the
orderly motion of moon and sun, and the choir of all the other stars,
both variable and fixed. They have their bodies, indeed, planted on
earth below; but for their souls, they have made them wings, so that
they speed through æther (αἰθεροβατοῦντες), and gaze on every side upon
the powers above, as though they were the true world-citizens, most
excellent, who dwell in cosmos as their city; such citizens as Wisdom
hath as her associates, inscribed upon the roll of Virtue, who hath in
charge the supervising of the common weal. . . .

“Such men, though \[in comparison\] but few in number, keep alive the
covered spark of Wisdom secretly, throughout the cities \[of the
world\], in order that Virtue may not be absolutely quenched and vanish
from our human kind.” <span id="fr_612"></span>[1](#fn_613.md)

Again, elsewhere, speaking of those who are good and wise, he says:

“The whole of this company (θίασος) have voluntarily deprived themselves
of the possession of aught in abundance, thinking little of things dear
to the flesh. Now athletes are men whose bodies are well cared for and
full of vigour, men who make strong the fort, their body, against their
soul; whereas the \[athletes\] of

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

\[this\] discipline, pale, wasted, and, as it were, reduced to
skeletons, sacrifice even the muscles of their bodies to the powers of
their own souls, dissolving, if the truth be told, into one form—that of
the soul, and by their mind becoming free from body.

“The earthly element is, therefore, naturally dissolved and washed away,
when the whole mind in its entirety resolves to make itself
well-pleasing unto God. This race is rare, however, and found with
difficulty; still it is not impossible it should exist.” <span
id="fr_613"></span>[1](#fn_614.md)

And in another passage, when referring to the small number of the
“prudent and righteous and gracious,” Philo says:

“But the ‘few,’ though rare \[to meet with\], are yet not non-existent.
Both Greece and Barbary \[that is, non-Greek lands\] bear witness \[to
them\].

“For in the former there nourished those who are pre-eminently and truly
called the Seven Sages—though others, both before and after them, in
every probability reached the \[same\] height—whose memory, in spite of
their antiquity, has not evanished through the length of time, while
that of those of far more recent date has been obliterated by the tide
of the neglect of their contemporaries.

“While in non-Grecian lands, in which the most revered and ancient in
such words and deeds \[have nourished\], are very crowded companies of
men of worth and virtue; among the Persians, for example, the \[caste\]
of Magi, who by their careful scrutiny of nature’s works for purpose of
the gnosis of the truth, in quiet silence, and by means of \[mystic\]
images of piercing clarity (τρανωτέραις ἐμφάσεσιν) are made initiate
into the mysteries of godlike virtues, and in their turn initiate
\[those who come after them\]; in

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> India the
\[caste\] of the Gymnosophists, who, in addition to their study of the
lore of nature, toil in \[the fields of\] morals, and \[so\] make their
whole life a practical example of \[their\] virtue.

“Nor are Palestine and Syria, in which no small portion of the populous
nation of the Jews dwell, unfruitful in worth and virtue. Certain of
them are called Essenes, in number upwards of 4000, according to my
estimate.” <span id="fr_614"></span>[1](#fn_615.md)

Philo then proceeds to give an account of these famous mystics.

In Egypt itself, however, he selects out of the many communities of the
Therapeutæ and Therapeutrides (which the Old Latin Version renders
*Cultores et Cultrices pietatis*) <span id="fr_615"></span>[2](#fn_616.md)
only one special group, with which he was presumably personally familiar
and which was largely Jewish. Of this order (σύστημα) <span
id="fr_616"></span>[3](#fn_617.md) Philo gives us a most graphic account,
both of their settlement and mode of life. By means of this intensely
interesting sketch of the Contemplative or Theoretic Life, and by the
parallel passages from the rest of Philo’s works which Conybeare has so
industriously marshalled in his “Testimonia,” we are introduced into the
environment and atmosphere of these Theoretics, and find ourselves in
just such circumstances as would condition the genesis of our
Trismegistic literature.

The whole of Philo’s expositions revolve round the idea that the truly
philosophic life is an initiation into the Divine Mysteries; for him the
whole tradition of Wisdom is necessarily a mystery-tradition. Thus he
tells us of his own special Therapeut community, south of Alexandria:

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

“In every cottage there is a sacred chamber, <span
id="fr_617"></span>[1](#fn_618.md) which is called *semneion* and
*monastērion* <span id="fr_618"></span>[2](#fn_619.md) in which, in
solitude, they are initiated into the mysteries of the solemn
life.” <span id="fr_619"></span>[3](#fn_620.md)

With this it will be of interest to compare Matt, vi. 6: “When thou
prayest, enter into thy closet, and when thou hast shut thy door, pray
to thy Father who is in the Hidden; and thy Father who seeth in the
Hidden, shall reward thee.”

It is said that among the “Pharisees” there was a praying-room in every
house.

We may also compare with the above reference to the Mysteries Luke xii.
2 = Matt. x. 26, from a “source” which promised the revelation of all
mysteries, following on the famous *logos* also quoted in Mark iv. 22
and Luke viii. 17:

“For there is nothing veiled which shall not be revealed, and hidden
which shall not be made known.” “Therefore, whatsoever ye (M., I) have
spoken in darkness, shall be heard in the light, and what ye have spoken
(M., heard) in the ear in the closets, shall be heralded forth on the
house-tops.”

Both Evangelists have evidently adapted their “source” to their own
purposes, but the main sense of the original form is not difficult to
recover.

It is further of interest to compare with the first clause of the above
passages the new-found *logos*:

“Jesus saith, Everything that is not before thy face and that which is
hidden from thee, shall be revealed to thee. For there is nothing hidden
that shall

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

not be made manifest, nor buried that shall not be raised.” <span
id="fr_620"></span>[1](#fn_621.md)

But there are other and more general mysteries referred to in Philo;
for, in speaking of the command that the unholy man who is a speaker of
evil against divine things, should be removed from the most holy places
and punished, our initiated philosopher bursts forth:

“Drive forth, drive forth, ye of the closed lips, and ye revealers <span
id="fr_621"></span>[2](#fn_622.md) of the divine mysteries, <span
id="fr_622"></span>[3](#fn_623.md) the promiscuous and rabble crowd of the
defiled—souls unamenable to purification, and hard to wash clean, who
wear ears that cannot be closed, and tongues that cannot be kept within
the doors \[of their lips\]—organs that they ever keep ready for their
own most grievous mischance, hearing all things and things not law \[to
hear\].” <span id="fr_623"></span>[4](#fn_624.md)

Of these “ineffable mysteries,” <span id="fr_624"></span>[5](#fn_625.md) he
elsewhere says, in explaining that the wives of the patriarchs stand
allegorically as types of virtues:

“But in order that we may describe the conception and birth-throes of
the Virtues, let bigots <span id="fr_625"></span>[6](#fn_626.md) stop their
ears, or else let them depart. For that we give a higher teaching of the
mysteries divine, to mystæ who are worthy of the holiest rites \[of
all\].

“And these are they who, free from arrogance, practise real and truly
genuine piety, free from display

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

of any kind. But unto them who are afflicted with incorrigible ill—the
vanity of words, close-sticking unto names, and empty show of manners,
who measure purity and holiness by no other rule \[than this\]—\[for
them\] we will not play the part of hierophant.” <span
id="fr_626"></span>[1](#fn_627.md)

Touching on the mystery of the Virgin-birth, to which we will refer
later on, Philo continues:

“These things receive into your souls, ye mystæ, ye whose ears are
purified, as truly sacred mysteries, and see that ye speak not of them
to any who may be without initiation, but storing them away within your
hearts, guard well your treasure-house; not as a treasury in which gold
and silver are laid up, things that do perish, but as the pick and prize
of all possessions—the knowledge of the Cause \[of all\] and Virtue, and
of the third, the child of both.” <span id="fr_627"></span>[2](#fn_628.md)

Now the “Divine Spirit” (θεῖον πνεῦμα), says Philo, does not remain
among the many, though it may dwell with them for a short time.

“It is \[ever\] present with only one class of men—with those who,
having stripped themselves of all the things in genesis, even to the
innermost veil and garment of opinion, come unto God with minds
unclothed and naked.

“And so Moses, having fixed his tent outside the camp—that is, the whole
of the body <span id="fr_628"></span>[3](#fn_629.md)—that is to say, having
made firm his mind, so that it does not move, begins to worship God;
and, entering into the darkness, the unseen land, abideth there, being
initiated into the most holy mysteries. And he becomes, not only a
mystēs, but also a hierophant of revelations, <span
id="fr_629"></span>[4](#fn_630.md) and

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

teacher of divine things, which he will indicate to those who have had
their ears made pure.

“With such kind of men, then, the Divine Spirit is ever present, guiding
their every way aright.” <span id="fr_630"></span>[1](#fn_631.md)

Referring to the ritual sacrifices of a heifer and two rams, Philo
declares that the slaying of the second ram, and the symbolic rite of
sprinkling certain portions of the bodies of the priests with its blood,
was ordained “for the highest perfectioning of the consecrated by means
of the purification of chastity <span
id="fr_631"></span>[2](#fn_632.md)—which \[ram\] he \[‘Moses’\] called,
according to its meaning, the ‘\[ram\] of perfectioning,’ since they
\[the priests\] were about to act as hierophants of mysteries
appropriate to the servants (θεραπευταῖς) and ministers of God.” <span
id="fr_632"></span>[3](#fn_633.md)

So also Philo’s language about the Therapeuts proper, and not the
allegorically interpreted temple-sacrificers, is that of the Mysteries,
when he writes:

“Now they who betake themselves to this service (θεραπείαν) \[of God do
so\], not because of any custom, or on some one’s advice and appeal, but
carried away with heavenly love, like those initiated into the Bacchic
or Corybantic Mysteries, they are a-fire with God until they see the
object of their love.” <span id="fr_633"></span>[4](#fn_634.md)

These Mysteries were, of course, not to be revealed except to the
worthy. Therefore he says:

“Nor because thou hast a tongue and mouth and organ of speech, shouldst
thou tell forth all, even things that may not be spoken.” <span
id="fr_634"></span>[5](#fn_635.md)

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

And in the last section of the same treatise he writes:

“Wherefore I think that \[all\] those who are not utterly without
\[proper\] instruction, would prefer to be made blind than to see things
not proper \[to be seen\], to be made deaf than to hear harmful words,
and to have their tongue cut out, to prevent them divulging aught of the
ineffable Mysteries. . . . Nay, it is even better to make oneself eunuch
than to rush madly into unlawful unions.” <span
id="fr_635"></span>[1](#fn_636.md)

With which we may usefully compare Matt. v. 29: “If thy right eye offend
thee, cut it out and cast it from thee”; and Matt. xix. 12: “There are
some who have made themselves eunuchs for the sake of the kingdom of the
heavens; he that can receive it, let him receive it.” Both passages are
found in the first Gospel only.

For the comprehension of virtue man requires the reason only; but for
the doing of ill, the evil man requires the organs of the body, says our
mystic dualist; “for how will he be able to divulge the Mysteries, if he
have no organ of speech?” <span id="fr_636"></span>[2](#fn_637.md)

This continual harping on the divulging of the Mysteries, shows that
Philo considered it the greatest of all enormities; we might almost
think that he had in view some movement that was divulging part of the
mystery-tradition to the untrained populace.

Elsewhere, speaking of those “who draw nigh unto God, abandoning the
life of death, and sharing in immortality,” he tells us these are the
“Naked”—(that is, “naked” of the trammels of the flesh)—who sacrifice
all to God. And he adds that only these “are permitted to see the
ineffable Mysteries of God, who

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

are able to cloak them and guard them” from the unworthy. <span
id="fr_637"></span>[1](#fn_638.md)

With regard to these Mysteries, they were, as we might expect, divided
into the Lesser and the Greater—in the former of which the neophytes
“worked on the untamed and savage passions, as though they were
softening the \[dough <span id="fr_638"></span>[2](#fn_639.md) of their\]
food with reason (*logos*).”

The manner of preparing this divine food, so that it becomes the bread
of life, was a mystery. <span id="fr_639"></span>[3](#fn_640.md)

One of the doctrines revealed in these Lesser Mysteries was plainly that
of the Trinity; for, commenting on Gen. xviii. 2: “And he lifted up his
eyes and looked, and, lo, three men stood by him”—Philo writes:

“‘He lifted up his eyes,’ not the eyes of his body, for God cannot be
seen by the senses, but by the soul \[alone\]; for at a fitting time He
is discovered by the eyes of wisdom.

“Now the power of sight of the souls of the many and unrighteous is ever
shut in, since it lies dead in deep sleep, and can never respond and be
made awake to the things of nature and the types and ideas within her.
But the spiritual eyes of the wise man are awake, and behold them; nay,
they are sleeplessly alert, ever watchful from desire of seeing.

“Wherefore it is well said in the plural, that he raised not one eye,
but all the eyes that are in the soul, so that one would have said that
he was altogether all eye. Having, then, become *the* eye, he begins to
see the holy and divine vision of the Lord, in such a fashion that the
one vision appeared as a trinity, and the trinity as a unity.” <span
id="fr_640"></span>[4](#fn_641.md)

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

Elsewhere, referring to the same story, and to the words of Abraham to
Sarah “to hasten and knead three measures of fine meal, and to make
cakes upon the hearth,” <span id="fr_641"></span>[1](#fn_642.md) Philo
expounds the mystery at length as follows. It refers to that experience
of the inner life:

“When God, accompanied by His two highest Potencies, Dominion (ἀρχή) and
Goodness, making One \[with Himself\] in the midst, produces in the
seeing soul a triple presentation, of which \[three persons\] each
transcends all measure; for God transcendeth all delineation, and
equally transcendent are His Potencies, but He \[Himself\] doth measure
all.

“Accordingly, His Goodness is the measure of things good, and His
Dominion is the measure of things subject, while He Himself is chief of
all, both corporeal and incorporeal. <span
id="fr_642"></span>[2](#fn_643.md)

“Wherefore also these Potencies, receiving the Reason (*Logos*) of His
rules and ordinances, measure out all things below them. And, therefore,
it is right that these three measures should, as it were, be mingled and
blended together in the soul, in order that, being persuaded that He is
Highest God, who transcendeth His Potencies, both making Himself
manifest without them, and also causing Himself to be seen in them, it
\[the soul\] may receive His impressions (χαρακτῆρας), and powers, and
blessings, and \[so\] becoming initiate into the perfect secrets, may
not lightly disclose the divine Mysteries, but, treasuring them up, and
keeping sure silence, guard them in secret.

“For it is written: ‘Make \[them\] secret,’—for the sacred sermon
(λόγον) of initiation (μύστην) about the Ingenerable and about His
Potencies ought to be kept

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

secret, since it is not within the power of every man to guard the
sacred trust (παρακαταθήκην) of the divine revelations (ὀργίων).” <span
id="fr_643"></span>[1](#fn_644.md)

##### CONCERNING THE SACRED MARRIAGE

But the chief of all the mysteries for Philo was, apparently, the Sacred
Marriage, the mystic union of the soul, as female, with God, as male
(*Deo nubere*). In this connection he refers to Gen. iv. 1:

“And Adam knew his wife. And she conceived and bare Cain. And she said:
*I have gotten a man by means of the Lord*. And He caused her also to
bring forth Abel his brother.” <span id="fr_644"></span>[2](#fn_645.md)

We are, of course, not concerned with the legitimacy or consistency of
Philo’s allegorising system, whereby he sought to invoke the authority
of his national scriptures in support of his chosen doctrines; but we
are deeply concerned with these doctrines themselves, as being the
favourite dogmas of his circle and of similar circles of allied mystics
of the time.

His views on the subject are clearly indicated, for he tells us in the
same passage that he is speaking of a secret of initiation, not of the
conception and parturition of women, but of Virtues—that is, of the
virtuous soul. Accordingly he continues in § 13:

“But it is not lawful for Virtues, in giving birth to their many
perfections, to have part or lot in a mortal husband. And yet they will
never bring forth of themselves, without conceiving their offspring of
another.

“Who, then, is He who soweth in them their glorious \[progeny\], if not
the Father of all universal things—

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

the God beyond all genesis, who yet is Sire of everything that is? For,
for Himself, God doth create no single thing, in that He stands in need
of naught; but for the man who prays to have them \[He creates\] all
things.”

And then, bringing forward Sarah, Leah, Rebecca, and Sepphora, as
examples of the Virtues who lived with the great prophets of his race,
Philo declares that “Sarah” conceived, when God looked upon her while
she was in solitary contemplation, and so she brought forth for him who
eagerly longed to attain to wisdom—namely, for him who is called
“Abraham.”

And so also in the case of “Leah,” it is said “God opened her womb,”
which is the part played by a husband; and so she brought forth for him
who underwent the pains of labour for the sake of the Beautiful—namely,
for him who is called “Jacob”; “so that Virtue received the divine seed
from the Cause \[of all\], while she brought forth for that one of her
lovers who was preferred above all other suitors.”

So also when the “all-wise,” he who is called “Isaac,” went as a
suppliant to God, his Virtue, “Rebecca,” that is Steadfastness, became
pregnant in consequence of his supplication.

Whereas “Moses,” without any supplication or prayer, attained to the
winged and sublime Virtue “Sepphora,” and found her with child by no
mortal husband. <span id="fr_645"></span>[1](#fn_646.md)

Moreover, in § 14, in referring to Jeremiah, Philo writes:

“For I, having been initiated into the Great Mysteries by Moses, the
friend of God, nevertheless when I set eyes upon Jeremiah, the prophet,
and learned that he is not only a mystes, but also an adept hierophant,
I did not hesitate to go to him as his disciple.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

“And he, in that in much \[he says\] he is inspired by God, uttered a
certain oracle \[as\] from the Face of God, who said unto the Virtue of
Perfect Peace: ‘Hast thou not called Me as ’twere House and Father and
Husband of thy virginity?’ <span
id="fr_646"></span>[1](#fn_647.md)—suggesting in the clearest \[possible\]
fashion that God is both Home, the incorporeal land of incorporeal
ideas, and Father of all things, in that He did create them, and Husband
of Wisdom, sowing for the race of mankind the seed of blessedness into
good virgin soil.

“For it is fitting God should converse with an undefiled, an untouched
and pure nature, with her who is in very truth *the* Virgin, in fashion
very different from ours.

“For the congress of men for the procreation of children makes virgins
women. But when God begins to associate with the soul, He brings it to
pass that she who was formerly woman becomes virgin again. For banishing
the foreign and degenerate and non-virile desires, by which it was made
womanish, He substitutes for them native and noble and pure
virtues. . . .

“But it is perhaps possible that even a virgin soul may be polluted by
intemperate passions, and so dishonoured.

“Wherefore the oracle hath been careful to say that God is husband not
of ‘a virgin’—for a virgin is subject to change and death—but of
‘virginity’ \[that is of\] the idea which is ever according to the same
\[principles\], and in the same mode.

“For whereas things that have qualities, have with their nature received
both birth and dissolution, the \[archetypal\] potencies which mould
them have obtained a lot transcending dissolution.

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

“Wherefore is it not fitting that God, who is beyond all generation and
all change, should sow \[in us\] the ideal seeds of the immortal virgin
Virtues, and not those of the woman who changes the form of her
virginity?” <span id="fr_647"></span>[1](#fn_648.md)

But, indeed, as Conybeare says:

“The words, virgin, virginity, ever-virginal, occur on every other page
of Philo. It is indeed Philo who first <span
id="fr_648"></span>[2](#fn_649.md) formulated the idea of the Word or ideal
ordering principle of the Cosmos being born of an ever-virgin soul,
which conceives, because God the Father sows into her His intelligible
rays and divine seed, so begetting His only well-beloved son, the
Cosmos.” <span id="fr_649"></span>[3](#fn_650.md)

Thus, speaking of the impure soul, Philo writes:

“For when she is a multitude of passions and filled with vices, her
children swarming over her—pleasures, appetites, folly, intemperance,
unrighteousness, injustice—she is weak and sick, and lies at death’s
door, dying; but when she becomes sterile, and ceases to bring them
forth or even casts them from her, forthwith, from the change, she
becometh a chaste virgin, and, receiving the Divine Seed, she fashions
and engenders marvellous excellencies that nature prizeth
highly—prudence, courage, temperance, justice, holiness, piety, and the
rest of the virtues and good dispositions.” <span
id="fr_650"></span>[4](#fn_651.md)

So also, speaking of the Therapeutrides, he writes:

“Their longing is not for mortal children, but for a deathless progeny,
which the soul that is in love with God can alone bring forth, when the
Father hath sown into it the spiritual light-beams, by means of which it

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

shall be able to contemplate (θεωρεῖν) the laws of wisdom.” <span
id="fr_651"></span>[1](#fn_652.md)

And as to the progeny of such virgin-mothers, Philo elsewhere instances
the birth of “Isaac”—“which could not refer to any man,” but is “a
synonym of Joy, the best of the blessed states of the soul—Laughter, the
spiritually conceived (ἐνδιάθετος) <span id="fr_652"></span>[2](#fn_653.md)
Son of God, Who bestoweth him as a comfort and means of good cheer on
souls of perfect peace.” <span id="fr_653"></span>[3](#fn_654.md)

And a little later on he adds:

“And Wisdom, who, after the fashion of a mother, brings forth the
self-taught Race, declares that God is the sower of it.” <span
id="fr_654"></span>[4](#fn_655.md)

And yet, again, elsewhere, speaking of this spiritual progeny, Philo
writes:

“But all the Servants of God (Therapeuts), who are lawfully begotten,
shall fulfill the law of \[their\] nature, which commands them to be
parents. For the men shall be fathers of many sons, and the women
mothers of numerous children.” <span id="fr_655"></span>[5](#fn_656.md)

So also, in the case of the birth of Joseph, when his mother, Rachael,
says to Jacob: “Give me children!”—“the Supplanter, disclosing his
proper nature, will reply: ‘Thou hast wandered into deep error. For I am
not in God’s place, who alone is able to open the wombs of souls, and
sow in them virtues, and make them pregnant and mothers of good
things.’” <span id="fr_656"></span>[6](#fn_657.md)

So too, again, in connection with the birth of Isaac, referring to the
exultant cry of Sarah: “The Lord hath

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

made me Laughter; for whosoever heareth, rejoiceth with me” <span
id="fr_657"></span>[1](#fn_658.md)—Philo bursts forth:

“Open, then, wide your ears, ye mystæ, and receive the most holy
mysteries. ‘Laughter’ is Joy, and ‘hath made’ is the same as ‘hath
begotten’; so that what is said hath the following meaning: ‘The Lord
hath begotten Isaac’—for He is Father of the perfect nature, sowing in
the soul and generating blessedness.” <span
id="fr_658"></span>[2](#fn_659.md)

That all of this was a matter of vital moment for Philo himself, may be
seen from what we must regard as an intensely interesting
autobiographical passage, in which our philosopher, speaking of the
happy childbirth of Wisdom, writes:

“For some she judges entirely worthy of living with her, while others
seem as yet too young to support such admirable and wise house-sharing;
these latter she hath permitted to solemnise the preliminary initiatory
rites of marriage, holding out hopes of its \[future\] consummation.

“‘Sarah’ then, the Virtue who is mistress of my soul, hath brought
forth, but hath not brought forth for me—for that I could not, because I
was too young, receive \[into my soul\] her offspring—wisdom, and
righteousness, and piety—because of the brood of bastard brats which
empty opinions had borne me.

“For the feeding of these last, the constant care and incessant anxiety
concerning them, have forced me to take no thought for the legitimate
children who are the true citizens.

“It is well, therefore, to pray Virtue not only to bear children, who
even without praying brings her fair

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

progeny to birth, but also to bear sons *for us,* so that we may be
blessed with a share in her seed and offspring.

“For she is wont to bear to God alone, with thankfulness repaying unto
Him the first-fruits of the things she hath received, \[to Him\] who,
Moses says, ‘hath opened’ her ever-virgin ‘womb.’” <span
id="fr_659"></span>[1](#fn_660.md)

But, indeed, Philo is never wearied of reiterating this sublime
doctrine, which for him was the consummation of the mysteries of the
holy life. Thus, then, again he sets it forth as follows:

“We should, accordingly, understand that the True Reason (*Logos*) of
nature has the potency of both father and husband for different
purposes—of a husband, when he casts the seed of virtues into the soul
as into a good field; of a father, in that it is his nature to beget
good counsels, and fair and virtuous deeds, and when he hath begotten
them, he nourisheth them with those refreshing doctrines which
discipline and wisdom furnish.

“And the intelligence is likened at one time to a virgin, at another to
a wife, or a widow, or one who has not yet a husband.

“\[It is likened\] to a virgin, when the intelligence keeps itself
chaste and uncorrupted from pleasures and appetites, and griefs and
fears, the passions which assault it; and then the father who begot it,
assumes the leadership thereof.

“And when she (intelligence) lives as a comely wife with comely Reason
(*Logos*), that is with virtuous Reason, this self-same Reason himself
undertakes the care of her, sowing, like a husband, the most excellent
concepts in her.

“But whenever the soul is bereft of her children of

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

prudence, and of her marriage with Right Reason, widowed of her most
fair possessions, and left desolate of Wisdom, through choosing a
blameworthy life—then, let her suffer the pains she hath decreed against
herself, with no wise Reason to play physician to her transgressions,
either as husband and consort, or as father and begetter.” <span
id="fr_660"></span>[1](#fn_661.md)

Referring to Jacob’s dream of the white, and spotted, and ring-straked,
and speckled kine, Philo tells us that this, too, must be taken as an
allegory of souls. The first class of souls, he says, are “white.”

“The meaning is that when the soul receives the Divine Seed, the
first-born births are spotlessly white, like unto light of utmost
purity, to radiance of the greatest brilliance, as though it were the
shadowless ray of the sun’s beams from a cloudless sky at noon.” <span
id="fr_661"></span>[2](#fn_662.md)

With this it is of service to compare the Vision of Hades seen by
Thespesius (Aridæus), and related by Plutarch. Thespesius’ guide in the
Unseen World draws his attention to the “colours” and “markings” of the
souls as follows:

“Observe the colours of the souls of every shade and sort: that greasy,
brown-grey is the pigment of sordidness and selfishness; that blood-red,
inflamed shade is a sign of a savage and venomous nature; wherever
blue-grey is, from such a nature incontinence in pleasure is not easily
eradicated; innate malignity, mingled with envy, causes that livid
discoloration, in the same way as cuttle-fish eject their sepia.

“Now it is in earth-life that the vice of the soul (being acted upon by
the passions, and re-acting upon the body) produces these
discolorations; while the purification and correction here have for
their object

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

the removal of these blemishes, so that the soul may become entirely
ray-like and of uniform colour.” <span id="fr_662"></span>[1](#fn_663.md)

Again, in giving the allegorical meaning of the primitive-culture story
of Tamar, <span id="fr_663"></span>[2](#fn_664.md) Philo not only
interprets it by the canon of the Sacred Marriage, but also introduces
other details from the Mysteries. Thus he writes:

“For being a widow she was commanded to sit in the House of the Father,
the Saviour; for whose sake for ever abandoning the congress and
association with mortal \[things\], she is bereft and widowed from
\[all\] human pleasures, and receives the Divine quickening, and,
full-filled with the Seeds of virtue, conceives, and is in travail with
fair deeds. And when she brings them forth, she carries off the trophies
from her adversaries, and is inscribed as victor, receiving as a symbol
the palm of victory.” <span id="fr_664"></span>[3](#fn_665.md)

And every stage of this divine conception is but the shadow of the great
mystery of cosmic creation, which Philo sums up as follows:

“We shall, however, be quite correct in saying that the Demiurge who
made all this universe, is also at the same time Father of what has been
brought into existence; while its Mother is the Wisdom of Him who hath
made it—with whom God united, though not as man \[with woman\], and
implanted the power of genesis. And she, receiving the Seed of God,
brought forth with perfect labour His only beloved Son, whom all may
perceive <span id="fr_665"></span>[4](#fn_666.md)—this Cosmos.” <span
id="fr_666"></span>[5](#fn_667.md)

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

##### CONCERNING THE LOGOS

The idea of God found in Philo is that of the more enlightened theology
of his time. God is That which transcends all things and all ideas. It
would, of course, be a far too lengthy study to marshal the very
numerous passages in which our philosopher sets forth his view on Deity;
and so we shall select only two passages simply to give the reader who
may not be acquainted with the works of the famous Alexandrian, some
notion of the transcendency of his conception. For, as he writes:

“What wonder is it if That-which-\[really\]-is transcends the
comprehension of man, when even the mind which is in each of us, is
beyond our power of knowing? Who hath ever beheld the essence of the
soul?” <span id="fr_667"></span>[1](#fn_668.md)

This Mystery of Deity was, of necessity, in itself ineffable; but in
conception, it was regarded under two aspects—the active and the passive
causative principles.

“The Active Principle, the Mind of the universals, is absolutely pure,
and absolutely free from all admixture; It transcendeth Virtue; It
transcendeth Wisdom; nay, It transcendeth even the Good Itself and the
Beautiful Itself.

“The Passive Principle is of itself soulless and motionless, but when It
is set in motion, and enformed and ensouled by the Mind, It is
transformed into the most perfect of all works—namely, this
Cosmos.” <span id="fr_668"></span>[2](#fn_669.md)

This Passive Principle is generally taken by commentators to denote
Matter; but if so, it must be equated with Wisdom, which we have just
seen was regarded by Philo as the Mother of the Cosmos.

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

But beyond all else Philo is useful to us in recording the views of
contemporary Hellenistic theology concerning the concept of the Logos,
the Mystery of the Heavenly Man. the Son of God. Even as this word of
mystic meaning comes forward in almost every tractate and fragment of
our Trismegistic literature, so in Philo is it the dominant idea in a
host of passages.

It should, however, never be forgotten that Philo is but handing on a
doctrine; he is inventing nothing. His testimony, therefore, is of the
greatest possible value for our present study, and deserves the closest
attention. We shall accordingly devote the rest of this chapter
exclusively to this subject, and marshal the evidence, if not in Philo’s
own words, at anyrate in as exact a translation of them as we can give;
for although much has been written on the matter, we know no work in
which the simple expedient of letting Philo speak for himself has been
attempted.

##### THE SON OF GOD

The Logos, then, is pre-eminently the Son of God, for Philo writes:

“Moreover God, as Shepherd and King, leads \[and rules\] with law and
justice the nature of the heaven, the periods of sun and moon, the
changes and harmonious progressions of the other stars—deputing \[for
the task\] His own Right Reason (*Logos*), His Firstborn Son, to take
charge of the sacred flock, as though he were the Great King’s
viceroy.” <span id="fr_669"></span>[1](#fn_670.md)

Of this Heavenly Man, who was evidently for Philo the Celestial Messiah
of God, he elsewhere writes:

“Moreover, I have heard one of the companions of Moses uttering some
such word (*logos*) as this:

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> ‘Behold Man whose
name is East,’ <span id="fr_670"></span>[1](#fn_671.md)—a very strange
appellation, if you imagine the man composed of body and soul to be
meant; but if you take him for that Incorporeal Man in no way differing
from the Divine Image, you will admit that the giving him the name of
East exactly hits the mark.

“For the Father of things that are hath made him rise as His Eldest Son,
whom elsewhere He hath called His First-born, and who, when he hath been
begotten, imitating the ways of his Sire, and contemplating His
archetypal patterns, fashions the species \[of things\].” <span
id="fr_671"></span>[2](#fn_672.md)

Here we notice first of all Philo’s graphic manner (a commonplace of the
time) of quoting Ezekiel as though he were still alive, and he had heard
him speak; and, in the second place, that the First-born Son is
symbolically represented as the Sun rising in the East.

##### THE TRUE HIGH PRIEST

That, moreover, the Logos is the Son of God, he explains at length in
another passage, when writing of the true High Priest:

“But we say that the High Priest is not a man, but the Divine Reason
(*Logos*), who has no part or lot in any transgressions, not only
voluntary errors, but also involuntary ones. For, says Moses, he cannot
be defiled either ‘on account of his father,’ the Mind, nor ‘on account
of his mother,’ <span id="fr_672"></span>[3](#fn_673.md) the \[higher\]
Sense—in that, as I think, it is his good fortune to have incorruptible

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

and perfectly pure parents,—God for father, who is as well Father of all
things, and for mother Wisdom, through whom all things came into
genesis; and because ‘his head hath been anointed with oil,’—I mean his
ruling principle <span id="fr_673"></span>[1](#fn_674.md) shineth with
ray-like brilliance, so that he is deemed fit for robing in his
vestures.

“Now the Most Ancient Reason (*Logos*) of That-which-is is vestured with
the Cosmos as his robe;—for he wrappeth himself in Earth and Water, Air
and Fire, and what comes from them; the partial soul \[doth clothe
itself\] in body; the wise man’s mind in virtues.

“And ‘he shall not take the mitre from off his head,’ \[signifies\] he
shall not lay aside the royal diadem, the symbol of his admirable rule,
which, however, is not that of an autocrat-emperor, but of a viceroy.

“Nor ‘will he rend his garments,’—for the Reason (*Logos*) of
That-which-is, being the bond of all things, as hath been said, both
holds together all the parts, and binds them, and does not suffer them
to be dissolved or separated.” <span id="fr_674"></span>[2](#fn_675.md)

In another passage Philo treats of the same subject still more plainly
from the point of view of the Mysteries, writing as follows:

“For there are, as it seems, two temples of God;—the one is this Cosmos,
in which there is also the High Priest, His First-born Divine Reason
(*Logos*); the other is the rational soul, whose \[High\] Priest is the
True Man, a sensible copy of whom is he who rightly performs the prayers
and sacrifices of his Father, who is ordained to wear the robe, the
duplicate of the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

universal heaven, in order that the cosmos may work together with man,
and man with the universe.” <span id="fr_675"></span>[1](#fn_676.md)

##### THE ELDER AND YOUNGER SONS OF GOD

The Cosmic Logos is not the sensible cosmos, but the Mind thereof. This
Philo explains at length.

“It is then clear, that He who is the generator of things generated, and
the artificer of things fashioned, and the governor of things governed,
must needs be absolutely wise. He is in truth the father, and artificer,
and governor of all in both the heaven and cosmos.

“Now things to come are hidden in the shade of future time, sometimes at
short, and sometimes at long distances. But God is the artificer of time
as well. For He is father of its father; and time’s father is the
cosmos, which manifests its motion as the genesis of time; so that time
holds to God the place of grandson.

“For that *this* cosmos <span id="fr_676"></span>[2](#fn_677.md) is the
Younger Son of God, in that it is perceptible to sense. The Son who’s
older than this one, He hath declared to be no one \[perceivable by
sense\], for that he is conceivable by mind alone. But having judged him
worthy of the elder’s rights, He hath determined that he should remain
with Him alone.

“This \[cosmos\], then, the Younger Son, the sensible, being set
a-moving, has caused time’s nature to appear and disappear; so that
there nothing is which future is with God, who has the very bounds of
time subject to Him. For ’tis not time, but time’s archetype and
paradigm, Eternity (or Æon), which is His life. But

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

in Eternity naught’s past, and naught is future, but all is present
only.” <span id="fr_677"></span>[1](#fn_678.md)

##### YET GOD IS ONE

The Logos, then, is not God absolute, but the Son of God *par
excellence,* and as such is sometimes referred to as “second,” and once
even as the “second God.” Thus Philo writes:

“But the most universal \[of all things\] is God, and second the Reason
(*Logos*) of God.” <span id="fr_678"></span>[2](#fn_679.md)

In his treatise entitled *Questions and Answers,* however, we read:

“But why does He say as though \[He were speaking\] about another God,
‘in the image of God I made “man”,’ <span
id="fr_679"></span>[3](#fn_680.md) but not in His own image?

“Most excellently and wisely is the oracle prophetically delivered. For
it was not possible that anything subject to death should be imaged
after the supremest God who is the Father of the universes, but after
the second God who is His Reason (*Logos*).

“For it was necessary that the rational impress in the soul of man
should be stamped \[on it\] by the Divine Reason (*Logos*), since God,
who is prior even to His own Reason, transcendeth every rational nature;
\[so that\] it was not lawful that aught generable should be made like
unto Him who is beyond the Reason, and established in the most excellent
and the most singular Idea \[of all\].” <span
id="fr_680"></span>[4](#fn_681.md)

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

From this passage we see that though it is true Philo calls the Logos
the “second God,” he does not depart from his fundamental monotheism,
for the Logos is not an entity apart from God, but the Reason of God.
Nevertheless, this solitary phrase of Philo’s is almost invariably
trotted out in the forefront of all enquiry into Philo’s Logos-doctrine,
in order that the difference between this phrase and the wording of the
Proem to the Fourth Gospel may be insisted on as strongly as possible
for controversial apologetical purposes.

That, however, Philo is a strict monotheist may be seen from the
following passage, in which he is commenting on the words of Gen. xxxi.
13: “I am the God who was seen by thee in the place of God” <span
id="fr_681"></span>[1](#fn_682.md)—where, apparently, two Gods are referred
to.

“What, then, should we say? The true God is one; they who are called
gods, by a misuse of the term, are many. On which account the Holy
Word <span id="fr_682"></span>[2](#fn_683.md) has, on the present occasion,
indicated the true \[God\] by means of the article, saying: ‘I am *the*
God’; but the \[one so named\] by misuse of the term, without the
article, saying: ‘who was seen by thee in the place,’ not of the God,
but only ‘of God.’ And what he (Moses) here calls ‘God’ is His Most
Ancient Word (*Logos*).” <span id="fr_683"></span>[3](#fn_684.md)

##### THE LOGOS IS LIFE AND LIGHT

This Logos, moreover, is Life and Light. For, speaking of Intelligible
or Incorporeal “Spirit” and “Light,” Philo writes:

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

“The former he \[‘Moses’\] called the Breath of God, because it is the
most life-giving thing \[in the universe\], and God is the cause of
life; and the latter the Light \[of God\], because it is by far the most
beautiful thing \[in the universe\].

“For by so much more glorious and more brilliant is the intelligible
\[Light\] than the visible, as, methinks, the sun is than darkness, and
day than night, and the mind, which is the guide of the whole soul, than
the sensible means of discernment, and the eyes than the body.

“And he calls the invisible and intelligible Divine Reason (*Logos*) the
Image of God. And of this \[Image\] the image \[in its turn\] is that
intelligible light, which has been created as the image of the Divine
Reason who interprets it \[that is, Light’s\] creation.

“\[This Light\] is the \[One\] Star, beyond \[all\] heavens, the Source
of the Stars that are visible to the senses, which it would not be
beside the mark to call All-brilliancy, and from which the sun and moon
and the rest of the stars, both errant and fixed, draw their light, each
according to its power.” <span id="fr_684"></span>[1](#fn_685.md)

The necessity and reason of forming some such concept of the Logos is
that man cannot bear the utter transcendency of God in His absoluteness.
And applying this idea further to theophanies in human form, Philo
writes:

“For just as those who are unable to look at the sun itself look upon
its reflected rays as the sun, and the \[light-\] changes round the
moon, as the moon itself, so also do men regard the Image of God, His
Angel, Reason (*Logos*), as Himself.” <span
id="fr_685"></span>[2](#fn_686.md)

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

##### THE DIVINE VISION

Such Divine Vision is the object of the contemplative life, for:

“It is the special gift of those who dedicate themselves to the service
(θεραπευόντων) of That-which-is . . . to ascend by means of their
rational faculties to the height of the æther, setting before themselves
‘Moses’—the Race that is the friend of God, <span
id="fr_686"></span>[1](#fn_687.md) as the leader of the way.

“For then they will behold ‘the place that is clear,’ <span
id="fr_687"></span>[2](#fn_688.md) on which the immovable and unchangeable
God hath set His feet, and the \[regions\] beneath His feet, as it were
a work of sapphire stone, and as it might be the form of the firmament
of heaven, the sensible cosmos, which he \[‘Moses’\] symbolises by these
things.

“For it is seemly that those who have founded a brotherhood for the sake
of wisdom, should long to see Him; and if they cannot do this, to behold
at least His Image, Most Holy Reason (*Logos*), <span
id="fr_688"></span>[3](#fn_689.md) and after him also the most perfect work
in \[all\] things sensible, \[namely\] this cosmos.

“For the work of philosophy is naught else than the striving clearly to
see these things.” <span id="fr_689"></span>[4](#fn_690.md)

##### THE SONS OF GOD ON EARTH

And later on, in the same treatise (§ 28), Philo writes still more
interestingly and instructively as follows:

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

“But they who have attained unto wisdom, are, as they should be, called
Sons of the One God, as Moses admits when he says: ‘Ye are the Sons of
the Lord God,’ <span id="fr_690"></span>[1](#fn_691.md) and ‘God who begat
thee,’ <span id="fr_691"></span>[2](#fn_692.md) and ‘Is not He Himself thy
father?’ <span id="fr_692"></span>[3](#fn_693.md) . . .

“And if a man should not as yet have the good fortune to be worthy to be
called a Son of God, let him strive manfully to set himself in order
according to His First-born Reason (*Logos*), the Oldest Angel, who is
as though it were the Angel-chief, of many names; for he is called
Dominion, <span id="fr_693"></span>[4](#fn_694.md) and Name of God, and
Reason, and the Man-after-the-likeness, and Seeing Israel.

“And for this reason I was induced a little before to praise the
principles of them who say: ‘We are all Sons of One Man.’ <span
id="fr_694"></span>[5](#fn_695.md) For even if we have not yet become fit
to be judged Sons of God, we may at anyrate be Sons of His Eternal
Likeness, His Most Holy Reason; for Reason, the Eldest \[of all
Angels\], is God’s Likeness \[or Image\].” <span
id="fr_695"></span>[6](#fn_696.md)

And so also we read elsewhere:

“But the Reason (*Logos*) is God’s Likeness, by whom \[*sc.* Reason\]
the whole Cosmos was fashioned.” <span id="fr_696"></span>[7](#fn_697.md)

This Divine Reason of things, then, was the means by which the Cosmos
came into existence. And so we find Philo writing:

“But if anyone should wish to make use of naked

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

terms, he might say that the intelligible order of things <span
id="fr_697"></span>[1](#fn_698.md) is nothing else than the Reason
(*Logos*) of God perpetually creating the \[sensible\] world-order.

##### THE CITY OF GOD

“For the Intelligible City is nothing else but the reasoning of the
Architect determining in His Mind to found a city perceivable by the
senses after \[the model of\] the City which the mind alone can
perceive.

“This is the doctrine of Moses and not \[only\] mine. At any rate in
describing the genesis of man he expressly agrees that he \[man\] was
fashioned in the image of God. And if this is the case with the part—the
image of the Image—it is plainly also the case with the whole Form, that
is the whole of this sensible cosmos, which is a \[far\] greater
imitation of the Divine Image than the human image is.

“It is plain, moreover, that the Archetypal Seal, which we call Cosmos
which is perceptible only to the intellect, must itself be the
Archetypal Pattern, <span id="fr_698"></span>[2](#fn_699.md) the Idea of
ideas, the Reason (*Logos*) of God.” <span
id="fr_699"></span>[3](#fn_700.md)

And elsewhere also he writes:

“Passing, then, from details, behold the grandest House or City, namely,
this cosmos. Thou shalt find that the cause of it is God, by whom it
came into existence. The matter of it is the four elements, out of which
it has been composed. The instrument by means of which it has been
built, is the Reason (*Logos*) of God. And the object of its building is
the Goodness of the Creator.” <span id="fr_700"></span>[4](#fn_701.md)

And again:

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

##### GOD’S SHADOW

“Now the Reason (*Logos*) is the Likeness of God, by which the whole
cosmos was made.” <span id="fr_701"></span>[1](#fn_702.md)

And still more clearly:

“But God’s Shadow is His Reason (*Logos*), which using, as it were an
instrument, He made the cosmos. And this Shadow is as it were the
Archetypal Model of all else. For that as God is the Original of His
Image, which he \[‘Moses’\] now calls \[His\] Shadow, so, \[in its
turn\] that Image is the model of all else, as he \[‘Moses’\] showed
when, at the beginning of the law-giving, he said: ‘And God made man
according to the Image of God,’ <span
id="fr_702"></span>[2](#fn_703.md)—this Likeness being imaged according to
God, and man being imaged according to this Likeness, which received the
power of its Original.” <span id="fr_703"></span>[3](#fn_704.md)

Moreover, the Divine Reason, as an instrument, is regarded as the means
of separation and division:

“So God, having sharpened His Reason (*Logos*), the Divider of all
things, cut off both the formless and undifferentiated essence of all
things, and the four elements of cosmos which had been separated out of
it, <span id="fr_704"></span>[4](#fn_705.md) and the animals and plants
which had been compacted by means of these.” <span
id="fr_705"></span>[5](#fn_706.md)

With this we may compare the following passage from *The Acts of John,*
where we read of the Logos:

“But what it is in truth, as conceived of in itself, and as spoken of to
thee, <span id="fr_706"></span>[6](#fn_707.md)—it is the marking-off \[or
delimitation\] of all things, the firm necessity of those

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

things that are fixed and were unsettled, the Harmony of Wisdom.” <span
id="fr_707"></span>[1](#fn_708.md)

But to return to the concept of the Logos as symbolised by the idea of a
City; speaking of the six “cities of refuge,” Philo allegorises them as
follows:

“Is not, then, the most ancient and most secure and best Mother-city,
and not merely City, the Divine Reason (*Logos*), to which it is of the
greatest service to flee first?

“The other five, as though they were colonies \[from it\], are the
Powers of the Speaker \[of this Word (*Logos*)\], of which the chief is
the Creative \[Potency\], according to which He who creates by Reason
\[or Word\], fashioned the cosmos. The second is the Sovereign
\[Potency\], according to which He who created, ruleth that which is
brought into existence. The third is the Merciful \[Potency\], by means
of which the Artist hath compassion and hath mercy on His own work. The
fourth is the Legislative Providence, by means of which He doth forbid
the things that may not be. . . .” <span id="fr_708"></span>[2](#fn_709.md)

Philo then regards these “cities” as symbolising the refuges to which
the various kinds of erring souls should flee to find comfort. If the
Divine Reason, and the Creative and Sovereign (Kingly) Powers are too
far off for the comprehension of the sinner’s ignorance, then he should
flee to other goals at a shorter distance, the “cities” of the Necessary
Powers, namely, the Powers of Mercy and of the Law, which latter are
twofold, Enjoining and Forbidding, the latter again of which is referred
to vaguely, at the end of the chapter, as the “averting of evils”
without further definition.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

Moreover, Philo continues, there are symbols of these five Potencies
mentioned in the Scriptures:

“\[The symbols\] of Command and Prohibition are the \[two tables of
the\] laws in the ark; of the Merciful Potency, the top of the ark,
which he \[‘Moses’\] calls the Mercy-seat; of the Creative and Sovereign
\[Potencies\], the winged Cherubim, who are set over it.

“But the Divine Reason (*Logos*) above them did not take any visible
shape, inasmuch as no sensible object answers to it, for it is the very
Likeness of God, the Eldest of all beings, one and all, which are
cognisable by mind alone, the nearest to the \[One and\] Only
One-that-is, without a space of any kind between, copied inerrantly.

“For it is said: ‘I will speak to thee from above the Mercy-seat, from
between the two Cherubim.’ <span id="fr_709"></span>[1](#fn_710.md)

“So that he who drives the Chariot <span id="fr_710"></span>[2](#fn_711.md)
of the Powers is the Word (*Logos*), and He who is borne in the Chariot
is He who speaks \[the Word\], giving commandment to the Driver for the
right driving of the universe.” <span id="fr_711"></span>[3](#fn_712.md)

##### THE TRUE SHEPHERD

Again, speaking of God as the True Shepherd of the universe and all
things therein, the elements and all therein, the sun, moon, and
planets, the stars and heavens, Philo writes:

“\[He placed\] at the head His own True Reason (*Logos*), His First-born
Son, who shall succeed unto the care of this sacred flock, as though he
were the lieutenant of the Great King.” <span
id="fr_712"></span>[4](#fn_713.md)

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

The Divine Reason of things, moreover, is regarded as the Plērōma or
Fullness of all powers,—ideal space, and ideal time, if such terms can
be permitted. The Logos is the Æon or Eternity proper. And so Philo
speaks of:

“The Divine Reason (*Logos*) whom God Himself hath full-filled entirely
and throughout with incorporeal powers.” <span
id="fr_713"></span>[1](#fn_714.md)

##### THE APOSTLES OF GOD

This Supreme Logos, then, is filled full of powers—words, *logoi,* in
their turn, energies of God. As Philo writes:

“For God not disdaining to descend into the sensible world, sends forth
as His apostles His own ‘words’ (*logoi*) to give succour to those who
love virtue; and they act as physicians and expel the diseases of the
soul.” <span id="fr_714"></span>[2](#fn_715.md)

These “words” or “reasons” are men’s angels; they are the “light-sparks”
or “rays” in the heart—of which we hear so much in “Gnostic” and allied
literature—all from the Father-Sun, the Light of God, or Logos proper,
which Philo calls “the Light of the invisible and supremest Deity that
rays and shines transcendently on every side.”

##### THE LADDER OF THE “WORDS”

“When this Light shineth into the mind, the secondary beams of the
‘words’ (*logoi*) set \[or are hidden\].” <span
id="fr_715"></span>[3](#fn_716.md)

In treating of the allegorical Ladder set up from earth to heaven, Philo
first gives what he considers to

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

be its cosmic correspondences and then applies the figure to the little
world of man:

“The ladder (κλῖμαξ), then, symbolically spoken of, is in the cosmos
somewhat of the nature I have suggested. But if we turn our attention to
it in man, we shall find it is the soul; the foot of which is as it were
its earthly part—namely, sensation, while its head is as it were its
heavenly part—the purest mind.

“Up and down through all of it the ‘words’ (*logoi*) go incessantly;
whenever they ascend, drawing it up together with them, divorcing it
from its mortal nature, and revealing the sight of those things which
alone are worth the seeing; not that when they descend they cast it
down, for neither God nor yet God’s Word (*Logos*) is cause of any loss.

“But they accompany them <span id="fr_716"></span>[1](#fn_717.md) \[in
their descent\] for love of man and pity of our race, to succour, and
give help, that they, by breathing into them their saving breaths, may
bring the soul to life, tossed as it is upon the body \[’s waves\] as on
a river \[’s bosom\].

“It is the God and Governor of the universe alone who doth, transcending
sound and sight, walk ’mid the minds of them who have been throughly
purified. For them there is an oracle, which the sage prophesied, in
which is said: ‘I will walk amid you; and I will be your God.’ <span
id="fr_717"></span>[2](#fn_718.md)

“But in the minds of them who are still being washed, and have not yet
had throughly cleansed the life that is befouled and stained with
bodies’ grossness, it is the angels, the ‘words’ (*logoi*) divine,
making them bright for Virtue’s eyes.” <span
id="fr_718"></span>[3](#fn_719.md)

This Light of God is, as has repeatedly been said before, the Divine
Reason of things.

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

“‘For the Lord is my Light and my Saviour,’ <span
id="fr_719"></span>[1](#fn_720.md) as is sung in the Hymns;—\[He is\] not
only Light, but the Archetype of every other light; nay rather more
ancient and sublime than the Archetypal Model \[of all things\], in that
this \[latter\] is His Word (*Logos*). For the \[Universal\] Model is
His all-full <span id="fr_720"></span>[2](#fn_721.md) Word, the Light,
while He Himself is like to naught of things created.” <span
id="fr_721"></span>[3](#fn_722.md)

##### THE LOGOS THE SPIRITUAL SUN

This Word, or Logos, is further symbolised among phenomena as the sun.
The Spiritual Sun is the Divine Reason—“the intelligible Model of the
\[sun\] that moves in heaven.”

“For the Word (*Logos*) of God, when it enters into our earthly
constitution, succours and aids those who are Virtue’s kinsmen, and
those that are favourably disposed to her, affording them a perfect
place of refuge and salvation, and shedding on their foes <span
id="fr_722"></span>[4](#fn_723.md) destruction and ruin past repair.” <span
id="fr_723"></span>[5](#fn_724.md)

The Logos is thus naturally the panacea of all ills.

“For the Word (*Logos*) is, as it were, the saving medicine for all the
wounds and passions of the soul, which \[Word\], the lawgiver declares,
we should restore ‘before the sun’s going down’ <span
id="fr_724"></span>[6](#fn_725.md)—that is, before the

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

most brilliant rays of God, supremest and most manifest, go down \[or
set\]—\[rays\] which through His pity for our race He has sent forth
from \[His high\] Heaven into the mind of man.

“For whilst that Light most Godlike abideth in the soul, we shall
restore the ‘word’ (*logos*) that hath been given to us in pledge, as
though it were a garment, that it may be to him who doth receive it, the
special property of man—\[a garment\] both to cover up the shame <span
id="fr_725"></span>[1](#fn_726.md) of life, and to enjoy the gift of God
and have respite in quietude, by reason of the present help of such a
counsellor, and of a shielder such as will never leave the rank in which
he hath been stationed.” <span id="fr_726"></span>[2](#fn_727.md)

From all of which it seems that Philo is drawing a distinction between
the Pure Light of the Logos and the reflection of that Light in the
reason of man, for he goes on to say:

“Indeed we have prolonged this long excursus for no other reason than to
explain that the trained mind, moved by irregular motions to
productiveness and its contrary, and, as it were, continually ascending
and descending \[the ladder\]—when it is productive and raised into the
height, then is it bathed in radiance of the archetypal immaterial rays
of the Logic <span id="fr_727"></span>[3](#fn_728.md) Source of God who
bringeth all unto perfection; and when it doth descend and is barren, it
is illumined by their

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

images, the ‘words’ (*logoi*) immortal, whom it is custom to call
angels.” <span id="fr_728"></span>[1](#fn_729.md)

##### THE DISCIPLES OF THE LOGOS

And a little later on Philo proceeds to speak of those who are disciples
or pupils of the Holy Word or Divine Reason.

“These are they who are truly men, lovers of temperance, and
orderliness, and modesty,”—whose life he proceeds further to describe in
similar terms to those he uses of the Therapeuts.

Such a life, he concludes, “is adapted not for those who *are called*
men, but for those who *are truly* so.” <span
id="fr_729"></span>[2](#fn_730.md)

For those, then, who consciously set their feet upon the ladder of true
manhood, there is a Way up even to Deity Itself, for Philo writes:

“Stability, and sure foundation, and eternally abiding in the same,
changeless and immovable, is, in the first place, a characteristic of
That-which-is; and, in the second, \[a characteristic\] of the Reason
(*Logos*) of That-which-is—which Reason He hath called his Covenant; in
the third, of the wise man; and in the fourth, of him who goeth forward
\[towards wisdom\].” <span id="fr_730"></span>[3](#fn_731.md)

How, then, continues Philo, can the wicked mind think that it can stand
alone—“when it is swept hither and thither by the eddies of passion,
which carry the body forth to burial as a corpse?”

And a little later on he proceeds to tell us that Eden must be taken to
stand for the Wisdom of God.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

“And the Divine Reason (*Logos*) floweth down like a river, from Wisdom,
as from a source, that it may irrigate and water the heavenly shoots and
plants of Virtue-lovers, that grow upon the sacred Mountain of the
Gods, <span id="fr_731"></span>[1](#fn_732.md) as though it were a
paradise.

##### THE RIVER OF THE DIVINE REASON

“And this Holy Reason is divided into four sources—I mean it is
separated into four virtues—each of which is a queen. For its being
divided into sources <span id="fr_732"></span>[2](#fn_733.md) does not bear
any resemblance to division of space, but rather to a sovereignty, <span
id="fr_733"></span>[3](#fn_734.md) in order that, having pointed to the
virtues, as its boundaries, he \[‘Moses’\] may immediately display the
wise man, who makes use of these virtues, as king, elected to kingship,
not by the show of men’s hands, but by choice of that Nature \[namely,
Virtue\] which alone is truly free, and genuine, and above all
bribes. . . .

“Accordingly, one of the companions of Moses, likening this Word
(*Logos*) to a river, says in the Hymns: ‘The river of God was filled
with water.’ <span id="fr_734"></span>[4](#fn_735.md)

“Now it is absurd that any of the rivers flowing on earth should be so
called; but, as it seems, he \[the psalmist\] clearly signifies the
Divine Reason (*Logos*), full of the flood of Wisdom, having no part of
itself bereft or empty \[thereof\], but rather, as has been said, being
entirely diffused throughout the universe, and \[again\] raised up to
the height \[thereof\], by reason of

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

the perpetual and continuous \[circling\] course of that eternally
flowing fountain.

“There is also the following song-verse: ‘The rapid flow of the river
maketh glad the city of God.’ <span id="fr_735"></span>[1](#fn_736.md)

##### JERUSALEM ABOVE

“What kind of city? For what is now the holy city, <span
id="fr_736"></span>[2](#fn_737.md) in which is the holy temple, was founded
at a distance from sea and rivers; so that it is clear that \[the
writer\] intends to represent by means of an under-meaning something
different from the surface-sense.

“For indeed the stream of the Divine Reason (*Logos*) continually
flowing on with rapidity and regularity, diffuses all things through all
and maketh them glad.

“And in one sense he calls cosmos the City of God, inasmuch as,
receiving the whole cup <span id="fr_737"></span>[3](#fn_738.md) of the
Divine draught it . . ., <span id="fr_738"></span>[4](#fn_739.md) and,
being made joyous, it shouteth with a joy that can never be taken away
or quenched for the eternity.

“But in another sense \[he uses it of\] the soul of the wise man, in
which God is said to walk as in a city, for ‘I will walk in you and I
will be your God.’ <span id="fr_739"></span>[5](#fn_740.md)

“And for the happy soul that stretches forth its own reasoning <span
id="fr_740"></span>[6](#fn_741.md) as a most holy drinking vessel <span
id="fr_741"></span>[7](#fn_742.md)—who is it that poureth forth the sacred
measures of true joy, if not the cup-bearer of God, the \[Divine\]
Reason (*Logos*), who is master of the feast?—he who differs not from

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

the draught, but is himself unmingled delight, and sweetness,
forthpouring, good-cheer, the immortal philtre of all joy and of
contentment,—if we may use the words of poetry.

“But the City of God the Hebrews call Jerusalem, which by interpretation
signifies the ‘Sight of Peace.’ Wherefore seek not the City of
That-which-is in regions of the earth—for ’tis not made of stocks and
stones; but \[seek it\] in the soul that doth not war, but offers unto
them of the keen sight a life of contemplation and of peace.” <span
id="fr_742"></span>[1](#fn_743.md)

This, then, is how Philo understands the New Jerusalem (or Ogdoad), so
familiar to us from the writings of the “Gnostic” schools, beyond which
was the Plērōma or Treasure of Light. For elsewhere he writes:

“He will offer a fair and fitting prayer, as Moses did, that God may
open for us His Treasure, yea \[His\] Reason (*Logos*) sublime, and
pregnant with lights divine, which he \[‘Moses’\] has called
Heaven.” <span id="fr_743"></span>[2](#fn_744.md)

These “lights” are “reasons” (*logoi*), for a little further on he says:

“Thou seest that the soul is not nourished with things earthly and
contemptible, but by the reasons God rains down from His sublime and
pure nature, which he \[‘Moses’\] calls Heaven.” <span
id="fr_744"></span>[3](#fn_745.md)

##### THE LOGOS IS AS MANNA AND CORIANDER SEED

And a little further on, referring to the allegorical “manna,” or
heavenly food, “the bread which the Lord hath given you to eat” (Ex.
xvi. 13), he writes:

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

“Dost thou not see the food of the soul, what it is? It is the
Continuing Reason (*Logos*) of God, like unto dew, encircling the whole
of it \[the soul\] on all sides, and suffering no part of it to be
without its share of it \[the *Logos*\].

“But this Reason is not apparent everywhere, but \[only\] in the man who
is destitute of passions and vices; yea, subtle is it for the mind to
distinguish, or to be distinguished by the mind, exceedingly translucent
and pure for sight to see.

“It is, moreover, as it were, a coriander seed. <span
id="fr_745"></span>[1](#fn_746.md) For agriculturalists declare that the
seed of the coriander can be divided and dissected infinitely, and that
every single part and section \[thereof\], when sown, comes up just as
the whole seed. Such also is the Reason (*Logos*) of God, profitable in
its entirety and in every part, however small it be.” <span
id="fr_746"></span>[2](#fn_747.md)

And he adds a little further on:

“This is the teaching of the hierophant and prophet, Moses, who will
say: ‘This is the bread, the food which God hath given to the
soul,’ <span id="fr_747"></span>[3](#fn_748.md) that He hath given \[us\]
for meat and drink, His own Word, <span id="fr_748"></span>[4](#fn_749.md)
His own Reason, <span id="fr_749"></span>[5](#fn_750.md) for this
\[Reason\] is the bread which He hath given us to eat; this is the
Word.” <span id="fr_750"></span>[6](#fn_751.md)

##### THE LOGOS IS THE PUPIL OF GOD’S EYE

Philo also likens the Divine Reason to the pupil of the eye—a figure
that will meet us later in considering the meaning of the Κόρη Κόσμου
(“Virgin of the World”) treatise—for he writes:

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

“May not \[this Reason\] be also likened to the pupil of the eye? For
just as the eye’s pupil, though the smallest part \[of it\], does yet
behold all of the zones of things existing—the boundless sea, and
vastness of the air, and all of the whole heaven which the sun doth
bound from east to west,—so is the sight of the Divine Reason the
keenest sight of all, so that it can behold all things; by which \[men\]
shall behold things worthy to be seen beyond white \[light\] <span
id="fr_751"></span>[1](#fn_752.md) itself.

“For what could be more bright or more far-seeing than Reason Divine, by
shining in which the other \[lights\] drive out all mist and darkness,
striving to blend themselves with the soul’s light.” <span
id="fr_752"></span>[2](#fn_753.md)

##### “MAN SHALL NOT LIVE BY BREAD ALONE”

And again, in a passage of intense interest we read:

“For He nourisheth us with His Reason (*Logos*)—the most general \[of
all things\]. . . . And the Reason of God is above the whole cosmos; it
is the most ancient and most general of all the things that are.

“This Reason the ‘fathers’ <span id="fr_753"></span>[3](#fn_754.md) knew
not,—not \[our\] true \[eternal\] fathers, but those hoary in time, who
say: ‘Let us take a leader, and let us return unto’—the passions
of—‘Egypt.’ <span id="fr_754"></span>[4](#fn_755.md)

“Therefore let God announce His \[good\] tidings to the soul in an
image: ‘Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word <span
id="fr_755"></span>[5](#fn_756.md) that proceedeth out of the mouth of
God,’ <span id="fr_756"></span>[6](#fn_757.md)—that is, he shall be
nourished by the whole of Reason (*Logos*) and by \[every\] part of it.
For ‘mouth’ is a symbol of the \[whole\] Logos, and ‘word’ is its
part.” <span id="fr_757"></span>[7](#fn_758.md)

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

These “fathers,” then, are those of the lower nature, and not our true
spiritual parents; it is these “fathers” that we are to abandon.

Compare with this Matt. x. 37: “He who loveth father and mother more
than Me is not worthy of Me”; and the far more striking form of the
tradition in Luke xiv. 26: “If any man cometh unto Me, and doth not hate
his own father and mother and wife and children and brethren and
sisters, yea and his own soul also, he cannot be My disciple.”

In the Gnostic gospel, known as the *Pistis Sophia* (341), the mystic
meaning of these parents is given at length, as signifying the rulers of
the lower nature, and the Master is made to say: “For this cause have I
said unto you aforetime, ‘He who shall not leave father and mother to
follow after Me is not worthy of Me.’ What I said then was, ‘Ye shall
leave your parents the rulers, that ye may be children of the First
Everlasting Mystery.’”

But the most arresting point is that Matt. iv. 4, in the story of the
Temptation, quotes precisely the same words of the LXX. text of Deut.
viii. 3 which Philo does, beginning where he does and finishing where he
does, both omitting the final and tautological “shall man live”—a very
curious coincidence. Luke iv. 4 preserves only the first half of the
sentence; but it evidently lay in exactly the same form in which Philo
uses it before the first and third Evangelists in their second or
“Logia” source. It was, then, presumably a frequently quoted text.

##### THE LOGOS-MEDIATOR

The Divine Reason is further figured as a true “Person,” the Mediator
between God and man. Thus Philo writes:

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

“And on His angel-ruling and most ancient Reason (*Logos*), the Father
who created all, hath bestowed a special gift—that standing between them
as a Boundary, <span id="fr_758"></span>[1](#fn_759.md) he may distinguish
creature from Creator.

“He \[the Reason\] ever is himself the suppliant unto the Incorruptible
on mortal kind’s behalf in its distress, and is the King’s ambassador to
subject nature.

“And he exulteth in his gift, and doth majesticly insist thereon,
declaring: ‘Yea, have I stood between the Lord and you,’ <span
id="fr_759"></span>[2](#fn_760.md)—not increate as God, nor yet create as
ye, but in the midst between the \[two\] extremes, hostage to both: to
Him who hath created him, for pledge that the creature never will remove
itself entirely \[from Him\], nor make revolt, choosing disorder in
order’s place; and to the thing created for good hope that God, the
Merciful, will never disregard the work of His own hands. ‘For I will
herald forth the news of peace to the creation from Him who knows how to
make wars to cease, from God the Everlasting Peacekeeper.’” <span
id="fr_760"></span>[3](#fn_761.md)

In considering what is claimed to be the elaborate symbolism of the
sacred vestments of the High Priest, and the nature of this symbolical
office, Philo declares that the twelve stones upon the breast of the
High Priest, in four rows of three each, are a symbol of the Divine
Reason (*Logos*), which holds together and regulates the universe; this
breastplate, then, is the *logion* or sacred oracle of God.

“For it was necessary that he who was consecrated to the Father of the
cosmos, should have \[His\] Son,

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

the most perfect in virtue, as intercessor, <span
id="fr_761"></span>[1](#fn_762.md) both for the forgiveness <span
id="fr_762"></span>[2](#fn_763.md) of sins, and for the abundant supply of
the most unstinted blessings.

“It probably also imparts the preliminary teaching to the Servant of
God, <span id="fr_763"></span>[3](#fn_764.md) that if he cannot be worthy
of Him who made the cosmos, he should nevertheless without ceasing
strive to be worthy of that cosmos; for when he has \[once\] been
clothed with its likeness, <span id="fr_764"></span>[4](#fn_765.md) he is
bound forthwith, by carrying about the image of the model <span
id="fr_765"></span>[5](#fn_766.md) in his head, of his own self to change
himself as though it were from man into the nature of the cosmos, and,
if we ought to say so <span id="fr_766"></span>[6](#fn_767.md)—nay, he who
speaks on truth ought to speak truth!—be \[himself\] a little
cosmos.” <span id="fr_767"></span>[7](#fn_768.md)

##### THE YOGA OF PLOTINUS

With these most instructive indications we may compare the intensely
interesting passage of Plotinus in his essay “On Intelligible Beauty,”
where he gives his yoga-system, so to speak. It is perhaps the most
important passage that has come down to us from the coryphæus of Later
Platonism, giving, as it does, in every probability, the method of the
school whereby *ecstasis* was attained.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

“Let us, then, form a mental image of this cosmos with each of its parts
remaining what it is, and yet interpenetrating one another,
\[imagining\] them all together into one as much as we possibly can,—so
that whatsoever one comes first into the mind as the ‘one’ (as for
instance the outer sphere), there immediately follows also the sight of
the semblance of the sun, and together with it that of the other
stars, <span id="fr_768"></span>[1](#fn_769.md) and the earth, and sea, and
all things living, as though in \[one\] transparent sphere,—in fine, as
though all things could be seen in it.

“Let there, then, be in the soul some semblance of a sphere of light
\[transparent\], having all things in it, whether moving or still, or
some of them moving and others still.

“And, holding this \[sphere\] in the mind, conceive in thy self another
\[sphere\], removing \[from it all idea of\] mass; take from it also
\[the idea of\] space, and the phantom of matter in thy mind; and do not
try to image another sphere \[merely\] less in bulk than the former.

“Then invoking God who hath made \[that true sphere\] of which thou
holdest the phantom \[in thy mind\], pray that He may come.

“And may He come with his own cosmos, <span
id="fr_769"></span>[2](#fn_770.md) with all the Gods therein—He being one
and all, and each one all, united into one, yet different in their
powers, and yet, in that one \[power\] of multitude all one.

“Nay, rather the One God is all \[the Gods\] for that He falleth not
short \[of Himself\] though all of them are \[from Him\]; \[and\] they
are all together, yet each again apart in \[some kind of\] an unextended
state, possessing no form perceptible to sense.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

“For, otherwise, one would be in one place, another in another, and
\[each\] be ‘each,’ and not ‘all’ in itself, without parts other from
the others and \[other\] from itself.

“Nor is each whole a power divided and proportioned according to a
measurement of parts; but this \[whole\] is the all, all power,
extending infinitely and infinitely powerful;—nay, so vast is that
\[divine world-order <span id="fr_770"></span>[1](#fn_771.md)\], that even
its ‘parts’ are infinite.” <span id="fr_771"></span>[2](#fn_772.md)

##### THE RACE OF GOD

But to return to Philo. The rational soul or mind of man is potentially
the Intelligible Cosmos or Logos; thus he writes:

“The great Moses did not call the species of the rational soul by a name
resembling any one of the things created, but he called it the image of
the Divine and Invisible, deeming it a true \[image\] brought into being
and impressed with the soul of God, of which the Signet is the Eternal
Reason (*Logos*).” <span id="fr_772"></span>[3](#fn_773.md)

All of which the disciplined soul shall realise in himself. Of such a
man Abraham is a type, for:

“Abandoning mortal things, he ‘is added to the people of God,’ <span
id="fr_773"></span>[4](#fn_774.md) plucking the fruit of immortality,
having become equal to the angels. For the angels are the host of God,
incorporeal and happy souls.”

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

The angels are the “people” of God; but there is a still higher degree
of union, whereby a man becomes one of the “Race” or “Kin” of God. This
“Race” is an intimate union of all them who are “kin to Him”; they
become one. For this Race “is one, the highest one, but ‘people’ is the
name of many.”

“As many, then, as have advanced in discipline and instruction, and been
perfected \[therein\], have their lot among this ‘many.’

“But they who have passed beyond these introductory exercises, becoming
natural Disciples of God, receiving wisdom free from all toil, migrate
to this incorruptible and perfect Race, receiving a lot superior to
their former lives in genesis.” <span id="fr_774"></span>[1](#fn_775.md)

And that the mind is immortal may be shown allegorically from the death
of Moses, who, says Philo, migrated “by means of the Word (*Logos*) of
the Cause, <span id="fr_775"></span>[2](#fn_776.md) by whom the whole
cosmos was created.”

This is said “in order that thou mayest learn that God regards the wise
man as of equal honour with the cosmos; for it is by means of the same
Reason (*Logos*) that He hath made the universe, and bringeth back the
perfect man from earthly things unto Himself again.” <span
id="fr_776"></span>[3](#fn_777.md)

But enough of Philo for the moment. Sufficient has been given to let the
reader hear the Alexandrian speak for himself on the central idea of his
cosmos. Much else could be added—indeed, volumes could be written on the
subject—for it gives us one of the most important backgrounds of
Christian origins, and without a thorough knowledge of Hellenistic
theology it is impossible in any way to get our values of many things
correctly.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_604"></span>[199:1](th111.htm#fr_603.md) In all, upwards of
sixty Philonean tractates are preserved to us; and in addition we have
also numerous fragments from lost works.

<span id="fn_605"></span>[200:1](th111.htm#fr_604.md) Philo is known to the
Jews as Yedidyah ha-Alakhsanderi.

<span id="fn_606"></span>[200:2](th111.htm#fr_605.md) Thus, in *D. V. C*.,
§ 3; M. ii. 475, P. 893 (Ri. v. 309, C. 65), referring to his beloved
Therapeuts, he himself says: “They have also works of ancient authors
who were once heads of their school, and left behind them many monuments
of the method used in allegorical works.” Nor was this “allegorising”
Jewish only; it was common. It was applied to Homer; it was the method
of the Stoics. Indeed, this “treatment (θεραπεία) of myths” was the only
way in which the results of the philosophy and science of the time could
be brought into touch with popular faith.  
  
The text I use is that of Richter (M. C. E.), *Philonis Judæi Opera
Omnia,* in *Bibliotheca Sacra Patrum Ecclesiæ Græcorum* (Leipzig,
1828-1830), 8 vols. M. refers to the edition of Mangey; P. to the Paris
edition; Ri. stands for that of Richter—thus abbreviated so as not to be
confused with R., which elsewhere stands for Reitzenstein; C. stands for
Conybeare’s critical text of the *D. V. C.* (Oxford, 1895), the only
really critical text of any tractate which we so far possess.

<span id="fn_607"></span>[200:3](th111.htm#fr_606.md) “Philo,” in Smith and
Wace’s *Dict. of Christ. Biog*. (London, 1887), iv. 357-389—by far the
best general study on the subject in English. Drummond’s (J.) two
volumes, *Philo Judæus, or The Alexandrian Philosophy* (London, 1888),
may also be consulted, but they leave much to be desired. The only
English translation is that of Yonge (C. D.), *The Works of Philo
Judæus* (London, 1854) in Bonn’s Library; but it is by no means
satisfactory, and I have in every instance of quotation made my own
version.

<span id="fn_608"></span>[202:1](th111.htm#fr_607.md) Or “divinely
prompted” (*De Vit. Mos.,* ii. 5-7).

<span id="fn_609"></span>[203:1](th111.htm#fr_608.md) *De Vit. Mos.,* iii.
23, 24.

<span id="fn_610"></span>[204:1](th111.htm#fr_609.md) For a sketch of
ancient Alexandria, see *F. F. F.,* pp. 96-120.

<span id="fn_611"></span>[205:1](th111.htm#fr_610.md) For a translation of
the famous tractate on this subject, from the recent critical text of
Conybeare, see *F. F. F.,* pp. 66-82.

<span id="fn_612"></span>[205:2](th111.htm#fr_611.md) *D. V. C.,* § 3; M.
ii. 474, P. 891 (Ri. v. 308, C. 56).

<span id="fn_613"></span>[206:1](th111.htm#fr_612.md) *De Sept.,* §§ 3, 4;
M. ii. 279, P. 1175 (Ri. v. 21, 22).

<span id="fn_614"></span>[207:1](th111.htm#fr_613.md) *De Mut. Nom.,* § 4;
M. i. 583, P. 1049 (Ri. iii. 163, 164).

<span id="fn_615"></span>[208:1](th111.htm#fr_614.md) *Quod Om. Prob. L.,*
§ 11; M. ii. 456, P. 876 (Ri. v. 284, 285).

<span id="fn_616"></span>[208:2](th111.htm#fr_615.md) C., p. 146, 1. 13.

<span id="fn_617"></span>[208:3](th111.htm#fr_616.md) *D. V. C.,* § 9; M.
ii. 482, P. 900 (Ri. v. 319, C. 111).

<span id="fn_618"></span>[209:1](th111.htm#fr_617.md) Or shrine—a small
room or closet.

<span id="fn_619"></span>[209:2](th111.htm#fr_618.md) That is, a sanctuary
or monastery, the latter in the sense of a place where one can be alone
or in solitude. This is the first use of the term “monastery” known in
classical antiquity, and, as we see, it bears a special and not a
general meaning.

<span id="fn_620"></span>[209:3](th111.htm#fr_619.md) *Ibid.,* § 3; M. ii.
475, P. 892 (Ri. v. 309, C. 60).

<span id="fn_621"></span>[210:1](th111.htm#fr_620.md) Grenfell and Hunt,
*New Sayings of Jesus* (London, 1904), p. 18.

<span id="fn_622"></span>[210:2](th111.htm#fr_621.md) Lit., ye mystæ and
hierophants.

<span id="fn_623"></span>[210:3](th111.htm#fr_622.md) Lit., orgies—that is,
“burstings forth” of inspiration, or revealings.

<span id="fn_624"></span>[210:4](th111.htm#fr_623.md) *De Prof.,* § 16; M.
i. 558, P. 462 (Ri. iii. 128).

<span id="fn_625"></span>[210:5](th111.htm#fr_624.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* i. 39,
4.

<span id="fn_626"></span>[210:6](th111.htm#fr_625.md) δεισιδαίμονες—here
meaning the literalists; it generally signifies the religious in a good
sense, and the superstitious in a bad one.

<span id="fn_627"></span>[211:1](th111.htm#fr_626.md) *De Cherub.,* § 12;
M. i. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208).

<span id="fn_628"></span>[211:2](th111.htm#fr_627.md) *Ibid.,* § 14; M. i.
147, P. 116 (Ri. i. 210).

<span id="fn_629"></span>[211:3](th111.htm#fr_628.md) *Cf. Leg. Alleg.,*
ii. § 15; M. i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 105).

<span id="fn_630"></span>[211:4](th111.htm#fr_629.md) Lit., orgies.

<span id="fn_631"></span>[212:1](th111.htm#fr_630.md) *De Gigan.,* § 12; M.
i. 270, P. 291 (Ri. ii. 61).

<span id="fn_632"></span>[212:2](th111.htm#fr_631.md) Philo, apparently,
would have it that the sacrifice of the ram, which was a symbol of
virility, signified the obligation of chastity prior to initiation into
the higher rites.

<span id="fn_633"></span>[212:3](th111.htm#fr_632.md) *De Vit. Mos.,* iii.
§ 17; M. ii. 157, P. 675 (Ri. iv. 216). The Therapeuts, with Philo, then
do not mean “Healers,” as has been sometimes thought, but “Servants of
God.”

<span id="fn_634"></span>[212:4](th111.htm#fr_633.md) *D. V. C.,* § 2; M.
ii. 473, P. 891 (Ri. v. 306, C. 41, 42).

<span id="fn_635"></span>[212:5](th111.htm#fr_634.md) *Quod Det. Pot.
Insid.,* § 27; M. i. 211, P. 174 (Ri. i. 295).

<span id="fn_636"></span>[213:1](th111.htm#fr_635.md) *Ibid.,* § 48; M. i.
224, P. 186 (Ri. i. 314).

<span id="fn_637"></span>[213:2](th111.htm#fr_636.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* i. §
32; M. i. 64, P. 59 (Ri. i. 87).

<span id="fn_638"></span>[214:1](th111.htm#fr_637.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* ii. §
xv.; M. i. 76, P. 1097 (Ri. i. 106).

<span id="fn_639"></span>[214:2](th111.htm#fr_638.md) Which they brought
out of Egypt—that is, the body.

<span id="fn_640"></span>[214:3](th111.htm#fr_639.md) *De Sacrif.,* § 16;
M. i. 174, P. 139 (Ri. i. 245).

<span id="fn_641"></span>[214:4](th111.htm#fr_640.md) *Quæst. in Gen.,* iv.
§ 2; P. Auch. 243 (Ri. vii. 61).

<span id="fn_642"></span>[215:1](th111.htm#fr_641.md) Gen. xviii. 6.

<span id="fn_643"></span>[215:2](th111.htm#fr_642.md) That is, apparently,
the “good” = the “incorporeal,” and the “subject” = the “corporeal.”

<span id="fn_644"></span>[216:1](th111.htm#fr_643.md) *De Sacrif.,* § 15;
M. i. 173, 174; P. 139 (Ri. i. 244, 245).

<span id="fn_645"></span>[216:2](th111.htm#fr_644.md) *De Cherub.,* § 12;
M. i. 146, P. 115 (Ri. i. 208).

<span id="fn_646"></span>[217:1](th111.htm#fr_645.md) *Ibid.,* § 13; M. i.
147, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 209).

<span id="fn_647"></span>[218:1](th111.htm#fr_646.md) Jer. iv. 3—where A.V.
translates: “Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, My father, thou
art the guide of my youth?”

<span id="fn_648"></span>[219:1](th111.htm#fr_647.md) *De Cherub.,* § 14,
15; M. i. 148, P. 116, 117 (Ri. i. 210, 211).

<span id="fn_649"></span>[219:2](th111.htm#fr_648.md) In this, however, I
venture to think that Conybeare is mistaken; it was a common dogma of
the Hellenistic theology of the time.

<span id="fn_650"></span>[219:3](th111.htm#fr_649.md) *Op. sup. cit.,* pp.
302, 303.

<span id="fn_651"></span>[219:4](th111.htm#fr_650.md) *De Execrat.,* § 7;
M. ii. 435, P. 936 (Ri. v. 254). See “Myth of Man in the Mysteries,” S.
§ 25 J.

<span id="fn_652"></span>[220:1](th111.htm#fr_651.md) *D. V. C.,* § 8; M.
ii. 482, P. 899 (Ri. v. 318, C. 108).

<span id="fn_653"></span>[220:2](th111.htm#fr_652.md) Elsewhere an epithet
of the Logos.

<span id="fn_654"></span>[220:3](th111.htm#fr_653.md) *De Mut. Nom.,* § 23;
M. i. 598, P. 1065 (Ri. iii. 183).

<span id="fn_655"></span>[220:4](th111.htm#fr_654.md) *Ibid.,* § 24; M. i.
599, P. 1065 (Ri. iii. 184).

<span id="fn_656"></span>[220:5](th111.htm#fr_655.md) *De Præm. et Pæn.,* §
18; M. ii. 425, P. 927 (Ri. v. 241).

<span id="fn_657"></span>[220:6](th111.htm#fr_656.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii. §
63; M. i. 122, 123, P. 94 (Ri. i. 175). *Cf.* Gen. xxx. 2: “Am I in
God’s stead?”

<span id="fn_658"></span>[221:1](th111.htm#fr_657.md) Gen. xxi. 6. A.V.:
“God hath made me to laugh, so that all that hear will laugh with me.”

<span id="fn_659"></span>[221:2](th111.htm#fr_658.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii. §
77; M. i. 131, P. 101 (Ri. i. 187). *Cf.* also *De Cherub.,* § 13; M. i.
147, P. 115 (Ri. i. 209).

<span id="fn_660"></span>[222:1](th111.htm#fr_659.md) Gen. xxix. 31. *Cong.
Erud. Grat.,* § 2; M. i. 520, P. 425 (Ri. iii. 72).

<span id="fn_661"></span>[223:1](th111.htm#fr_660.md) *De Spec. Leg.,* § 7;
M. ii. 275, P. 774 (Ri. v. 15, 16).

<span id="fn_662"></span>[223:2](th111.htm#fr_661.md) *De Som.,* i. § 35;
M. i. 651, P. 595 (Ri. iii. 257).

<span id="fn_663"></span>[224:1](th111.htm#fr_662.md) *De Ser. Num. Vind.,*
565 C.; ed. Bern. iii. 459. See, for a translation of the whole Vision,
my “Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries,” *Theosophical Review* (April,
May, June, 1898), xxii. 145 ff., 232 ff., 312 ff.

<span id="fn_664"></span>[224:2](th111.htm#fr_663.md) Gen. xxxviii. 11 ff.

<span id="fn_665"></span>[224:3](th111.htm#fr_664.md) *Quod Deus Immut.,* §
29; M. i. 293, P. 313 (Ri. ii. 94).

<span id="fn_666"></span>[224:4](th111.htm#fr_665.md) Lit., “sensible.”

<span id="fn_667"></span>[224:5](th111.htm#fr_666.md) *De Ebriet.,* § 8; M.
i. 361, P. 244 (Ri. i. 189).

<span id="fn_668"></span>[225:1](th111.htm#fr_667.md) *De Mut. Nom.,* § 2;
M. i. 579, P. 1045 (Ri. iii. 159).

<span id="fn_669"></span>[225:2](th111.htm#fr_668.md) *De Mund. Op.,* § 2;
M. i. 2, P. 2 (Ri. i. 6).

<span id="fn_670"></span>[226:1](th111.htm#fr_669.md) *De Agric.,* § 13; M.
i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116).

<span id="fn_671"></span>[227:1](th111.htm#fr_670.md) Or Rising. *Cf.*
Zech. vi. 12—where A.V. translates: “Behold the man whose name is The
Branch.” Philo, however, follows LXX., but reads ἄνθρωπος instead of
ἀνήρ. The Man-doctrine of the “Pœmandres” and of the Naassene Document
was a fundamental one with Philo.

<span id="fn_672"></span>[227:2](th111.htm#fr_671.md) *De Confus. Ling.,* §
14; M. i. 414, P. 329 (Ri. ii. 262).

<span id="fn_673"></span>[227:3](th111.htm#fr_672.md) *Cf.* Lev. xxi. 11.

<span id="fn_674"></span>[228:1](th111.htm#fr_673.md) τὸ ἡγεμονικόν—that
is, the authoritative or responsible part of the soul, namely, the
reason—a Stoic technical term.

<span id="fn_675"></span>[228:2](th111.htm#fr_674.md) *De Prof.,* § 20; M.
i. 562, P. 466 (Ri. iii. 133). The quotations look back to Lev. xxi. 10,
but the readings in the first two differ from the LXX.

<span id="fn_676"></span>[229:1](th111.htm#fr_675.md) *De Som.,* § 37; M.
i. 653, P. 597 (Ri. iii. 260).

<span id="fn_677"></span>[229:2](th111.htm#fr_676.md) That is the sensible
and not the intelligible cosmos.

<span id="fn_678"></span>[230:1](th111.htm#fr_677.md) *Quod Deus Im.,* § 6;
M. i. 277, P. 298 (Ri. ii. 72, 73).

<span id="fn_679"></span>[230:2](th111.htm#fr_678.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* § 21;
M. i. 82, P. 1103 (Ri. i. 113).

<span id="fn_680"></span>[230:3](th111.htm#fr_679.md) *Cf.* Gen. i. 27.
Philo reads ἐν εἰκόνι instead of the κατ᾽ εἰκόνα of LXX., and ἐποίησα
instead of ἐποίησε.

<span id="fn_681"></span>[230:4](th111.htm#fr_680.md) Namely, in His
Reason. The Greek text is quoted by Eusebius, *Præp. Evang.,* vii. 13
(M. ii. 625, Ri. vi. 175), who gives it as from Bk. i. of *Quæst. et
Solut.* The original text is lost, but we have a Latin Version—*q.v.*
ii. § 62 (Ri. vi. 356)—which, however, in this instance, has made sorry
havoc of the original.

<span id="fn_682"></span>[231:1](th111.htm#fr_681.md) Philo and LXX. both
have: “ἐγώ εἰμι ὁ θεὸς ὁ ὀφθείς σοι ἐν τόπῳ θεοῦ”; whereas A.V.
translates: “I am the God of Beth-el”—that is, the “House or Place of El
or God.”

<span id="fn_683"></span>[231:2](th111.htm#fr_682.md) Here meaning the
Inspiration of Scripture.

<span id="fn_684"></span>[231:3](th111.htm#fr_683.md) *De Som.,* § i. 39;
M. i. 655, P. 599 (Ri. iii. 262, 263).

<span id="fn_685"></span>[232:1](th111.htm#fr_684.md) *De Mund. Op.,* § 8;
M. i. 6, 7, P. 6 (Ri. i. 11).

<span id="fn_686"></span>[232:2](th111.htm#fr_685.md) *De Som.,* § 41; M.
i. 657, P. 600 (Ri. iii. 264).

<span id="fn_687"></span>[233:1](th111.htm#fr_686.md) This is the Race of
the Logos.

<span id="fn_688"></span>[233:2](th111.htm#fr_687.md) *Cf.* Ex. xxiv. 10.
A.V. does not render this reading, but LXX. gives “The place where the
God of Israel stood.”

<span id="fn_689"></span>[233:3](th111.htm#fr_688.md) Which here, as also
above, Philo would equate with the “Place of God.”

<span id="fn_690"></span>[233:4](th111.htm#fr_689.md) *De Confus. Ling.,* §
20; M. i. 419, P. 333, 334 (Ri. ii. 268, 269).

<span id="fn_691"></span>[234:1](th111.htm#fr_690.md) Deut. xiv. 1. A.V.:
“Ye are the children of the Lord your God.” LXX.: “Ye are the sons of
the Lord your God.”

<span id="fn_692"></span>[234:2](th111.htm#fr_691.md) Deut. xxxii. 18.
A.V.: “God that formed thee.” LXX. has the same reading as Philo.

<span id="fn_693"></span>[234:3](th111.htm#fr_692.md) Deut. xxxii. 6.

<span id="fn_694"></span>[234:4](th111.htm#fr_693.md) ἀρχή, or Source,
Beginning, as in the Proem to the Fourth Gospel.

<span id="fn_695"></span>[234:5](th111.htm#fr_694.md) Gen. xlii. 11.

<span id="fn_696"></span>[234:6](th111.htm#fr_695.md) *De Confus. Ling.,* §
28; M. i. 426, 427, P. 341 (Ri. ii. 279).

<span id="fn_697"></span>[234:7](th111.htm#fr_696.md) *De Monarch.,* ii. §
5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302).

<span id="fn_698"></span>[235:1](th111.htm#fr_697.md) Or the cosmos, which
is comprehensible by the intellect alone.

<span id="fn_699"></span>[235:2](th111.htm#fr_698.md) Or Paradigm.

<span id="fn_700"></span>[235:3](th111.htm#fr_699.md) *De Mund. Op.,* § 6;
M. i. 5, P. 5 (Ri. i. 9).

<span id="fn_701"></span>[235:4](th111.htm#fr_700.md) *De Cherub.,,* § 35;
M. i. 162, P. 129 (Ri. i. 228).

<span id="fn_702"></span>[236:1](th111.htm#fr_701.md) *De Monarch.,* ii. §
5; M. ii. 225, P. 823 (Ri. iv. 302).

<span id="fn_703"></span>[236:2](th111.htm#fr_702.md) Gen. i. 26.

<span id="fn_704"></span>[236:3](th111.htm#fr_703.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii.
31; M. i. 106, 107, P. 79 (Ri. i. 152, 153).

<span id="fn_705"></span>[236:4](th111.htm#fr_704.md) *Sc.* the essence.

<span id="fn_706"></span>[236:5](th111.htm#fr_705.md) *Sc.* elements. *Quis
Rer. Div. Her.,* § 27; M. i. 492, P. 500 (Ri. iii. 32).

<span id="fn_707"></span>[236:6](th111.htm#fr_706.md) John, to whom the
Master is speaking.

<span id="fn_708"></span>[237:1](th111.htm#fr_707.md) *F. F. F.,* 436.

<span id="fn_709"></span>[237:2](th111.htm#fr_708.md) *De Prof.,* § 18; M.
i. 560, P. 464 (Ri. iii. 130). There is unfortunately a *lacuna* in the
text, so that we do not learn the characteristics of the fifth potency;
but this is explained elsewhere,—the Legislative Providence being a
twofold potency, namely, the Enjoining and the Forbidding.

<span id="fn_710"></span>[238:1](th111.htm#fr_709.md) Ex. xxv. 22.

<span id="fn_711"></span>[238:2](th111.htm#fr_710.md) This plainly refers
to the Mercabah or Chariot of the Vision of Ezechiel.

<span id="fn_712"></span>[238:3](th111.htm#fr_711.md) *De Prof.,* § 19; M.
i. 561, P. 465 (Ri. iii. 131).

<span id="fn_713"></span>[238:4](th111.htm#fr_712.md) *De Agric.,* § 12; M.
i. 308, P. 195 (Ri. ii. 116).

<span id="fn_714"></span>[239:1](th111.htm#fr_713.md) *De Som.,* i. § 11;
M. i. 630, P. 574 (Ri. iii. 227).

<span id="fn_715"></span>[239:2](th111.htm#fr_714.md) *Ibid.,* § 12; M. i.
631, P. 575 (Ri. iii. 229).

<span id="fn_716"></span>[239:3](th111.htm#fr_715.md) *Ibid.,* § 13.

<span id="fn_717"></span>[240:1](th111.htm#fr_716.md) *Sc.* the souls.

<span id="fn_718"></span>[240:2](th111.htm#fr_717.md) Lev. xxvi. 12.

<span id="fn_719"></span>[240:3](th111.htm#fr_718.md) *De Som.,* § 23; M.
i. 642, 643, P. 587 (Ri. iii. 245, 246).

<span id="fn_720"></span>[241:1](th111.htm#fr_719.md) Ps. xxvii. 1. A.V.
“salvation.” LXX. reads φωτισμός, “illumination”—a technical term among
the mystics of Early Christendom for baptism—instead of the φῶς of
Philo.

<span id="fn_721"></span>[241:2](th111.htm#fr_720.md) That is, the Logos as
Pleroma.

<span id="fn_722"></span>[241:3](th111.htm#fr_721.md) *De Som.,* § 13.

<span id="fn_723"></span>[241:4](th111.htm#fr_722.md) *Sc.* the vices of
the soul.

<span id="fn_724"></span>[241:5](th111.htm#fr_723.md) *Ibid.,* § 15; M. i.
363, P. 578 (Ri. iii. 232).

<span id="fn_725"></span>[241:6](th111.htm#fr_724.md) This seems to be
somewhat reminiscent of the custom of evening prayer in the Therapeut
and other similar communities, when, at the time of the setting of the
sun, it was enjoined that “rational” praises should be restored or given
back to God, for benefits received.  
  
Philo, however, is here somewhat laboriously commenting, in allegorical
fashion, on the pawnbroking bye-law in Ex. xxii. 26, 27: “But if thou
takest in pledge thy neighbour’s garment, thou shalt give it him back
before the going down of the sun. For this is his covering; this is the
only garment of his indecency. In what \[else\] shall he sleep? If,
then, he shall cry unto me, I will give ear to him; for I am pitiful.”
(See § 16.) The A.V. translates otherwise.

<span id="fn_726"></span>[242:1](th111.htm#fr_725.md) *Cf.* the well-known
*logos* from the *Gospel according to the Egyptians,* “Unless ye tread
on the garment of shame.”

<span id="fn_727"></span>[242:2](th111.htm#fr_726.md) *De Som.,* § 18; M.
i. 637, P. 582 (Ri. iii. 238).

<span id="fn_728"></span>[242:3](th111.htm#fr_727.md) Or Rational.

<span id="fn_729"></span>[243:1](th111.htm#fr_728.md) *Ibid.,* § 19; M. i.
638, P. 582 (Ri. iii. 239).

<span id="fn_730"></span>[243:2](th111.htm#fr_729.md) *Ibid.,* 20; M. i.
639, P. 584 (Ri. iii. 241). *Cf.* *C. H.,* x. (xi.) 24.

<span id="fn_731"></span>[243:3](th111.htm#fr_730.md) *De Som.,* ii. § 36;
M. i. 690, P. 1140 (Ri. iii. 312).

<span id="fn_732"></span>[244:1](th111.htm#fr_731.md) Lit., Olympian.

<span id="fn_733"></span>[244:2](th111.htm#fr_732.md) ἀρχαὶ mean sources,
but also principles and sovereignties. It is, however, impossible to
keep the word-play in English.

<span id="fn_734"></span>[244:3](th111.htm#fr_733.md) Or kingdom, namely,
“of the heavens,” or rulership of the celestial realms, or rather of
one’s self.

<span id="fn_735"></span>[244:4](th111.htm#fr_734.md) Ps. lxv. 9. So also
LXX.; but A.V., “Thou greatly enrichest it with the river of God, which
is full of water.”

<span id="fn_736"></span>[245:1](th111.htm#fr_735.md) Ps. xlvi. 4. LXX. has
the plural, rivers or streams. A.V. translates: “There is a river the
streams whereof shall make glad the city of God.”

<span id="fn_737"></span>[245:2](th111.htm#fr_736.md) The physical
Jerusalem in Palestine.

<span id="fn_738"></span>[245:3](th111.htm#fr_737.md) κρατῆρα—lit., crater
or mixing-bowl.

<span id="fn_739"></span>[245:4](th111.htm#fr_738.md) A *lacuna* occurs
here in the text.

<span id="fn_740"></span>[245:5](th111.htm#fr_739.md) A loose quotation of
Lev. xxvi. 12, as already cited above.

<span id="fn_741"></span>[245:6](th111.htm#fr_740.md) λογισμόν.

<span id="fn_742"></span>[245:7](th111.htm#fr_741.md) ἔκπωμα.

<span id="fn_743"></span>[246:1](th111.htm#fr_742.md) *De Som.,* ii. §§
37-39; M. i. 690-692, P. 1141, 1142 (Ri. iii. 312-315).

<span id="fn_744"></span>[246:2](th111.htm#fr_743.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii. §
34; M. i. 108, P. 80 (Ri. i. 155).

<span id="fn_745"></span>[246:3](th111.htm#fr_744.md) *Ibid.,* § 56; M. i.
119, P. 90 (Ri. i. 170).

<span id="fn_746"></span>[247:1](th111.htm#fr_745.md) The grain of mustard
seed of the Gospels and of the “Gnostics.”

<span id="fn_747"></span>[247:2](th111.htm#fr_746.md) *Ibid.,* § 59; M. i.
121, 122, P. 92 (Ri. i. 172, 173).

<span id="fn_748"></span>[247:3](th111.htm#fr_747.md) A gloss on Ex. xiv.
15.

<span id="fn_749"></span>[247:4](th111.htm#fr_748.md) ῥῆμα.

<span id="fn_750"></span>[247:5](th111.htm#fr_749.md) λόγος.

<span id="fn_751"></span>[247:6](th111.htm#fr_750.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii.,
§ 0; M. i. 121, P. 92 (Ri. i. 173).

<span id="fn_752"></span>[248:1](th111.htm#fr_751.md) The reading seems to
be faulty.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[248:2](th111.htm#fr_752.md) *Ibid.,* § 59.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[248:3](th111.htm#fr_753.md) *Cf.* Deut. viii. 13.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[248:4](th111.htm#fr_754.md) Num. xiv. 4.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[248:5](th111.htm#fr_755.md) ῥήματι.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[248:6](th111.htm#fr_756.md) Deut. viii. 3.

<span id="fn_758"></span>[248:7](th111.htm#fr_757.md) *Leg. Alleg.,* iii. §
61; M. i. 121, P. 93 (Ri. i. 174).

<span id="fn_759"></span>[250:1](th111.htm#fr_758.md) *Cf.* the “Gnostic”
Horos (not the Egyptian Hōrus) as referred to previously.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[250:2](th111.htm#fr_759.md) Perhaps a reflection
of Num. xvi. 48.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[250:3](th111.htm#fr_760.md) *Quis Rer. Div.
Her.,* § 42; M. i. 501, 502, P. 504 (Ri. iii. 45, 46).

<span id="fn_762"></span>[251:1](th111.htm#fr_761.md) παρακλήτῳ—as
paraclete, or intercessor, or defender (a term of the law courts), or
comforter.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[251:2](th111.htm#fr_762.md) ἀμνηστείαν—lit.,
amnesty, or forgetfulness of wrong.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[251:3](th111.htm#fr_763.md) τὸν τοῦ θεοῦ
θεραπευτήν—the Therapeut.

<span id="fn_765"></span>[251:4](th111.htm#fr_764.md) The dress of the High
Priest, then, symbolised the cosmos—the elements, etc. May we deduce
from this that in one of the Therapeut initiations the approyed
candidate was clothed in such a symbolic robe?

<span id="fn_766"></span>[251:5](th111.htm#fr_765.md) *Sc.* the Logos as
cosmos.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[251:6](th111.htm#fr_766.md) Signifying a
religious scruple as referring to a matter of initiation.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[251:7](th111.htm#fr_767.md) *De Vit. Mos.,* iii.
§ 14; M. ii. 155, P. 673 (Ri. iv. 212, 213).

<span id="fn_769"></span>[252:1](th111.htm#fr_768.md) Presumably the seven
“planetary spheres” of “difference,” as set forth in Plato’s *Timæus*.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[252:2](th111.htm#fr_769.md) *Sc.* the
intelligible or spiritual world-order.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[253:1](th111.htm#fr_770.md) Intelligible cosmos.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[253:2](th111.htm#fr_771.md) *Ennead,* V. viii.
(cap. ix.), 550 A-D.; *Plot. Op. Om.,* ed. F. Creuzer (Oxford, 1835),
ii. 1016, 1017. M. N. Bouillet—in *Les Ennéades de Plotin* (Paris,
1861), iii. 122, 123—gives, as usual, an excellently clear rendering,
but it is not easy to recognise some of his sentences in the text.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[253:3](th111.htm#fr_772.md) *De Plant. Noe,* § 5;
M. i. 332, P. 216, 217 (Ri. ii. 148).

<span id="fn_774"></span>[253:4](th111.htm#fr_773.md) A gloss on Gen. xxv.
8: “And was added (A.V. gathered) to his people.”

<span id="fn_775"></span>[254:1](th111.htm#fr_774.md) *De Sacrif.,* § 2; M.
i. 164, P. 131 (Ri. i. 233).

<span id="fn_776"></span>[254:2](th111.htm#fr_775.md) Deut. xxxiv. 5. A.V.:
“According to the word of the Lord.”

<span id="fn_777"></span>[254:3](th111.htm#fr_776.md) *De Sacrif.,* § 3; M.
i. 165, P. 131 (Ri. i. 233).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Foreword](th112.md)
