[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th138)  [Next](th140) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### AGAINST THE WEATHER AND VEGETATION GOD THEORIES

LXV\. 1. And we shall also get our hands on the dull crowd who take
pleasure in associating the \[mystic recitals\] about these Gods either
with changes of the atmosphere according to the seasons, or with the
generation of the corn and sowings and ploughings, and in saying that
Osiris is buried when the sown corn is hidden by the earth, and comes to
life and shows himself again when it begins to sprout.

2\. For which cause also \[they declare\] that Isis, on feeling she is
pregnant, ties an amulet round her \[neck\] on the sixth day of the
first half of the month Phaōphi; <span id="fr_1201"></span>[2](#fn_1202)
and that Harpocrates is brought forth about the winter solstice
imperfect and infant in the things that sprout too early. <span
id="fr_1202"></span>[3](#fn_1203)

3\. For which cause they offer him first-fruits of growing lentils, and
they keep the days of thanks for safe delivery after the spring equinox.

4\. For they love to hear these things and believe them, drawing
conviction from things immediately at hand and customary.

LXVI\. 1. Still there is nothing to complain of if

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

\[only\], in the first place, they cherish the Gods in common with
ourselves, and do not make them peculiar to Egyptians, either by
characterising Nile and only the land that Nile waters by these names,
or, by saying that marshes and lotuses and god-making \[are their
monopoly\], deprive the rest of mankind who have no Nile or Butō or
Memphis, of \[the\] Great Gods.

2\. Indeed, all \[men\] have Isis and know her and the Gods of her
company; for though they learned not long ago to call some of them by
names known among the Egyptians, still they knew and honoured the power
of each \[of them\] from the beginning.

3\. In the second place, and what is more important—they should take
very good heed and be apprehensive lest unwittingly they write-off the
sacred mysteries and dissolve them into winds and streams, and sowing
and ploughings, and passions of earth and changes of seasons.

4\. As those who \[say\] that Dionysus is wine and Hephæstus flame, and
Persephone, as Cleanthes says somewhere, the wind that drives through
the crops and is killed; and \[as\] some poet says of the reapers:

> <span style="font-size: small">Then when they, lusty, cut Demeter’s
> limbs. <span id="fr_1203"></span>[1](#fn_1204)</span>

5\. For these in nothing differ from those who regard a pilot as sails
and ropes and anchor, and a weaver as yarns and threads, and a physician
as potions and honey-brew and barley-water; nay, they put into men’s
minds dangerous and atheistic notions, by transferring names of Gods to
natures and to things that have no sense or soul, and which are
necessarily destroyed by men according to their need and use. For it is
not possible to consider such things in themselves as Gods.

LXVII\. 1. For a God is not a thing without a mind or soul, or one made
subject to the hand of man; but it

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

is from these things that we deduce that those who bestow them on us for
our use and offer them \[to us\] in perpetual abundance, are Gods.

2\. Not different \[Gods\] for different peoples, not non-Greek and
Greek, not southern and northern \[Gods\]; but just as sun and moon and
earth and sea \[are\] common to all \[men\], though they are called by
different names by different peoples, so of the Reason (*Logos*) that
orders all things, and of one Providence that also directs powers
ordained to serve under her for all \[purposes\], have different honours
and titles been made according to their laws by different \[nations\].

3\. And there are consecrated symbols, some obscure ones and others more
plain, guiding the intelligence towards the mysteries of the Gods,
\[though\] not without risk.

4\. For some going entirely astray have stepped into superstitions,
while others, shunning superstition as a quagmire, have unwittingly
fallen into atheism <span id="fr_1204"></span>[1](#fn_1205) as down a
precipice.

LXVIII\. 1. Wherefore especially with regard to such things, should we,
taking with us Reason (*Logos*) as our mystic guide out of philosophy,
reverently meditate upon each of the things said and done; in order
that, \[we may avoid what\] Theodorus said, \[namely\] that when he
offered his words with his right hand some of his hearers took them with
their left,—and so not miss the mark by taking in another sense what
laws on offerings and feasts have well ordained.

2\. For that all \[these things\] must be referred to the Reason
(*Logos*), we may learn from themselves also.

For on the nineteenth of the first month, <span
id="fr_1205"></span>[2](#fn_1206) when they

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

keep a feast to Hermes, they eat honey and figs, saying when so doing,
“Truth is sweet.” And the amulet of Isis which the myth says she put
round her \[neck\] <span id="fr_1206"></span>[1](#fn_1207) is, when
interpreted, “True Voice.”

3\. And we should not consider Harpocrates either as an imperfect or
infant god, or a \[god\] of pulse, <span
id="fr_1207"></span>[2](#fn_1208) but as protector and chastener of the
babyish and imperfect and inarticulate reason that men have about Gods.
For which cause he has his finger laid upon his lips as a symbol of
reticence and silence.

4\. And in the month of Mesorē <span id="fr_1208"></span>[3](#fn_1209)
when they make offerings of pulse, they say: “Tongue \[is\] fortune;
tongue is daimon.”

5\. And they say that of the trees in Egypt the persea especially has
been made sacred to the Goddess, because its fruit resembles a heart and
its leaf a tongue.

6\. For of all man’s natural possessions nothing is more godlike than
*logos* \[word or reason\], and especially that concerning the Gods, nor
is there anything that decides more weightily for happiness.

7\. Wherefore we commend him who goes down to consult the Oracle
here <span id="fr_1209"></span>[4](#fn_1210) to think religiously and
speak reverently. But the many act ridiculously when, after they have in
the processions and feasts made proclamation to speak reverently, they
subsequently speak and think the most irreverent things about the Gods
themselves.

LXIX\. 1. What use, then, must one make of those melancholy and
laughterless and mournful sacrifices, if it is not right either to omit
the rites of custom, or to confound our views about Gods and throw them
into confusion with absurd suspicions?

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

2\. Yea, among Greeks, too, many things are done, just about the same
time also, similar to those which Egyptians perform in the sacred
\[rites\].

3\. For instance, at Athens, the women fast at the Thesmophoria, sitting
on the ground. While Bœotians move the palace of Achæa, <span
id="fr_1210"></span>[1](#fn_1211) giving that festival the name of
Epachthē \[the Grief-bringing\], as though Demeter were in grief (ἄχθει)
on account of the Descent <span id="fr_1211"></span>[2](#fn_1212) of
Korē.

4\. And this month is the one for sowing when the Pleiades rise, which
Egyptians call Athyr, <span id="fr_1212"></span>[3](#fn_1213) Greeks
Pyanepsiōn, and Bœotians Damatrios. <span
id="fr_1213"></span>[4](#fn_1214)

5\. Moreover, Theopompus <span id="fr_1214"></span>[5](#fn_1215) tells
us that the Western peoples <span id="fr_1215"></span>[6](#fn_1216)
consider and name the winter Kronos, the summer Aphrodite, and the
spring Persephone; and \[say\] that all things are born from Kronos and
Aphrodite.

6\. While the Phrygians, thinking that the God sleeps in winter, and
wakes in summer, celebrate in his honour the Orgies of his “Going to
sleep” at one time, and at another of his “Waking up”; while the
Paphlagonians pretend that he is bound hand and foot and imprisoned in
winter, and in spring is set in motion and freed from his bonds.

LXX\. 1. And the season of the year suggests that the appearance of
mourning is assumed at the hiding away of grains \[in the earth\],—which
the ancients did not

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

consider gods, but gifts of the Gods, indispensable \[indeed\] if we are
to live otherwise then savagely and like the brutes.

2\. And at the season when, you know, these \[ancients\] saw the
\[fruits\] entirely disappearing from the trees and ceasing, and those
they had sown themselves still scanty and poor,—in scraping away the
earth with their hands, and pressing it together again, and depositing
\[the seed\] in uncertainty as to whether it would come up again and
have its proper consummation, they used to do many things similar to
those who bury and mourn.

3\. Then, just as we say that one who buys Plato’s books “buys Plato,”
and that one who presents the creations of Menander “acts Menander,” so
did they not hesitate to call the gifts and creations of the Gods by the
names of the Gods—honouring them and reverencing them by use.

4\. But those \[who came\] after, receiving \[these names\] like boors
and ignorantly misapplying what happens <span
id="fr_1216"></span>[1](#fn_1217) to the fruits to the Gods
\[themselves\], and not merely calling but believing the advent and
hiding away of the necessaries \[of life\] generations and destructions
of gods, filled their heads with absurd, indecent, and confused
opinions, although they had the absurdity of their unreason before their
eyes.

5\. Excellent, however, was the view of Xenophanes <span
id="fr_1217"></span>[2](#fn_1218) of Colophon that Egyptians don’t mourn
if they believe in Gods and don’t believe in Gods if they mourn; nay,
that it would be ridiculous for them in the same breath to mourn and
pray for the seed to appear again, in order that it might again be
consumed and mourned for.

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

LXXI\. 1. But such is not really the case; but, while mourning for the
grain, they pray the Gods, the authors and givers \[of it\], to renew it
again and make other grow up in the place of that which is consumed.

2\. Whence there is an excellent saying among the philosophers, that
those who do not learn how to hear names rightly, use things wrongly.
Just as those of the Greeks who have not learned or accustomed
themselves to call bronzes and pictures and marbles images in honour of
the Gods, but \[call them\] Gods, \[and\] then make bold to say that
Lacharēs stripped Athena, and Dionysius cut off Apollo’s golden curls,
and that Capitoline Zeus was burnt and perished in the Civil Wars,—these
without knowing it find themselves drawn into adopting mischievous
opinions following \[directly\] on the \[abuse of\] names.

3\. And this is especially the case of Egyptians with regard to the
honours they pay to animals. For in this respect, at any rate, Greeks
speak rightly when they consider the dove as the sacred creature of
Aphrodite, and the dragon of Athena, and the raven of Apollo, and the
dog of Artemis, as Euripides \[sings\]:

> <span style="font-size: small">Thou shalt be dog, pet of torch-bearing
> Hecate. <span id="fr_1218"></span>[1](#fn_1219) </span>

4\. Whereas most of the Egyptians, by the service and cult they pay to
the animals themselves as though they were Gods, have not only covered
their sacred rites entirely with laughter and ridicule—which is the
least evil of their fatuity; but a dangerous way of thinking grows up
which perverts the weak and simple to pure superstition, and, in the
case of the shrewder and bolder, degenerates into an atheistic and
brutal rationalism.

<span id="page_353">p. 353</span>

5\. Wherefore, also, it is not unfitting to run through the conjectures
about these things. <span id="fr_1219"></span>[1](#fn_1220)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1202"></span>[346:2](th139.htm#fr_1201) Copt. Paopi—corr.
roughly with October.

<span id="fn_1203"></span>[346:3](th139.htm#fr_1202) *Cf.* lxviii. 2, 3.
Ḥeru-p-Khart, Horus the Younger, or the “Child,’’ so called to
distinguish him from Ḥeru-ur, or Horus the Elder. *Cf.* Budge, *op.
cit.,* i. 468 f.

<span id="fn_1204"></span>[347:1](th139.htm#fr_1203) *Cf.* Ps. Plut.,
*De Vita Homeri,* § 23.

<span id="fn_1205"></span>[348:1](th139.htm#fr_1204) King again,
erroneously in my opinion, refers this to the Christians.

<span id="fn_1206"></span>[348:2](th139.htm#fr_1205) Copt. Thoth—corr.
roughly with September.

<span id="fn_1207"></span>[349:1](th139.htm#fr_1206) *Cf.* lxv. 2.

<span id="fn_1208"></span>[349:2](th139.htm#fr_1207) *Cf. ibid.,* 3.

<span id="fn_1209"></span>[349:3](th139.htm#fr_1208) Copt. Mesōrē—corr.
roughly with August.

<span id="fn_1210"></span>[349:4](th139.htm#fr_1209) *Sc.* at Delphi.

<span id="fn_1211"></span>[350:1](th139.htm#fr_1210) A surname of
Demeter, by which she was worshipped at Athens by the Gephyræans who had
emigrated thither from Bœotia (*Herod.,* v. 61).

<span id="fn_1212"></span>[350:2](th139.htm#fr_1211) *Sc.* into Hades.

<span id="fn_1213"></span>[350:3](th139.htm#fr_1212) Copt. Hathōr—corr.
roughly to November, or rather last half of October and first of
November. *Cf.* also lvi. 10.

<span id="fn_1214"></span>[350:4](th139.htm#fr_1213) That is, the month
of Demeter.

<span id="fn_1215"></span>[350:5](th139.htm#fr_1214) Müller, i. 328. T.
flourished 2nd half of 4th century B.C.

<span id="fn_1216"></span>[350:6](th139.htm#fr_1215) That is,
presumably, the Celts.

<span id="fn_1217"></span>[351:1](th139.htm#fr_1216) τὰ πάθη—lit., “the
passions.”

<span id="fn_1218"></span>[351:2](th139.htm#fr_1217) X. flourished about
end of 6th and beginning of 5th century B.C.

<span id="fn_1219"></span>[352:1](th139.htm#fr_1218) Nauck, p. 525.

<span id="fn_1220"></span>[353:1](th139.htm#fr_1219) Dr Budge (*op.
cit.,* i. 29) writes: “Such monuments and texts as we have . . . seem to
show that the Egyptians first worshipped animals as animals, and nothing
more, and later as the habitations of divine spirits and gods; but there
is no reason for thinking that the animal worship of the Egyptians was
descended from a system of totems and fetishes as Mr J. F. M‘Lennan
(*Fortnightly Review,* 1869-1870) believed.” I believe myself that the
Egyptian animal-cult depended chiefly on the fact that life flowed
differently in different animal forms, corresponding with the
life-currents in the invisible forms or aspects of the Animal-Soul of
the Cosmos.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Concerning the Worship of Animals, and Totemism](th140)
