[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th146)  [Next](th148) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

### XIII

#### PLATO: CONCERNING METEMPSYCHOSIS

“<span class="smallcaps">And</span> the soul’s vice is ignorance. For
that the soul who hath no knowledge of the things that are, or knowledge
of their nature, or of Good, is blinded by the body’s passions and
tossed about.

“This wretched soul, not knowing what she is, becomes the slave of
bodies of strange form in sorry plight, bearing the body as a load; not
as the ruler, but the ruled.”—*C. H.,* x. (xi.) 8. <span
id="fr_1400"></span>[1](#fn_1401)

For the better understanding of this passage, we may appropriately
refresh the memory of our readers with the Platonic doctrine of the
transmigration of souls, as given in the *Phædrus,* 248 ff., using for
this purpose the best translation we have in English, namely, that of
Stewart, <span id="fr_1401"></span>[2](#fn_1402) as a basis, but often
departing from it for greater clearness.

##### THE SOUL AND HER MYSTERIES IN THE “PHÆDRUS”

“This is the life of the Gods. Of the other Souls, whosoever followeth
God best, and is being made most like unto Him, keepeth the Head <span
id="fr_1402"></span>[3](#fn_1403) of her Charioteer

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

lifted up into the Space without the firmament; so she is carried round
with the circuit thereof, yet being \[still\] troubled with the
Horses, <span id="fr_1403"></span>[1](#fn_1404) and hardly beholding the
Things-which-are; so she is now lifted up, now sinketh down, and because
of the compulsion of the Horses, seeth some of the Things-which-are, and
some she seeth not.

“And the rest of the Souls, you must know, follow all striving after
that which is above, but unable \[to reach it\], and so are carried
round together and sink below it, <span
id="fr_1404"></span>[2](#fn_1405) trampling upon one another, and
running against one another, and pressing on for to outstrip one
another, with mighty great sound of tumult and sweat.

“And here by reason of the unskilfulness <span
id="fr_1405"></span>[3](#fn_1406) of the Charioteers, many Souls are
maimed, and many have many feathers \[of their wings\] broken; and all,
greatly travailing, depart without initiation in the Sight of
That-which-is, and departing betake them to the food of Opinion.

“Now this is why there is so great anxiety to see the Space where is the
Plain of Truth,—both because the pasture suited to the Best Part of the
Soul groweth in the Meadow there, and the power of wing, whereby the
Soul is lightly carried up, is nourished by it, and that the law of
Adrasteia is that whatsoever Soul by following after God hath seen
somewhat of the true things, shall be without affliction till its next
journey round; and if she can always do this, <span
id="fr_1406"></span>[4](#fn_1407) she shall be without hurt alway.

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

“But when through incapacity to follow \[God\] she doth not see, and,
overtaken by some evil chance, filled with forgetfulness and wickedness,
she is weighed down, and, being weighed down, she sheds the feathers of
her wings and falls on to the Earth,—then is the law not to plant
her <span id="fr_1407"></span>[1](#fn_1408) in her first birth in a
beast’s nature; but to implant the Soul that hath seen most into the
seed of one who shall become a Wisdom-lover, or a lover of the
Beautiful, or a man who truly loves the Muses; the Soul that hath seen
second best, into the seed of one who shall become a king that loveth
law, and is a warrior and a true ruler; the Soul that hath seen third,
unto the seed of one who shall become busied in civic duties, or in some
stewardship, or in affairs; the one that hath seen fourth, into the seed
of one who shall be a hardship-loving master of the body’s discipline or
skilled in healing of the body; the Soul that hath seen fifth, into that
which shall have a life connected with the oracles or mystic rites some
way; <span id="fr_1408"></span>[2](#fn_1409) unto the sixth a life
poetic shall be joined, or that of some one or of another of the tribe
of copiers; unto the seventh, the life of workman or of husbandman; unto
the eighth, that of a sophist or a demagogue; unto the ninth, that of a
tyrant.

“In all these lives, whoever lives them righteously obtains a better
fate; he who unrighteously, a worse.

“Now to the selfsame state from which each Soul hath come, she cometh
not again for some ten thousand years. For sooner than this period no
Soul \[re-\]gains

<span id="page_432">p. 432</span>

its wings, except the Soul of him who has loved wisdom naturally or
contrary to nature. <span id="fr_1409"></span>[1](#fn_1410)

“Such Souls in the third period of a thousand years, if they have chosen
thrice this life successively, thus getting themselves wings, depart in
the three thousandth year. <span id="fr_1410"></span>[2](#fn_1411)

“But the other Souls, when they have ended their first life, are brought
to judgment; and being judged, some go to places of correction below the
Earth and pay the penalty, while others are rewarded by being raised
unto a certain space in Heaven where they live on in a condition
appropriate unto the life they lived in a man’s form.

“But in the thousandth year both classes come to the lottery of lives,
and each doth make choice of its second life, whatever it may
choose. <span id="fr_1411"></span>[3](#fn_1412)

“And now is it that a Soul that once had had a man’s life doth pass into
a brute’s life, <span id="fr_1412"></span>[4](#fn_1413) and from a

<span id="page_433">p. 433</span>

brute, he who was once a man, passes again into a man; for that indeed
the Soul that never hath seen truth, will never come into this
configuration. <span id="fr_1413"></span>[1](#fn_1414)

“For we must understand ‘man,’ in the sense of form, as one proceeding
from many sensations and collected into a unit by means of
ratiocination. <span id="fr_1414"></span>[2](#fn_1415) But this <span
id="fr_1415"></span>[3](#fn_1416) is recollection (ἀνάμνησις) of those
things which our Soul once did see when she journeyed with God, <span
id="fr_1416"></span>[4](#fn_1417) and looked beyond the things we now
call things that are, by raising her face <span
id="fr_1417"></span>[5](#fn_1418) to That-which-really-is.

“Wherefore of right, alone the understanding of the Wisdom-lover hath
got wings; for he is ever engaged upon those things in memory as far as
he can be, on being engaged at which, as being a God, he is divine.

<span id="page_434">p. 434</span>

“The man then who doth make a right use of memories such as these, ever
being made perfect in perfect perfectionings, alone becometh really
Perfect. <span id="fr_1418"></span>[1](#fn_1419)

“But in as much as he eschews the things that men strive after, and is
engaged in the Divine \[alone\], he is admonished by the many as though
he were beside himself, <span id="fr_1419"></span>[2](#fn_1420) for they
cannot perceive he is inspired by God.”

##### PLOTINUS ON METEMPSYCHOSIS

Let us now turn to the genuine disciples of the master for further light
on this tenet, and first of all to Plotinus.

The most sympathetic notice of this tenet in Plotinus is to be found in
Jules Simon’s *Histoire de l’École d’Alexandrie* (Paris, 1845), i. 588
ff., based for the most part on *En.,* I. i. 12; II. ix. 6; IV. iii. 9;
V. ii. 2; and on Ficinus’ Commentary (p. 508 of Creuzer’s edition).

After citing some “ironical” passages from Plotinus (in which the
philosopher disguised the real doctrine which in his day still pertained
to the teachings of a higher initiation), Jules Simon goes on to say:

“Even though admitting that this doctrine of metempsychosis is taken
literally by Plotinus, we should still have to ask for him as for Plato,
whether the human soul really inhabits the body of an animal, and
whether it is not reborn only into a human body which reflects the
nature of a certain animal by the character of its passions.

“The commentators of the Alexandrian school sometimes interpreted Plato
in this sense. Thus, according

<span id="page_435">p. 435</span>

to Proclus, Plato in the *Phædrus* condemns the wicked to live as brutes
and not to become them, κατίεναι εἰς βιὸν θήρειον, καὶ οὐκ εἰς σῶμα
θήρειον (Proc., *Comm. Tim*., p. 329). Chalcidius gives the same
interpretation, for he distinguishes between the doctrines of Plato and
those of Pythagoras and Empedocles, *qui non naturam modō feram, sed
etiam formas*. <span id="fr_1420"></span>[1](#fn_1421) Hermes (*Comm*.
of Chalcidius on *Timæus*; ed. Fabric., p. 350) declares in unmistakable
terms that a human soul can never return to the body of an animal, and
that the will of the Gods for ever preserves it from such
disgrace.” <span id="fr_1421"></span>[2](#fn_1422)

##### PROCLUS ON THE DESCENT OF SOULS INTO IRRATIONAL NATURES

Again, Proclus in his Commentaries on the *Timæus,* writes very
definitely with reference to the following passage of Plato:

“And if he still in these conditions did not cease from vice, he would
keep on changing into some brutish nature according as he acted in a way
resembling the expression in genesis of such a mode of vicious
living.” <span id="fr_1422"></span>[3](#fn_1423)

For he says:

“With reference to this descent of souls into irrational animals, it is
usual for men to enquire how it is meant.

“And some think that what are called brute-like lives are certain
resemblances of men to brutes, for that it is not possible for the
rational essence to become the soul of a brute.

“Others allow that even this \[human soul\] may be

<span id="page_436">p. 436</span>

immediately degraded to reason-less creatures, for that all souls are of
one and the same species, so that they may become wolves and panthers
and ichneumons.

“But the true reason (*logos*) asserts that though the human soul may be
degraded to brutes, it is \[only\] to brutes which possess the life
suited to such a purpose, while the degraded soul is as it were vehicled
on this \[life\], and bound to it sympathetically.

“And this has been demonstrated by us at great length in our lectures on
the *Phædrus,* and that this is the only way in which such de-gradation
can take place. If, however, it is necessary to remind you that this
meaning (*logos*) is that of Plato, it must be added that in the
Republic <span id="fr_1423"></span>[1](#fn_1424) he says that the soul
of Thersites assumed an ape \[*life*\], but not an ape’s *body,* and in
the *Phædrus* <span id="fr_1424"></span>[2](#fn_1425) that \[the soul\]
descends into a brutish *life,* and not into a brutish *body,* for the
mode of life goes with its appropriate soul. And in the passage \[from
the *Timæus*\] he says that it changes into a brute-like nature; for the
brutish nature is not the body but the life \[principle\] of the
brute.” <span id="fr_1425"></span>[3](#fn_1426)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1401"></span>[429:1](th147.htm#fr_1400) See commentary
thereon.

<span id="fn_1402"></span>[429:2](th147.htm#fr_1401) Stewart (J. A.),
*The Myths of Plato* (London, 1905), pp. 313 ff.; *cf.* also Jowett
(Oxford, 1892), i. 454 ff.; and Taylor (London, 1804), iii. 325 ff.

<span id="fn_1403"></span>[429:3](th147.htm#fr_1402) *Cf. C. H.,* x.
(xi.) 11: “Since Cosmos is a sphere—that is to say, a head.”

<span id="fn_1404"></span>[430:1](th147.htm#fr_1403) *Cf.* 246 B: “For
’tis a Yoke of Horses that the Charioteer of Man’s Soul driveth, and,
moreover, of his Horses the one is well favoured and good and of good
stock, the other of the contrary and contrary.”

<span id="fn_1405"></span>[430:2](th147.htm#fr_1404) Lit., under water.

<span id="fn_1406"></span>[430:3](th147.htm#fr_1405) Lit., evil—that is,
ignorance.

<span id="fn_1407"></span>[430:4](th147.htm#fr_1406) Viz., behold the
truth.

<span id="fn_1408"></span>[431:1](th147.htm#fr_1407) *Sc.* as a germ or
seed.

<span id="fn_1409"></span>[431:2](th147.htm#fr_1408) It is low down in
the scale, indeed, that Plato places the soothsayers and hierophants; he
is, however, “ironical,” for he places poets even lower down, and still
lower sophists and tyrants, all in keeping with his well-known views
about these people as known in his own time.

<span id="fn_1410"></span>[432:1](th147.htm#fr_1409) ἢ παιδεραστήσαντος
μετὰ φιλοσοφίας—Stewart, “Of loved his comrade in the bonds of wisdom”;
Jowett, “or a lover who is not devoid of philosophy”; Taylor, “or
together with philosophy has loved beautiful forms.” I fancy that Plato
has used this graphic expression simply to designate a man who has not
true union with wisdom, but is seeking for union though ignorantly.

<span id="fn_1411"></span>[432:2](th147.htm#fr_1410) “The numbers three
and ten are called perfect; because the former is the first complete
number, and the latter in a certain respect the whole of number; the
consequent series of numbers being only a repetition of the numbers
which this contains. Hence, as 10 multiplied into itself produces 100, a
plane number, and this again multiplied by 10 produces 1000, a solid
number; and as 1000 multiplied by 3 forms 3000, and 1000 by 10, 10,000;
on this account Plato employs these numbers as symbols of the purgation
of the soul, and her restitution to her proper perfection and felicity.
I say, as symbols; for we must not suppose that this is accomplished in
just so many years, but that the soul’s restitution takes place in a
perfect manner.”—Taylor, *op. cit.,* iii. 325.

<span id="fn_1412"></span>[432:3](th147.htm#fr_1411) *Cf.* the “Vision
of Er.”

<span id="fn_1413"></span>[432:4](th147.htm#fr_1412) “We must not
understand by this that the soul of a man becomes the soul of a brute;
but that by way of punishment it is bound to the soul of a brute, or
carried in it, just as dæmons used to reside in our souls. Hence all the
energies of the rational soul are perfectly impeded, and its
intellectual eye beholds naught but the dark and tumultuous phantasms of
a brutal life.”—Taylor, *loc. cit*.

<span id="fn_1414"></span>[433:1](th147.htm#fr_1413) Viz., the form of a
man; it is, however, also an astrological term.

<span id="fn_1415"></span>[433:2](th147.htm#fr_1414) There seems to be
no agreement among translators as to the meaning of this sentence: δεῖ
γὰρ ἄνθρωπον ξυνιέναι καὶ εἶδος λεγόμενον, ἐκ πολλῶν ἰὸν αἰσθήσεων εἰς
ἕν λογισμῷ ξυναιρούμενον. Stewart translates: “Man must needs understand
the Specific Form which proceedeth from the perceiving of many things,
and is made one by Thought;” Jowett: “For a man must have intelligence
of universals, and be able to proceed from the many particulars of sense
to one conception of reason;” Taylor: “Indeed it is necessary to
understand man, denominated according to species, as a being proceeding
from the information of many senses, to a perception contracted into one
reasoning power.”

<span id="fn_1416"></span>[433:3](th147.htm#fr_1415) *Sc.* collecting
into one.

<span id="fn_1417"></span>[433:4](th147.htm#fr_1416) That is to say,
revolved in the Cosmos Order.

<span id="fn_1418"></span>[433:5](th147.htm#fr_1417) *Cf. C. H.,* i. 14:
“So \[Man\] . . . bent his face downwards through the Harmony.”

<span id="fn_1419"></span>[434:1](th147.htm#fr_1418) All these are
technical terms of the Mysteries.

<span id="fn_1420"></span>[434:2](th147.htm#fr_1419) *Cf. C. H.,* ix.
(x.) 4: “For this cause they who Gnostic are please not the many nor the
many them. They are thought mad and laughed at.”

<span id="fn_1421"></span>[435:1](th147.htm#fr_1420) Who not only made
the soul go into an animal *nature* but into animal *forms.*

<span id="fn_1422"></span>[435:2](th147.htm#fr_1421) The last sentence
of *C. H.,* x. (xi.) being quoted textually by Chalcidius.

<span id="fn_1423"></span>[435:3](th147.htm#fr_1422) *Tim*., 42 C.

<span id="fn_1424"></span>[436:1](th147.htm#fr_1423) Lib. X. 620 C.

<span id="fn_1425"></span>[436:2](th147.htm#fr_1424) *Phædr.,* 249 B.

<span id="fn_1426"></span>[436:3](th147.htm#fr_1425) *Comment, in Plat.
Tim.,* 329 D; ed. Schneider (Warsaw, 1847), pp. 800, 801. With all of
this the views of Basilides (*F. F. F.,* 275 ff.) may be most
instructively compared.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. The Vision of Er](th148)
