[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th145)  [Next](th147.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_413">p. 413</span>

### XII

#### THE SEVEN ZONES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS

“<span class="smallcaps">To</span> the first zone he gives the energy of
Growth and Waning; unto the second zone, Device of Evils now
de-energized; unto the third, the Guile of the Desires de-energized;
unto the fourth, his Domineering Arrogance also de-energized; unto the
fifth, unholy Daring and the Rashness of Audacity de-energized; unto the
sixth, Striving for Wealth by evil means deprived of its aggrandisement;
and to the seventh zone, Ensnaring Falsehood de-energized.”—*C. H.,* i.
25.

##### MACROBIUS ON “THE DESCENT OF THE SOUL FROM THE HEIGHT OF COSMOS TO THE DEPTHS OF EARTH”

Let us first turn to the commentary of Macrobius on the famous “Dream of
Scipio,” which Cicero introduces into his *Republic* (Bk. VI.), just as
Plato appends the Vision of Er to *his*. Macrobius devotes the twelfth
chapter of his First Book to a consideration of “The Descent of the Soul
from the Height of Cosmos to the Depths of Earth,” and professes to base
himself on Pythagorean and Platonic traditions. His dissertation covers
more ground than the precise subject of the zones with which we are more
immediately concerned; but as the whole scheme is of interest to our
present

<span id="page_414">p. 414</span>

studies, we will append a translation of practically the whole chapter.

“\[According to Pythagoras\] when the Soul descends from the Boundary
where the Zodiac and Galaxy \[or Milky Way\] meet, from a spherical
form, which is the only divine one, it is elongated into a conical
one <span id="fr_1377"></span>[1](#fn_1378.md) by its downward tendency.

“Just as the line is born from the point and proceeds into length out of
the indivisible, so the soul from its point, that is ‘monad,’ comes into
‘dyad’—its first production \[or lengthening\].

“And this is the essence which Plato in the *Timæus,* speaking about the
construction of the World-Soul, describes as indivisible yet at the same
time divisible.

“For just as the Soul of the World so also the soul of an individual man
will be found in one respect incapable of division—if it is regarded
from the standpoint of the simplicity of its divine nature—and in
another capable \[of division\]—since the former is diffused through the
members of the world, and the latter through those of a man.

“When then the soul is drawn towards body—in this first production of
it—it begins to experience a material agitation, matter flowing into
it. <span id="fr_1378"></span>[2](#fn_1379.md)

“And this is remarked by Plato in the *Phædo* \[when he says\] that the
soul is drawn to body staggering with recent intoxication,—meaning us to
understand by this a new draught of matter’s superfluity, by which it
becomes defiled and gravid and so is brought down.

“A symbol of this mystic secret is that Starry Cup (*Cratēr*) of Father
Bacchus placed in the space between

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Cancer and
Leo <span id="fr_1379"></span>[1](#fn_1380.md)—meaning that intoxication is
there first experienced by souls in their descent by the influx of
matter into them. From which cause also forgetfulness, the companion of
intoxication, then begins secretly to creep into souls.

“For if souls brought down to body memory of the divine things of which
they were conscious in heaven, there would be no difference of opinion
among men concerning the divine state. But all, indeed, in their descent
drink of forgetfulness—some more, some less.

“And for this cause on earth, though the truth is not clear to all, they
nevertheless have all some opinion about it; for opinion arises when
memory sinks. Those, however, are greater discoverers of truth who have
drunk less of forgetfulness, because they remember more easily what they
have known before in that state.

“Hence it is that what the Latins call a ‘lecture’ (*lectio*) the Greeks
call a ‘re-knowing’ (*repetita cognitio* <span
id="fr_1380"></span>[2](#fn_1381).md), because when we give utterance to
true things, we re-cognize the things which we knew by nature before the
influence of matter intoxicated our souls in their descent into body.

“Now it is this Matter (*Hylē*) which, after being impressed by the
\[divine\] ideas, fashioned every body in the cosmos which we see. Its
highest and purest nature, by means of which the divinities are either
sustained or consist, <span id="fr_1381"></span>[3](#fn_1382.md) is called
Nectar, and is believed to be the drink of the gods; while its lower and
more

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

turbid nature is the drink of souls. The latter is what the Ancients
called the River of Lethe \[or Forgetfulness\].

“The Orphic \[initiates\], however, suppose that Dionysus himself is to
be understood as ‘Hylic Nous’ <span
id="fr_1382"></span>[1](#fn_1383.md)—\[that Mind\] which after its birth
from the Indivisible \[Mind\] is itself divided into individual
\[minds\].

“And it is for this reason that in their Mystery-tradition Dionysus is
represented as being torn limb from limb by the fury of the Titans, and,
after the pieces have been buried, as coming together again whole and
one; for Nous—which, as we have said, is their term for Mind—by offering
itself for division from its undivided state, and by returning to the
undivided from the divided, both fulfils the duties of the cosmos and
also performs the mysteries of its own nature.

“The soul, therefore, having by means of this first weight \[of matter\]
fallen down from the Zodiac and Galaxy into the series of spheres that
lie below them, in continuing its descent through them, is not only
enwrapped in the envelope of a luminous body, <span
id="fr_1383"></span>[2](#fn_1384.md) but also develops the separate motions
which it is to exercise.

“In the sphere of Saturn \[it develops\] the powers of reasoning and
theorizing <span id="fr_1384"></span>[3](#fn_1385.md)—which \[the Greeks\]
call τὸ λογιστικὸν and τὸ θεωρητικόν; in that of Jupiter, the power of
putting into practice—which they call τὸ πρακτικόν; in that of Mars, the
power of ardent vehemence—which they call τὸ θυμικόν; in that of the
Sun, the nature of sensing and imagining—which they call τὸ αἰσθητικὸν
and τὸ φανταστικόν; in that of Venus, the motion of desire—which they
call τὸ

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

ἐπιθυμητικόν, in the sphere of Mercury, the power of giving expression
to and interpretation of feelings—which they call τὸ ἑρμη νευτικόν; on
its entrance into the sphere of the Moon it brings into activity τὸ
φυτικόν—that is, the nature of making bodies grow and of moving them.

“And this \[soul\], though the last thing in the divine series, is
nevertheless the first thing in us and in all terrestrial beings; just
as this body \[of ours\], though the dregs of things divine, is still
the first substance of the animal world.

“And this is the difference between terrene bodies and supernal—I mean
those of the heaven and stars and of the other elements <span
id="fr_1385"></span>[1](#fn_1386.md)—that the latter are summoned upwards
to the abode of the soul, and are worthy of immunity from death from the
very nature of the space in which they are and their imitation of
sublimity.

“The soul, however, is drawn down to these terrene bodies, and so it is
thought to die when it is imprisoned in the region of things fallen and
in the abode of death. Nor should it cause distress that we have so
often spoken of death in connection with the soul, which we have
declared to be superior to death. For the soul is not annihilated by
\[what is called\] its death, but is \[only\] buried for a time; nor is
the blessing of its perpetuity taken from it by its submersion for a
time, since when it shall have made it worthy to be cleansed clean
utterly of all contagion of its vice, it shall once more return from
body to the light of Everlasting Life *restored* and whole.” <span
id="fr_1386"></span>[2](#fn_1387.md)

The characteristics of the spheres given by Macrobius are according to
their simple energies; there is no

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

question of good or bad; it is the “thinking” of the soul that
conditions the use of these energies for beneficent or maleficent ends.

##### THE TRADITION OF SERVIUS

Servius, however, in his Commentary on Virgil’s *Æneid,* vi. 714, hands
on another tradition, in which the Spheres were regarded as inimical to
the good of the soul, its evil propensities being ascribed to their
energies. Some scholars are of opinion that Virgil in his famous Sixth
Book is largely dependent on the ideas of popular Egyptian
theology; <span id="fr_1387"></span>[1](#fn_1388.md) however that may be,
Servius writes as follows:

“The philosophers tell us what the soul loses in its descent through the
separate spheres. For which cause also the Mathematici imagine that our
body and soul are knit together by the powers of the separate
divinities, on the supposition that when souls descend, they bring with
them the sluggishness of Saturn, the passionateness of Mars, the
lustfulness of Venus, the cupidity of Mercury, and the desire for rule
of Jupiter. And these things perturb souls, so that they are unable to
use their own energy and proper powers.”

It is to be noticed that the characteristics of the Sun and Moon are
omitted, and this points to a doctrine in which Sun and Moon were
treated as distinct from “the five.” So also in the “Books of the
Saviour” appended to the *Pistis Sophia* document we find (pp. 360, 366
ff.) mention of only five planets. The

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

tradition of this doctrine is exceedingly obscure, <span
id="fr_1388"></span>[1](#fn_1389.md) and does not immediately concern us,
as our text works on a “seven” basis.

##### CRITICISM OF THE EVIDENCE

I have done my best to discover some consistent scheme by which the
contradictory *data* in Macrobius, Servius, and Hermes might be
reconciled, but the tabularising of their indications only makes
confusion worse confounded.

It is evident, however, that the main thing that Macrobius hands on, and
which he attributes to Orphic-Pythagorean-Platonic tradition, contains
in itself no suggestion that these philosophers attributed any evil
tendencies to the characteristics of the spheres in themselves. The
tradition of Macrobius is as follows:

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
<col style="width: 20%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Saturn</p></td>
<td><p><span style="font-size: x-large">{</span></p></td>
<td><p>τὸ θεωρητικὸν<br />
τὸ λογιστικὸν</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p><em>intelligentia.<br />
ratiocinatio.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Jupiter</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p>τὸ πρακτικὸν</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p><em>vis agendi.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Mars</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p>τὸ θυμικὸν</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p><em>ardor animositatis.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Sun</p></td>
<td><p><span style="font-size: x-large">{</span></p></td>
<td><p>τὸ αἰσθητικὸν<br />
τὸ φανταστικὸν</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p><em>natura sentiendi.<br />
natura opinandi.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Venus</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p>τὸ ἐπιθυμητικὸν</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p><em>motus desiderii.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td><p>Mercury</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p>τὸ ἑρμηνευτικὸν</p></td>
<td><p><span style="font-size: xx-large">{</span></p></td>
<td><p><em>vis pronuntiandi<br />
et interpretandi<br />
quæ sentiantur.</em></p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Moon</p></td>
<td><p> </p></td>
<td><p>τὸ φυτικὸν</p></td>
<td><p><span style="font-size: x-large">{</span></p></td>
<td><p><em>natura plantandi<br />
et agendi corpora.</em></p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

The confusion between the “*vis agendi*” of Jupiter and that of the Moon
may be resolved by supposing that the former was the application of the
reasoning

<span id="page_420">p. 420</span>

faculty to the practical things of life, while the latter was the power
of moving one’s own physical body, if indeed the “*et agendi*” is not a
gloss of Macrobius.

Servius, on the contrary, is following a tradition in which the spheres
were regarded as the sources of evil tendencies; ethical considerations
dominate the whole conception. Seeing, however, that it is a fivefold
distribution, we are unable to equate it with the doctrine of Hermes,
which is sevenfold. Nevertheless, there are some parallels.

The lustfulness (*libido*) of Servius is to be paralleled with the
“guile of the desires” or “lustful error” (ἡ ἐπιθυμητικὴ ἀπάτη) of
Hermes. This is ascribed to the third zone by Hermes, and to Venus by
Servius, Venus further coming third in Macrobius.

The “desire of rule” (*desiderium regni*) of Servius is clearly the
“domineering arrogance” (ἡ ἀρχοντικὴ προφανία) of Hermes. In Hermes this
belongs to the middle zone (fourth); in Servius it is ascribed to
Jupiter, presumably as the ruler of the age—the ruler of the previous
age being Saturn, who has been deprived of his energy and so rendered
“torpid.”

The “passion” or “wrathfulness” (*iracundia*) of Servius is also to be
paralleled to some extent with the “unholy daring” of Hermes. It is
ascribed to the fifth zone by Hermes and to Jupiter by Servius, Mars
also coming fifth in Macrobius.

Finally, the “love of gain” (*lucri cupiditas*) of Servius may be
paralleled by the “striving for wealth by evil means” (αἱ ἀφορμαὶ αἱ
κακαὶ τοῦ πλούτου) of Hermes. Hermes attributes this to the sixth zone,
and Servius to Mercury.

The remaining quality mentioned by Servius, “torpor,” which he ascribes
to Saturn, equates with nothing in Hermes, unless we can persuade
ourselves that the

<span id="page_421">p. 421</span>

“ensnaring falsehood” or “falsehood that lies in wait” (τὸ ἐνεδρεῦον
ψεῦδος) of Hermes has some connection with it.

The scheme of Hermes is septenary, and connected with the ideas of the
ascent of the soul through seven zones, which we must locate as seven
superimposed atmospheres extending from the surface of the earth to the
moon’s orbit. There is no question here of the Celestial Spheres proper
of the Philosophers, the characteristics of the energies of which are
neither good nor evil in themselves; nor is there apparently any
question of the “animal soul” proper, for the “passions and desires” are
said to withdraw into the “nature which is void of reason.” Though
nothing more is said about this nature in this connection, in the
general belief of the time its dominion was thought of as located below
the earth-surface—as a Tartarus of seven zones, corresponding to those
above, in which the “animal soul” or “vehicle of desire” was thought of
as being gradually disintegrated, its energies finally going back to
their source in the Depths of the Darkness, while the process of such
disintegration or metamorphosis produced a parallel consciousness of
chastisements and horrors. The seven zones of our text, however, are
apparently the region of purification of the lower energies of the human
soul; the mental energies led into error by the animal passions.

##### THE “OPHITE” HEBDOMAD

Now if we turn to Salmon’s article on the “Hebdomad,” <span
id="fr_1389"></span>[1](#fn_1390.md) and to his discussion of the tradition
of the “Ophites”—a mysterious medley of chaotic elements, which have not
yet been analysed in any satisfactory

<span id="page_422">p. 422</span>

fashion, but which have their roots in pre-Christian traditions of a
very varied nature within the general characteristic of a syncretic
Gnosticism—we find that after treating of the Celestial Hebdomad, he
continues as follows:

“Besides the higher hebdomad of the seven angels, the Ophite system told
of a lower hebdomad. After the serpent in punishment for having taught
our first parents to transgress the commands of Ialdabaoth was cast down
into this lower world, he begat himself six sons, <span
id="fr_1390"></span>[1](#fn_1391.md) who with himself form a hebdomad, the
counterpart of that of which his father Ialdabaoth is chief. These are
the seven demons, the scene of whose activity is this lower earth, not
the heavens; and who delight in injuring the human race on whose account
their father had been cast down. Origen (*Adv. Cels.,* vi. 30) gives
their names and forms from an Ophite Diagram; Michael in form as a lion,
Suriel as an ox, Raphael as a dragon, Gabriel as an eagle, Thautabaoth
as a bear, Erataoth as a dog, Onoel as an ass.”

Here, I think, we are on the track of one aspect of a general
mystery-tradition that Hermes has “philosophized.” I say one aspect, for
the “Ophite” tradition is not a single form of tradition, but a medley
of traditions containing a number of forms; it is a complex or
syncretism of Chaldæan, Persian, and Egyptian elements, patched
together, or “centonized,” if we may use the term, with Jewish industry.

<span id="page_423">p. 423</span>

##### THE SIMPLER FORM OF THE TRISMEGISTIC GNOSIS

The wealth of symbolism and profusion of mysterious personifications
with which these systems of subjective imagery were smothered, could
exercise only a partial fascination on the clear-thinking, philosophical
mind which had been trained in the method of Plato. If such a mind was
combined with the mystic temperament, as was indubitably the case with
the writer of our “Pœmandres” treatise, his main effort would be to
simplify and categorize in the terms of philosophy at the expense of
apocalyptic detail; nevertheless, when a man lived in the midst of such
ideas, and was presumably in intimate relations with mystics and seers
of all sorts, he could not but be strongly affected by the main
presuppositions of all such apocalyptic, and the general notions of the
schematology of the Unseen World, which all students of such matters at
that period seem to have accepted in common.

We thus find that our Trismegistic literature, though dealing throughout
with the Gnosis, treats it in a far more simple way than any other known
system of the time. Nevertheless, even the complex imagery of the Ophite
schools is occasionally summed up in a few graphic general symbols, and
these, too, representing probably the oldest elements in them.

##### CONCERNING LEVIATHAN AND BEHEMOTH

From the confused description by Origen <span
id="fr_1391"></span>[1](#fn_1392.md) of the famous but exceedingly puzzling
Ophite Diagram that both Celsus and Origen had before them, though in
different forms, we can make out with certainty only

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

that this chart of the Unseen Spaces was divided into three main
divisions—Upper, Middle, and Lower. The Middle Space contained a
geometrical diagram of a group of ten circles surrounded by one great
circle. This Great Circle was called Leviāthān, and the grouping of
circles within it was apparently divided into a three and a seven. The
Lower Space had in it a grouping of seven circles, the circles of the
seven ruling daimones (xxx.)—elsewhere called Archontics—and the whole
group was apparently called Bĕhēmōth (xxv.).

Celsus, quoted by Origen (xxvii.), tells us that the doctrine was that
on the death of the body two groups of angels range themselves on either
side of the soul, <span id="fr_1392"></span>[1](#fn_1393.md) the one set
being called “Angels of Light” and the other “Archontics”—evidently
intended for “Angels of Darkness.” Thus the evil soul was thought to be
led away by the Daimones to Behemoth, and the pure soul to Leviathan.

We cannot enter into the endless discussions concerning these two Great
Beasts, mentioned together in Job xl. 15-24, and separately in Isaiah
and Psalms; the most recent research comes to the conclusion that “it
would seem that Leviāthān was regarded as lord of the ocean and Bĕhēmōth
of dry land.” <span id="fr_1393"></span>[2](#fn_1394.md)

But in our diagram Leviathan is Lord of the Heaven-Ocean or Great Green
or Cosmic Air, and Behemoth Lord of the Cosmic Earth.

Indeed, in the *Book of Enoch,* <span id="fr_1394"></span>[3](#fn_1395.md)
the apocalyptic writer associates these two monsters with precisely the
same eschatological considerations which Origen tells us were the
purpose of the Diagram, only “Enoch” speaks of

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

the Last Day, while the Ophite writer has in view the ascent of the soul
of an initiate after death.

At the final separation of Righteous and Unrighteous, “Enoch” tells us,
these Great Creatures, which before were united, will be parted. That is
to say, at death there is a metamorphosis of the soul.

From what is said in “Enoch,” moreover, I deduce that the Upper Space of
the Ophite Diagram was intended to represent the Celestial Paradise,
that is the state of the Pure Mind or of the Righteous.

Leviathan and Behemoth are figured in IV. Esdras vi. 49-52, as Devourers
of the Unrighteous; while general Jewish apocalyptic in both Apocrypha
and Talmud believed that these monsters would in their turn become the
food of the Righteous in Messianic times. <span
id="fr_1395"></span>[1](#fn_1396.md)

From all these indications we deduce that Behemoth was the Great Beast
and Leviathan the Great Fish. The animal soul, intensified by contact
with the human mind, then goes back to its source the Great Beast, and
is devoured by it, and reabsorbed by it, its energies returning to the
sum total of energies of the Great Animal Group-Soul, the whole energy
and experience of which shall eventually become the “food” of the
perfected man; that is to say, presumably, he will in his turn devour
and so transmute these energies; the perfected man will thrive by
transmuting the Body of the Great Beast into the Body of the Great Man.

The Great Fish, however, would seem to symbolize the higher energies of
the soul, which also require transmutation. In being born into the
stature of the Great Man, the Son of Man must needs pass “three days” in
the Belly of the Whale. This Great Fish is of the nature of knowledge;
for does not Oannes come

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

out of the Ocean in fish-form to teach, <span
id="fr_1396"></span>[1](#fn_1397.md) in the Assyrian Mystery-tradition, and
does not the Ophite tradition in another of its phases <span
id="fr_1397"></span>[2](#fn_1398.md) derive the inspiration of the great
prophets of Israel, in their several degrees, from this same Group of
Angels which the Diagram calls Leviathan?

It is also of interest to notice that Leviathan and Behemoth were
believed to have once formed one monster, which was subsequently divided
into male and female, Behemoth being male and Leviathan female. This
reminds one of the primæval Water-Earth of Hermes, which was
subsequently divided into Water and Earth, just as the animals were
first of all male-female, and subsequently were separated. Moreover, in
the Vision of Er the arcs of the journeyings of the ascending and
descending souls end in two orifices above in the sky and two below in
the earth, as though they were the ends of a once great hollow ring or
circle that had been divided, or as it were two serpents arched above
and below, with mouths and tails as orifices; and, curiously enough, in
the *Pistis Sophia* the souls of the unrighteous enter by the mouth of
the Lower Dragon and depart by the tail.

Now, Leviathan being female and Behemoth male, and both forming together
as it were the circumference of the Great Wheel of Necessity, the Wheel
of Genesis, the attribution of the gestation, so to speak, of the

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

virtues of the soul to the one and the digesting of its vices to the
other, is not so surprising. Further, they could be regarded as the
right-hand or left-hand arcs or hemispheres of the Wheel, or Sphere, or
Egg, according to celestial topography; whereas in Egyptian terrestrial
parallelism the right hand was to the north and the left hand the south,
upper and lower Egypt. Curiously enough, in Isa. xxx. 6, Behemoth is
called the monster “of the south land.” <span
id="fr_1398"></span>[1](#fn_1399.md)

Whether or no the writer of the “Pœmandres” was directly influenced by
the precise forms of tradition to which we have referred, is impossible
to determine; but that he was influenced by the general ideas as
symbolized is indubitable, and that he understood the esoteric meaning
of the “hippopotamus” and “crocodile” symbols in Egyptian mysticism is
highly probable.

##### THE “FENCE OF FIRE”

Origen (xxxi.), moreover, tells us that, according to the Ophites, the
consciousness of the soul after passing through the domain of the
animal-formed Rulers, broke through what was called the “Fence of
Iniquity,” and so turned towards the higher spheres, through which it
also had to pass. In the seventh and highest of them, over which ruled
the Virtue which was called Hōræus, <span
id="fr_1399"></span>[2](#fn_1400.md) it addresses the Ruler thereof with an
apology or defence of its own innocence, beginning with the words: “O
thou who hast transcended the ‘Fence of Fire’ without fear!”

This Fence of Fire was symbolised in the form of the Diagram which
Origen (xxxiii.) had before him, as a

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

circle of fire with a flaming sword lying across its diameter. This must
then have been intended to represent the Sphere of Fire, or Angel or
Guardian of the Gate, which had to be passed before the Celestial
Paradise could be entered, for the flashing, circling blade is said to
have guarded the “Tree of Gnosis and of Life.”

The same idea of a typical Boundary or Fence meets us in the
“Pœmandres.” It is Man who breaks through the seven spheres and also
their enclosing Sphere, the Might or Power that circumscribed the Fire.
The root idea is the same. The point of view of Hermes, however, like
that of the Ophite Gnostics, is not the passage round the Circle of
Necessity of the souls of the unregenerate, as in the Vision of Er, but
of the Straight Ascent of the soul of the initiate, his breaking through
the spheres. It is the ascent of a soul who has reached the
Hermes-stage, or Thrice-greatest grade, the final stage of winning its
freedom, the Ascent after the last compulsory birth—the Ascent “as now
it is for me” (§ 25).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1378"></span>[414:1](th146.htm#fr_1377.md) Not into a
mathematical cone, but into an egg-shaped or elliptical form resembling
that of a pine-cone.

<span id="fn_1379"></span>[414:2](th146.htm#fr_1378.md) This shows that the
soul was thought of as being without or outside body of every kind, and
body was taken into it.

<span id="fn_1380"></span>[415:1](th146.htm#fr_1379.md) *Cf. Pistis
Sophia,* pp. 371 and 367.

<span id="fn_1381"></span>[415:2](th146.htm#fr_1380.md) That is,
presumably, ἀνάγνωσμα—a philosophical discourse, or sacred sermon.

<span id="fn_1382"></span>[415:3](th146.htm#fr_1381.md) As distinguished
from “exist.” Latin, however, is but a poor medium for the expression of
philosophical distinctions.

<span id="fn_1383"></span>[416:1](th146.htm#fr_1382.md) νοῦς ὑλικός.

<span id="fn_1384"></span>[416:2](th146.htm#fr_1383.md) The augoeides.

<span id="fn_1385"></span>[416:3](th146.htm#fr_1384.md) Or of contemplative
reason, synthesis as opposed to analysis.

<span id="fn_1386"></span>[417:1](th146.htm#fr_1385.md) That is, the
elements other than those of earth.

<span id="fn_1387"></span>[417:2](th146.htm#fr_1386.md) Ed. Eyssenhardt
(F.), pp. 531 ff. (Leipzig, 1893).

<span id="fn_1388"></span>[418:1](th146.htm#fr_1387.md) *Cf.,* for
instance, Maass (E.), *Die Tagesgötter in Rom und den Provinzen,* p. 33.
See R. 53, n. 1.

<span id="fn_1389"></span>[419:1](th146.htm#fr_1388.md) For references, see
R. 53, n. 2.

<span id="fn_1390"></span>[421:1](th146.htm#fr_1389.md) Smith and Wace’s
*D. of Christ. Biog.,* ii. 849-851.

<span id="fn_1391"></span>[422:1](th146.htm#fr_1390.md) In Irenæus (*C.
Hær.,* I. xxx. 5; ed. Stieren, i. 266) this sevenfold serpent is the son
of Ialdabaoth (the Creative Mind), and is said to be “mind,” also
“crooked mind,” coiled up like a serpent.

<span id="fn_1392"></span>[423:1](th146.htm#fr_1391.md) *C. Cels.,* VI.
xxv. ff.

<span id="fn_1393"></span>[424:1](th146.htm#fr_1392.md) Plainly a
conflation of Persian and Chaldæan ideas.

<span id="fn_1394"></span>[424:2](th146.htm#fr_1393.md) Cheyne’s article,
“Behemoth and Leviathan,” in the *Encyclopædia Biblica*.

<span id="fn_1395"></span>[424:3](th146.htm#fr_1394.md) Charles’ Trans.,
lx. 7 ff. (Ethiop. V., p. 155).

<span id="fn_1396"></span>[425:1](th146.htm#fr_1395.md) See Charles, *op.
cit.,* p. 155, n. 7.

<span id="fn_1397"></span>[426:1](th146.htm#fr_1396.md) Oannes also comes
to teach from the Waters of the Euphrates; the Jewish overwriter of the
Naassene Document (see “Myth of Man in the Mysteries”) equates Euphrates
with Great Jordan, and this with the Stream of Ocean; and, curiously
enough, Origen (xxviii.) ascribes the Ophite teaching to a certain
Euphrates, of whom no one else has ever heard. It is, however, a common
error of the Church Fathers to mistake a principle of the Gnosis for the
founder of a heresy.

<span id="fn_1398"></span>[426:2](th146.htm#fr_1397.md) See Salmon, *loc.
sup. cit*.

<span id="fn_1399"></span>[427:1](th146.htm#fr_1398.md) According to
Cheyne’s rendering in the above-quoted article.

<span id="fn_1400"></span>[427:2](th146.htm#fr_1399.md) That is,
presumably, the Hōrus-like; thus showing traces of an Egyptian element.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIII. Plato: Concerning Metempsychosis](th147.md)
