[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th147)  [Next](th149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_437">p. 437</span>

### XIV

#### THE VISION OF ER

“<span class="smallcaps">But</span> to the Mindless ones, the wicked and
depraved, the envious and covetous, and those who murder do and love
impiety, I am far off, yielding my place to the Avenging Daimon.”—*C.
H.,* ff., i. 23.

##### ER SON OF ARMENIUS

To this Daimon it is that the “way of life” of the man is surrendered at
death (§ 24). In this connection we may consider the Story or Vision of
“Ēr Son of Armenius,” which Plato tells at the end of the last book (X.)
of his *Republic* (614 B ff.), for the symbolism is very similar to that
of our tractate and the subject is more or less the same.

This Ēr is said by Clement of Alexandria to have been Zoroaster, “but no
trace of acquaintance with Zoroaster is found elsewhere in Plato’s
writings, and there is no reason for giving him the name of Er the
Pamphylian. The philosophy of Heracleitus cannot be shown to be borrowed
from Zoroaster, and still less the myths of Plato.” <span
id="fr_1426"></span>[1](#fn_1427)

What the source of the story is, scholarship has so far been unable to
discover; the vast majority of scholars holding it to be an invention of
Plato.

<span id="page_438">p. 438</span>

It is the story of a man “killed in battle,” whose body was brought home
on the tenth day still fresh and showing no sign of decomposition. On
the twelfth day, when laid on the funeral pyre, Er awakes and tells a
strange story of his experiences in the invisible world.

This story should be taken in close connection with Plutarch’s similar
but fuller Vision of Aridæus (Thespesius), upon which I have commented
at length in my “Notes on the Eleusinian Mysteries.” <span
id="fr_1427"></span>[1](#fn_1428)

##### FROM THE MYSTERIES

I there stated that the experiences of Aridæus were either a literary
subterfuge for describing part of the instruction in certain Mysteries,
or the Vision, in popular story form, was considered so true a
description of what was thought to be the nature of the invisible world
and the after-death conditions of the soul, that it required little
alteration to make it useful for that purpose.

I would now suggest that the Story of Er is also used by Plato for a
somewhat similar purpose. It is further interesting to notice that one
of the characters in the Vision of Er is called Ardiæus, while in
Plutarch the main personage is called Aridæus. The transposition of a
single letter is so slight as to make the names practically identical,
and the subject matter is so similar that we are inclined to think that
there must be some connection between the Visions. Moreover, Aridæus is
said to have been a native of Soli in Cilicia, just as Er is said to
have been a Pamphylian; the tradition of such stories would thus seem to
have been derived from Asia Minor, and the origin of them may

<span id="page_439">p. 439</span>

thus be hidden in the syncretism of that land—where West and East were
for ever meeting. It is, however, much safer to assume that, in the
Story of Er, Plato is handing on the doctrines of Orphic
eschatology; <span id="fr_1428"></span>[1](#fn_1429) whether or not the
story already existed in some form, and was worked up and elaborated by
the greatest artist in words of all philosophers, will perhaps never be
known. But to the story itself.

##### THE CYLINDER

614 C.—Er, in a certain daimonian or psychic plane (τόπος τις
δαιμόνιος), is made a spectator of a turning-point or change of course
in the ascent and descent of souls. He thus seems to have been in a
space or state midway between Tartarus and Heaven—presumably the
invisible side of the sublunary space.

The world-engine of Fate, or Kārmic World-whorl, is represented by seven
spheres (surrounded by an eighth) whose harmonious spinning is adjusted
by the three Fates, the Daughters of Necessity.

Jowett (*loc. cit*.) says that the heaven-sphere is represented under
the symbol of a “cylinder or box.” Where the “box” comes in I do not
know; the term “cylinder” does not occur in the text, and even the
cylinder idea is exceedingly difficult to discover in any precise sense.
Indeed, it may be doubted whether the “heaven-sphere” is to be so
definitely interpreted; for then our discussion of the meaning of the
term “cylinder,” which occurs definitely in our *K. K.* Fragments, would
be greatly simplified.

The matter is hard to understand, and Jowett’s

<span id="page_440">p. 440</span>

attempts at exposition are hazy and sketchy in the extreme. Either Plato
is talking nonsense, or Jowett does not understand the elements of his
idea. Stewart’s attempt, which makes use of the latest Platonic
research, is far more successful, but he also has to abandon many points
in despair. <span id="fr_1429"></span>[1](#fn_1430) How difficult the
solution of the problem is may be seen from the text, which gives the
symbolism of the vision of the spheres somewhat as follows:

##### THE VISION

616 B.—“Now when those in the meadow <span
id="fr_1430"></span>[2](#fn_1431) had tarried seven days, on the eighth
they were obliged to proceed on their journey upwards, and, on the
fourth day after, <span id="fr_1431"></span>[3](#fn_1432) he \[Er\] said
they came to a region where they saw light extended straight as a column
from above throughout the whole extent of heaven and earth, in colour
resembling the rainbow, only brighter and purer.

“Another day’s journey brought them to it, and there they saw the
extremities of the boundaries of the heaven extended in the midst of the
light; for this light was the final boundary of the heaven—somewhat like
the under-girdings of ships—and thus confined its whole revolution.

“From these extremities depended the spindle of Necessity, by means of
which all its revolutions are made to revolve. The spindle’s stalk <span
id="fr_1432"></span>[4](#fn_1433) and its hook are made of
adamant, <span id="fr_1433"></span>[5](#fn_1434) and the whorl of a
mixture of adamant and other kinds \[of elements\].

<span id="page_441">p. 441</span>

“And the nature of the whorl is as follows. In shape it was like that of
the one down here; but in itself we must understand from his description
that it was somewhat as though in one great hollow whorl clean scooped
out there lay another similar but smaller one fitted into it, as though
they were jars <span id="fr_1434"></span>[1](#fn_1435) fitting into one
another. And so he said there was a third and a fourth, and \[also\]
four others. For in all there are eight whorls set in one
another—looking like circles from above as to their rims, <span
id="fr_1435"></span>[2](#fn_1436) \[but from below\] finished off into
the continuous belly <span id="fr_1436"></span>[3](#fn_1437) of one
whorl round the shaft, which is driven right through the eighth whorl.

“The first and outermost whorl had the circle of its rim first in width;
that of the sixth was second; that of the fourth, third; that of the
eighth, fourth; that of the seventh, fifth; that of the fifth, sixth;
that of the third, seventh; that of the second, eighth.

617.—“And the circle of the largest was variegated; that of the seventh
brightest; that of the eighth had its colour from the seventh shining on
it; those of the second and of the fifth had \[colours\] somewhat like
one another, but yellower than the preceding; the third had the whitest
colour; the fourth was reddish; the sixth was second in whiteness. <span
id="fr_1437"></span>[4](#fn_1438)

<span id="page_442">p. 442</span>

“Now the spindle as a whole circled round at the same rate in its
revolution; and within this revolution as a whole the seven circles
revolved slowly in a contrary direction to the one as a whole; of these
the eighth went the fastest of them; the seventh, sixth, and fifth came
second \[in speed, and at the same rate\] with one another; the fourth,
in a reversed orbit, as it appeared to them, was third in speed; the
third was fourth and the second fifth.

“The spindle revolved on the knees of Necessity; and on its circles
above, on each of them, was a Siren whom they carried round with them,
singing a single sound or tone; and from all eight of them a single
harmony was produced.

“And there were three others seated at equal distances round about, each
upon a throne,—the Daughters of Necessity, the Fates, clothed in white
robes, with garlands on their heads, Lachesis and Clotho and Atropos;
and they sang to the tune of the Sirens’ harmony,—Lachesis sang things
that have been, Clotho things that are, and Atropos things that shall
be.

“And Clotho from time to time with her right hand gave an extra turn to
the outer spin of the spindle; Atropos, with her left, in like fashion
to the inner ones; while Lachesis in turn touched the one with one hand
and the other with the other.

“Now when they \[Er and the souls\] arrived, they had to go immediately
to Lachesis. Accordingly a prophet \[a proclaimer\] first of all
arranged them in their proper order, and taking from the lap of Lachesis
both lots <span id="fr_1438"></span>[1](#fn_1439) and samples of lives,
he ascended a kind of raised place and said:

“‘The word (*logos*) of the Virgin Lachesis, Daughter of Necessity! Ye
souls, ye things of a day, lo the

<span id="page_443">p. 443</span>

beginning of another period of mortal birth that brings you death. It is
not your daimon who will have you assigned to him by lot, but ye who
will choose your daimon. He who obtains the first turn let him first
choose a life to which he will of necessity have to hold. As for Virtue,
Necessity has no control over her, but every one will possess her more
or less just as he honours or dishonours her. The responsibility is the
chooser’s; God is blameless.’

“Thus speaking he threw the lots to all of them, and each picked up the
one that fell beside him, except Er, who was not permitted to do so. So
every one who picked up a lot knew what turn he had got.

618.—“After this he set on the ground before them the samples of the
lives, in far greater number than those present. They were of every
kind; not only lives of every kind of animal, but also lives of every
kind of man. There were lives of autocratic power \[lit., tyrannies\]
among them, some continuing to the end, some breaking off half-way and
ending in poverty, exile, and beggary. There were also lives of famous
men, some famed for their beauty of form and strength, and victory in
the games, others for their birth and the virtues of their forebears;
others the reverse of famous, and for similar reasons. So also with
regard to the lives of women.

“As to the rank of the soul, it was no longer in the power \[of the
chooser\], for the decree of Necessity is that its choosing of another
life conditions its change of soul-rank. As for other things, riches and
poverty were mingled with each other, and these sometimes with disease
and sometimes with health, and sometimes a mean between these.”

Thereupon Plato breaks into a noble disquisition on what is the best
choice, and how a man should take

<span id="page_444">p. 444</span>

with him into the world an adamantine faith in truth and right; and then
continues:

619 B.—“And this is precisely what the messenger from that invisible
world reported that the prophet said:

“‘Even for him who comes last in turn, if he but choose with his *mind,*
and live consistently, there is in store a life desirable and far from
evil. So let neither him who has the best choice be careless, nor him
who comes last despair.’

“And when he had thus spoken, the one who had the first choice, Er said,
immediately went and chose the largest life of autocratic power, but
through folly and greediness he did not choose with sufficient attention
to all points, and failed to notice the fate wrapped up with it, of
‘dishes of his own children’ <span id="fr_1439"></span>[1](#fn_1440) and
other ills. But when he had examined it at leisure, he began to beat his
breast, and bemoan his choice, not abiding by what the prophet had
previously told him; for he did not lay the blame of these evils on
himself, but on ill-luck and daimones, and everything rather than
himself. And he was one of those who came from heaven, who in his former
life had lived in a well-ordered state, and been virtuous from custom
and not from a love of wisdom. <span id="fr_1440"></span>[2](#fn_1441)

“In brief, it was by no means the minority of those who involved
themselves in such unfortunate choices who came from heaven, seeing that
such souls were unexercised in the hardships of life. Many of those who
came from earth, as they had suffered hardships themselves, and had seen
others suffering them, did not make their choice off-hand.

<span id="page_445">p. 445</span>

“Consequently many of the souls, independently of the fortune of their
turn, changed good for evil, and evil for good. For if a man should
always, whenever he comes into life on earth, live a sound philosophic
life, and the lot of his choice should not fall out to him among the
last, the chances are, according to this news from the other world, that
he will not only spend his life happily here, but also that the path
which he will tread from here to there, and thence back again, will not
be below the earth <span id="fr_1441"></span>[1](#fn_1442) and
difficult, but easy and of a celestial nature.

620.—“Yes, the vision he had, Er said, was well worth the seeing,
showing how each class of souls chose their lives. <span
id="fr_1442"></span>[2](#fn_1443) The vision was both a pitiful and
laughable as well as a wonderful thing to see. For the most part they
chose according to the experience of their former life. For Er said that
he saw the soul that had once been that of Orpheus becoming the life of
a swan for choice, <span id="fr_1443"></span>[3](#fn_1444) through its
hatred of womankind, because owing to the death of Orpheus at the hands
of women, it did not wish to come into existence by conception in a
woman. He further saw the soul of Thamyras <span
id="fr_1444"></span>[4](#fn_1445) choose the life of a nightingale. On
the contrary, he saw also a swan change to the choice of a human life,
and other musical animals in like fashion.

“The soul that obtained the twentieth lot chose

<span id="page_446">p. 446</span>

the life of a lion; it was the soul of Ajax, son of Telamon, to avoid
being a man, because it still remembered the \[unjust\] decision about
the arms. The next soul was Agamemnon’s; and it too, out of hatred to
the human race on account of its sufferings, changed into the life of an
eagle. <span id="fr_1445"></span>[1](#fn_1446) The soul of Atalanta
obtained its lot in the middle, and letting her eye fall on the great
honours paid an ‘athlete,’ was unable to pass it by, and took it. The
soul of Epeius, <span id="fr_1446"></span>[2](#fn_1447) son of Panopeus,
he saw pass into the nature of a woman skilful in the arts. And far away
among the last he saw the soul of the buffoon Thersites putting on an
‘ape.’

“By a stroke of luck also he saw the soul of Odysseus, which had
obtained the last lot of all, come to make its choice. From memory of
its former labours it had given itself a rest from love of renown, and
for a long time went about to find the life of a man in private life
with nothing to do with public affairs, and with great difficulty found
one lying in a corner and thus passed over by all the rest; on seeing
it, it declared that it would have done the same even if it had had
first turn, and been glad to do it.

“And Er said that of the rest of the brutes also in like fashion some of
them passed into men, and some into one another, the unrighteous ones
changing into wild ones, and the righteous into tame; in fact, there
were intermixings of every kind.

“When, then, all the souls had chosen their lives according to the
number of their turn, they went in order to Lachesis; and she sent along
with them the daimon each had chosen, as watcher over his life and
bringer to pass of the things he had chosen. And

<span id="page_447">p. 447</span>

the daimon first of all brought the soul to Clotho, set it beneath her
hand and the whirling of the spindle, thus ratifying the fate each soul
had chosen in its turn. And after he had attached it to her, he brought
it to the spinning of Atropos, thus making its destinies <span
id="fr_1447"></span>[1](#fn_1448) irreversible.

621.—“Thence \[Er\] went, without turning, \[down\] beneath the
Throne <span id="fr_1448"></span>[2](#fn_1449) of Necessity, and when he
had passed down through it, and the others had also done so, they all
passed on to the Plain of Forgetfulness (Lethē) in a frightful and
stifling heat; for it was bare of trees and vegetation of every kind.

“As it was now evening they camped by the River Heedlessness whose water
no vessel can hold. <span id="fr_1449"></span>[3](#fn_1450) They were
all, however, compelled to drink a certain quantity of its water; those
who are not safeguarded by prudence drink more than their quantity,
while he who keeps on drinking it forgets everything.

“When they had fallen asleep and midnight had come, there was thunder
and earthquake, and thence suddenly they were carried up into birth
\[genesis\] some one way some another, like shooting stars.

“Er, however, was prevented from drinking the water; but in what manner
and by what means he got back to his body he could not say, only,
suddenly waking in the morning, he found himself lying on the pyre.”

<span id="page_448">p. 448</span>

##### COMMENTARY

The question that one naturally asks oneself is: Did Plato conclude his
great treatise on the Ideal State with a popular legend in jest, or had
he some deeper purpose? I cannot but think that he was jesting
seriously. Is it too wild a supposition that he is hinting at things
which he could not disclose because of his oath? Those who knew would
understand; those who did not would think he was jesting simply, and so
the mysteries would not be disclosed.

In any case we have, I think, got a hint of the part played by the
Daimon in our treatise. Whether or not Hermes “copied” the idea from
Plato, or both derived it from the same tradition, must be left to the
fancy and taste of individual scholars. The Daimon is the watcher over
the “way of life” (ἦθος); he is not necessarily a Kakodaimon, but so to
speak the Kārmic Agent of the soul, appointed to carry out the “choice”
of that soul, both good and ill, according to the Law of
Necessity. <span id="fr_1450"></span>[1](#fn_1451) The choice is man’s;
Nature adjusts the balance.

The Vision is of a typical nature, and the types are mythologized in the
persons of well-known characters in Grecian story. The “way of life” the
souls choose becomes the garment of “habit” they are to wear, their form
of personality, or kārmic limitation. Apparently some souls, instead of
choosing a reincarnation in a human body, prefer to live the “lives” of
certain animal natures. Are we then to believe that Plato seriously
endorsed the popular ideas of metempsychosis? Or is it possible that he
is referring to some state of existence of souls, which was symbolized
by certain animal types

<span id="page_449">p. 449</span>

in the Mysteries; as was certainly the case with the “lion” and “eagle,”
though the “swan” and “nightingale” and “ape” are, as far as I am aware,
never mentioned in this connection? Can it be that Plato here gives play
to his imagination, basing his speculations on some general idea he may
have learned in Egypt?

We know from the so-called “Diagram of the Ophites,” which is still
traceable in a fragmentary form in the polemic of Origen against Celsus,
that the “seven spheres” of the lower psychic nature were characterised
by the names of animals: lion, bull, serpent, eagle, bear, dog, ass. We
also know how the whole subject of animal correspondences preoccupied
the attention of the Egyptian priesthood. But not only can we now make
no reasonable scheme out of the fragmentary indications that have come
down to us, but we also feel pretty well certain that if Plutarch’s
account of the beliefs of the later Egyptians on the subject is
approximately reliable, the priests themselves of those days had no
longer any consistent scheme.

We may, therefore, conclude either that the whole matter was a vain
superstition entirely devoid of any basis in reality; or that there was
a psychic science of animal natures and their relationship to man which
was once the possession of the priesthood of the ancient civilisation of
Egypt, but that it was lost, owing to the departure from amongst men of
those who had the power to understand it, and subsequently only
fragments of misunderstood tradition remained among the lesser folk on
earth. This at anyrate is the theory of our Trismegistic treatises.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1427"></span>[437:1](th148.htm#fr_1426) Jowett,
*Dialogues,* iii. clxvi.

<span id="fn_1428"></span>[438:1](th148.htm#fr_1427) *The Theosophical
Review* (April, May, June, 1898), xxii. 145 ff., 232 ff., 312 ff.

<span id="fn_1429"></span>[439:1](th148.htm#fr_1428) And this I find to
be the opinion of the last commentator on the subject; see Stewart (J.
A.), *The Myths of Plato* (London, 1905), pp. 152 ff.

<span id="fn_1430"></span>[440:1](th148.htm#fr_1429) So also Dreyer (J.
L. E.), *History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler*
(Cambridge, 1906), pp. 56 ff.

<span id="fn_1431"></span>[440:2](th148.htm#fr_1430) The daimonian
region.

<span id="fn_1432"></span>[440:3](th148.htm#fr_1431) That is the
eleventh day; Er, it will be remembered, was “unconscious” for twelve
days.

<span id="fn_1433"></span>[440:4](th148.htm#fr_1432) Or shaft.

<span id="fn_1434"></span>[440:5](th148.htm#fr_1433) That which cannot
be destroyed or changed.

<span id="fn_1435"></span>[441:1](th148.htm#fr_1434) The shape would
thus approximate to an oblate spheroid.

<span id="fn_1436"></span>[441:2](th148.htm#fr_1435) To carry out the
metaphor of the jars.

<span id="fn_1437"></span>[441:3](th148.htm#fr_1436) Lit., “back.”

<span id="fn_1438"></span>[441:4](th148.htm#fr_1437) The names of the
spheres may be deduced from *Tim.* 38, and are as follows: 1. Fixed
Stars (all-coloured); 2. Saturn (yellow); 3. Jupiter (whitish); 4. Mars
(reddish); 5. Mercury (yellowish); 6. Venus (white); 7. Sun
(light-colour); 8. Moon (light-colour reflected). How the above
statements as to “width of rim” and colours are to be made to work in
with the scheme of rates of motions and numbers given in *Tim.* 36, I
have not as yet been able to discover from any commentator. And seeing
that Er is said to have seen this mystery from a region that transcended
even the daimonian region, it is perhaps out of place to insist on a
purely physical interpretation of the data.

<span id="fn_1439"></span>[442:1](th148.htm#fr_1438) Or number-turns.

<span id="fn_1440"></span>[444:1](th148.htm#fr_1439) A literary
embellishment from the Tragic Muse of Greece, and the mythical recitals
of Thyestian banquets.

<span id="fn_1441"></span>[444:2](th148.htm#fr_1440) ἔθει ἄνευ
φιλοσοφίας.

<span id="fn_1442"></span>[445:1](th148.htm#fr_1441) The Tartarean
spheres of the invisible world, popularly believed to be below the
earth; that is, philosophically, more material than earth-life.

<span id="fn_1443"></span>[445:2](th148.htm#fr_1442) The vision (θέα)
was therefore typical.

<span id="fn_1444"></span>[445:3](th148.htm#fr_1443) The birds are
typical of souls living in the air—that is, in aery bodies and not in
physical ones; or types of intelligence.

<span id="fn_1445"></span>[445:4](th148.htm#fr_1444) Or Thamyris, an
ancient Thracian bard; it is said that in his conceit he imagined he
could surpass the Muses in song, in consequence of which he was deprived
of his sight and the power of singing.

<span id="fn_1446"></span>[446:1](th148.htm#fr_1445) Notice the “lion”
and “eagle” are selected as types—they being typical sun-animals, as we
have already seen.

<span id="fn_1447"></span>[446:2](th148.htm#fr_1446) The fabled engineer
of the Trojan Horse.

<span id="fn_1448"></span>[447:1](th148.htm#fr_1447) τὰ ἐπικλωσθέντα—a
play on Κλωθώ.

<span id="fn_1449"></span>[447:2](th148.htm#fr_1448) This is probably a
symbol of the heaven-plane.

<span id="fn_1450"></span>[447:3](th148.htm#fr_1449) οὖ τὸ ὕδωρ ἀγγείον
οὐδὲν στέγειν. So this is usually translated; but as the souls drink of
it, the appropriateness of the rendering is not very apparent. On the
other hand, στέγειν is used of things that are water-tight—*e.g.* houses
and ships; hence “whose water no vessel can keep out.” The “vessel”
might thus stand for the ship of the soul; and if so, we are in contact
with an Egyptian idea. The River is in the Desert—the reverse of the
Nile and Egypt, of Osiris and Isis, their Typhonean counterparts.

<span id="fn_1451"></span>[448:1](th148.htm#fr_1450) For the more
intimate teaching on this point, see *C. H.,* x. (xi.) 16 ff.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. Concerning the Crater or Cup](th149)
