[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Gnosticism and
Hermetica](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](th149) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0766126129/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Thrice-Greatest Hermes, Vol. 1*, by G.R.S. Mead, \[1906\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_457">p. 457</span>

### XVI

#### THE DISCIPLES OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

##### PTAḤ, SEKHET AND I-EM-ḤETEP (ASCLEPIUS)

<span class="smallcaps">Budge</span>, in his *Gods of the Egyptians*
(vol. i. ch. xvi.), tells us that the Great Triad of Memphis consisted
of Ptaḥ, Sekhet, and I-em-ḥetep.

Ptaḥ, as we have seen, was the “Sculptor or Engraver,” the Demiurge *par
excellence*. He is called the “Very Great God who came into being in the
earliest time”; “Father of fathers, Power of powers”; “Father of
beginnings and Creator of the Egg\[s\] of the Sun and Moon”; “Lord of
Maāt \[Truth\], King of the Two Lands, the God of the Beautiful
Face . . . who created His own Image, who fashioned His own Body, who
hath established Maāt throughout the Two Lands”; “Ptaḥ the Disk of
Heaven, Illuminer of the Two Lands with the Fire of His Two Eyes.” The
“Workshop of Ptaḥ” was the World Invisible.

It was Ptaḥ who carried out the commands concerning the creation of the
universe issued by Thoth.

The Syzygy or female counterpart of Ptaḥ was Sekhet, “who was at once
his sister and wife, and the mother of his son Nefer-Tem, and a
sister-form of the Goddess Bast” (*op. cit.,* i. 514). She is called:
“Greatly Beloved One of Ptaḥ, Lady of Heaven, Mistress of the Two
Lands”; and one of her commonest names is “Nesert,” that is “Flame.”

<span id="page_458">p. 458</span>

It was Thoth (Ṭekh) who, with his Seven Wise Ones, planned the world
(*ib.,* 516). But if Ptaḥ is the executive power of Thoth and his Seven
Wise Ones, so is Thoth the personification of the Intelligence of Ptaḥ.
It is in this way that Sekhet becomes identified with Maāt, the
inseparable spouse of Thoth.

##### NEFER-TEM

The third member of the Memphite Triad is Nefer-Tem, or the “Young Tem.”
In the Ritual (Ch. lxxxi., version B) we read the “apology”: “Hail, thou
Lotus, thou type of the God Nefer-Tem! I am he who knoweth you, and I
know your name among the Gods, the Lords of the Underworld, and I am one
of you.” Again, in Ch. clxxiv. 19, Nefer-Tem is compared with “the Lotus
at the nostrils of Rā”; also, in Ch. clxxviii. 36, Nefer-Tem has the
same title.

In the later texts Nefer-Tem is identified with many Gods, all of them
forms of Horus or Thoth (*ib.,* 522).

Here we are in contact with the Ptaḥ-tradition of Memphis which, we have
seen, played an important part in the heredity of the cosmogenesis of
our “Pœmandres” tractate. In it the simultaneous identification and
distinction of Thoth and Ptaḥ and of Maāt and Sekhet are naturally
explained, and the Son of these Powers is the Young Tem, identified with
the Young Horus or Young Thoth who is to succeed his Father. Are we here
on the track of the ancestry of our Tat?

At Heliopolis (Ȧnnu) the Ancient God Tem was equated with Rā. Tem was
the Father-God, Lord of Heaven, and Begetter of the Gods (*op. cit.,* i.
92, 93). Usertsen I. rebuilt the sanctuary of Heliopolis about

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 2433 B.C., and
dedicated it to Rā in the two forms of Horus and Temu (*ib.,* 330).

“Tem was the first *living* Man-God known to the Egyptians, just as
Osiris was the first *dead* Man-God, and as such was always represented
in human form and with a human head. . . .

“Tem was, in fact, to the Egyptians a manifestation of God in human
form. . . . It is useless to attempt to assign a date to the period when
the Egyptians began to worship God in human form, for we have no
material for so doing; the worship of Tem must, however, be of very
great antiquity, and the fact that the priests of Rā in the Fifth and
Sixth Dynasties united him to their God under the name of Rā-Tem, proves
that his worship was wide-spread, and that the God was thought to
possess attributes similar to those of Rā” (*ib.,* 349, 350).

In the Trismegistic tradition in which Thoth holds the chief place, the
Young Tem would thus represent the Young Thoth who succeeded to his
Father when that Father ascended to the Gods.

##### IMHOTEP-IMUTH-ASCLEPIUS

Moreover the Egyptian texts prove that besides Nefer-Tem still another
Son of Ptaḥ was regarded as the third member of the Memphitic Triad.
This Son was called I-em-ḥetep (or Imḥotep), whom the Greeks called
Imouthēs or Imuth, and equated him with their Asclepius.

The name I-em-ḥetep means “He who cometh in Peace,” and is very
appropriate to the God who brought the knowledge of Healing to mankind;
but I-em-ḥetep, though specially the God of medicine, was also the God
of study and learning in general.

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

“As a God of learning he partook of some of the attributes of Thoth, and
he was supposed to take the place of this God in the performance of
funeral ceremonies, and in superintending the embalming of the dead; in
later times he absorbed the duties of Thoth as ‘Scribe of the Gods,’ and
the authorship of the words of power which protected the dead from
enemies of every kind in the Underworld was ascribed to him” (*ib*.,
522, 523).

In the “Ritual of Embalmment” <span id="fr_1465"></span>[1](#fn_1466) it
is said to the Deceased: “Thy soul uniteth itself to I-em-ḥetep whilst
thou art in the funeral valley.”

The oldest shrine of the God was situated close to Memphis, and was
called the “Temple of I-em-ḥetep, the Son of Ptaḥ,” which the Greeks
called the Asclēpieion.

Under Ptolemy IV., Philopator (222-205 B.C.), a temple was built to
I-em-ḥetep on the Island of Philæ, and from the hieroglyphic
inscriptions we learn that the God was called: “Great One, Son of Ptaḥ,
the Creative God, made by Thenen, begotten by him and beloved by him,
the God of divine forms in the temples, who giveth life to all men, the
Mighty One of wonders, the Maker of times \[?\], who cometh unto him
that calleth upon him wheresoever he may be, who giveth sons to the
childless, the wisest and most learned one, the image and likeness of
Thoth the Wise.” <span id="fr_1466"></span>[2](#fn_1467)

Imḥotep-Asclepius was thus the “image and likeness of Thoth the Wise,”
even as Nefer-Tem was

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Young Thoth. Here
we have precisely the distinction drawn between Asclepius and Tat in our
Trismegistic literature; Asclepius was trained in all philosophy, Tat
was young and as yet untrained.

“I-em-ḥetep,” concludes Budge, “was the God who sent sleep to those who
were suffering and in pain, and those who were afflicted with any kind
of disease formed his special charge; he was the Good Physician both of
Gods and men, and he healed the bodies of mortals during life, and
superintended the arrangements for the preservation of the same after
death. . . . He was certainly the God of physicians and of all those who
were occupied with the mingled science of medicine and magic; and when
we remember that several of the first Kings of the Early Empire are
declared by Manetho, whose statements have been supported by the
evidence of the papyri, to have written, *i.e.* caused to be edited,
works on medicine, it is clear that the God of medicine was in Memphis
as old as the archaic period” (*ib.,* 524).

So much for the more important information that Budge has to offer us on
the subject of Asclepius-Imuth from the side of pure Egyptian
tradition—if we can use such a phrase of that tradition as strained
through the sieve of almost purely physical interpretation. <span
id="fr_1467"></span>[1](#fn_1468)

##### THĀTH-TAT

And now let us turn to Reitzenstein and his instructive Dissertation,
“Hermes u. Schüler” (pp. 117 ff.).

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

Unquestionably the most general form of sermon found in the remains of
our Trismegistic literature is that of instruction to Tat the “Son” of
Hermes, who is “Father” and Initiator. Of these instructions two Corpora
existed, namely, “The General Sermons” and “The Expository Sermons.”

The name Tat is, of course, a variant of Thoth (Teḥut); but whereas
Hermes himself is always in such sermons characterised as
Thrice-greatest, Tat has not yet reached to this grade of mastership; he
is still “Young.”

The name “Tat” occurs in one of the prayers in the Magic Papyri, part of
which is undecipherable, and can only be translated by following the
conjecture of Reitzenstein (p. 117, n. 6).

“Show thyself unto me in thy prophetic power O God of mighty mind,
Thrice-great Hermes! Let him who rules the four regions of the Heavens
and the four foundations of the Earth appear. Be present unto me O thou
in Heaven, be present unto me thou from the Egg. . . . Speak, the Two
Gods also are round thee,—the one God is called Thāth and the other
Haf.” <span id="fr_1468"></span>[1](#fn_1469)

Spiegelberg equates Haf with *Ḥpj,* the “Genius of the Dead” who appears
coupled with Thoth in a Coptic Magic Papyrus of the second century
A.D., <span id="fr_1469"></span>[2](#fn_1470) where Isis speaks of “my
father Ape-Thoth.” This thus seems to identify Haf with Anubis—that is,
Harmanup or Horus as Anubis. And Anubis, as Hermes-Tat, was considered
in Egyptian tradition to be a composer of sacred scripture. <span
id="fr_1470"></span>[3](#fn_1471)

<span id="page_463">p. 463</span>

##### THE INCARNATIONS OF THOTH

The prayer just cited appears to put us into contact with the atmosphere
of some inner mysteries of spiritual instruction. The God or Spiritual
Master contains in himself his disciple, or a duad or triad of
disciples; the relationship of Master and disciple is of the most
intimate nature; not only is it of that of father to son, but of mother
to child—for the disciple is born in the womb of the Master Presence.
The disciple is as it were his *ka*.

Thus for the Egyptians, as Sethe and others have pointed out, the wise
priest, that is a priest truly initiated into the Wisdom, was regarded
as an incarnation of Thoth, and such an one after the death of his body
was worshipped as Thoth.

And so we find at Medinet Habu the remains of a shrine, erected in the
time of Ptolemy IX. (Euergetes II.)—146-117 BC.—to a certain High Priest
of Memphis, Teos, who is called “Teos the Ibis,” <span
id="fr_1471"></span>[1](#fn_1472) that is Thoth, and so identified with
Thoth himself.

What we learn from the general tradition of this belief in the
“incarnation” of Thoth into the perfected disciple of Wisdom, and the
ascription of sacred literature to similar though not identical
God-names to that of Thoth himself, is that there was on the one

<span id="page_464">p. 464</span>

hand a firm belief in the unity of the Thoth-tradition, and on the other
a necessary division of the sacred literature into older and later
periods. The Thoth of the older period was regarded as a God, the Thoth
of more recent times as a God-man. <span
id="fr_1472"></span>[1](#fn_1473) And so we find Plato in the famous
passage of the *Philebus,* 18 B, uncertain whether to speak of Thoth as
God or man.

##### THE DISCIPLES OF LORD HERMES IN PETOSIRIS AND NECHEPSO

In the known oldest references to the Thoth-Hermes literature, there has
so far not been discovered anything that suggests the existence of a
distinction between Hermes \[Thoth\] and Tat \[Thoth\]; but the absence
of references proves little. Already, however, Nechepso and Petosiris,
in the second century B.C., make Hermes the teacher of the younger
God-disciples Anubis and Asclepius; in which connection it is of
interest to note the following passage from a horoscope for the first
year of the Emperor Antoninus Pius, <span
id="fr_1473"></span>[2](#fn_1474) set up by the priests of Hermes at
Thebes—the Greek of which is very faulty and evidently written by
“Barbari”:

“After enquiry based on many books, handed down to us by the wise
Ancients, the Chaldæans,—both Petosiris,and especially King Necheus
\[*sic; i.e.* Nechepso\], in as much as they also took counsel of our
Lord Hermes and of Asclepius, that is of Imouthēs, son of
Hephēstus. . . .” <span id="fr_1474"></span>[3](#fn_1475)

<span id="page_465">p. 465</span>

From this we learn that in the second century A.D. the writings of
Petosiris and Nechepso, together with the “Chaldæan Books,” still formed
part of the Temple Library at Thebes; moreover, that Petosiris and
Nechepso, in the second century B.C., based themselves on these Books as
well as on Books ascribed to both Hermes and Asclepius. Moreover, from
the Fragments of Nechepso <span id="fr_1475"></span>[1](#fn_1476) we
learn that he had before him a sermon of Asclepius called
*Moirogenesis,* concerning the *Genesis of Fate,* and also Dialogues in
which Hermes instructs Asclepius and Anubis concerning the mysteries of
astrology. These Trismegistic works must thus be dated prior to the
beginning of the second century B.C.

Sethe, in his essay on Asclepius-Imhotep, has endeavoured to show that
this Imuth was originally a man, and that divine honours were first paid
to him in the reign of Amāsis (Amōsis—Ȧāḥ-mes), about 1700 B.C.

##### TOSOTHRUS-ASCLEPIUS

Manetho, however, tells us another story, when he writes of a certain
king of the Third Dynasty (B.C. 3700): “Toso\[r\]thrus reigned
twenty-nine years. He is called Asclepius by the Egyptians, for his
medical knowledge. He built a house of hewn stones, and greatly
patronised literature.” <span id="fr_1476"></span>[2](#fn_1477)

Tosothrus is Tcheser or Tcheser-sa (Dośer), the second king of the Third
Dynasty from Memphis. The “house of hewn stones” which he built,
received remarkable confirmation from the excavations which were carried
out by the Prussian General Minutoli in 1819, <span
id="fr_1477"></span>[3](#fn_1478) in the Step-Pyramid of Ṣaḳḳāra. This
temple,

<span id="page_466">p. 466</span>

says Budge (*op. cit.,* i. 219) “is certainly the oldest of all the
large buildings which have successfully resisted the action of wind and
weather, and destruction by the hand of man.”

In the Inscription of the Seven Famine Years, <span
id="fr_1478"></span>[1](#fn_1479) moreover, belonging in its present
form to the later Ptolemaic period, but a copy of a far more ancient
record, we read, in Sethe’s restored Greek text:

“Tosothrus, in whose days (lived) Imouthēs. He was considered by the
Egyptians to be Asclepius because of his knowledge of the healing art;
he discovered the art of building with hewn stones, and, moreover,
occupied himself with literature.”

We thus learn that long before Manetho’s time there was an Asclepian
literature, and not only did this deal with medicine but also with
scripture in general and with “masonry.”

##### IMUTH-ASCLEPIUS THE MASTER MASON AND POET

That Asclepius was specially occupied with the sacred building-art, may
be seen from Sethe’s study, whose industry has discovered a book on
Temple-building ascribed to Imuth, a “Book that came from Heaven
northwards from Memphis.” It was according to this Book that Ptolemy X.
(Soter II.) and Ptolemy XI. (Alexander I.) enlarged the building of
their ancestors at Edfu, “in agreement with the writing concerning the
plans of the Temple of Horus, which the chief prelector of the priests,
Imhotp, the son of Ptaḥ, had written.”

There were also certain very ancient Sermons (or Songs) of Imhotp, and a
saying from one of these

<span id="page_467">p. 467</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sermons, the “Song
from the House of King Intf,” is given by Sethe as follows:

“I have heard the words of Imhotp and Hardadaf; they are still much
spoken of, but where are their abodes?”

Perhaps this explains the statement in *S. H. I.* (Stob., *Ec.,* i. 49;
W. p. 467, 4) that Asclepius-Imuth was the inventor of poetry. Imuth was
to the Egyptians what Orpheus, Linus or Musæus was to the Greeks.

And so Reitzenstein (p. 121) concludes that the tradition of the old
Egyptian and Hellenistic literature is unbroken. In Hellenistic times
this view of the Divine Son of Ptaḥ of Memphis and of his chief Shrine
at Memphis spread widely, and his cult was extended to Thebes and even
to Philæ. At Thebes he appears united with the Theban Thoth and his
younger likeness or image Amenhotep—the twin-brother of Imhotep
(Asclepius) Son of Hapu, who is said to have lived as a man under King
Amenophis III. (Ȧmen-ḥetep), 1450 B.C., and who tells us himself how he
became acquainted with the “Book of God” and saw in vision the
“Pre-eminence of Thoth.” <span id="fr_1479"></span>[1](#fn_1480)

The chief Temple of Asclepius at Memphis was still honoured in later
times, and even in the days of Jerome its priesthood was renowned for
its occult wisdom. <span id="fr_1480"></span>[2](#fn_1481)

##### ÆSCULAPIUS THE HEALER

Of the Cult of Æsculapius in Greece and of the widespread influence of
this ideal there is little need to remind the student of the comparative
history of religions; we cannot, however, refrain from appending a
paragraph

<span id="page_468">p. 468</span>

from a remarkable address recently delivered by the Rev. J. Estlin
Carpenter to the students of Manchester College, Oxford, <span
id="fr_1481"></span>[1](#fn_1482) in which he says:

“Pass beyond the limits of Israel and its hopes, and you enter a world
of religious phenomena, so varied as to be practically inexhaustible,
and all the patient labour of the last thirty years has only begun to
exhibit to us its contents. At every turn you are confronted with
beliefs resembling those which pervade our New Testament, so that Prof.
Cheyne has recently attempted in a very remarkable little volume, *Bible
Problems,* to trace archæologically the roots of four great doctrines
associated with the person of Jesus—the Virgin Birth, the Descent into
Hades, the Resurrection, and the Ascension. The inscriptions reveal to
you the very language of Christianity in the making. The hymns and
liturgies of other faiths derive their strength from similar ideas, and
express similar aspirations. Does Jesus, according to the Gospels, give
sight to the blind, and call the dead back to life? So does Æsculapius.
He, too, is wondrously born; he, too, is in danger in his infancy. He,
too, heals the sick and raises the dead, till Zeus, jealous of this
infringement of his prerogatives, smites him with his thunderbolt, and
translates him to the world above. But from his heavenly seat he
continues to exercise his healing power. His worship spreads all through
Greece. After a great plague in Rome, in 291 B.C., it is planted on a
sacred island in the Tiber. In the first century of our era you may
follow it all round the Eastern Mediterranean. In Greece alone Pausanias
mentions sixty-three *Asklepieia*. There were others in Asia Minor,
Egypt, Sicily; nearly two hundred being still traceable. They were both

<span id="page_469">p. 469</span>

sanctuaries and medical schools. A number of inscriptions relate details
of cures, or consecrate the *ex-votos,* which are still dedicated at
Loretto or Lourdes. The temple by the Tiber won special fame in the
reign of Antoninus Pius, for the restoration of the sight of a blind
man. Æsculapius himself bears the titles ‘king’ and θεὸς σωτήρ, ‘divine
saviour.’ He was even σωτὴρ τῶν ὅλων, ‘saviour of the universe.’ In his
cosmic significance he was thus identified-with Zeus himself, and on
earth he was felt to be ‘most loving to man’ (*cp.* Tit. iii. 4).
Harnack, in one of the fascinating chapters of his *Expansion of
Christianity,* has traced the action of these influences on later
Christianity conceived as a religion of healing or salvation, medicine
alike of body and of mind. It must be enough now to remind you that the
god was believed to reveal himself to those who sought his aid, and
Origen affirms that a great multitude, both of Greeks and barbarians,
acknowledge that they ‘have frequently seen, and *still see,* no mere
phantom, but Æsculapius himself, healing and doing good, and foretelling
the future.’”

But to pass on to the Trismegistic Asclepius.

##### ASCLEPIUS IN TRISMEGISTIC TRADITION

Asclepius comes forward in our literature as the type of a disciple of
Trismegistus already trained in philosophy. This prior training must
presumably be referred to the Ptah-tradition—Ptah being himself a God of
Revelation, that is of teaching by means of apocalypsis, and Asclepius
being originally his “son” and “priest.” But not only was Ptah a God of
apocalypsis generally, but also a God of medicine, as he must needs have
been for his son to have learned his wisdom from him.

<span id="page_470">p. 470</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> This view is
brought out in a Hellenistic text which reads as follows:

“A Remedy from the shrines of Hephæstus \[Ptah\] at Memphis interpreted
by the decision and owing to the philanthropy, they say, of
Thrice-greatest Hermes; for he decided that it should be published with
a view to man’s saving. It was found on a golden tablet written in
Egyptian characters.” <span id="fr_1482"></span>[1](#fn_1483)

The tradition of the date when Asclepius was admitted to the
Trismegistic discipline is given in *K. K.,* 3 (Stob., *Ec.,* i. 49; W.
p. 387, 1). After the ascension of Hermes, we are told:

“To him succeeded Tat, who was at once his son and heir unto these
knowledges; and not long afterwards Asclepius-Imuth, according to the
will of Ptah who is Hephæstus.”

What precise historical worth this tradition may contain, it is
impossible to say; all we can suppose is that there was at some early
date a union of two schools of mystic discipline belonging respectively
to the Thebaic and Memphitic traditions. This union may have been
somewhat analogous to that of the disciples of John the Baptist and of
Jesus. What is clear, however, from our Trismegistic writings, is that
there is no doubt whatever in the writer’s mind that the Trismegistic
tradition is in possession of the higher wisdom; and, indeed, *C. H.,*
xiii. (xiv.) distinctly allows us to conclude that though. Tat was
younger, in so far as he had not the technical training of the
Asclepius-grade, it is nevertheless Tat, when he reaches “manhood,” and
not Asclepius, who succeeds to the mastership of the School.

Nevertheless we find a number of Trismegistic writings, presupposed
especially in “The Definitions of

<span id="page_471">p. 471</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Asclepius” and in
“The Perfect Sermon,” in which both Tat and Asclepius share in a common
instruction—Asclepius appearing as the older and riper scholar.

This makes Reitzenstein (p. 122) suppose that this type of what we may
call a company of two disciples was invented by the Hermes priests at
Thebes, and that it was later on taken over by the Memphitic
Ptah-Asclepius priests and developed in their own interest.

This may be so if we must be compelled to speculate on the dim shades of
history which may be recovered from these obscure indications.

##### CONCERNING AMMON

Of the Trismegistic writings of Asclepius, Lactantius (*D. I.,* ii. 15,
7) mentions a “Perfect Sermon” to the King (Ammon), <span
id="fr_1483"></span>[1](#fn_1484) and also refers to a rich ancient
literature by Asclepius addressed to the same king.

Reitzenstein (p. 123), moreover, says that *C. H.,* (xvii.) presupposes
writings addressed to the same King Ammon by Tat; but I gather that the
persons of the dialogue are really Asclepius and the King, and not Tat,
and that Tat has been substituted for Asclepius by some copyist in
error.

However this may be, there was a large literature addressed by Hermes
himself to Ammon, as we may see from the distinct statement in *P. S.
A.,* i. 2, and also from Stobæus, Exx. xii.-xix. The same tradition is
preserved in the presumably later Hermetic treatise, *Iatromathematica,*
which is also addressed to Ammon. <span
id="fr_1484"></span>[2](#fn_1485)

<span id="page_472">p. 472</span>

##### PROPHET AND KING

Here, then, we have another type of literature, and that, too, very
ancient, in which the wise Priest and Prophet is set over against the
King as teacher or discoverer of hidden wisdom. This we have already
seen to have been the relationship between the Priest and Prophet
Petosiris and King Nechepso. But the type goes still further back to
pre-Greek times in Egypt. It was, as we have learned from Plutarch, who
probably hands on the information direct from Manetho, a necessity that
the King, to be a true King, should be initiated into the wisdom of the
Priests.

As we have already seen, Imuth-Asclepius appears in Manetho as an
inventor, so also in the charming story put into the mouth of Socrates
by Plato in his *Phædrus* (274 C) about “the famous old God whose name
was Theuth,”—Thoth is the inventor *par excellence*. In this story—which
elicits the remark from *Phædrus*: “Yes, Socrates, you can easily invent
tales of Egypt, or of any other country”—Thoth takes his inventions to a
certain King Thamus for his approval or disapproval, as to whether or no
the Egyptians might be allowed the benefit of them. This Thamus was
“King of the whole country of Egypt, and dwelt in that great city of
upper Egypt which the Hellenes call Egyptian Thebes, and the God Himself
is called by them Ammon.”

In Hecatæus, also, Osiris, King of Thebes, has all inventions laid
before him, and gives special honour to Hermes whose inventions were far
and wide renowned. <span id="fr_1485"></span>[1](#fn_1486)

In this connection it is to be noted that in the Theban Thoth-cult,
Thoth was regarded as the Representative

<span id="page_473">p. 473</span>

of the King and Light-God Rā (or Ammon). And so we read on the tomb of
Seti I.:

“Thou art in my place, my representative. Wherefore are thou moreover
called Thoth, Representative of the Light-God Rā.” <span
id="fr_1486"></span>[1](#fn_1487)

From these and other indications it is quite possible to conclude that
Plato has used an ancient Egyptian *logos* as the basis of his story,
and that this *logos* at a very early period found an echo in written
instructions given by Thoth to the King.

All this took place on purely Egyptian ground, and hence the type of
instruction from Thoth-Hermes to Ammon was fairly established in
tradition before it was taken over by our Hellenistic Trismegistic
writers.

##### AMENHOTEP-ASCLEPIUS

So far, however, I believe, no reference to books written by Imhotep
(Asclepius) to Ammon in the pre-Greek period has been discovered.
Sethe, <span id="fr_1487"></span>[2](#fn_1488) however, tells us that a
certain Amenhotep who lived as early as the fifteenth century B.C., was
a disciple and seer of Thoth. This Amenhotep was famous as a teacher of
wisdom and discoverer of magic books; he was probably also renowned for
his own writings as well. Gradually this Amenhotep became blended with
Imhotep-Asclepius as his twin-brother, and finally in Ptolemaic times
received divine honours at Thebes. Here, then, we have the blending in
of another tradition, of a writer of books who was a disciple of Thoth,
and was gradually confounded with Asclepius-Imuth, son of Ptah. And that
there were two Asclepiuses, an older and a later, we are told distinctly
by *P. S. A.,* xxxvii. 3.

<span id="page_474">p. 474</span>

Of the Sayings of this Asclepius a Greek porcelain <span
id="fr_1488"></span>[1](#fn_1489) gives us some idea. The first three
Sayings, however, are simply taken from the Sayings of the Seven Sages
of Greece; the rest may be partially Egyptian. This scrap of evidence,
however, is of importance; for already in the third century B.C., Orphic
Sayings are known to have been worked up with Egyptian material, and
here we have Greek gnomic material blended with an Egyptian
Imuth-tradition of Sayings.

Perhaps still more careful research may reward us with further
side-lights on the development of this Asclepius-literature prior to the
Greek period, and in its earliest Hellenistic forms. As it is, we are
left with the impression that the traces which have been already
discovered, justify the remarks made by the writer of our Trismegistic
“Definitions of Asclepius unto the King” or “The Perfect Sermon of
Asclepius unto the King”—*C. H.,* (xvi.)—as based upon a
well-established tradition in the School, concerning the change brought
about by putting the Egyptian forms of the Asclepian writings, which
were of a very mystical nature, into the more precise forms of the Greek
tongue.

##### THE SACRED GROUP OF FOUR

What, however, is clear in “The Perfect Sermon” of Hermes himself, where
he gives instruction to his three disciples, Asclepius, Tat and Ammon,
assembled in the “holy place,” is that the history of the matter is of
small moment to the writer of that Sermon. He is dealing with the inner
and more intimate side of the teaching. Asclepius, Tat and Ammon are for
him the sacred triad, forming with the Master himself the “sacred group
of four” (*P. S. A*., i. 2).

<span id="page_475">p. 475</span>

With this we may very well compare the group of three made so familiar
to us by the Evangelists—the three who were always with the Master in
the most intimate moments of His inner life and exaltation—James, John
and Peter.

Now, if the reader will refer to my notes on the last paragraph of
Hippolytus’ Introduction to the Naassene document, he will see that
Clement of Alexandria expressly asserts that:

“The Lord imparted the Gnosis to James the Just, to John and Peter,
after His Resurrection; these delivered it to the rest of the Apostles,
and they to the Seventy.”

##### JAMES, JOHN AND PETER

Here I would suggest that we have a similarity of conception. Asclepius
is the main subsequent teacher, even as James is, in Christian
tradition; Peter is the organiser, to whom the rulership over the Church
is given—he represents the king-power, and may be equated with Ammon;
while John is the Beloved even as is Tat.

John understands the spirit of the teaching best of all; James is more
learned on the formal side; while Peter is the organiser, and in many an
apocryphal story is made to display lack of control and want of
understanding.

A most interesting scrap of Johannine tradition will throw some further
light on the fact that John succeeded to the spiritual directorship,
even as Tat, in our sermons, succeeds to Trismegistus.

This scrap is an addition to John xvii. 26, from a Codex of the Fourth
Gospel, preserved in the Archives of the Templars of St John of
Jerusalem in Paris: <span id="fr_1489"></span>[1](#fn_1490)

<span id="page_476">p. 476</span>

“Ye have heard what I said unto you: I am not of this world, the
Comforter is among you, teach through the Comforter. As the Father has
sent Me, even so send I you. Amen, I say unto you, I am not of this
world; but *John shall be your father,* till he shall go with Me into
Paradise. And He anointed them with the Holy Spirit.”

So also in an addition to John xix. 26-30, we read:

“He saith to His mother, Weep not; I go to My Father and to Eternal
Life. Behold thy son! He will keep My place. Then saith He to the
disciple, Behold thy mother! Then bowing His head He gave up the Ghost.”

Here then at the Supreme Crisis the Master constitutes John the
spiritual Father of the School in His place. So is it with Tat.

##### THE TRIAD OF DISCIPLES

The idea of triads and other groups (*e.g.* of five and seven) united in
the Presence of a Master, is familiar to the student of Druidical
mysticism. In our “Perfect Sermon” we have such a triad, each disciple
distinguished by strongly-marked characteristics; the tuning of these
into one harmony, so that, to use another and a familiar simile, the
disciples may be as the fingers of one hand, for the Master’s use, is a
matter of enormous difficulty. One is characterised by Power, another by
Knowledge, and another by Love. All three must sink their individually
strongest characteristic in a supreme sacrifice, where all blend
together into the Wisdom of the Master. This seems to me to be the inner
purport of our “Perfect Sermon,” and whatever may be the history of the
evolution of the

<span id="page_477">p. 477</span>

forms of the literature, the eternal fact of the nature of the intimate
teaching of the Christ to the Three was known to our writer.

##### CHNUM THE GOOD DAIMON

Let us now turn to the type of Trismegistic literature in which Osiris
and Isis came forward as disciples; and first of all let us take a
glance at the God Chnum, Chnubis, or Chnuphis (Knuphis), whose name
occurs in so many of the Abraxas and Abraxoid gems.

Chnum was for Southern Egypt precisely what Ptah of Memphis was for
Northern Egypt. He was the Fashioner of men, even as a potter makes pots
on a wheel. Chnum was Demiurge and God of the heart. The chief centre of
his cult was at Syene and the Island of Elephantine. Here he was
regarded as the Father of Osiris. And so we hear of astrological
dialogues between Chnum and Osiris, as, for instance, when we are told:

“And all that Kouphis, who is with them \[the Egyptians\], the Good
Daimon, handed on, and his disciple Osiris philosophized.” <span
id="fr_1490"></span>[1](#fn_1491)

These writings were grouped with those of Nechepso, and also with our
Trismegistic writings. Compare the passage in Firmicus Maternus which
runs:

“All things which Mercurius (Hermes) and Chnubis \[?\] handed on to
Æsculapius (Asclepius), which Petosiris discovered and Nechepso.” <span
id="fr_1491"></span>[2](#fn_1492)

<span id="page_478">p. 478</span>

##### OSIRIS DISCIPLE OF AGATHODAIMON THE THRICE-GREATEST

The Patristic references to our Trismegistic literature further imform
us that Osiris was regarded as the disciple of Agathodaimon, who in them
bears the name of Thrice-greatest. <span
id="fr_1492"></span>[1](#fn_1493) There is, however, nothing to show
that Hermes himself appears in them as the disciple of Chnubis, as
Reitzenstein says (p. 126). The introductory phrase of Lactantius to
Frag. xix. runs: “But I \[L.\] will call to mind the words of Hermes the
Thrice-greatest; in the ‘To Asclepius’ he says: ‘Osiris said: How, then,
O thou Thrice-greatest, \[thou\] Good Daimon, did Earth in its entirety
appear?’”

Here we have a sermon of Hermes quoting from a tradition in which Osiris
appears as the disciple of Agathodaimon, who is also called
Trismegistus; that is, the Agathodaimon-Osiris Dialogue type was old,
and presumably pertained to one of the earliest forms of the
Trismegistic literature, probably contemporary with the most ancient
Pœmandres type. This type seems to have borne impressions of the form of
the “Books of the Chaldæans” type of cosmogenesis, which we have seen to
have strongly influenced Petosiris and Nechepso in the early second
century B.C.

Agathodaimon is to Osiris as Pœmandres to Hermes.

##### LOGOS-MlND THE GOOD DAIMON

So also in the early Alchemical literature there is a treatise of
Agathodaimon addressed to Osiris, and in it others are
presupposed. <span id="fr_1493"></span>[2](#fn_1494) These Alchemical
teachings of the Good Daimon are frequently in close contact with

<span id="page_479">p. 479</span>

our Trismegistic doctrines; moreover, in the same literature, Hermes
refers to Agathodaimon and appears to regard himself as his
disciple. <span id="fr_1494"></span>[1](#fn_1495) It thus may be
supposed that it was from Chnum that was originally derived the
tradition of the Agathodaimonites. So thinks Reitzenstein; but I do not
think that we have sufficient evidence as yet for so general a
conclusion. The term Agathodaimon is a very general one, it is true, but
the whole idea cannot be refunded into Chnum; in fact, Osiris is quite
as much Agathodaimon as Chnum, and in *C. H.,* xii. (xiii.), which deals
with the General Mind, Good Mind, or Good Daimon, Agathodaimon is taken
in the most general sense, and in the three quotations there made by
Hermes from the “Sayings of the Good Daimon” (§§ 1, 8, 13), <span
id="fr_1495"></span>[2](#fn_1496) we find that they are in the words of
Heracleitus as inspired by the Logos; so that in reality Agathodaimon
must be equated with Logos. The origin of Agathodaimon is then not
solely Chnum; and Hermes therefore cannot be spoken of as the disciple
of Chnubis, unless we can cite texts in which Thoth is so described.

In our Trismegistic literature the teaching is quite simple and
distinct; as, for instance, in *C. H.,* x. (xi.) 23: “He \[Mind\] is the
Good Daimon.”

When, however, Reitzenstein (p. 128) declares that the sentence in § 25
of the same sermon, “For this cause can a man dare say that man on earth
is God subject to death, while God in heaven is man from death
immune,” <span id="fr_1496"></span>[3](#fn_1497) is a saying belonging
to the

<span id="page_480">p. 480</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span>
Chnuphis-literature, we think he is going beyond the limits of probable
conjecture, unless we substitute for Chnuphis the general term
Agathodaimon in the sense of Logos.

When again Reitzenstein (p. 129) says that the fragments he has adduced
show that Hermes was a later addition in the Agathodaimon-literature,
and gradually pushed on one side Osiris the Son of the God of
Revelation, we are not convinced that we have correctly recovered the
“history”—for in the great Osiris-myth it is Hermes who is always the
teacher of wisdom and not Osiris.

##### CHNUM GOOD MIND THE ÆON

Nevertheless that a wide-spread Chnuphis-literature, in the
Agathodaimonistic sense, existed prior to the second century B.C.,
Reitzenstein has shown by a number of interesting quotations (pp.
129-133). In Hellenistic times the worship of Chnuphis as the Primal
Deity and God of Revelation was strongly established, and, most
interesting of all for us, his symbol was the serpent. The symbol, then,
of Agathodaimon as Logos was the Serpent of Wisdom, and we are in
contact with the line of tradition of the Gnostic Ophites and Naassenes.
And so also in Ptolemaic times we find his syzygy, Isis, also symbolised
as a serpent, and both of them frequently as serpents with human heads;
they are both “as wise as serpents.” And as Horus was their son, so we
find the hawk-headed symbol of that God united with a serpent body. So
also we find Agathodaimon, in his sun-aspect, symbolised as a serpent
with a lion’s head. <span id="fr_1497"></span>[1](#fn_1498) He is the
Æon.

<span id="page_481">p. 481</span>

##### ISIS, LADY OF WISDOM, DISCIPLE OF THRICE-GREATEST HERMES

In addition to the types of Hermes and his disciples, and Agathodaimon
and his disciples, we have also in our Trismegistic literature another
type—namely, Isis and her disciples. Isis is the ancient Lady of all
wisdom, and Teacher of all magic. In the early Hellenistic period she is
substituted for Hermes as Orderer of the cosmos, <span
id="fr_1498"></span>[1](#fn_1499) while Plutarch calls her Lady of the
Heart and Tongue even as is Hermes. <span
id="fr_1499"></span>[2](#fn_1500) She “sees” the teaching.

As her disciple, she has in the Stobæan Ex. xxxi. <span
id="fr_1500"></span>[3](#fn_1501) a king, probably King Ammon.

In a Magic Papyrus she even appears as teacher of Asclepius. <span
id="fr_1501"></span>[4](#fn_1502) But the more usual and natural type is
that of Isis as teacher of her son Horus, and so we find Lucian speaking
of Pythagoras visiting Egypt to learn wisdom of her prophets, and saying
that the sage of Samos descended into the *adyta* and learned the Books
of Horus and Isis. <span id="fr_1502"></span>[5](#fn_1503) To this type
of literature belongs our lengthy Stobæan Exx. xxv.-xxvii.

But in all of this Isis owes her wisdom to face to face instruction by
the most ancient Hermes, with whom she gets into contact through
spiritual vision. All this I have discussed in the Commentaries to Exx.
xxv.-xxvii.; the conclusion being that to the mind of the Pœmandrists,
no matter how ancient might be any line of tradition, whether of
Agathodaimon or Osiris or Isis, the direct teaching of the Mind
transcended it.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1466"></span>[460:1](th150.htm#fr_1465) See Maspero, *op.
cit.,* p. 80. Which of the numerous *opp. citt.* of Maspero’s this may
be is not clear from Budge’s reference.

<span id="fn_1467"></span>[460:2](th150.htm#fr_1466) *Cf.* Brugsch,
*Thesaurus,* p. 783; *Religion,* p. 527. Sethe, *Imhotep,* 1903—so
Budge; but, more accurately, Sethe (K.), *Untersuchungen zur Geschichte
und Altertumskunde Ägyptens,* ii. 4 (“Imhotep, der Asklepios der
Ägypter”).

<span id="fn_1468"></span>[461:1](th150.htm#fr_1467) For Asclepius among
the Greeks, see Thraemer’s article “Asklepios” in Reseller’s *Lex.
d. . . . Mythologie* (Leipzig, 1884-1900), i. 615-641; also the “Cornell
Studies in Classical Philosophy,” No. III., *The Cult of Asklepios,* by
Alice Walton, Ph.D. (Ithaca, N.Y., U.S.A., 1894).

<span id="fn_1469"></span>[462:1](th150.htm#fr_1468) Wessely, *Denkschr.
d. K. K. Akad.* (1893), p. 38, 11. 550 ff.; Kenyon, *Cat. of Gk. Pap.,*
p. 102.

<span id="fn_1470"></span>[462:2](th150.htm#fr_1469) Griffith, in
*Zeitschr. f. äg. Sprache* (1900), p. 90.

<span id="fn_1471"></span>[462:3](th150.htm#fr_1470) According to
Manetho; see Müller, *Manetho Fragm*., 4.

<span id="fn_1472"></span>[463:1](th150.htm#fr_1471) Teephibis. *Cf.
Catal. Cod. Astral. Græc.,* i. 167: “Hermes Phibi the Thrice-greatest.”
Sethe (*op. sup. cit*.) would equate this Teephibis with Hermes of
Thebes, in connection with the statement of Clement of Alexandria
(*Strom*., I. xxi. 134): “Of those, too, who once lived as men among the
Egyptians, but who have been made Gods by human opinion, are Hermes of
Thebes and Asclepius of Memphis.” If this is correct, we have our
Trismegistus nourishing as Teephibis at the end of the second century
B.C. But there seems to my mind to be nothing definite in Sethe’s
contention.

<span id="fn_1473"></span>[464:1](th150.htm#fr_1472) There is also an
older and younger Isis in the *K. K.* extracts, and also in both these
and in *P. S. A.* an older and younger Asclepius.

<span id="fn_1474"></span>[464:2](th150.htm#fr_1473) R. (p. 119) has
“*des Kaisers Antonius*”; but I know of no Emperor so called. The first
years of Antoninus Pius would be 138-139 A.D.

<span id="fn_1475"></span>[464:3](th150.htm#fr_1474) *Pap. du Louvre,*
19 *bis, Notices et Extraits,* xviii. 2, 136.

<span id="fn_1476"></span>[465:1](th150.htm#fr_1475) Riess, *Fr.* 25.

<span id="fn_1477"></span>[465:2](th150.htm#fr_1476) Cory, *An. Frags.,*
p. 100. Budge, *A History of Egyp*t (London, 1902), i. 218.

<span id="fn_1478"></span>[465:3](th150.htm#fr_1477) *Reise zum Tempel
des Jupiter Ammon,* pp. 296 ff.

<span id="fn_1479"></span>[466:1](th150.htm#fr_1478) A rock inscription
found on the cataract island Sehêl. R., p. 129.

<span id="fn_1480"></span>[467:1](th150.htm#fr_1479) R., p. 124. *Cf.*
Sethe, *Ægyptiaca,* Festschrift für G. Ebers, pp. 106 ff.

<span id="fn_1481"></span>[467:2](th150.htm#fr_1480) Ammian. Marc.,
xxii. 14. 7; *Vit, Hil.,* 21.

<span id="fn_1482"></span>[468:1](th150.htm#fr_1481) “Christianity in
the Light of Historical Science,” in *The Examiner* (London), Oct. 21,
1905, pp. 668 ff.

<span id="fn_1483"></span>[470:1](th150.htm#fr_1482) *Cod. Antinori*
101, *fol*. 361.

<span id="fn_1484"></span>[471:1](th150.htm#fr_1483) Probably our *C.
H.* (xvi.).

<span id="fn_1485"></span>[471:2](th150.htm#fr_1484) Camerarius,
*Astrologica* (Nürnberg, 1537); *Hermetis Iatromath*., ed. Hoeschel
(1597); Ideler, *Physici et Medici Græci Minores,* i. 387 and 430.
Iatromathematici were those who practised medicine in conjunction with
astrology, as was done in Egypt (Procl., *Paraph. Ptol.,* p. 24).

<span id="fn_1486"></span>[472:1](th150.htm#fr_1485) Diodor., I. 15, 16.

<span id="fn_1487"></span>[473:1](th150.htm#fr_1486) Brugsch, *Religion
u. Myth. d. alt. Äg.,* p. 451.

<span id="fn_1488"></span>[473:2](th150.htm#fr_1487) *Op. sup. cit.,*
*ibid.*

<span id="fn_1489"></span>[474:1](th150.htm#fr_1488) Published by
Wilcken in the “Festschrift für Ebers,” pp. 142 ff.

<span id="fn_1490"></span>[475:1](th150.htm#fr_1489) Given by Thilo,
*Codex Apocryphus Novi Testamenti* (Leipzig, 1832), p. 880. *Cf.* Pick
(B.), *The Extra-Canonical Life of Christ* (New York, 1903), p. 279.

<span id="fn_1491"></span>[477:1](th150.htm#fr_1490) Cramer, *Anecd.
Ox*., iii. 171, 20.

<span id="fn_1492"></span>[477:2](th150.htm#fr_1491) *Fir. Mat.,* iv.
proœm. 5 (Skutsch and Kroll, p. 196, 21). The “and Chnubis” is the
emendation of R. for the unintelligible letters “*einhnusuix*.”

<span id="fn_1493"></span>[478:1](th150.htm#fr_1492) *Cf.* Lactantius
Fragg., xiv., xix., xxi., xxii.

<span id="fn_1494"></span>[478:2](th150.htm#fr_1493) Berthelot, *Les
Alchimistes grecs,* Texte, p. 268.

<span id="fn_1495"></span>[479:1](th150.htm#fr_1494) *Op. cit.,* pp.
125, 156-263.

<span id="fn_1496"></span>[479:2](th150.htm#fr_1495) We meet with a
similar collection of Sayings, or Summaries of the chief points of
teaching, in the Stobæan Ex. i. 7 ff., belonging to the Tat-literature,
and also in (*C. H.,* x. (xi.), xiv. (xv.), and (xvi.).

<span id="fn_1497"></span>[479:3](th150.htm#fr_1496) A very similar
phrase occurs in Dio Cassius, *Fr.* 30; i. 87, ed. Boiss.

<span id="fn_1498"></span>[480:1](th150.htm#fr_1497) See the Nechepso
Fragment 29 (Riess, p. 379).

<span id="fn_1499"></span>[481:1](th150.htm#fr_1498) R., *Zwei relig.
Frag.,* 104 ff.

<span id="fn_1500"></span>[481:2](th150.htm#fr_1499) *De Is. et Os*.,
xlviii.

<span id="fn_1501"></span>[481:3](th150.htm#fr_1500) With heading: “Of
Hermes from the \[Sermon\] of Isis to Horus.”

<span id="fn_1502"></span>[481:4](th150.htm#fr_1501) Wessely, *Denkschr.
d. K. K. Akad.* (1893), p. 41, 1. 633.

<span id="fn_1503"></span>[481:5](th150.htm#fr_1502) *Alectruon,* 18.
