[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist030) 
[Next](hist032) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xxviii"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xxviii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXIX. How the same Pope sent to Augustine the Pall and a letter, along with several ministers of the Word. \[601 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xxviii-p1"></span>Moreover, the same Pope Gregory, hearing
from Bishop Augustine, that the harvest which he had was great and the
labourers but few, sent to him, together with his aforesaid envoys,
certain fellow labourers and ministers of the Word, of whom the chief
and foremost were Mellitus, Justus, Paulinus, and Rufinianus, and by
them all things in general that were necessary for the worship and
service of the Church, to wit, sacred vessels and altar-cloths, also
church-furniture, and vestments for the bishops and clerks, as likewise
relics of the holy Apostles and martyrs; besides many manuscripts. He
also sent a letter, wherein he signified that he had despatched the pall
to him, and at the same time directed how he should constitute bishops
in Britain. The letter was in these words:

<span id="v.i.xxviii-p2"></span>"To his most reverend and holy brother
and fellow bishop, Augustine, Gregory, the servant of the servants of
God. Though it be certain, that the unspeakable rewards of the eternal
kingdom are reserved for those who labour for Almighty God, yet it is
requisite that we bestow on them the benefit of honours, to the end that
they may by this recompense be encouraged the more vigorously to apply
themselves to the care of their spiritual work. And, seeing that the new
Church of the English is, through the bounty of the Lord, and your
labours, brought to the grace of God, we grant you the use of the pall
in the same, only for the celebration of the solemn service of the Mass;
that so you may ordain twelve bishops in different places, who shall be
subject to your jurisdiction. But the bishop of London shall, for the
future, be always consecrated by his own synod, and receive the pall,
which is the token of his office, from this holy and Apostolic see,
which I, by the grace of God, now serve. But we would have you send to
the city of York such a bishop as you shall think fit to ordain; yet so,
that if that city, with the places adjoining, shall receive the Word of
God, that bishop shall also ordain twelve bishops, and enjoy the honour
of a metropolitan; for we design, if we live, by the help of God, to
bestow on him also the pall; and yet we would have him to be subject to
your authority, my brother; but after your decease, he shall so preside
over the bishops he shall have ordained, as to be in no way subject to
the jurisdiction of the bishop of London. But for the future let there
be this distinction as regards honour between the bishops of the cities
of London and York, that he who has been first ordained have the
precedence. But let them take counsel and act in concert and with one
mind dispose whatsoever is to be done for zeal of Christ; let them judge
rightly, and carry out their judgement without dissension.

<span id="v.i.xxviii-p3"></span>"But to you, my brother, shall, by the
authority of our God and Lord Jesus Christ, be subject not only those
bishops whom you shall ordain, and those that shall be ordained by the
bishop of York, but also all the prelates in Britain; to the end that
from the words and manner of life of your Holiness they may learn the
rule of a right belief and a good life, and fulfilling their office in
faith and righteousness, they may, when it shall please the Lord, attain
to the kingdom of Heaven. God preserve you in safety, most reverend
brother.

<span id="v.i.xxviii-p4"></span>"Given the 22nd of June, in the
nineteenth year of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius
Tiberius Augustus, the eighteenth year after the consulship of our said
lord, and the fourth indiction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. A copy of the letter which Pope Gregory sent to the Abbot
Mellitus, then going into Britain. \[601 A.D.\]](hist032)
