[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist004) 
[Next](hist006) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.ii"></span>

### <span id="v.i.ii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. II. How Caius Julius Caesar was the first Roman that came into Britain. \[54 AD\]

<span id="v.i.ii-p1"></span>Now Britain had never been visited by the
Romans, and was entirely unknown to them before the time of Caius Julius
Caesar, who, in the year 693 after the foundation of Rome, but the
sixtieth year before the Incarnation of our Lord, was consul with Lucius
Bibulus. While he was making war upon the Germans and the Gauls, who
were divided only by the river Rhine, he came into the province of the
Morini, whence is the nearest and shortest passage into Britain. Here,
having provided about eighty ships of burden and fast-sailing vessels,
he sailed over into Britain; where, being first roughly handled in a
battle, and then caught in a storm, he lost a considerable part of his
fleet, no small number of foot-soldiers, and almost all his cavalry.
Returning into Gaul, he put his legions into winter-quarters, and gave
orders for building six hundred sail of both sorts. With these he again
crossed over early in spring into Britain, but, whilst he was marching
with the army against the enemy, the ships, riding at anchor, were
caught in a storm and either dashed one against another, or driven upon
the sands and wrecked. Forty of them were lost, the rest were, with much
difficulty, repaired. Caesar’s cavalry was, at the first encounter,
defeated by the Britons, and there Labienus, the tribune, was slain. In
the second engagement, with great hazard to his men, he defeated the
Britons and put them to flight. Thence he proceeded to the river Thames,
where a great multitude of the enemy had posted themselves on the
farther side of the river, under the command of Cassobellaunus, and
fenced the bank of the river and almost all the ford under water with
sharp stakes: the remains of these are to be seen to this day,
apparently about the thickness of a man’s thigh, cased with lead, and
fixed immovably in the bottom of the river. This being perceived and
avoided by the Romans, the barbarians, not able to stand the charge of
the legions, hid themselves in the woods, whence they grievously
harassed the Romans with repeated sallies. In the meantime, the strong
state of the Trinovantes, with their commander Androgius, surrendered to
Caesar, giving him forty hostages. Many other cities, following their
example, made a treaty with the Romans. Guided by them, Caesar at
length, after severe fighting, took the town of Cassobellaunus, situated
between two marshes, fortified by sheltering woods, and plentifully
furnished with all necessaries. After this, Caesar returned from Britain
into Gaul, but he had no sooner put his legions into winter quarters,
than he was suddenly beset and distracted with wars and sudden risings
on every side.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III. How Claudius, the second of the Romans who came into
Britain, brought the islands Orcades](hist006)
