[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist068) 
[Next](hist070) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xiii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xiii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIII. How a certain person in Ireland was restored, when at the point of death, by his relics.

<span id="v.iii.xiii-p1"></span> NOR was the fame of the renowned Oswald
confined to Britain, but, spreading rays of healing light even beyond
the sea, reached also to Germany and Ireland. For the most reverend
prelate, Acca,is wont to relate, that when, in his journey to Rome,he
and his bishop Wilfrid stayed some time with Wilbrord,the holy
archbishop of the Frisians, he often heard him tell of the wonders which
had been wrought in that province at the relics of that most worshipful
king. And he used to say that in Ireland, when, being yet only a priest,
he led the life of a stranger and pilgrim for love of the eternal
country, the fame of that king’s sanctity was already spread far and
near in that island also. One of the miracles, among the rest, which he
related, we have thought fit to insert in this our history.

<span id="v.iii.xiii-p2"></span>"At the time," said he, "of the plague
which made such widespread havoc in Britain and Ireland, among others, a
certain scholar of the Scottish race was smitten with the disease, a man
learned in the study of letters, but in no way careful or studious of
his eternal salvation; who, seeing his death near at hand, began to fear
and tremble lest, as soon as he was dead, he should be hurried away to
the prison-house of Hell for his sins. He called me, for I was near, and
trembling and sighing in his weakness, with a lamentable voice made his
complaint to me, after this manner: ‘You see that my bodily distress
increases, and that I am now reduced to the point of death. Nor do I
question but that after the death of my body, I shall be immediately
snatched away to the everlasting death of my soul, and cast into the
torments of hell, since for a long time, amidst all my reading of divine
books, I have suffered myself to be ensnared by sin, instead of keeping
the commandments of God. But it is my resolve, if the Divine Mercy shall
grant me a new term of life, to correct my sinful habits, and wholly to
devote anew my mind and life to obedience to the Divine will. But I know
that I have no merits of my own whereby to obtain a prolongation of
life, nor can I hope to have it, unless it shall please God to forgive
me, wretched and unworthy of pardon as I am, through the help of those
who have faithfully served him. We have heard, and the report is
widespread, that there was in your nation a king, of wonderful sanctity,
called Oswald, the excellency of whose faith and virtue has been made
famous even after his death by the working of many miracles. I beseech
you, if you have any relics of his in your keeping, that you will bring
them to me; if haply the Lord shall be pleased, through his merits, to
have mercy on me.’ I answered, ‘I have indeed a part of the stake on
which his head was set up by the pagans, when he was killed, and if you
believe with steadfast heart, the Divine mercy may, through the merits
of so great a man, both grant you a longer term of life here, and render
you worthy to be admitted into eternal life.’ He answered immediately
that he had entire faith therein. Then I blessed some water, and put
into it a splinter of the aforesaid oak, and gave it to the sick man to
drink. He presently found ease, and, recovering of his sickness, lived a
long time after; and, being entirely converted to God in heart and deed,
wherever he went, he spoke of the goodness of his merciful Creator, and
the honour of His faithful servant."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XIV. How on the death of Paulinus, Ithamar was made Bishop of
Rochester in his stead; and of the](hist070)
