[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist076) 
[Next](hist078) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxi"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXI. How the province of the Midland Angles became Christian under King Peada. \[653 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p1"></span> AT this time, the Middle Angles, that
is, the Angles of the Midland country (probably Leicestershire)under
their Prince Peada, the son of King Penda, received the faith and
mysteries of the truth. Being an excellent youth, and most worthy of the
name and office of a king, he was by his father elevated to the throne
of that nation, and came to Oswy, king of the Northumbrians, requesting
to have his daughter Aichfled given him to wife; but he could not obtain
his desire unless he would receive the faith of Christ, and be baptized,
with the nation which he governed. When he heard the preaching of the
truth, the promise of the heavenly kingdom, and the hope of resurrection
and future immortality, he declared that he would willingly become a
Christian, even though he should not obtain the maiden; being chiefly
prevailed on to receive the faith by King Oswy’s son Alchfrid,who was
his brother-in-law and friend, for he had married his sister Cyneburg,3
the daughter of King Penda.

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p2"></span> Accordingly he was baptized by Bishop
Finan, with all his his nobles and thegns,and their servants, that came
along with him, at a noted township, belonging to the king, called At
the Wall. And having received four priests, who by reason of their
learning and good life were deemed proper to instruct and baptize his
nation, he returned home with much joy. These priests were Cedd and
Adda, and Betti and Diuma; the last of whom was by nation a Scot, the
others English. Adda was brother to Utta, whom we have mentioned
before,a renowned priest, and abbot of the monastery which is called At
the Goat’s Head.8The aforesaid priests, arriving in the province with
the prince, preached the Word, and were heard willingly; and many, as
well of the nobility as the common sort, renouncing the abominations of
idolatry, were daily washed in the fountain of the faith.

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p3"></span> Nor did King Penda forbid the preaching
of the Word even among his people, the Mercians, if any were willing to
hear it; but, on the contrary, he hated and despised those whom he
perceived to be without the works of faith, when they had once received
the faith of Christ, saying, that they were contemptible and wretched
who scorned to obey their God, in whom they believed. These things were
set on foot two years before the death of King Penda.

<span id="v.iii.xxi-p4"></span> But when he was slain, and the most
Christian king, Oswy, succeeded him in the throne, as we shall hereafter
relate, Diuma,one of the aforesaid four priests, was made bishop of the
Midland Angles, as also of the Mercians, being ordained by Bishop Finan;
for the scarcity of priests made it necessary that one prelate should be
set over two nations. Having in a short time gained many people to the
Lord, he died among the Midland Angles, in the country called
Infeppingum; and Ceollach, also of the Scottish nation, succeeded him in
the bishopric. But he, not long after, left his bishopric, and returned
to the island of Hii, which, among the Scots, was the chief and head of
many monasteries. His successor in the bishopric was Trumhere,a godly
man, and trained in the monastic life, an Englishman, but ordained
bishop by the Scots. This happened in the days of King Wulfhere, of whom
we shall speak hereafter.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXII. How under King Sigbert, through the preaching of Cedd, the
East Saxons again received the faith, which they had before cast off
\[653 A.D.\]](hist078)
