[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist020) 
[Next](hist022) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xviii"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xviii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIX. How the same holy man, being detained there by sickness, by his prayers quenched a fire that had broken out among the houses, and was himself cured of his infirmity by a vision. \[429 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xviii-p1"></span>AS they were returning thence, the
treacherous enemy, having, as it chanced, prepared a snare, caused
Germanus to bruise his foot by a fall, not knowing that, as it was with
the blessed Job, his merits would be but increased by bodily affliction.
Whilst he was thus detained some time in the same place by his
infirmity, a fire broke out in a cottage neighbouring to that in which
he was; and having burned down the other houses which were thatched with
reed, fanned by the wind, was carried on to the dwelling in which he
lay. The people all flocked to the prelate, entreating that they might
lift him in their arms, and save him from the impending danger. But he
rebuked them, and in the assurance of his faith, would not suffer
himself to be removed. The whole multitude, in terror and despair, ran
to oppose the conflagration; but, for the greater manifestation of the
Divine power, whatsoever the crowd endeavoured to save, was destroyed;
and what the sick and helpless man defended, the flame avoided and
passed by, though the house that sheltered the holy man lay open to it,
and while the fire raged on every side, the place in which he lay
appeared untouched, amid the general conflagration. The multitude
rejoiced at the miracle, and was gladly vanquished by the power of God.
A great crowd of people watched day and night before the humble cottage;
some to have their souls healed, and some their bodies. All that Christ
wrought in the person of his servant, all the wonders the sick man
performed cannot be told. Moreover, he would suffer no medicines to be
applied to his infirmity; but one night he saw one clad in garments as
white as snow, standing by him, who reaching out his hand, seemed to
raise him up, and ordered him to stand firm upon his feet; from which
time his pain ceased, and he was so perfectly restored, that when the
day came, with good courage he set forth upon his journey.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XX. How the same Bishops brought help from Heaven to the Britons
in a battle, and then returned home.](hist022)
