[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist114) 
[Next](hist116) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxix"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXIX. How this bishop foretold that his own death was at hand to the anchorite Herebert. \[687 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p1"></span>HAVING spent two years in his bishopric,
he returned to his island and hermitage,being warned of God that the day
of his death, or rather of his entrance into that life which alone can
be called life, was drawing near; as he, at that time, with his wonted
candour, signified to certain persons, though in words which were
somewhat obscure, but which were nevertheless afterwards plainly
understood; while to others he declared the same openly.

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p2"></span>There was a certain priest, called
Herebert, a man of holy life, who had long been united with the man of
God, Cuthbert, in the bonds of spiritual friendship. This man leading a
solitary life in the island of that great lake from which the river
Derwent flows at its beginning, was wont to visit him every year, and to
receive from him the teaching of everlasting salvation. Hearing that
Bishop Cuthbert was come to the city of Lugubalia, he went thither to
him, according to his custom, seeking to be more and more inflamed in
heavenly desires through his wholesome admonitions. Whilst they
alternately entertained one another with draughts of the celestial life,
the bishop, among other things, said, "Brother Herebert, remember at
this time to ask me and speak to me concerning all whereof you have need
to ask and speak; for, when we part, we shall never again see one
another with bodily eyesight in this world. For I know of a surety that
the time of my departure is at hand, and that shortly I must put off
this my tabernacle." Hearing these words, Herebert fell down at his
feet, with tears and lamentations, and said, "I beseech you, by the
Lord, not to forsake me; but to remember your most faithful companion,
and entreat the mercy of God that, as we have served Him together upon
earth, so we may depart together to behold His grace in Heaven. For you
know that I have always endeavoured to live according to the words of
your lips, and likewise whatsoever faults I have committed, either
through ignorance or frailty, I, have instantly sought to amend
according to the judgement of your will." The bishop applied himself to
prayer, and having presently had intimation in the spirit that he had
obtained what he asked of the Lord, he said, "Rise, brother, and do not
weep, but rejoice greatly because the mercy of Heaven has granted what
we desired."

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p3"></span>The event established the truth of this
promise and prophecy, for after their parting, they never again saw one
another in the flesh; but their spirits quitting their bodies on one and
the same day, to wit, the 20th of March,were immediately united in
fellowship in the blessed vision, and together translated to the
heavenly kingdom by the ministry of angels. But Herebert was first
wasted by a long-continued infirmity, through the dispensation of the
Lord’s mercy, as may be believed, to the end that if he was in any wise
inferior in merit to the blessed Cuthbert, that which was lacking might
be supplied by the chastening pain of a long sickness, that being thus
made equal in grace to his intercessor, as he departed out of the body
at one and the same time with him, so he might be accounted worthy to be
received into the like abode of eternal bliss.

<span id="v.iv.xxix-p4"></span>The most reverend father died in the isle
of Fame, earnestly entreating the brothers that he might also be buried
there, where he had served no small time under the Lord’s banner. But at
length yielding to their entreaties, he consented to be carried back to
the isle of Lindisfarne, and there buried in the church.This being done,
the venerable Bishop Wilfrid held the episcopal see of that church one
year, till such time as a bishop should be chosen to be ordained in the
room of Cuthbert. Afterwards Eadbertwas ordained, a man renowned for his
knowledge of the Holy Scriptures, as also for his observance of the
heavenly precepts, and chiefly for almsgiving, so that, according to the
law, he gave every year the tenth part, not only of four-footed beasts,
but also of all corn and fruit, as also of his garments, to the poor.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXX. How his body was found altogether uncorrupted after it had
been buried eleven years, and](hist116)
