[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist041) 
[Next](hist043) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.ii.vi"></span>

### <span id="v.ii.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VI.

<span id="v.ii.vi-p1"></span> LAURENTIUS, being about to follow Mellitus
and Justus, and to quit Britain, ordered his bed to be laid that night
in the church of the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, which has been
often mentioned before; wherein having laid himself to rest, after he
had with tears poured forth many prayers to God for the state of the
Church, he fell asleep; in the dead of night, the blessed chief of the
Apostles appeared to him, and scourging him grievously a long time,
asked of him with apostolic severity, why he was forsaking the flock
which he had committed to him? or to what shepherd he was leaving, by
his flight, Christ's sheep that were in the midst of wolves? "Hast
thou," he said, "forgotten my example, who, for the sake of those little
ones, whom Christ commended to me in token of His affection, underwent
at the hands of infidels and enemies of Christ, bonds, stripes,
imprisonment, afflictions, and lastly, death itself, even the death of
the cross, that I might at last be crowned with Him?" Laurentius, the
servant of Christ, roused by the scourging of the blessed Peter and his
words of exhortation, went to the king as soon as morning broke, and
laying aside his garment, showed the scars of the stripes which he had
received. The king, astonished, asked who had presumed to inflict such
stripes on so great a man. And when he heard that for the sake of his
salvation the bishop had suffered these cruel blows at the hands of the
Apostle of Christ, he was greatly afraid; and abjuring the worship of
idols, and renouncing his unlawful marriage, he received the faith of
Christ, and being baptized, promoted and supported the interests of the
Church to the utmost of his power.  
  
He also sent over into Gaul, and recalled Mellitus and Justus, and bade
them return to govern their churches in freedom. They came back one year
after their departure, and Justus returned to the city of Rochester,
where he had before presided; but the people of London would not receive
Bishop Mellitus, choosing rather to be under their idolatrous high
priests; for King Eadbald had not so much authority in the kingdom as
his father, and was not able to restore the bishop to his church against
the will and consent of the pagans. But he and his nation, after his
conversion to the Lord, sought to obey the commandments of God. Lastly,
he built the church of the holy Mother of God, in the monastery of the
most blessed chief of the Apostles, which was afterwards consecrated by
Archbishop Mellitus.  
  
  

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. How Bishop Mellitus by prayer quenched afire in his city.
\[619 AD.\]](hist043)
