[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist099) 
[Next](hist101) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xiv"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XIV. How a pestilence ceased through the intercession of King Oswald. \[681-686 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p1"></span>  
IN this monastery, at that time, certain special manifestations of the
heavenly grace are said to have been shown forth; in as much as the
tyranny of the Devil had been recently cast out and Christ had begun to
reign there. Of these I have thought it proper to perpetuate the memory
of one which the most reverend Bishop Acca was wont often to relate to
me, affirming that it had been told him by most creditable brothers of
the same monastery. About the same time that this province had received
the faith of Christ, a grievous pestilence fell upon many provinces of
Britain; which, also, by the Divine dispensation, reached to the
aforesaid monastery, then governed by the most religious priest of
Christ, Eappa;and many, as well of those that had come thither with the
bishop, as of those of the same province of the South Saxons who had
been lately called to the faith, were snatched away out of this world.
The brethren, therefore, thought fit to keep a fast of three days, and
humbly to implore the Divine goodness to vouchsafe to have mercy on
them, either by delivering from instant death those that were in danger
by reason of the disease, or by saving those who were hurried out of
this life from the eternal damnation of their souls.

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p2"></span>There was at that time in the monastery, a
little boy, of the Saxon nation, lately called to the faith ,who had
been attacked by the same infirmity, and had long kept his bed. On the
second day of the aforesaid fasting and prayer, it happened about the
second hour of the day, that this boy was left alone in the place where
he lay sick, when on a sudden, through the Divine disposition, the most
blessed chiefs of the Apostles vouchsafed to appear to him; for he was a
boy of a very simple and gentle disposition, and with sincere devotion
observed the mysteries of the faith which he had received. The Apostles
therefore, greeting him with loving words, said, "My son, fear not
death, concerning which thou art troubled; for this day we will bring
thee to the kingdom of Heaven; but first thou must needs wait till the
Masses are celebrated, that having received thy voyage provision, the
Body and Blood of our Lord, and so being set free from sickness and
death, thou mayest be taken up to the everlasting joys in Heaven.

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p3"></span>"Call therefore to thee the priest, Eappa,
and tell him, that the Lord has heard your prayers, and has favourably
looked upon your devotion and your fast, and not one more shall die of
this plague, either in the monastery or the lands adjacent to it; but
all your people who any where labour under this sickness, shall be
raised up from their weakness, and restored to their former health,
saving, thee alone, who art this day to be delivered from death, and to
be carried into Heaven, to behold our Lord Christ, whom thou hast
faithfully served. This favour the Divine mercy has vouchsafed to grant
you, through the intercession of the godly King Oswald, beloved of God,
who formerly nobly ruled over the nation of the Northumbrians, with the
authority of a temporal kingdom and the devotion of Christian piety
which leads to the eternal kingdom. For this very day that king was
killed in body by the infidels in war, and straightway taken up to
Heaven to the everlasting joys of souls, and brought into fellowship
with the number of the elect. Let them look in their records,wherein the
burial of the dead is set down, and they will find that he was, this
day, as we have said, taken out of this world. Let them, therefore,
celebrate Masses in all the oratories of this monastery, either in
thanksgiving because their prayers are heard, or else in memory of the
aforesaid King Oswald, who once governed their nation, and therefore
humbly prayed to the Lord for them, as for converts of his nation; and
let all the brethren assemble in the church, and all communicate in the
heavenly Sacrifices, and so let them cease to fast, and refresh the body
also with the food that belongs to it."

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p4"></span>The boy called the priest, and repeated
all these words to him; and the priest carefully inquired after the
habit and form of the men that had appeared to him. He answered, "Their
habit was altogether noble, and their countenances most pleasant and
beautiful, such as I had never seen before, nor did I think there could
be any men so fair and comely. One of them indeed was shorn like a
clerk, the other had a long beard; and they said that one of them was
called Peter, the other Paul; and they were the servants of our Lord and
Saviour Jesus Christ, sent by Him from Heaven to protect our monastery."
The priest believed what the boy said, and going thence immediately,
looked in his chronicle, and found that King Oswald had been killed on
that very day. He then called the brethren, ordered dinner to be
provided, Masses to be said, and all of them to communicate as usual;
causing also a part of the same Sacrifice of the Lord’s Oblation to be
carried to the sick boy.

<span id="v.iv.xiv-p5"></span>Soon after this, the boy died, on that
same day; and by his death proved that the words which he had heard from
the Apostles of Christ were true. And this moreover bore witness to the
truth of his words, that none besides himself, belonging to the same
monastery, was taken away at that time. And without doubt, by this
vision, many that heard of it were wonderfully excited to implore the
Divine mercy in adversity, and to submit to the wholesome remedy of
fasting. From that time, the day of commemoration of that king and
soldier of Christ began to be yearly honoured with the celebration of
Masses, not only in that monastery, but in many other places.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XV. How King Caedwalla, king of the Gewissae, having slain
Ethelwalch, wasted that Province](hist101)
