[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist125) 
[Next](hist127) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.viii"></span>

### <span id="v.v.viii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. IX. How the holy man, Egbert, would have gone into Germany to preach, but could not; and how Wictbert went, but because he availed nothing, returned into Ireland, whence he came. \[Circ. 688 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.viii-p1"></span>AT that time the venerable servant of
Christ, and priest, Egbert, who is to be named with all honour, and who,
as was said before, lived as a stranger and pilgrim in Ireland to obtain
hereafter a country in heaven, purposed in his mind to profit many,
taking upon him the work of an apostle, and, by preaching the Gospel, to
bring the Word of God to some of those nations that had not yet heard
it; many of which tribes he knew to be in Germany, from whom the Angles
or Saxons, who now inhabit Britain, are known to have derived their race
and origin; for which reason they are still corruptly called "Garmans"
by the neighbouring nation of the Britons. Such are the Frisians, the
Rugini, the Danes, the Huns, the Old Saxons, and the Boructuari. There
are also in the same parts many other peoples still enslaved to pagan
rites, to whom the aforesaid soldier of Christ determined to go, sailing
round Britain, if haply he could deliver any of them from Satan, and
bring them to Christ; or if this might not be, he was minded to go to
Rome, to see and adore the thresholds of the holy Apostles and martyrs
of Christ.

<span id="v.v.viii-p2"></span>But a revelation from Heaven and the
working of God prevented him from achieving either of these enterprises;
for when he had made choice of most courageous companions, fit to preach
the Word, inasmuch as they were renowned for their good deeds and their
learning, and when all things necessary were provided for the voyage,
there came to him on a certain day early in the morning one of the
brethren, who had been a disciple of the priest, Boisil, beloved of God,
and had ministered to him in Britain, when the said Boisil was provost
of the monastery of Mailros, under the Abbot Eata, as has been said
above. This brother told him a vision which he had seen that night.
"When after matins," said he, "I had laid me down in my bed, and was
fallen into a light slumber, Boisil, that was sometime my master and
brought me up in all love, appeared to me, and asked, whether I knew
him? I said, ‘Yes, you are Boisil.’ He answered, ‘I am come to bring
Egbert a message from our Lord and Saviour, which must nevertheless be
delivered to him by you. Tell him, therefore, that he cannot perform the
journey he has undertaken; for it is the will of God that he should
rather go to teach the monasteries of Columba.’ Now Columba was the
first teacher of the Christian faith to the Picts beyond the mountains
northward, and the first founder of the monastery in the island of Hii,
which was for a long time much honoured by many tribes of the Scots and
Picts. The said Columba is now by some called Columcille, the name being
compounded from "Columba" and "Cella." Egbert, having heard the words of
the vision, charged the brother that had told it him, not to tell it to
any other, lest haply it should be a lying vision. But when he
considered the matter secretly with himself, he apprehended that it was
true, yet would not desist from preparing for his voyage which he
purposed to make to teach those nations.

<span id="v.v.viii-p3"></span>A few days after the aforesaid brother
came again to him, saying that Boisil had that night again appeared to
him in a vision after matins, and said, "Why did you tell Egbert so
negligently and after so lukewarm a manner that which I enjoined upon
you to say? Yet, go now and tell him, that whether he will or no, he
must go to Columba’s monasteries, because their ploughs are not driven
straight; and he must bring them back into the right way." Hearing this,
Egbert again charged the brother not to reveal the same to any man.
Though now assured of the vision, he nevertheless attempted to set forth
upon his intended voyage with the brethren. When they had put aboard all
that was requisite for so long a voyage, and had waited some days for
fair winds, there arose one night so violent a storm, that part of what
was on board was lost, and the ship itself was left lying on its side in
the sea. Nevertheless, all that belonged to Egbert and his companions
was saved. Then he, saying, in the words of the prophet, "For my sake
this great tempest is upon you,"’ withdrew himself from that undertaking
and was content to remain at home.

<span id="v.v.viii-p4"></span>But one of his companions, called
Wictbert, notable for his contempt of the world and for his learning and
knowledge, for he had lived many years as a stranger and pilgrim in
Ireland, leading a hermit’s life in great perfection, took ship, and
arriving in Frisland, preached the Word of salvation for the space of
two whole years to that nation and to its king, Rathbed; but reaped no
fruit of all his great labour among his barbarous hearers. Returning
then to the chosen place of his pilgrimage, he gave himself up to the
Lord in his wonted life of silence, and since he could not be profitable
to strangers by teaching them the faith, he took care to be the more
profitable to his own people by the example of his virtue.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. How Wilbrord, preaching in Frisand, converted many to Christ;
and how his two companions,](hist127)
