[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist139) 
[Next](hist141) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xxii"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xxii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXIII. Of the present state of the English nation, or of all Britain. \[725-731 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.xxii-p1"></span>IN the year of our Lord 725, being the
seventh year of Osric, king of the Northumbrians, who had succeeded
Coenred, Wictred, the son of Egbert, king of Kent, died on the 23rd of
April, and left his three sons, Ethelbert, Eadbert, and Alric, heirs of
that kingdom, which he had governed thirty-four years and a half. The
next year Tobias, bishop of the church of Rochester, died, a most
learned man, as has been said before; for he was disciple to those
masters of blessed memory, Theodore, the archbishop, and Abbot Hadrian,
wherefore, as has been said, besides having a great knowledge of letters
both ecclesiastical and general, he learned both the Greek and Latin
tongues to such perfection, that they were as well known and familiar to
him as his native language. He was buried in the chapel of St. Paul the
Apostle, which he had built within the church of St. Andrew for his own
place of burial. After him Aldwulf took upon him the office of bishop,
having been consecrated by Archbishop Bertwald.

<span id="v.v.xxii-p2"></span>In the year of our Lord 729, two comets
appeared about the sun, to the great terror of the beholders. One of
them went before the sun in the morning at his rising, the other
followed him when he set in the evening, as it were presaging dire
disaster to both east and west; or without doubt one was the forerunner
of the day, and the other of the night, to signify that mortals were
threatened with calamities at both times. They carried their flaming
brands towards the north, as it were ready to kindle a conflagration.
They appeared in January,, and continued nearly a fortnight. At which
time a grievous blight fell upon Gaul, in that it was laid waste by the
Saracens with cruel bloodshed; but not long after in that country they
received the due reward of their Unbelief. In that year the holy man of
God, Egbert, departed to the Lord, as has been said above, on Easter
day; and immediately after Easter, that is, on the 9th of May, Osric,
king of the Northumbrians, departed this life, after he had reigned
eleven years, and appointed Ceolwulf, brother to Coenred who had reigned
before him, his successor; the beginning and progress of whose reign
have been so filled with many and great commotions and conflicts, that
it cannot yet be known what is to be said concerning them, or what end
they will have.

<span id="v.v.xxii-p3"></span>In the year of our Lord 731, Archbishop
Bertwald died of old age, on the 13th of January, having held his see
thirty-seven years, six months and fourteen days. In his stead, the same
year, Tatwine, of the province of the Mercians, was made archbishop,
having been a priest in the monastery called Briudun. He was consecrated
in the city of Canterbury by the venerable men, Daniel, bishop of
Winchester, Ingwald of London, Aldwin of Lichfield, and Aldwulf of
Rochester, on Sunday, the 10th of June, being a man renowned for piety
and wisdom, and of notable learning in Holy Scripture.

<span id="v.v.xxii-p4"></span>Thus at the present time, the bishops
Tatwine and Aldwulf preside in the churches of Kent; Ingwald is bishop
in the province of the East Saxons. In the province of the East Angles,
the bishops are Aldbert and Hadulac; in the province of the West Saxons,
Daniel and Forthere; in the province of the Mercians, Aldwin. Among
those peoples who dwell beyond the river Severn to the westward,
Walhstod is bishop; in the province of the Hwiccas, Wilfrid; in the
province of Lindsey, Bishop Cynibert presides; the bishopric of the Isle
of Wight belongs to Daniel, bishop of the city of Winchester. The
province of the South Saxons, having now continued some years without a
bishop, receives episcopal ministrations from the prelate of the West
Saxons. All these provinces, and the other southern provinces, as far as
the boundary formed by the river Humber, with their several kings, are
subject to King Ethelbald.

<span id="v.v.xxii-p5"></span>But in the province of the Northumbrians,
where King Ceolwulf reigns, four bishops now preside; Wilfrid in the
church of York, Ethelwald in that of Lindisfarne, Acca in that of
Hagustald, Pecthelm in that which is called the White House, which, as
the number of the faithful has increased, has lately become an episcopal
see, and has him for its first prelate. The Pictish people also at this
time are at peace with the English nation, and rejoice in having their
part in Catholic peace and truth with the universal Church. The Scots
that inhabit Britain, content with their own territories, devise no
plots nor hostilities against the English nation. The Britons, though
they, for the most part, as a nation hate and oppose the English nation,
and wrongfully, and from wicked lewdness, set themselves against the
appointed Easter of the whole Catholic Church; yet, inasmuch as both
Divine and human power withstand them, they can in neither purpose
prevail as they desire; for though in part they are their own masters,
yet part of them are brought under subjection to the English. In these
favourable times of peace and calm, many of the Northumbrians, as well
of the nobility as private persons, laying aside their weapons, and
receiving the tonsure, desire rather both for themselves and their
children to take upon them monastic vows, than to practise the pursuit
of war. What will be the end hereof, the next age will see. This is for
the present the state of all Britain; about two hundred and eighty-live
years after the coming of the English into Britain, and in the 731st
year of our Lord, in Whose kingdom that shall have no end let the earth
rejoice; and Britain being one with them in the joy of His faith, let
the multitude of isles be glad, and give thanks at the remembrance of
His holiness.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. Chronological recapitulation of the whole work: also
concerning the author himself.](hist141)
