[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist059) 
[Next](hist061) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iv"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.iv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. IV. When the nation of the Picts received the faith of Christ. \[565 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.iv-p1"></span> IN the year of our Lord 565, when Justin,
the younger, the successor of Justinian, obtained the government of the
Roman empire, there came into Britain from Ireland a famous priest and
abbot, marked as a monk by habit and manner of life, whose name was
Columba,to preach the word of God to the provinces of the northern
Picts, who are separated from the southern parts belonging to that
nation by steep and rugged mountains. For the southern Picts, who dwell
on this side of those mountains, had, it is said, long before forsaken
the errors of idolatry, and received the true faith by the preaching of
Bishop Ninias, a most reverend and holy man of the British nation, who
had been regularly instructed at Rome in the faith and mysteries of the
truth; whose episcopal see, named after St. Martin the bishop, and
famous for a church dedicated to him (wherein Ninias himself and many
other saints rest in the body), is now in the possession of the English
nation. The place belongs to the province of the Bernicians, and is
commonly called the White House, because he there built a church of
stone, which was not usual among the Britons.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p2"></span> Columba came into Britain in the ninth
year of the reign of Bridius, who was the son of Meilochon, and the
powerful king of the Pictish nation, and he converted that nation to the
faith of Christ, by his preaching and example. Wherefore he also
received of them the gift of the aforesaid island whereon to found a
monastery. It is not a large island, but contains about five families,
according to the English computation; his successors hold it to this
day; he was also buried therein, having died at the age of
seventy-seven, about thirty-two years after he came into Britain to
preach.Before he crossed over into Britain, he had built a famous
monastery in Ireland, which, from the great number of oaks, is in the
Scottish tongue called Dearmach—The Field of Oaks. From both these
monasteries, many others had their beginning through his disciples, both
in Britain and Ireland; but the island monastery where his body lies,
has the pre-eminence among them all.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p3"></span> That island has for its ruler an abbot,
who is a priest, to whose jurisdiction all the province, and even the
bishops, contrary to the usual method, are bound to be subject,
according to the example of their first teacher, who was not a bishop,
but a priest and monk;of whose life and discourses some records are said
to be preserved by his disciples. But whatsoever he was himself, this we
know for certain concerning him, that he left successors renowned for
their continence, their love of God, and observance of monastic rules.
It is true they employed doubtful cycles in fixing the time of the great
festival, as having none to bring them the synodal decrees for the
observance of Easter, by reason of their being so far away from the rest
of the world; but they earnestly practiced such works of piety and
chastity as they could learn from the Prophets, the Gospels and the
Apostolic writings. This manner of keeping Easter continued among them
no little time, to wit, for the space of 150 years, till the year of our
Lord 715.

<span id="v.iii.iv-p4"></span> But then the most reverend and holy
father and priest, Egbert, of the English nation, who had long lived in
banishment in Ireland for the sake of Christ, and was most learned in
the Scriptures, and renowned for long perfection of life, came among
them, corrected their error, and led them to observe the true and
canonical day of Easter; which, nevertheless, they did not always keep
on the fourteenth of the moon with the Jews, as some imagined, but on
Sunday, although not in the proper week.For, as Christians, they knew
that the Resurrection of our Lord, which happened on the first day of
the week, was always to be celebrated on the first day of the week; but
being rude and barbarous, they had not learned when that same first day
after the Sabbath, which is now called the Lord’s day, should come. But
because they had not failed in the grace of fervent charity, they were
accounted worthy to receive the full knowledge of this matter also,
according to the promise of the Apostle, "And if in any thing ye be
otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you." Of which we
shall speak more fully hereafter in its proper place.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: V. Of the life of Bishop Aidan. \[635 A.D.\]](hist061)
