[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist031) 
[Next](hist033) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.i.xxix"></span>

### <span id="v.i.xxix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXX. A copy of the letter which Pope Gregory sent to the Abbot Mellitus, then going into Britain. \[601 A.D.\]

<span id="v.i.xxix-p1"></span>The aforesaid envoys having departed, the
blessed Father Gregory sent after them a letter worthy to be recorded,
wherein he plainly shows how carefully he watched over the salvation of
our country. The letter was as follows:

<span id="v.i.xxix-p2"></span>"To his most beloved son, the Abbot
Mellitus; Gregory, the servant of the servants of God. We have been much
concerned, since the departure of our people that are with you, because
we have received no account of the success of your journey. Howbeit,
when Almighty God has led, you to the most reverend Bishop Augustine,
our brother, tell him what I have long been considering in my own mind
concerning the matter of the English people; to wit, that the temples of
the idols in that nation ought not to be destroyed; but let the idols
that are in them be destroyed; let water be consecrated and sprinkled in
the said temples, let altars be erected, and relics placed there. For if
those temples are well built, it is requisite that they be converted
from the worship of devils to the service of the true God; that the
nation, seeing that their temples are not destroyed, may remove error
from their hearts, and knowing and adoring the true God, may the more
freely resort to the places to which they have been accustomed. And
because they are used to slaughter many oxen in sacrifice to devils,
some solemnity must be given them in exchange for this, as that on the
day of the dedication, or the nativities of the holy martyrs, whose
relics are there deposited, they should build themselves huts of the
boughs of trees about those churches which have been turned to that use
from being temples, and celebrate the solemnity with religious feasting,
and no more offer animals to the Devil, but kill cattle and glorify God
in their feast, and return thanks to the Giver of all things for their
abundance; to the end that, whilst some outward gratifications are
retained, they may the more easily consent to the inward joys. For there
is no doubt that it is impossible to cut off every thing at once from
their rude natures; because he who endeavours to ascend to the highest
place rises by degrees or steps, and not by leaps. Thus the Lord made
Himself known to the people of Israel in Egypt; and yet He allowed them
the use, in His own worship, of the sacrifices which they were wont to
offer to the Devil, commanding them in His sacrifice to kill animals, to
the end that, with changed hearts, they might lay aside one part of the
sacrifice, whilst they retained another; and although the animals were
the same as those which they were wont to offer, they should offer them
to the true God, and not to idols; and thus they would no longer be the
same sacrifices. This then, dearly beloved, it behoves you to
communicate to our aforesaid brother, that he, being placed where he is
at present, may consider how he is to order all things. God preserve you
in safety, most beloved son.

<span id="v.i.xxix-p3"></span>"Given the 17th of June, in the nineteenth
year of the reign of our most religious lord, Mauritius Tiberius
Augustus, the eighteenth year after the consulship of our said lord, and
the fourth indiction."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXI. How Pope Gregory, by letter, exhorted Augustine not to
glory in his miracles. \[601 A.D.\]](hist033)
