[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist095) 
[Next](hist097) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.x"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.x-p0.1"></span>CHAP. X. How a blind woman, praying in the burial-place of that monastery, was restored to her sight. \[675 A.D.?\]

<span id="v.iv.x-p1"></span>HILDILID**,** a devout handmaid of God,
succeeded Ethelburg in the office of abbess and presided over that
monastery with great vigour many years, till she was of an extreme old
age,in the observance of regular discipline, and carefully providing all
things for the common use. The narrowness of the space where the
monastery is built, led her to determine that the bones of the servants
and handmaidens of Christ, who had been there buried, should be taken
up, and should all be translated into the church of the Blessed Mother
of God, and interred in one place. How often a brightness of heavenly
light was seen there, when this was done, and a fragrancy of wonderful
sweetness arose, and what other signs were revealed, whosoever reads
will find in the book from which we have taken these tales.

<span id="v.iv.x-p2"></span>But in truth, I think it by no means fit to
pass over the miracle of healing, which the same book informs us was
wrought in the cemetery of that community dedicated to God. There lived
in that neighbourhood a certain thegn, whose wife was seized with a
sudden dimness in her eyes, and as the malady increased daily, it became
so burdensome to her, that she could not see the least glimpse of light.
Having continued some time wrapped in the night of this blindness, on a
sudden she bethought herself that she might recover her lost sight, if
she were carried to the monastery of the nuns, and there prayed at the
relics of the saints. Nor did she lose any time in fulfilling that which
she had conceived in her mind: for being conducted by her maids to the
monastery, which was very near, and professing that she had perfect
faith that she should be there healed, she was led into the cemetery,
and having long prayed there on her knees, she did not fail to be heard,
for as she rose from prayer, before she went out of the place, she
received the gift of sight which she had desired; and whereas she had
been led thither by the hands of her maids, she now returned home
joyfully without help: as if she had lost the light of this world to no
other end than that she might show by her recovery how great a light is
vouchsafed to the saints of Christ in Heaven, and how great a grace of
healing power.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XI. How Sebbi, king of the same province, ended his life in a
monastery. \[694 A.D.\]](hist097)
