[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist066) 
[Next](hist068) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xi"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XI. How a light from Heaven stood all night over his relics, and how those possessed with devils were healed by them. \[679-697 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xi-p1"></span> AMONG the rest, I think we ought not to
pass over in silence the miracles and signs from Heaven that were shown
when King Oswald’s bones were found, and translated into the church
where they are now preserved. This was done by the zealous care of
Osthryth, queen of the Mercians,the daughter of his brother Oswy, who
reigned after him, as shall be said hereafter.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p2"></span> There is a famous monastery in the
province of Lindsey, called Beardaneu, which that queen and her husband
Ethelred greatly loved and venerated, conferring upon it many honours.
It was here that she was desirous to lay the revered bones of her uncle.
When the wagon in which those bones were carried arrived towards evening
at the aforesaid monastery, they that were in it were unwilling to admit
them, because, though they knew him to be a holy man, yet, as he was a
native of another province, and had obtained the sovereignty over them,
they retained their ancient aversion to him even after his death. Thus
it came to pass that the relics were left in the open air all that
night, with only a large tent spread over the wagon which contained
them. But it was revealed by a sign from Heaven with how much reverence
they ought to be received by all the faithful; for all that night, a
pillar of light, reaching from the wagon up to heaven, was visible in
almost every part of the province of Lindsey. Hereupon, in the morning,
the brethren of that monastery who had refused it the day before, began
themselves earnestly to pray that those holy relics, beloved of God,
might be laid among them. Accordingly, the bones, being washed, were put
into a shrine which they had made for that purpose, and placed in the
church, with due honour; and that there might be a perpetual memorial of
the royal character of this holy man, they hung up over the monument his
banner of gold and purple. Then they poured out the water in which they
had washed the bones, in a corner of the cemetery. From that time, the
very earth which received that holy water, had the power of saving grace
in casting out devils from the bodies of persons possessed.

<span id="v.iii.xi-p3"></span> Lastly, when the aforesaid queen
afterwards abode some time in that monastery, there came to visit her a
certain venerable abbess, who is still living, called Ethelhild, the
sister of the holy men, Ethelwinand Aldwin, the first of whom was bishop
in the province of Lindsey, the other abbot of the monastery of
Peartaneu; not far from which was the monastery of Ethelhild. When this
lady was come, in a conversation between her and the queen, the
discourse, among other things, turning upon Oswald, she said, that she
also had that night seen the light over his relics reaching up to
heaven. The queen thereupon added, that the very dust of the pavement on
which the water that washed the bones had been poured out, had already
healed many sick persons. The abbess thereupon desired that some of that
health-bringing dust might be given her, and, receiving it, she tied it
up in a cloth, and, putting it into a casket, returned home. Some time
after, when she was in her monastery, there came to it a guest, who was
wont often in the night to be on a sudden grievously tormented with an
unclean spirit; he being hospitably entertained, when he had gone to bed
after supper, was suddenly seized by the Devil, and began to cry out, to
gnash his teeth, to foam at the mouth, and to writhe and distort his
limbs. None being able to hold or bind him, the servant ran, and
knocking at the door, told the abbess. She, opening the monastery door,
went out herself with one of the nuns to the men’s apartment, and
calling a priest, desired that he would go with her to the sufferer.
Being come thither, and seeing many present, who had not been able, by
their efforts, to hold the tormented person and restrain his convulsive
movements, the priest used exorcisms, and did all that he could to
assuage the madness of the unfortunate man, but, though he took much
pains, he could not prevail. When no hope appeared of easing him in his
ravings, the abbess bethought herself of the dust, and immediately bade
her handmaiden go and fetch her the casket in which it was. As soon as
she came with it, as she had been bidden, and was entering the hall of
the house, in the inner part whereof the possessed person was writhing
in torment, he suddenly became silent, and laid down his head, as if he
had been falling asleep, stretching out all his limbs to rest. "Silence
fell upon all and intent they gazed," anxiously waiting to see the end
of the matter. And after about the space of an hour the man that had
been tormented sat up, and fetching a deep sigh, said, "Now I am whole,
for I am restored to my senses." They earnestly inquired how that came
to pass, and he answered, "As soon as that maiden drew near the hall of
this house, with the casket she brought, all the evil spirits that vexed
me departed and left me, and were no more to be seen." Then the abbess
gave him a little of that dust, and the priest having prayed, he passed
that night in great peace; nor was he, from that time forward, alarmed
by night, or in any way troubled by his old enemy.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XII. How a little boy was cured of a fever at his tomb.](hist068)
