[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist131) 
[Next](hist133) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.v.xiv"></span>

### <span id="v.v.xiv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XV. How divers churches of the Scots, at the instance of Adamnan, adopted the Catholic Easter; and how the same wrote a book about the holy places. \[703 A.D.\]

<span id="v.v.xiv-p1"></span>AT this time a great part of the Scots in
Ireland, and some also of the Britons in Britain, by the grace of God,
adopted the reasonable and ecclesiastical time of keeping Easter. For
when Adamnan, priest and abbot of the monks that were in the island of
Hii, was sent by his nation on a mission to Aldfrid, king of the
English, he abode some time in that province, and saw the canonical
rites of the Church. Moreover, he was earnestly admonished by many of
the more learned sort, not to presume to live contrary to the universal
custom of the Church, either in regard to the observance of Easter, or
any other ordinances whatsoever, with those few followers of his
dwelling in the farthest corner of the world.

<span id="v.v.xiv-p2"></span>Wherefore he so changed his mind, that he
readily preferred those things which he had seen and heard in the
English churches, to the customs which he and his people had hitherto
followed. For he was a good and wise man, and excellently instructed in
knowledge of the Scriptures. Returning home, he endeavoured to bring his
own people that were in Hii, or that were subject to that monastery,
into the way of truth, which he had embraced with all his heart; but he
could not prevail. He sailed over into Ireland, and preaching to those
people, and with sober words of exhortation making known to them the
lawful time of Easter, he brought back many of them, and almost all that
were free from the dominion of those of Hii, from the error of their
fathers to the Catholic unity, and taught them to keep the lawful time
of Easter.

<span id="v.v.xiv-p3"></span>Returning to his island, after having
celebrated the canonical Easter in Ireland, he was instant in preaching
the Catholic observance of the season of Easter in his monastery, yet
without being able to achieve his end; and it so happened that he
departed this life before the next year came round, the Divine goodness
so ordaining it, that as he was a great lover of peace and unity, he
should be taken away to everlasting life before he should be obliged, on
the return of the season of Easter, to be at greater variance with those
that would not follow him into the truth.

<span id="v.v.xiv-p4"></span>This same man wrote a book concerning the
holy places, of great profit to many readers; his authority was the
teaching and dictation of Arculf, a bishop of Gaul, who had gone to
Jerusalem for the sake of the holy places; and having wandered over all
the Promised Land, travelled also to Damascus, Constantinople,
Alexandria, and many islands in the sea, and returning home by ship, was
cast upon the western coast of Britain by a great tempest. After many
adventures he came to the aforesaid servant of Christ, Adamnan, and
being found to be learned in the Scriptures, and acquainted with the
holy places, was most gladly received by him and gladly heard, insomuch
that whatsoever he said that he had seen worthy of remembrance in the
holy places, Adamnan straightway set himself to commit to writing. Thus
he composed a work, as I have said, profitable to many, and chiefly to
those who, being far removed from those places where the patriarchs and
Apostles lived, know no more of them than what they have learnt by
reading. Adamnan presented this book to King Aldfrid, and through his
bounty it came to be read by lesser persons. The writer thereof was also
rewarded by him with many gifts and sent back into his country. I
believe it will be of advantage to our readers if we collect some
passages from his writings, and insert them in this our History.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XVI. The account given in the aforesaid book of the place of our
Lord's Nativity, Passion, and](hist133)
