[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist115) 
[Next](hist117) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.xxx"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.xxx-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXX. How his body was found altogether uncorrupted after it had been buried eleven years, and how his successor in the bishopric departed this world not long after. \[698 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.xxx-p1"></span>IN order to show forth the great glory of
the life after death of the man of God, Cuthbert, whereas the loftiness
of his life before his death had been revealed by the testimony of many
miracles, when he had been buried eleven years, Divine Providence put it
into the minds of the brethren to take up his bones. They thought to
find them dry and all the rest of the body consumed and turned to dust,
after the manner of the dead, and they desired to put them into a new
coffin, and to lay them in the same place, but above the pavement, for
the honour due to him. They made known their resolve to Bishop Eadbert,
and he consented to it, and bade them to be mindful to do it on the
anniversary of his burial. They did so, and opening the grave, found all
the body whole, as if he were still alive, and the joints of the limbs
pliable, like one asleep rather than dead; besides, all the vestments in
which he was clothed were not only undefiled, but marvellous to behold,
being fresh and bright as at the first. The brothers seeing this, were
struck with a great dread, and hastened to tell the bishop what they had
found; he being then alone in a place remote from the church, and
encompassed on all sides by the shifting waves of the sea. There he
always used to spend the time of- Lent, and was wont to pass the forty
days before the Nativity of our Lord, in great devotion with abstinence.
and prayer and tears. There also his venerable predecessor, Cuthbert,
had for some time served as the soldier of the Lord in solitude before
he went to the isle of Fame.

<span id="v.iv.xxx-p2"></span>They brought him also some part of the
garments that, had covered the holy body; which presents he thankfully
accepted, and gladly heard of the miracles, and he kissed the garments
even, with great affection, as if they had been still upon his father’s
body, and said, "Let new garments be put upon the body, in place of
these you have brought, and so lay it in the coffin which you have
prepared; for I know of a surety that the place will not long remain
empty, which has been hallowed with so great grace of heavenly miracles;
and how happy is he to whom the Lord, the Author and Giver of all bliss,
shall vouchsafe to grant the privilege of resting therein." When the
bishop had made an end of saying this and more in like manner, with many
tears and great compunction and with faltering tongue, the brothers did
as he had commanded them, and when they had wrapped the body in new
garments, and laid it in a new coffin, they placed it above the pavement
of the sanctuary. Soon after, Bishop Eadbert, beloved of God, fell
grievously sick, and his fever daily increasing in severity, ere long,
that is, on the 6th of May, he also departed to the Lord, and they laid
his body in the grave of the blessed father Cuthbert, placing over it
the coffin, with the uncorrupted remains of that father. The miracles of
healing, sometimes wrought in that place testify to the merits of them
both; of some of these we have before preserved the memory in the book
of his life. But in this History we have thought fit to add some others
which have lately come to our knowledge.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXXI. Of one that was cured of a palsy at his tomb.](hist117)
