[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist091) 
[Next](hist093) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.vi"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.vi-p0.1"></span>CHAP. VI. How Wynfrid being deposed, Sexwulf received his bishopric, and Earconwald was made bishop of the East Saxons. \[675 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iv.vi-p1"></span>NOT long after these events, Theodore, the
archbishop, taking offence at some act of disobedience of Wynfrid,
bishop of the Mercians,deposed him from his bishopric when he had held
it but a few years, and in his, place ordained Sexwulf bishop,who was
founder and abbot of the monastery which is called Medeshamstead,’ in
the country of the Gyrwas.Wynfrid, thus deposed, returned to his
monastery which is called Ad Barvae,and there ended his life in holy
conversation.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p2"></span>Theodore then also appointed Earconwald
bishop of the East Saxons, in the city of London, over whom at that time
reigned Sebbi and Sighere, of whom mention has been made above.This
Earconwald’s life and conversation, as well when he was bishop as before
that time, is said to have been most holy, as is even now testified by
heavenly miracles; for to this day, his horse-litter, in which he was
wont to be carried when sick, is kept by his disciples, and continues to
cure many of fevers and other ailments; and, not only sick persons who
are laid under that litter, or close by it, are cured; but the very
splinters cut from it, when carried to the sick, are wont immediately to
bring healing to them.

<span id="v.iv.vi-p3"></span>This man, before he was made bishop, had
built two famous monasteries, the one for himself, and the other for his
sister Ethelburg, and established them both in regular discipline of the
best kind. That for himself was in the district of Sudergeona, by the
river Thames, at a place called Cerotaesei,that is, the Island of Cerot;
that for his sister in the province of the East Saxons, at a place
called In Berecingum, wherein she might be a mother and nurse of women
devoted to God. Being put into the government of that monastery, she
showed herself in all respects worthy of her brother the bishop, by her
own holy life and by her regular and pious care of those under her rule,
as was also manifested by heavenly miracles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VII. How it was indicated by a light from heaven where the bodies
of the nuns should be buried in](hist093)
