[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist058) 
[Next](hist060) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.iii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.iii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. III. How the same King Oswald, asking a bishop of the Scottish nation, had Aidan sent him, and granted him an episcopal see in the Isle of Lindisfarne. \[635A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.iii-p1"></span> THE same Oswald, as soon as he ascended
the throne, being desirous that all the nation under his rule should be
endued with the grace of the Christian faith, whereof he had found happy
experience in vanquishing the barbarians, sent to the elders of the
Scots, among whom himself and his followers, when in banishment, had
received the sacrament of Baptism, desiring that they would send him a
bishop, by whose instruction and ministry the English nation, which he
governed, might learn the privileges and receive the Sacraments of the
faith of our Lord. Nor were they slow in granting his request; for they
sent him Bishop Aidan, a man of singular gentleness, piety, and
moderation; having a zeal of God, but not fully according to knowledge;
for he was wont to keep Easter Sunday according to the custom of his
country, which we have before so often mentioned,from the fourteenth to
the twentieth of the moon; the northern province of the Scots, and all
the nation of the Picts, at that time still celebrating Easter after
that manner, and believing that in this observance they followed the
writings of the holy and praiseworthy Father Anatolius. Whether this be
true, every instructed person can easily judge. But the Scots which
dwelt in the South of Ireland had long since, by the admonition of the
Bishop of the Apostolic see, learned to observe Easter according to the
canonical custom.

<span id="v.iii.iii-p2"></span> On the arrival of the bishop, the king
appointed him his episcopal see in the island of Lindisfarne,as he
desired. Which place, as the tide ebbs and flows, is twice a day
enclosed by the waves of the sea like an island; and again, twice, when
the beach is left dry, becomes contiguous with the land. The king also
humbly and willingly in all things giving ear to his admonitions,
industriously applied himself to build up and extend the Church of
Christ in his kingdom; wherein, when the bishop, who was not perfectly
skilled in the English tongue, preached the Gospel, it was a fair sight
to see the king himself interpreting the Word of God to his ealdormen
and thegns, for he had thoroughly learned the language of the Scots
during his long banishment. From that time many came daily into Britain
from the country of the Scots, and with great devotion preached the Word
to those provinces of the English, over which King Oswald reigned, and
those among them that had received priest’s orders administered the
grace of Baptism to the believers.. Churches were built in divers
places; the people joyfully flocked together to hear the Word; lands and
other property were given of the king’s bounty to found monasteries;
English children, as well as their elders, were instructed by their
Scottish teachers in study and the observance of monastic discipline.
For most of those who came to preach were monks. Bishop Aidan was
himself a monk, having been sent out from the island called Hii
(Iona)whereof the monastery was for a long time the chief of almost all
those of the northern Scots, and all those of the Picts, and had the
direction of their people. That island belongs to Britain, being divided
from it by a small arm of the sea, but had been long since given by the
Picts, who inhabit those parts of Britain, to the Scottish monks,
because they had received the faith of Christ through their preaching.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IV. When the nation of the Picts received the faith of Christ.
\[565 A.D.\]](hist060)
