[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist094) 
[Next](hist096) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iv.ix"></span>

### <span id="v.iv.ix-p0.1"></span>CHAP. IX. Of the signs which were shown from Heaven when the mother of that community departed this life. \[675 A.D.?\]

<span id="v.iv.ix-p1"></span>Now when Ethelburg herself, the pious
mother of that community devoted to God, was about to be taken out of
this world, a wonderful vision appeared to one of the sisters, called
Tortgyth; who, having lived many years in that monastery, always
endeavoured, in all humility and sincerity, to serve God herself, and to
help the mother to maintain regular discipline, by instructing and
reproving the younger ones. Now, in order that her virtue might,
according to the Apostle, be made perfect in weakness, she was suddenly
seized with a most grievous bodily disease, under which, through the
merciful providence of our Redeemer, she was sorely tried for the space
of nine years; to the end, that whatever stain of evil remained amidst
her virtues, either through ignorance or neglect, might all be purified
in the furnace of long tribulation. This woman, going out of the chamber
where she abode one night, at dusk, plainly saw as it were a human body,
which was brighter than the sun, wrapped in fine linen, and lifted up on
high, being taken out of the house in which the sisters used to sleep.
Then looking earnestly to see what it was that drew up that appearance
of the glorious body which she beheld, she perceived that it was raised
on high as it were by cords brighter than gold, until, entering into the
open heavens, it could no longer be seen by her. Reflecting on this
vision, she made no doubt that some one of the community would soon die,
and her soul be lifted up to heaven by the good works which she had
wrought, as it were by golden cords. And so in truth it befell; for a
few days after, the beloved of God, Ethelburg, mother of that community,
was delivered out of the prison of the flesh; and her life is proved to
have been such that no one who knew her ought to doubt that an entrance
into the heavenly country was open to her, when she departed from this
life.

<span id="v.iv.ix-p2"></span>There was also, in the same monastery, a
certain nun, of noble origin in this world, and still nobler in the love
of the world to come; who had, for many years, been so disabled in all
her body, that she could not move a single limb. When she heard that the
body of the venerable abbess had been carried into the church, till it
should be buried, she desired to be carried thither, and to be placed
bending towards it, after the manner of one praying; which being done,
she spoke to her as if she had been living, and entreated her that she
would obtain of the mercy of our pitiful Creator, that she might be
delivered from such great and long-continued pains; nor was it long
before her prayer was heard: for being delivered from the flesh twelve
days after, she exchanged her temporal afflictions for an eternal
reward.

<span id="v.iv.ix-p3"></span>For three years after the death of her
Superior, the aforesaid handmaid of Christ, Tortgyth, was detained in
this life and was so far spent with the sickness before mentioned, that
her bones scarce held together. At last, when the time of her release
was at hand, she not only lost the use of her other limbs, but also of
her tongue; in which state having continued three days and as many
nights, she was, on a sudden, restored by a spiritual vision, and opened
her lips and eyes, and looking up to heaven, began thus to speak to the
vision which she saw: "Very acceptable to me is thy coming, and thou art
welcome!" Having so said, she was silent awhile, as it were, waiting for
the answer of him whom she saw and to whom she spoke; then, as if
somewhat displeased, she said, "I can in no wise gladly suffer this;"
then pausing awhile, she said again, "If it can by no means be to-day, I
beg that the delay may not be long;" and again holding her peace a short
while, she concluded thus; "If it is certainly so determined, and the
decree cannot be altered, I beg that it may be no longer deferred than
this next night." Having so said, and being asked by those about her
with whom she talked, she said, "With my most dear mother, Ethelburg;"
by which they understood, that she was come to acquaint her that the
time of her departure was at hand; for, as she had desired, after one
day and night, she was delivered alike from the bonds of the flesh and
of her infirmity and entered into the joys of eternal salvation.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X. How a blind woman, praying in the burial-place of that
monastery, was restored to her sight. \[675 A.D.?\]](hist096)
