[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist078) 
[Next](hist080) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxiii"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxiii-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXIII. How Bishop Cedd, having a place for building a monastery given him by King Etheiwald, consecrated it to the Lord with prayer and fasting; and concerning his death. \[659-664 A. D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxiii-p1"></span> THE same man of God, whilst he was
bishop among the East Saxons, was also wont oftentimes to visit his own
province, Northumbria, for the purpose of exhortation. Oidilwald,the son
of King Oswald, who reigned among the Deiri, finding him a holy, wise,
and good man, desired him to accept some land whereon to build a
monastery, to which the king himself might frequently resort, to pray to
the Lord and hear the Word, and where he might be buried when he died;
for he believed faithfully that he should receive much benefit from the
daily prayers of those who were to serve the Lord in that place. The
king had before with him a brother of the same bishop, called Caelin, a
man no less devoted to God, who, being a priest, was wont to administer
to him and his house the Word and the Sacraments of the faith; by whose
means he chiefly came to know and love the bishop. So then, complying
with the king’s desires, the Bishop chose himself a place whereon to
build a monastery among steep and distant mountains, which looked more
like lurking-places for robbers and dens of wild beasts, than dwellings
of men; to the end that, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, "In the
habitation of dragons, where each lay, might be grass with reeds and
rushes;" that is, that the fruits of good works should spring up, where
before beasts were wont to dwell, or men to live after the manner of
beasts.

<span id="v.iii.xxiii-p2"></span> But the man of God, desiring first to
cleanse the place which he had received for the monastery from stain of
former crimes, by prayer and fasting, and so to lay the foundations
there, requested of the king that he would give him opportunity and
leave to abide there for prayer all the time of Lent, which was at hand.
All which days, except Sundays, he prolonged his fast till the evening,
according to custom, and then took no other sustenance than a small
piece of bread, one hen’s egg, and a little milk and water. This, he
said, was the custom of those of whom he had learned the rule of regular
discipline, first to consecrate to the Lord, by prayer and fasting, the
places which they had newly received for building a monastery or a
church. When there were ten days of Lent still remaining, there came a
messenger to call him to the king; and he, that the holy work might not
be intermitted, on account of the king’s affairs, entreated his priest,
Cynibill, who was also his own brother, to complete his pious
undertaking. Cynibill readily consented, and when the duty of fasting
and prayer was over, he there built the monastery, which is now called
Laestingaeu,and established therein religious customs according to the
use of Lindisfarne, where he had been trained.

<span id="v.iii.xxiii-p3"></span> When Cedd had for many years held the
office of bishop in the aforesaid province, and also taken charge of
this monastery, over which he placed provosts,it happened that he came
thither at a time when there was plague, and fell sick and died. He was
first buried without the walls; but in the process of time a church was
built of stone in the monastery, in honour of the Blessed Mother of God,
and his body was laid in it, on the right side of the altar.

<span id="v.iii.xxiii-p4"></span> The bishop left the monastery to be
governed after him by his brother Ceadda,who was afterwards made bishop,
as shall be told hereafter. For, as it rarely happens, the four brothers
we have mentioned, Cedd and Cynibill, and Caelin and Ceadda, were all
celebrated priests of the Lord, and two of them also came to be bishops.
When the brethren who were in his monastery, in the province of the East
Saxons,heard that the bishop was dead and buried in the province of the
Northumbrians, about thirty men of that monastery came thither, being
desirous either to live near the body of their father, if it should
please God, or to die and be buried there. Being gladly received by
their brethren and fellow soldiers in Christ, all of them died there
struck down by the aforesaid pestilence, except one little boy, who is
known to have been saved from death by the prayers of his spiritual
father. For being alive long after, and giving himself to the reading of
Scripture, he was told that he had not been regenerated by the water of
Baptism, and being then cleansed in the layer of salvation, he was
afterwards promoted to the order of priesthood, and was of service to
many in the church. I do not doubt that he was delivered at the point of
death, as I have said, by the intercession of his father, to whose body
he had come for love of him, that so he might himself avoid eternal
death, and by teaching, offer the ministry of life and salvation to
others of the brethren.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXIV. How when King Penda was slain, the province of the Mercians
received the faith of Christ,](hist080)
