[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Christianity](../index) 
[England](../../neu/eng/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](hist080) 
[Next](hist082) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/014044565X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Bede's Ecclesiastical History of England*, ed. by A.M. Sellar,
\[1907\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="v.iii.xxv"></span>

### <span id="v.iii.xxv-p0.1"></span>CHAP. XXV. How the question arose about the due time of keeping Easter, with those that came out of Scotland. \[664 A.D.\]

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p1"></span> IN the meantime, Bishop Aidan being
taken away from this life, Finan, who was ordained and sent by the
Scots, succeeded him in the bishopric, and built a church in the Isle of
Lindisfarne, fit for the episcopal see; nevertheless, after the manner
of the Scots, he made it, not of stone, but entirely of hewn oak, and
covered it with reeds; and it was afterwards dedicated in honour of the
blessed Peter the Apostle, by the most reverend Archbishop Theodore.
Eadbert,also bishop of that place, took off the thatch, and caused it to
be covered entirely, both roof and walls, with plates of lead.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p2"></span> At this time, a great and frequently
debated question arose about the observance of Easter; those that came
from Kent or Gaul affirming, that the Scots celebrated Easter Sunday
contrary to the custom of the universal Church. Among them was a most
zealous defender of the true Easter, whose name was Ronan,a Scot by
nation, but instructed in the rule of ecclesiastical truth in Gaul or
Italy. Disputing with Finan, he convinced many, or at least induced them
to make a more strict inquiry after the truth; yet he could not prevail
upon Finan, but, on the contrary, embittered him the more by reproof,
and made him a professed opponent of the truth, for he was of a violent
temper. James,formerly the deacon of the venerable Archbishop Paulinus,
as has been said above, observed the true and Catholic Easter, with all
those that he could instruct in the better way. Queen Eanfled and her
followers also observed it as she had seen it practised in Kent, having
with her a Kentish priest who followed the Catholic observance, whose
name was Romanus. Thus it is said to have sometimes happened in those
times that Easter was twice celebrated in one year; and that when the
king, having ended his fast, was keeping Easter, the queen and her
followers were still fasting, and celebrating Palm Sunday. Whilst Aidan
lived, this difference about the observance of Easter was patiently
tolerated by all men, for they well knew, that though he could not keep
Easter contrary to the custom of those who had sent him, yet he
industriously laboured to practise the works of faith, piety, and love,
according to the custom of all holy men; for which reason he was
deservedly beloved by all, even by those who differed in opinion
concerning Easter, and was held in veneration, not only by less
important persons, but even by the bishops, Honorius of Canterbury, and
Felix of the East Angles.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p3"></span> But after the death of Finan, who
succeeded him, when Colman, who was also sent from Scotland, came to be
bishop, a greater controversy arose about the observance of Easter, and
other rules of ecclesiastical life. Whereupon this question began
naturally to influence the thoughts and hearts of many who feared, lest
haply, having received the name of Christians, they might run, or have
run, in vain. This reached the ears of the rulers, King Oswy and his son
Alchfrid. Now Oswy, having been instructed and baptized by the Scots,
and being very perfectly skilled in their language, thought nothing
better than what they taught; but Alchfrid, having for his teacher in
Christianity the learned Wilfrid, who had formerly gone to Rome to study
ecclesiastical doctrine, and spent much time at Lyons with Dalfinus,
archbishop of Gaul, from whom also he had received the crown of
ecclesiastical tonsure, rightly thought that this man’s doctrine ought
to be preferred before all the traditions of the Scots. For this reason
he had also given him a monastery of forty families, at a place called
Inhrypum; which place, not long before, he had given for a monastery to
those that were followers of the Scots; but forasmuch as they
afterwards, being left to their choice, preferred to quit the place
rather than alter their custom, he gave it to him, whose life and
doctrine were worthy of it.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p4"></span> Agilbert, bishop of the West Saxons,
above-mentioned, a friend of King Alchfrid and of Abbot Wilfrid, had at
that time come into the province of the Northumbrians, and was staying
some time among them; at the request of Alchfrid, he made Wilfrid a
priest in his aforesaid monastery. He had in his company a priest, whose
name was Agatho. The question being raised there concerning Easter and
the tonsure and other ecclesiastical matters, it was arranged, that a
synod should be held in the monastery of Streanaeshalch,which signifies
the Bay of the Lighthouse, where the Abbess Hilda,a woman devoted to the
service of God, then ruled; and that there this question should be
decided. The kings, both father and son, came thither, and the bishops,
Colman with his Scottish clerks, and Agilbert with the priests Agatho
and Wilfrid. James and Romanus were on their side; but the Abbess Hilda
and her followers were for the Scots, as was also the venerable Bishop
Cedd, long before ordained by the Scots, as has been said above, and he
acted in that council as a most careful interpreter for both parties.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p5"></span> King Oswy first made an opening speech,
in which he said that it behoved those who served one God to observe one
rule of life; and as they all expected the same kingdom in heaven, so
they ought not to differ in the celebration of the heavenly mysteries;
but rather to inquire which was the truer tradition, that it might be
followed by all in common; he then commanded his bishop, Colman, first
to declare what the custom was which he observed, and whence it derived
its origin. Then Colman said, "The Easter which I keep, I received from
my elders, who sent me hither as bishop; all our forefathers, men
beloved of God, are known to have celebrated it after the same manner;
and that it may not seem to any contemptible and worthy to be rejected,
it is the same which the blessed John the Evangelist, the disciple
specially beloved of our Lord, with all the churches over which he
presided, is recorded to have celebrated."’ When he had said thus much,
and more to the like effect, the king commanded Agilbert to make known
the manner of his observance and to show whence it was derived, and on
what authority he followed it. Agilbert answered, "I beseech you, let my
disciple, the priest Wilfrid, speak in my stead; because we both concur
with the other followers of the ecclesiastical tradition that are here
present, and he can better and more clearly explain our opinion in the
English language, than I can by an interpreter."

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p6"></span>Then Wilfrid, being ordered by the king
to speak, began thus:— "The Easter which we keep, we saw celebrated by
all at Rome, where the blessed Apostles, Peter and Paul, lived, taught,
suffered, and were buried; we saw the same done by all in Italy and in
Gaul, when we travelled through those countries for the purpose of study
and prayer. We found it observed in Africa, Asia, Egypt, Greece, and all
the world, wherever the Church of Christ is spread abroad, among divers
nations and tongues, at one and the same time; save only among these and
their accomplices in obstinacy, I mean the Picts and the Britons, who
foolishly, in these two remote islands of the ocean, and only in part
even of them, strive to oppose all the rest of the world."

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p7"></span> When he had so said, Colman answered,
"It is strange that you choose to call our efforts foolish, wherein we
follow the example of so great an Apostle, who was thought worthy to
lean on our Lord’s bosom, when all the world knows him to have lived
most wisely." Wilfrid replied, " Far be it from us to charge John with
folly, for he literally observed the precepts of the Mosaic Law, whilst
the Church was still Jewish in many points, and the Apostles, lest they
should give cause of offence to the Jews who, were among the Gentiles,
were not able at once to cast off all the observances of the Law which
had been instituted by God, in the same way as it is necessary that all
who come to the faith should forsake the idols which were invented by
devils. For this reason it was, that Paul circumcised Timothy,that he
offered sacrifice in the temple,that he shaved his head with Aquila and
Priscilla at Corinth;for no other advantage than to avoid giving offence
to the Jews. Hence it was, that James said to the same Paul, "Thou
seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and
they are all zealous of the Law." " And yet, at this time, when the
light of the Gospel is spreading throughout the world, it is needless,
nay, it is not lawful, for the faithful either to be circumcised, or to
offer up to God sacrifices of flesh. So John, according to the custom of
the Law, began the celebration of the feast of Easter, on the fourteenth
day of the first month, in the evening, not regarding whether the same
happened on a Saturday, or any other week-day. But when Peter preached
at Rome, being mindful that our Lord arose from the dead, and gave to
the world the hope of resurrection, on the first day of the week, he
perceived that Easter ought to be kept after this manner: he always
awaited the rising of the moon on the fourteenth day of the first month
in the evening, according to the custom and precepts of the Law, even as
John did. And when that came, if the Lord’s day, then called the first
day of the week, was the next day, he began that very evening to
celebrate Easter, as we all do at the present time. But if the Lord’s
day did not fall the next morning after the fourteenth moon, but on the
sixteenth, or the seventeenth, or any other moon till the twenty-first,
he waited for that, and on the Saturday before, in the evening, began to
observe the holy solemnity of Easter. Thus it came to pass, that Easter
Sunday was only kept from the fifteenth moon to the twenty-first. Nor
does this evangelical and apostolic tradition abolish the Law, but
rather fulfil it; the command being to keep the passover from the
fourteenth moon of the first month in the evening to the twenty-first
moon of the same month in the evening; which observance all the
successors of the blessed John in Asia, since his death, and all the
Church throughout the world, have since followed; and that this is the
true Easter, and the only one to be celebrated by the faithful, was not
newly decreed by the council of Nicaea, but only confirmed afresh; as
the history of the Church informs us.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p8"></span> "Thus it is plain, that you, Colman,
neither follow the example of John, as you imagine, nor that of Peter,
whose tradition you oppose with full knowledge, and that you neither
agree with the Law nor the Gospel in the keeping of your Easter. For
John, keeping the Paschal time according to the decree of the Mosaic
Law, had no regard to the first day of the week, which you do not
practise, seeing that you celebrate Easter only on the first day after
the Sabbath. Peter celebrated Easter Sunday between the fifteenth and
the twenty-first moon, which you do not practise, seeing that you
observe Easter Sunday from the fourteenth to the twentieth moon; so that
you often begin Easter on the thirteenth moon in the evening, whereof
neither the Law made any mention, nor did our Lord, the Author and Giver
of the Gospel, on that day either eat the old passover in the evening,
or deliver the Sacraments of the New Testament, to be celebrated by the
Church, in memory of His Passion, but on the fourteenth. Besides, in
your celebration of Easter, you utterly exclude the twenty-first moon,
which the Law ordered to be specially observed. Thus, as I have said
before, you agree neither with John nor Peter, nor with the Law, nor the
Gospel, in the celebration of the greatest festival."

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p9"></span> To this Colman rejoined: "Did the holy
Anatolius, much commended in the history of the Church, judge contrary
to the Law and the Gospel, when he wrote, that Easter was to be
celebrated from the fourteenth to the twentieth moon? Is it to be
believed that our most reverend Father Columba and his successors, men
beloved by God, who kept Easter after the same manner, judged or acted
contrary to the Divine writings? Whereas there were many among them,
whose sanctity was attested by heavenly signs and miracles which they
wrought; whom I, for my part, doubt not to be saints, and whose life,
customs, and discipline I never cease to follow."

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p10"></span> "It is evident," said Wilfrid, "that
Anatolius was a most holy, learned, and commendable man; but what have
you to do with him, since you do not observe his decrees? For he
undoubtedly, following the rule of truth in his Easter, appointed a
cycle of nineteen years, which either you are ignorant of, or if you
know it, though it is kept by the whole Church of Christ, yet you
despise it as a thing of naught. He so computed the fourteenth moon in
our Lord’s Paschal Feast, that according to the custom of the Egyptians,
he acknowledged it to be the fifteenth moon on that same day in the
evening; so in like manner he assigned the twentieth to Easter-Sunday,
as believing that to be the twenty-first moon, when the sun had set.
That you are ignorant of the rule of this distinction is proved by this,
that you sometimes manifestly keep Easter before the full moon, that is,
on the thirteenth day. Concerning your Father Columba and his followers,
whose sanctity you say you imitate, and whose rule and precepts
confirmed by signs from Heaven you say that you follow, I might answer,
then when many, in the day of judgement, shall say to our Lord, that in
His name they have prophesied, and have cast out devils, and done many
wonderful works, our Lord will reply, that He never knew them. But far
be it from me to speak thus of your fathers, for it is much more just to
believe good than evil of those whom we know not. Wherefore I do not
deny those also to have been God’s servants, and beloved of God, who
with rude simplicity, but pious intentions, have themselves loved Him.
Nor do I think that such observance of Easter did them much harm, as
long as none came to show them a more perfect rule to follow; for
assuredly I believe that, if any teacher, reckoning after the Catholic
manner, had come among them, they would have as readily followed his
admonitions, as they are known to have kept those commandments of God,
which they had learned and knew.

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p11"></span> "But as for you and your companions,
you certainly sin, if, having heard the decrees of the Apostolic see,
nay, of the universal Church, confirmed, as they are, by Holy Scripture,
you scorn to follow them; for, though your fathers were holy, do you
think that those few men, in a corner of the remotest island, are to be
preferred before the universal Church of Christ throughout the world?
And if that Columba of yours, (and, I may say, ours also, if he was
Christ’s servant,) was a holy man and powerful in miracles, yet could he
be preferred before the most blessed chief of the Apostles, to whom our
Lord said, ‘Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it, and I will give unto
thee the .keys of the kingdom of Heaven?’

<span id="v.iii.xxv-p12"></span> When Wilfrid had ended thus, the king
said, "Is it true, Colman, that these words were spoken to Peter by our
Lord?" He answered, "It is true, O king!" .Then said he, "Can you show
any such power given to your Columba?" Colman answered, "None." Then
again the king asked, " Do you both agree in this, without any
controversy, that these words were said above all to Peter, and that the
keys of the kingdom of Heaven were given to him by our Lord?" They both
answered, "Yes." Then the king concluded, "And I also say unto you, that
he is the door-keeper, and I will not gainsay him, but I desire, as far
as I know and am able, in all things to obey his laws, lest haply when I
come to the gates of the kingdom of Heaven, there should be none to open
them, he being my adversary who is proved to have the keys." The king
having said this, all who were seated there or standing by, both great
and small, gave their assent, and renouncing the less perfect custom,
hastened to conform to that which they had found to be better.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: XXVI. How Colman, being worsted, returned home, and Tuda
succeeded him in the bishopric, and](hist082)
