<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act012)  [Next](act014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 13:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Fasting and Prayer at Antioch. The Holy Spirit Directs Paul
and Barnabas to Be Sent Forth. Their Ordination. They Preach the Word in
Cyprus. Elymas Rebuked. The Proconsul Converted. The Missionaries Sail
to Perga. The Gospel Preached in Antioch of Pisidia. The Persecution
Raised by the Jews. The Departure to Iconium.

[Acts 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 13:1</span></span>

There were in the church at Antioch. For description of Antioch and
account of the founding of the church in that city see [Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019), notes. Also [Act
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026). This was the mother church of
Gentile Christendom. It was at this period the most important city of
Asia, and the third city of the world. For description, see notes on
[Act 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022).

Prophets and teachers. These offices were not identical ([Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011)), though the first included the
last. A prophet was an inspired teacher, not necessarily one who
predicted the future, but one who spoke God's message by inspiration.

Barnabas. One of the prophets. See notes on [Act
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022).

Simeon called Niger. Nothing more is known of him. As Niger means
"black," some have fancied that he was an African, but Niger was as
common a Roman surname as Black is now.

Lucius of Cyrene. The men who planted the church at Antioch were "of
Cyprus and Cyrene" (see note on [Act
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#020)). Lucius was probably one of
these. The name occurs again in [Rom
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021).

And Manaen. His mother was probably the nurse of Herod when the latter
was a babe. Herod Antipas, the husband of Herodias, the murderer of John
the Baptist, is meant. He was now dethroned and an exile in Gaul.

And Saul. The greatest of these men is named last. His greatness was not
yet demonstrated.

[Acts 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 13:2</span></span>

As they ministered. These men worshiped before the Lord, fasting, and no
doubt asking for guidance in the extension of Christianity.

The Holy Ghost said. By an inspiration given to some one of these
prophets. "God has spoken at sundry times and in divers manners unto the
fathers by the one of these prophets." Compare [Act
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#023).

Separate me Barnabas and Saul. Both had been tried and shown to be
worthy. They are now, by Divine direction, to be formally consecrated to
the work of preaching the gospel to the Gentiles. From this time Antioch
is the great missionary center.

Whereunto I have called them. God called; men separated, or formally set
apart.

[Acts 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 13:3</span></span>

When they had fasted and prayed. This verse shows how they were set
apart. It was by fasting, prayer, and the laying on of hands. They were
not thus set apart to an order or rank in the kingdom, but to a work
unto which they were called. They were not made priests, or bishops, but
missionaries. This act did not make Paul an apostle. Christ chose him,
as he had Peter, John and the others.

They sent them away. As the missionaries of the church at Antioch to the
heathen. We find that they return to report to the church ([Act
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027)) after a long missionary tour.

[Acts 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 13:4</span></span>

So they . . . departed unto Seleucia. This was the seaport of Antioch,
at the mouth of the Orontes, about sixteen miles distant in a direct
course. At that period it was crowded with shipping. The massive walls
of its harbors are still seen, though the city is a ruin.

They sailed to Cyprus. The large island which could be seen in clear air
from the coast of Asia. It was chosen as the first field, probably
because it was the old home of Barnabas ([Act
4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036)). It had a large Jewish
population.

[Acts 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 13:5</span></span>

At Salamis. The eastern seaport. A day's run would carry them from
Seleucia to Salamis. The distance is only about fifty miles.

Preached . . . in the synagogues. That there was more than one shows
that the Jews were very numerous. In the reign of Trajan, a half century
later, they were numerous enough in Cyprus to almost exterminate the
Gentile population, and were only put down after the arrival of the
Roman general, Hadrian, afterwards emperor, with a great army.

They had also John. Mark. He probably acted as baptist. He was related
to Barnabas ([Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)).

[Acts 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 13:6</span></span>

When they had gone through the isle. The island was about 130 miles long
by fifty wide. Salamis being at the east and Paphos at the west
extremity.

Paphos. This was at this time the capital. It was noted for the worship
of Venus.

Found a certain sorcerer. A magician. Though the law ([Deu
18:9-22](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#009); [Lev
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#031)) forbade witchcraft and magic,
yet contemporaneous history shows that at this period the Jewish
magicians had great influence. Marius, Pompey, Crassus, CÃ&brvbr;sar,
and Tiberius were all more or less under their sway.

A false prophet. Falsely professing inspiration.

[Acts 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 13:7</span></span>

Was with the deputy. In the Revision, "Proconsul." The Roman provinces
at this time were divided into senatorial and imperial. The senatorial
were ruled by a proconsul. We learn from other sources that Cyprus at
this time was a senatorial province ruled by a proconsul.

Sergius Paulus. Nothing more is known of him than is here related.

A prudent man. An inquiring man. Hence he was anxious to hear Barnabas
and Saul.

[Acts 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 13:8</span></span>

But Elymas. Another name of Bar-Jesus, meaning, the wise man. He had
probably assumed it.

Withstood them. As a Jew he was opposed, and his interests, too, were
opposed. He did not wish to lose his hold on the proconsul. Hence he
sought to prevent his acceptance of the faith.

[Acts 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 13:9</span></span>

But Saul, who is also called Paul. From this date he is the chief figure
of the Acts. Barnabas, who had hitherto been the leader, falls behind.
The origin of the name Paul is unknown. It is a Roman name, that of a
great Roman family, and it is likely that the great apostle had two
names, one Jewish, the other Gentile, a common thing anciently. Peter,
Daniel, Esther, and many others afford examples.

Filled with the Holy Ghost. Acting under the impulse of the Holy Spirit.

[Acts 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 13:10</span></span>

Child of the devil. Under his influence.

The right ways of the Lord. God's plan of salvation in Christ.

The hand of the Lord is upon thee. In judgment.

Thou shalt be blind. He was fighting against the light. Hence physical
blindness for a season.

A mist and a darkness. As though a cloud had gathered about him.

Then the deputy . . . believed. The language implies that he became a
Christian. The "believers" were those who accepted Christ.

[Acts 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 13:13</span></span>

Now when Paul and his company. Henceforth Paul is the leader. From
Paphos they sailed northward to Perga on the Asiatic mainland, an
important city of Pamphylia.

John departing. Why he left we do not know, but we know Paul did not
approve of it. See [Act 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039). Perhaps
he feared the dangers before them.

[Acts 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 13:14</span></span>

They came to Antioch. They seemed to have passed at once from Perga to
the Antioch that lay in the interior. It must be distinguished from the
Antioch of Syria ([Act 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#022)) before
named. There were several Antiochs, this one being the capital of the
province of Pisidia. Vast ruins still mark its site.

They went into the synagogue. In every Gentile city where there was a
Jewish synagogue the gospel was preached first to the Jews by the
apostolic preachers. The course of Paul and Barnabas here is an example
of their custom.

[Acts 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 13:15</span></span>

After the reading. In the synagogue worship the reading of the
Scriptures made a very important part. As copies of the Scriptures were
very rare, this reading was necessary to convey scriptural instruction
to the people. They were read in course, two lessons each Sabbath, one
from the five books of Moses, the other from the other books of the Old
Testament. Plumptre insists that we are enabled by two curious
coincidences to fix, with very little uncertainty, the precise Sabbath
on which the mission work at Antioch opened. The opening words of Paul
refer to [Deu 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#031), and this was the
lesson for the forty-fourth Sabbath in the year, which fell in July or
August; the corresponding second lesson from the prophets being Isa.
1:1-27, from which he also quotes. He starts, as was natural, from what
the people had just been listening to, as the text of his discourse.

The rulers of the synagogue. The synagogue was governed by a board of
elders.

[Acts 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 13:16</span></span>

Then Paul stood up. Invited to speak by the usual courtesy extended to
visiting brethren, he arose, according to the Greek custom. In Judea
speakers sat. Among the Greeks they stood. The address that follows, the
first reported address of Paul, is worthy of special study especially as
an example of the character of his preaching in the synagogue. It begins
with a short recapitulation of the glorious history of Israel, a theme
always apt to secure the favor of a Jewish audience, and when he has
ascended to David, the hero king and the pride of every Jew, he passes
from him to the promised Son of David, and thus preaches Christ. Had he
begun at once with the latter, the great object of his discourse, he
would have aroused prejudice and perhaps closed their ears. It will be
observed here before a Jewish audience, as well as at Athens before a
heathen audience, he first secured a common ground with his hearers, and
upon it founded his argument for the gospel.

Men of Israel, and ye that fear God. There were two classes present,
Jews and "the devout Greeks." The latter had given up heathenism, had
learned to "fear God," and were anxious to learn more about him; hence
were wont to attend the synagogue.

[Acts 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 13:17</span></span>

Destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan. For their names, see [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001).

[Acts 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 13:20</span></span>

After that he gave unto them judges about the space of four hundred and
fifty years. This statement seems to conflict with [Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001), which assigns 480 years to the
period between the coming out of Egypt and the fourth year of the reign
of Solomon. This would allow only about 300 years to the period of the
Judges. David's reign was forty years, Saul's the same, the period in
the wilderness the same, Joshua ruled about twenty-five years, add four
years for Solomon, and we have 149 years, which, taken from 480 years,
leaves 331 for the time of Judges and Samuel. The apparent discrepancy
between Paul and the writer of 1 Kings is removed, however, by the
Revision, based on the oldest and best Greek text. It changes the place
where "and after that" occurs, so that the passage reads, "When he had
destroyed the seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their
land for an inheritance, for about four hundred and fifty years: and
after these things (i. e., after the allotment of the land and all
before mentioned) he gave them judges until Samuel the prophet." The 450
years, in my judgment, includes the period from the departure out of
Egypt to the reign of David, the two greatest eras in Jewish history
before Christ.

[Acts 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 13:21</span></span>

By the space of forty years. The Old Testament does not give the length
of Saul's reign, but Josephus says Saul reigned for forty years.

[Acts 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 13:22</span></span>

He raised up unto them David. The Lord called the young shepherd to the
throne.

A man after mine own heart. The language does not occur in this form in
the Old Testament, but is implied in [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014). This does not imply that David
was perfect, but that he sought to do the Lord's will, instead of
showing stubborn disobedience, like Saul. He exhibited nobility of
purpose, sought the welfare of the people, and aimed at a purer life.

[Acts 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 13:23</span></span>

Of this man's seed, . . . according to his promise. For the promise of a
Savior of David's seed, see [Sa2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012);
[Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008); [Zac
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012).

[Acts 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 13:24</span></span>

When John had first preached. John, who preached before the Savior's
coming, is named because he was well known to the Jews, and most of them
regarded him a prophet. See [Mat
3:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001) and [Joh
5:32-35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#032).

[Acts 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 13:26</span></span>

Men and brethren. Having declared the coming of the Savior of the seed
of David, he now shows to whom his salvation was offered, not only to
"children of the stock of Abraham," but to "whosoever among you feareth
God," Gentiles as well as Jews.

[Acts 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 13:27</span></span>

Paul now recapitulates the facts of the Gospel, viz: (1) Christ rejected
by the rulers; (2) the Scriptures that they read every Sabbath fulfilled
by condemning him; (3) the demand upon Pilate to slay him, when he had
declared there was no cause of death; (4) the Scriptures fulfilled in
his death; (5) the abundantly attested resurrection; (6) he declares
that the promise made the fathers was now fulfilled to their children
(see [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003); [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018), etc.)

Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee. See [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007). Paul gives the thought in [Rom
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#004) : "He was declared to be the Son
of God with power, by the resurrection from the dead."

No more to return to corruption. Never more to endure death.

I will give you the sure mercies of David. The mercies promised to
David, one of which was a descendant whose throne should be everlasting.
See [Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003), and compare [Sa2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#010).

Thou wilt not suffer thine Holy One to see corruption. Quoted by Peter
on the day of Pentecost. See [Act
2:27-31](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#027), notes.

[Acts 13:38](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 13:38</span></span>

Through this man. The risen Savior. Only through Christ does God offer
pardon. See [Act 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012); [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025) and [Rom
8:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).

By him all that believe are justified. If you believe on Jesus as the
Messiah and accept him in faith, he will do for you what the law could
never do, justify you before God. The law could not bring peace.

Beware therefore. The address closes with a warning of the danger of
rejecting Christ. [Act 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#041) is freely
quoted from [Hab 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#005). His words
referred primarily to the invasion of the Chaldeans, but reached beyond
to a greater punishment for the greater sin of rejecting Christ. Only a
few years after Paul quoted this at Antioch "the despisers wondered and
perished" in the awful calamity of the Jewish nation, brought on by
refusing the Savior.

[Acts 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">act 13:42</span></span>

When the Jews were gone out. The Revised text gives a different sense:
"As they (Paul and Barnabas) went out," they were asked to speak again
the next Sabbath.

When the congregation broke up. When the services were over, many, both
Jews and proselytes, followed them to learn more, and possibly yielded
to Christ.

Persuaded them to continue in the grace of God. By trusting in and
obeying him. This could not be done if they refused Christ when he was
preached to them.

[Acts 13:44](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 13:44</span></span>

The next sabbath came almost the whole city. The sermon of the Sabbath
before, the labors of Paul and Barnabas during the week, and the talk
aroused, filled the city with intense interest.

[Acts 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">act 13:45</span></span>

When the Jews saw the multitudes. The vast concourse, in large part
Gentiles, anxious to hear of the "ensign to whom the Gentiles shall
seek," aroused Jewish bigotry. Nothing ever stirred the Jews of either
Palestine or of Gentile countries to such hatred as the declaration that
Christ is a Savior of the Gentiles as well as the Jews. See [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021).

Contradicting and blaspheming. Contradicting the application of the
prophecies to Jesus, which Paul made in his address; blaspheming by
denying and speaking contemptuously of the Son of God.

[Acts 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">act 13:46</span></span>

It was necessary. The preachers met this attitude of the Jews by boldly
stating their purpose to turn from them to the Gentiles. It was God's
will that the Gospel should first be offered to the chosen people. See
[Act 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008); [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026); [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016). While the chosen people were to
have the first opportunity, yet "God had put no difference" between Jew
and Greek. As soon as the Jewish audiences manifested a self-willed,
contradictory spirit, instead of engaging in idle disputation, the
apostles were wont to turn to the Gentiles.

[Acts 13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">act 13:47</span></span>

For so hath the Lord commanded. It was not only the Lord's will that
they should preach first to the Jews, but that they should then turn to
the Gentiles. So the Lord had shown in their own prophets. [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006) is quoted, where Christ is
declared to be "a light of the Gentiles," and appointed "for salvation
to the ends of the earth;" a world Savior.

[Acts 13:48](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">act 13:48</span></span>

When the Gentiles heard this, they were glad. Glad, not only that the
gospel was offered to them, but that in sacred writings of the Jews, it
was declared that the Gentiles should have the gospel. They, too, had
always been embraced in God's plan of redemption.

As many as were ordained to eternal life. This passage has been used as
a proof text for the extreme Calvinism that makes God arbitrarily select
some for salvation and reject others. Wesley, on the other hand, says:
"The original word rendered ordained is not once used in the Scriptures
to express eternal predestination of any kind. The sense is that those,
and those only, now ordained, now believed. Not that God rejected the
rest; it was his will that they also should be saved, but they thrust
salvation from them. Nor were those who then believed forced to believe.
Grace was offered to them and they did not thrust it away." It is God's
ordination that those of humble, teachable, honest hearts, seeking the
truth and life, shall come to life when it is offered, and such accepted
the gospel on this occasion.

Believed. "Made a public profession of their faith."--Dean Howson.

[Acts 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">act 13:50</span></span>

The Jews stirred up the devout and honourable women. Gentile women who
had learned to revere the One God, women of high rank (see Revision). A
Roman writer (Strabo) declares that the women in this part of Asia
exerted a powerful influence.

And the chief men. Probably the husbands of these women.

Raised persecution. There was probably no appeal to the magistrates, who
were Romans (Antioch of Pisidia was a Roman colony), but they excited
tumultuous opposition. The missionaries retired for the time, because
their work was interrupted. They were not exiled, for they returned
afterward ([Act 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021)).

[Acts 13:51](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 13:51</span></span>

They shook off the dust of their feet. See [Luk
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#005). The Master's command was obeyed.

Iconium. In Lycaonia, about fifty miles east of the Pisidian Antioch. At
a later period, Iconium became celebrated as the capital of the Turks,
before Constantinople fell into their hands. The Turkish sultan was long
called the Sultan of Iconium. It was only after the Turkish conquests in
Europe that the capital was moved to Constantinople. It is still a place
of 30,000 inhabitants, and is called Konieh.

[Acts 13:52](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">act 13:52</span></span>

The disciples were filled with joy. Those of Antioch. Even if Paul and
Barnabas were driven away, they had left them a glorious inheritance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 14](act014)

</div>
