<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act027)  [Next](rom000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 28:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Thrown on the Island of Malta. The Kindness of the People. A
Viper Fastens on Paul's Hand, but Hurts Him Not. Paul Heals the Father
of Publius. After Three Months Leave in the Castor and Pollux. Land and
Meet Brethren at Puteoli. Met at Apii Forum by Brethren from Rome. Paul
Suffered to Dwell by Himself Under Charge of a Soldier. Preaches to the
Jews of Rome. Preaches with Full Liberty for Two Years in His Own Hired
House.

[Acts 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 28:1</span></span>

The island was called Melita. They had no idea where they were cast
until they were ashore, but were told by the inhabitants. It is conceded
by scholars that it is the island so well known in our time as Malta. It
is sixty miles from the southern point of Sicily, 200 miles from Africa,
and is about sixty miles in circumference.

The barbarians. So called because they were neither Greeks nor Romans.
The word did not anciently mean uncivilized. The island was governed by
the Romans, but the people were of African and Asiatic stock. The modern
Maltese speak Arabic, mixed with Italian and English.

Kindled a fire. It was winter, stormy, and the shipwrecked strangers
were drenched. The fire was what a considerate kindness would suggest.

Paul had gathered . . . sticks. Instead of looking on, he helped. So
while on the ship he helped to throw out the tackling.

A viper came out of the heat. In the bundle of driftwood or brush the
serpent lay, chilled with the cold, but as soon as it was carried to the
fire it was awakened to activity by the heat and struck its fangs into
the hand that was disposing of the sticks.

This man is a murderer. The people pronounced it a judgment. Though he
had escaped the sea, divine justice would not let him escape. They
waited to see his hand swell, and him to fall dead, but when he shook it
off in the fire and experienced no harm they changed their minds and in
their superstition called him a god. We are hear reminded of the sudden
revulsion of feeling among the Lycaonians ([Act
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#018)). It is said that there are
now no venomous serpents in Malta, but this is due to the enormous
increase of the population and their extinction. The same fact has
occurred in many places.

[Acts 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 28:7</span></span>

The chief man of the island. His name, Publius, is Roman, and he was
doubtless the Roman governor of the island. It would be simply his duty
to take care of the Roman officer Julius and his company. Hence, he
"lodged them courteously" for three days until they could provide for
themselves.

Lay sick of a fever, etc. Dysentery was the disease. Paul, by prayer and
laying on of hands, healed him. This miracle naturally was followed by
others, and it is not strange that Paul was honored, and that the people
"laded them with all things necessary" for their further voyage.

[Acts 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 28:11</span></span>

After three months. They remained here most of the winter. As soon as
the weather would justify they would go forward. It was probably
February or March when they departed.

A ship of Alexandria. So was the one shipwrecked. This, no doubt, was
also laden with wheat. It had put into Malta, driven by bad weather, and
wintered there in the excellent harbor.

Castor and Pollux. Two favorite sea gods of the Greeks and Romans. Their
figures were carried on the prow, and probably gave name to the vessel.
"The great twin brothers" were famous in Roman legend.

Landing at Syracuse. Then the leading city of the great island of
Sicily, about eighty miles north of Malta.

Three days. Probably waiting for a fair wind.

Fetched a compass. Did not sail a straight course.

To Rhegium. On the Italian side of the straits of Messina, opposite
Messina on the Sicilian side. At this place they waited one day and then
the south wind blew, just the wind they wanted, as their course lay
north.

Came the next day to Puteoli. About 180 miles north of Rhegium, on the
bay of Naples, near the city of Naples. It is now called Pozzuoli.
Ostia, near Rome, and Puteoli were the two ports where the Egyptian corn
ships landed with their cargoes. In one of Seneca's letters (he was then
living) he describes the crowds that would gather at the wharf of
Puteoli when a great corn ship came in.

Where we found brethren. We know from the Epistle to the Romans that
there was a church at Rome that Paul was anxious to visit, and that the
brethren were numerous (see chap. 16). Here we find also a church at a
great seaport on the route from Palestine to Rome.

Were desired to tarry with them seven days. Compare also [Act
20:6-7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006) and [Act
21:4](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#004). In all these cases the object
must have been to pass a Lord's day and to celebrate the Lord's Supper.
The courteous Julius consenting, there was no difficulty in Paul's delay
here.

[Acts 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 28:15</span></span>

After the week they started toward Rome. Their route was along one of
the great roads for which the Romans were so famous, the Consular Way to
Capua, and the along the celebrated Appian Way to Rome.

When the brethren heard of us. The church in Rome. They determined to
meet the great apostle on the way. They had already received from him
the Epistles to the Romans. No doubt some of his Asiatic or European
converts were in the church. Aquila and Priscilla had returned to their
old home ([Rom 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#003)) in the Imperial
city, and perhaps were of those who met him on the way.

As far as Appii Forum. Some met them at Appii Forum, which is
forty-three miles from Rome, and another band met them at the Three
Taverns, which is ten miles nearer the great city. Both these places are
mentioned by Horace and Cicero (Hor. Sat. 1:5, 4; Cic. Letters to
Atticus 2:12).

Thanked God. As the apostle traveled as a prisoner amid these strange
scenes, along the crowded Appian Way, with so many evidences of colossal
power on every hand, and of such luxury and corruption, it was a glad
sight to meet a welcome from loving brethren, already numerous in Rome.
See Rom. chap. 16. It seemed a cheering omen that the church of the
capital of the world should meet and greet him. The distance traveled by
land from Puteoli to Rome as about 135 miles.

Delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard. The commander of
what was called the PrÃ&brvbr;torian Guard, the PrÃ&brvbr;torian
Prefect; at this time this great officer was named Burrhus. The
PrÃ&brvbr;torian camp was the permanent garrison of Rome.

But Paul was suffered to dwell by himself. Sometimes state prisoners,
sent from the provinces, awaiting trial, were thrown into a prison
adjoining the PrÃ&brvbr;torian camp, and sometimes were allowed to
choose their own residence under the guard of a soldier. Paul was
permitted the latter course, no doubt on account of the kindly reports
sent from CÃ&brvbr;sarea by Festus and King Agrippa to Rome. The soldier
was fastened to the prisoner by a chain. See [Act
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020).

[Acts 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 28:17</span></span>

After three days. We see indicated his restless activity. In three days
after his arrival as a prisoner he begins his work. The first three days
had probably been devoted to the brethren.

Called the chief of the Jews. The leading Jews. Josephus says that fifty
years earlier there were 8,000 Jews in Rome. A quarter of the city north
of the Tiber was given up to them. In A. D. 49, they had been banished
by decree of the Emperor Claudius, but shortly after were allowed to
return. At this time they enjoyed favor, PoppÃ&brvbr;a, the wife of
Nero, being a proselyte to the Jewish faith. These chiefs would include
the rulers of the synagogues, the scribes, and the heads of the leading
families.

Men, brethren. In a short speech, of which we have only an abstract, he
told them how he came to be there as a prisoner. No doubt he fully
explained the ground of enmity and his appeal; so fully that when he
said, For the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain. They knew that
it was the hope of Christ and the resurrection. This chain is a
reference to the one that bound him to the soldier.

We neither received letters, etc. They mean official letters from the
authorities at Jerusalem. They have no official tidings warning them
against him. They must have known of him, and of the charges made
against him. His fame was such that they desire to hear what he thinks,
or holds; to hear him explain the gospel.

For as concerning this sect, we know that it is every where spoken
against. Everywhere the Jews "spoke against" the Christians with
malignant hatred. Paul's treatment illustrates this. The Jews of Rome
had known but little of the Christians, but they knew the odium of the
church elsewhere. The Pagans also were beginning to regard the Christian
religion as "a detestable superstition" (Tacitus), and matters were
shaping for the bitter persecution of Nero, which came a few years
later.

[Acts 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 28:23</span></span>

When they had appointed him a day. On the appointed day "many" came. The
whole day was spent persuading them concerning Christ. Arguing from
Moses and the prophets, that Jesus was he of whom the law and the
prophets spoke.

Some believed, . . . and some believed not. As usual, some accepted and
some rejected, and this difference of opinion was openly expressed among
themselves. Probably the majority expressed themselves with extreme
bitterness. Paul's one word seems to imply this.

Well spake . . . Esaias the prophet. The passage quoted is found in [Isa
6:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009). It is quoted six times: in the
Gospels, here in Acts, and in Romans. No other Old Testament passage is
so often quoted in the New Testament, and it is always applied to Jewish
unbelief. The terrible prediction of the stubborn, willful unbelief of
the nation was fulfilled in Isaiah's time, in the time of Christ, in
that of his apostles, and eighteen centuries of Jewish history
illustrate the same fact to our times. For notes on the passage, see
[Mat 13:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014). These are the one final
word of Paul to the Jews before beginning his work among the Gentiles in
Rome. After the Jews departed, and had great reasoning among themselves,
we can hope that the result was that they believed and consorted with
Paul and the church.

[Acts 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 28:30</span></span>

Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house. His expense was met
during this period by the church in Rome and elsewhere. See [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018), where the Philippian
contributions are acknowledged. Here he was permitted to see and preach
freely to all who came unto him. Here he wrote four of his epistles; the
letters to the Ephesians, Colossians, Philippians, and the short letter
to Philemon. Here, from notices in these epistles, we know that Luke,
Timothy, Epaphros, Mark, Aristarchus and Tychius were with him at least
part of the time. Nor is there doubt but these two years produced great
results in Rome. It was at a later period, when Nero fell under the
influence of the cruel Tigellinus, that he became a persecutor, and Paul
had at this time full liberty. A few years after, at the time of the
Neronian persecutor, the church embraced vast numbers in the city of
Rome. The Roman historian, Tacitus says: "An immense multitude" were
converted and put to death.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Introduction](rom000)

</div>
