<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act006)  [Next](act008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

[Acts](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">act 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Stephen Outlines God's Dealings with Abraham. The Christ
Promised. Abraham a Man of Faith Before Circumcision Was Appointed. The
Patriarchs Sell Joseph into Bondage, Ignorant of the Counsels of God.
The Israelites in Egypt First Reject Moses Their Deliverer. The Rejected
Moses Is Their Savior. He Predicted a Prophet Like Unto Himself. The
Tabernacle and Temple Built, Though God Dwells Not in. Temples Made with
Hands. The Jews of Stephen's Time Were Like Their Fathers in Resisting
God. Had Slain the Holy One and Had Not Kept the Law. The Outburst of
Rage. Stephen Stoned by the Mob.

[Acts 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 7:1</span></span>

Are these things so? As president, the high priest asks what reply
Stephen has to make to the charges.

[Acts 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 7:2</span></span>

Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken. In order to make his defence, to
unveil the fact that his accusers were fighting God, and to preach
Christ, Stephen rapidly outlines Jewish history. Every fact cited has a
point. Note (1) that Abraham was called in uncircumcision, and the
Christ promised through his seed before he was circumcised; (2) that
Joseph, the type of Christ, was rejected by his brethren, and afterwards
saves them; (3) that Moses is also rejected and despised, but that God
makes choice of him to save Israel; (4) that the Israelites went whoring
after false gods and were carried into captivity; (5) that God had the
tabernacle and temple built, but was particular to assure Israel that he
dwelt not in temples made with human hands; (6) that their Moses,
rejected, whom the people refused to obey, predicted a prophet like unto
himself, and (7) that in the rejection of Christ they showed just the
same spirit as their fathers who had rejected and slain the prophets who
predicted Christ's coming. The speech is pointed, logical, and powerful,
not intended to conciliate, but to show the Jews their own sins.

The God of glory appeared unto . . . Abraham . . . in Mesopotamia. See
[Gen 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001). Abraham's childhood home
was at Ur of the Chaldees in Mesopotamia, the country between the
Euphrates and Tigris rivers. [Gen 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#001)
gives a second call at Haran, or Charran (the same), but Stephen
declares that the family had gone from Ur to Charran, because of an
earlier call. Charran was on the route to Canaan, and Abraham made a
stop there of five years, until his father died ([Gen
11:31-32](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#031)). See [Act
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#004).

[Acts 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 7:5</span></span>

Gave him none inheritance in it. Abraham possessed Canaan only by faith.
He looked to the fulfillment of the promise, that it would be the
possession of his children when he had neither land nor seed. See [Heb
11:8-16](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008).

[Acts 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 7:6</span></span>

His seed should sojourn in a strange land. See [Gen
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013), [Gen
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#016). In Egypt.

Four hundred years. In round numbers, counting from the time the seed,
Isaac, should be born to the Exodus. It is stated in [Exo
12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040) that the sojourning of the
children of Israel was 430 years. This includes the period from the call
of Abraham to the Exodus. See [Gal
3:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016). But Isaac was born about
thirty years after the call of Abraham, which leaves Stephen's period of
400 years.

[Acts 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 7:8</span></span>

And he gave him the covenant of circumcision. After his call and the
promise of Christ. See [Gen 17:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#001).
The covenant of Christ was for all; circumcision for the Jews.

[Acts 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 7:9</span></span>

The patriarchs, moved with envy. The sons of Jacob. See [Gen
37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028). As they rejected Joseph, their
descendants rejected Jesus.

God was with him. With the one rejected, and raised him to royal honors
in the house of Pharaoh.

[Acts 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 7:11</span></span>

There came a dearth. For the history of Joseph, begin at chapter 39, and
read to the close of Genesis. For the account of the famine and the
visit to Egypt of the ten brethren, see Gen. 42 and 43.

[Acts 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 7:14</span></span>

Then sent Joseph. The rejected Joseph becomes the prince and savior of
all Israel.

Threescore and fifteen souls. [Gen
46:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#027) says that sixty-six persons
besides Jacob, Joseph and his two sons, seventy in all, were in Egypt.
But the Septuagint Version, quoted almost invariably by Christ and the
apostles, as well as by Stephen here, after giving the sixty-six, adds:
"And the sons of Joseph born in Egypt were nine souls." The nine, added
to the sixty-six, make the seventy-five that Stephen gives. Why this
clause was omitted from the Hebrew text, followed by the Common Version,
is unknown. Stephen simply follows the text received by Christ, the
apostles, and the Jews generally.

[Acts 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 7:16</span></span>

And were carried over into Sychem. Jacob was buried at Hebron in the
cave of Machpelah ([Gen 50:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#013)), but
the fathers were buried in Sychem. We are told ([Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032)) that Joseph was buried there,
and Jewish tradition always affirmed that his brethren were buried there
also. Jerome, in the fourth century, said that their tombs were still to
be seen. He lived in Palestine.

That Abraham bought for a sum of money of the sons of Emmor. For an
account of this purchase, see [Gen
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen033.htm#019) and [Jos
24:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#032). The difficulty arises that it
was Jacob that made the purchase instead of Abraham. Some have supposed
that Stephen, in the hurry of a rapid speech under exciting
circumstances, by an oversight used the name of Abraham for Jacob;
others have thought that Abraham did make the purchase first and that it
was repeated by Jacob. Neither of these views are probable. Had Stephen
made a lapsus, it would have been corrected by Luke, who wrote under
Paul's supervision (see Introduction), so as to give Stephen's meaning.
It is far more probable that some copyist, by oversight, first wrote
"Abraham" for "Jacob," and that the MSS. that have come down to us were
made from that copy. There can hardly be a doubt that a man so learned
in the Scriptures as Stephen, and making an inspired defence, said
Jacob.

[Acts 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 7:17</span></span>

The time of the promise. Of deliverance from Egypt. See [Gen
15:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#013).

Which God had sworn. Solemnly promised. There is no account of a formal
oath. "Every divine assurance is equivalent to an oath."--Maimonides.

[Acts 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 7:18</span></span>

For an account of the persecution of Israel and birth of Moses, see
Exod. 1 and 2.

[Acts 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 7:22</span></span>

Moses was learned. He was reared as "the son of Pharaoh's daughter"
([Heb 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024)), and would be educated in
all the accomplishments of his time. We know from the researches of the
Egyptologists (see Rawlinson's Egypt) that at the period of Moses there
were great universities for the education of all who were expected to
engage in public employments. Eber's Uarda gives a good picture of Egypt
when Moses was a child.

[Acts 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 7:23</span></span>

For the accounts here given, see [Exo
2:11-15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#011). Compare [Heb
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#024). Observe the point of Stephen,
that Israel rejected Moses as "a ruler and judge over them," as they had
rejected Joseph and Jesus. Yet God chose both Joseph and Moses to be
their saviors and rulers.

[Acts 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 7:30</span></span>

For the call of Moses, see [Exo
3:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#001).

[Acts 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 7:35</span></span>

This Moses whom they refused. With great force Stephen makes his
application. This Moses they refused, but God sent him as their ruler
and deliverer. If his hearers failed to see the point, the next verse
makes it clear.

[Acts 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 7:37</span></span>

This is that Moses, which said. This rejected Moses who was chosen by
God to be a prince and a savior hath said, A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up . . . like unto me. Like me, "of your brethren;" like me,
rejected and despised by Israel; like me, exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior by God. See [Deu 18:15-19](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).

[Acts 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 7:38</span></span>

This is he. Moses.

That was in the church in the wilderness. The congregation of Israel,
the typical church. Moses was its mediator.

With the angel. The angel of the Covenant, who communicated the law to
Moses in Sinai. See [Act 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053) and [Exo
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), [Exo
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#023).

Lively oracles. The Word of life.

[Acts 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 7:39</span></span>

These verses summarize the unbelief, disbelief and waywardness of Israel
under Moses. The point is to show that the rejection of Christ
harmonizes with their past history. See [Exo
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#003); [Exo
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004); [Exo
32:1-14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001); [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019).

Did ye offer unto me slain beasts and sacrifices? This passage is quoted
from [Amo 5:25-27](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#025). The emphasis is on
me. Did ye not offer them to false gods also? The next verse gives the
reply.

[Acts 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">act 7:43</span></span>

Ye took up the tabernacle of Moloch. Israel turned to the abominable
worship of Moloch and other false gods, and hence shall be carried into
Captivity. Moloch, a god of the Amorites, worshiped by human sacrifices.

Remphan. Some planet worshiped as a god.

Beyond Babylon. A punishment brought on all Israel for its sins,
predicted by Amos. Observe still his point of showing their national
sinfulness.

[Acts 7:44](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">act 7:44</span></span>

Our fathers had the tabernacle of witness. The tabernacle built at
Sinai, a witness of the Covenant ([Num
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#002)), and of the good things to come
([Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005)). This tabernacle, built by
God's command, according to his pattern ([Exo
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009), [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040)), they had rejected for "the
tabernacle of Moloch" ([Act 7:43](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#043)).

Which also our fathers . . . brought in with Jesus. Joshua, the Hebrew
form for Jesus. He and the later generations of Jews brought this
tabernacle into Canaan when they conquered it.

Desired to find a tabernacle. David, who sought to build a permanent
temple ([Sa2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002); [Ch1
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#007)). He was restrained from building
the temple, and it was erected by Solomon ([Ch2
6:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#007)).

Howbeit the Most High dwelleth not. See [Ch2
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#018). The argument is that the
tabernacle was laid aside for the temple by God's command; that God does
not confine himself in any house made with hands, and hence the temple
also might be laid aside. God's real temple was greater than the
building they reverenced so superstitiously. See [Isa
66:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001).

[Acts 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">act 7:51</span></span>

Ye stiffnecked. Stubborn, like the ox which refuses to bend its neck for
the yoke. Stephen now makes his direct application.

Uncircumcised. Aliens in heart from God. The uncircumcised were aliens
from Israel. Stephen told them that spiritually they were heathen. They,
like their fathers, resist the Holy Ghost. The will of God.

[Acts 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">act 7:52</span></span>

Which of the prophets, etc.? Their fathers habitually persecuted the
prophets and slew some of them who predicted Christ (see lives of Isaiah
and Jeremiah). Now they, his hearers, were murderers of the Just One.

Received the law by the disposition of angels. Through the ministration
of angels. See [Deu 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029).

Have not kept it. Pretending to be very scrupulous observers of the law,
they were wicked law-breakers.

[Acts 7:54](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">act 7:54</span></span>

They were cut to the heart. Convulsed with rage. Stephen's speech was
now violently interrupted. Their rage is shown by their gnashing their
teeth.

[Acts 7:55](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">act 7:55</span></span>

Looked up stedfastly into heaven. The Lord who had promised his presence
was with him. His faith was so strengthened that, by faith, he saw the
Savior in Heaven, through the opened heavens. The scene was revealed to
his soul, instead of his eyes.

[Acts 7:57](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">act 7:57</span></span>

Cried out with a loud voice. They cried, closed their ears to what they
called blasphemy, then, in a tumult, without a vote on his guilt or
innocence, rushed upon him to slay him, though yet uncondemned legally.

[Acts 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">act 7:58</span></span>

Cast him out of the city. See [Lev
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#014). Though committing murder, they
were scrupulous to comply with their custom of execution outside of the
city.

And stoned him. Jesus was crucified, because the Romans put him to
death; Stephen was stoned, because Jesus slew him. Stoning was their
usual method of execution.

The witnesses. The witnesses had to cast the first stones ([Deu
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#010); [Deu
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#007)). Though doing all in a tumult,
without the consent of the Roman governor, the forms of the law were
observed.

At a young man's feet, whose name was Saul. Chrysostom says that this
young man, who was to become so celebrated, was now about thirty-five.
Hackett thinks we was about thirty. For a fuller account of him, see
[Act 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001), note.

[Acts 7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">act 7:59</span></span>

Stoned Stephen. Repeated to show that in the storm of stones he
committed himself to Jesus.

Kneeled down. Either voluntarily, or brought to his knees by the cruel
blows. The point is that in his sufferings, like his Master, he prayed
for his enemies. Saul, no doubt, noted this, and it had its effect.

He fell asleep. To wake again at his Savior's voice. The death of
Stephen was a murder, instead of an execution, because (1) no vote of
the Sanhedrim was taken, and (2) the consent of the Roman governor,
requisite to capital punishment, was not obtained. Consult [Joh
18:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#032), note.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 8](act008)

</div>
