<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1002)  [Next](co1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Proofs that the Corinthians were Yet Carnal. Not Able to
Endure Strong Meat. The Work of Paul and Apollos. The Increase of God.
The Church God's Building. The One Foundation. Perishable Materials
Built on This. The Sin of Defiling God's Temple. The Glorious Estate of
the Christians.

[1 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 3:1</span></span>

And I, brethren, could not speak unto you as unto spiritual. See [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006) of the preceding chapter; also
[Co1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014). The brethren at Corinth had
not reached the state of "spiritual men." They were carnal, undeveloped
like babes.

I have fed you with milk. When he was at Corinth he treated them as
babes, teaching them the simple, rudimentary principles.

Milk. Simple teaching.

Meat. Stronger and deeper doctrines. In the school of Christ, like all
others, the teaching must be adapted to the advancement of the learner.

Ye are yet carnal. Hence, still not spiritual enough to receive the
higher teaching, the "hidden wisdom," the meat. The proof that they were
yet carnal was the existence of divisions in the church.

Walk as men. Exhibit the jealous and discordant spirit characteristic of
men of the world.

When one saith, I am of Paul, etc. The fact that they are divided by
following different human leaders, instead of all following Christ,
demonstrated that they were yet carnal.

[1 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 3:5</span></span>

Who then is Paul and Apollos? Their carnal-mindedness shows itself in
choosing and following these human leaders. One said he was a Paulite,
etc. Hence he asks, Who is Paul, or Apollos? Only ministers, servants,
subordinates, agents through whom they believed on Christ.

As the Lord gave to every man. Gave to Paul and Apollos power to lead
you to faith.

I have planted, etc. It was Paul's work given him to plant the seed of
the kingdom; it was the work of Apollos to afterwards water or cultivate
the Christian plants which had come forth, but God gave the growth; gave
the seed its vitality and the plant its life.

So then neither is he that planteth, etc. The parts of Paul and Apollos
were as nothing; the power was all of God, who gave growth to the seed
and plant.

Now he that planteth and he that watereth are one. They have kindred
work, as servants, and each will be rewarded as a servant, according to
his own labor.

For we are laborers together with God. The Revision gives the true
meaning: "For we are God's fellow-workers." They, he and Apollos, were
fellow-laborers belonging to God (of God, not with God). They were
fellow-laborers with each other, of God. The Corinthian church was God's
field in which they labored. The Greek word means "tilled land."
Husbandry is obscure.

Ye are God's building. The figure is now changed. Paul and Apollos are
God's builders, and the church is the building they build. The leading
idea is that they are only God's employees. How can Paul have a party,
then, and Apollos another, when they are only employees of God?

[1 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 3:10</span></span>

According to the grace given to me. Given when? When he was called to be
an apostle.

I have laid the foundation. The figure of the building is retained. Paul
is a discreet master-builder. He had laid the foundation at Corinth,
when he was preaching Christ, and working through faith in him ([Co1
2:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#004)). Notice it is not a foundation,
but the foundation, because God's spiritual temple (v. 16) can have only
one.

Another buildeth thereon. After Paul left Corinth, Apollos and other
teachers continued to build upon the foundation that Paul had laid.

Let every man take heed how, etc. Since there is only one foundation of
the temple, viz: Jesus Christ, there should be most careful and
conscientious building upon it ([Co1
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#012)).

Other foundation can no man lay, etc. There is only one foundation of
the church ([Mat 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)). This
foundation-stone was laid by God ([Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016)). Paul's work under God was to
point to this foundation, to induce them to believe, and thus to build
them upon it. His preaching laid it in their hearts. To preach Christ is
to preach the fundamental or foundation truth of the church.

If any man buildeth upon this foundation. There is only one foundation
for all builders to build upon. The church or temple will be of the
character of the material built upon it. If this material be precious
and imperishable, if apostolic doctrines and men moulded into the image
of Christ be this material, it is well. If erroneous doctrines and
unstable men, wood, hay, stubble, this will all be revealed in due time.

Every man's work shall be made manifest. The kind of work that every
builder does will be manifested.

The day shall declare it. Probably the day of Christ's coming. As fire
destroys wood, hay, stubble, but leaves gold, silver, precious stones,
so the work of some builders, when tested, will vanish. They do not do
solid work.

If any man's work shall abide. Shall stand the test of trial. Such a
builder will be rewarded. There shall be stars in his crown.

If any man's work shall be burned. Shall perish as worthless. Such an
one will forfeit his reward.

So as by fire. He is saved, because he intended well, but is barely
saved, like one who escapes from a burning house where all his property
is consumed.

[1 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 3:16</span></span>

If any man defile the temple of God. In [Co1
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009) the apostle had said, "Ye are
God's building." Now he returns to that figure, and denounces the
judgment of God upon all who would defile his house by their carnal
divisions. In that temple the Spirit dwelt, as the Shekinah had dwelt in
the temple of God at Jerusalem; it was therefore a holy temple, and an
awful sin to defile it. Under the old dispensation, death was the
penalty of polluting the temple.

[1 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 3:18</span></span>

Let no man deceive himself. A caution against the philosophical
tendencies of the Apolloite party.

If any man thinketh that he is wise. If he is wise in his own estimation
and that of the world, let him choose what the world calls
"foolishness," in order that he may became "wise unto salvation."

For the wisdom of this world is foolishness with God. See [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020).

For it is written. [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013).

And again, the Lord knoweth, etc. [Psa
94:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#011).

Wherefore, let no man glory in men. In preachers like Paul, and Apollos,
and Cephas. Above all, let them not form parties around human leaders.

For all things are yours. All, the preachers as well as all beside, are
ordained to prepare you for eternal glory.

Whether Paul, etc. See [Co1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#005).

Or the world. The world is not to be the master, but the servant of
God's children.

Or life. Life is given to do God's work and to insure life eternal.

Or death. To the saint "death is gain."

Or things present. These, whatsoever they are, "shall work together for
good to them that love God."

Or things to come. The things to come to the Christian are the presence
of Christ, and the joys of the New Jerusalem.

All are yours. What a climax!

And ye are Christ's. He had procured for us all things, but has bought
us with a price.

Christ is God's. God's Son, and belonging to the Father. All things are
ours, but we are not our own! We own all else, but we do not own
ourselves! Hence our duty to be consecrated to the service of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 4](co1004)

</div>
