<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1001)  [Next](co1003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The One Theme of Preaching Christ Crucified. Not Eloquence or
Human Wisdom, but the Power of the Spirit Needed. A Divine Wisdom in the
Cross of Christ. This is a Mystery Revealed to the Converted; Unseen by
the Unregenerate. The Things of the Kingdom Not Understood by the
Worldly. These are Revealed to Those who Have the Spirit of God.

[1 Corinthians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 2:1</span></span>

Paul has shown, in the preceding chapter, that God chose the things and
persons which the world calls foolish, and weak, and base, and of no
account, in order to confute the world's wisdom and to overthrow its
power. He now shows that this harmonizes with the means used at Corinth
in the founding of the church.

Not with excellency of speech or of wisdom. Not with the eloquent arts
of a Grecian orator, or the speculations of a Greek philosopher; things
highly esteemed at Corinth and among all the Greeks.

The testimony of God. The Revision has, "Mystery of God," which has the
support of the best MSS., and harmonizes better with the context. The
gospel is often called "a mystery" ([Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009), and [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016)).

Save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. All his preaching centered upon
this great theme, "To the Greeks foolishness, and to the Jews a
stumbling-block" ([Co1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)).

I was with you in weakness, etc. In this great center of Greek culture,
he felt a human timidity at first in presenting the simple gospel in the
face of the splendors of the Greek philosophy.

Not with enticing words of man's wisdom. He did not resort to the arts
and enticements of Greek oratory or philosophy.

But in demonstration of the Spirit and of power. Filled by the Holy
Spirit, he spoke in its power, and thus moved upon the hearts of his
hearers. His words were also supported by the power of the Spirit shown
in miracles ([Rom 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019); [Co2
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#012)).

That your faith should not stand. Their faith was not produced by the
triumphs of oratory or philosophy, but by the gospel preached in the
power of the Spirit. Hence it was wrought through the means supplied of
God.

[1 Corinthians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 2:6</span></span>

Howbeit we speak wisdom. "We" refers to Paul and his fellow-preachers.
Though the gospel abjured carnal wisdom, yet it has a wisdom of its own,
a divine wisdom, which is imparted to and recognized by those who have
become full-grown Christians. "The perfect" are the full-grown in
Christ, instead of babes. Babes must be fed on milk, but the grown can
endure strong meat. For such there is a depth of wisdom revealed in the
gospel, but not the wisdom of this world.

Princes of this world. Leading men of the Jews, Greeks and Romans. They
had not learned this divine wisdom.

We speak the wisdom of God in a mystery. The Greeks had their mysteries,
like the Eleusinian, in which secrets were imparted to the initiated. A
mystery is a secret as yet not made known. The wisdom of God in the
gospel was a mystery hidden until Christ came, and since then fully
comprehended only by "the initiated," the full-grown Christians. The
apostolic sense of "mystery" is that which was hidden, but is now
disclosed to those who accept the gospel. Those who will not receive the
gospel cannot comprehend this wisdom. See [Rom
16:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#025); [Eph
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#006); [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016).

Even the hidden wisdom. Long hidden, though existing in God's plans made
before the "age" (see margin of Revision). The Jewish age or
dispensation may be meant, or it may mean the ages of man's existence.
The Greek word is "ages." This hidden wisdom proposed all through the
dispensations the glory of God's chosen ones.

Which none of the princes . . . knew. Utterly ignorant of the divine
wisdom to be revealed in Christ, they, the high priests, with Pilate and
Herod, crucified the Son.

As it is written ([Isa 54:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#004)). There
was no human conception, as shown by the prophet, of the glory to be
revealed in the mystery of the gospel. And indeed that glory is still
beyond the power of mere human conception.

[1 Corinthians 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 2:10</span></span>

But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit. These wonders of the
love of God, not seen by eye, nor heard by ear, nor revealed to the
senses, were revealed by the Spirit to the apostles (to us), and made
known through them to full-grown Christians ("the perfect," [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006)).

The Spirit searcheth, etc. The Holy Spirit, imparted so freely to the
apostles to lead them into all truth ([Joh
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)), is the Spirit of God. Hence
this Spirit imparts a knowledge of the deep things of God. The secrets
of the divine wisdom are thus made known.

For what man knoweth, etc. A man's spirit knows all his secrets, though
these are unknown to another man. So God's Spirit knows the Divine
secrets, and imparts these wherever he dwells in full measure as the
Spirit of knowledge.

Now we have received, etc. We apostles. The Spirit received by all the
apostles was not the spirit of the world, but the Holy Spirit which
Christ promised them as a guide into all truth. Hence they were enabled
to know what God imparted freely to them.

Which things we also speak. The grand truths, "the hidden wisdom," "the
mystery of God," revealed to them through the Spirit, they spoke to
others. These things they spoke, not in the words of man's wisdom, not
in the garb of philosophy, but in the words given by the Holy Spirit.

Comparing spiritual things with spiritual. This difficult clause has
received many explanations. Canon Cook explains it: "Matching spiritual
things with spiritual words." Conybeare and Howson say: "Explaining
spiritual things to spiritual men." This last view, which Canon Cook
says does no violence to the Greek, harmonizes best with [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006) and [Co1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014). I think that [Co1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014), the next verse, shows that this
is the true meaning.

[1 Corinthians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 2:14</span></span>

But the natural man. The natural man is the unregenerate, one who has
the spirit of the world, one not born anew of water and of the Spirit.
Man is a triune being--body, soul and spirit. The natural man is under
the dominion of the soul, the animal life. The spirit must be stirred
from its dormant condition, and born again, before one can comprehend
the things of the Spirit. These are foolishness to one under the
dominion of the animal life, such as the Jewish scribes and Greek
"disputers," for they can be discerned only by the spirit of man. It is
only when a spiritual hunger is felt, when one is born again, and when
man becomes a spiritual instead of an animal being, that he can
understand "the deep things of the Spirit." But blessed be God, the A B
C's of the gospel, which the ignorant and unlearned men can understand,
are sufficient to convert and prepare one for a higher knowledge.

He that is spiritual. He who lives the spiritual life.

Judgeth all things. "Examineth," in the margin of the Revision. The
spiritual man, helped by the indwelling Spirit, is prepared to study the
deeper truths of the Spirit.

Judged of no man. None who are not spiritual are able to sit in judgment
upon his higher life. He is on a higher level, and the animal man, from
his lower level, cannot well estimate him.

For who hath known the mind of the Lord? etc. No man, not even the most
spiritual, knows the mind of the Lord so as to instruct him. If there
was such a one, he, and he only, might instruct those who have the mind
of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 3](co1003)

</div>
