<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2011)  [Next](co2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 12:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Visions and Revelations. Caught Up into Paradise. The Thorn in
the Flesh. God's Answer to Prayer. Weakness Made Strength. The Signs of
an Apostle. Coming Now the Third Time to Corinth. Paul's Unselfish
course at Corinth.

[2 Corinthians 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 12:1</span></span>

It is not expedient for me, doubtless, to glory. It was distasteful for
him to speak on himself, and he could only do it when compelled by the
disparagement of adversaries.

I will come to visions and revelations of the Lord. Supernatural things
revealed to the spiritual eye and divine truths revealed to the human
spirit.

I know (not knew) a man above fourteen years ago. He knows the man and
could name him, since the man was himself. See [Co2
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#007). Above fourteen years ago this
man was caught up, etc. This letter was written A. D. 57. The being
caught up was then in A. D. 43. This is about the time that Paul was at
Antioch with Barnabas, or at Tarsus ([Act
9:29-30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#029)). It could not have been at
conversion, for that was about twenty years earlier than A. D. 57, nor
could it be the trance in the temple ([Act
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#017)) for that was too late.

Whether in the body or, etc. A person could then be caught up, see and
hear, without his body, in Paul's view. Hence the human spirit is not
material.

The third heaven. A Jewish expression for that heaven which was beyond
(1) the air, and (2) beyond the sun and stars; the secret place of the
Almighty.

I know such a man. Why does he not use the first person? Because it
would seem more like he was glorying in his own exaltation.

He was caught up into Paradise. Paradise and "the third heaven"
evidently mean the same. The term applied to a blessed abode beyond the
life in [Luk 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#043) and [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007).

Heard unspeakable words. Words that would be neither right nor possible
to reveal in human speech.

Of such an one will I glory. One so favored had ground for boasting, but
of himself personally he will not glory, save in his infirmities. See
note on [Co2 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#030). While he glories
of such an one, if he glories of himself it will be in his weaknesses.

[2 Corinthians 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 12:6</span></span>

For though I would desire to glory, I should not be a fool. He could
declare things truthfully that would show that his boast was not empty
vanity.

Lest I should be exalted, etc. This verse shows that [Co2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002) refers to himself.

There was given me a thorn in the flesh. Generally supposed to be some
painful physical infirmity. See [Gal
4:13-14](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#013).

A messenger of Satan. All physical evils are due to sin and hence are
ascribed to Satan. This thorn was (1) in the flesh; (2) it buffeted or
assailed him; (3) it was permitted to prevent undue exaltation, hence
must have been humiliating.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice. Prayed thrice that the thorn
might be removed.

My grace is sufficient for thee. The Lord answered his prayer, not by
removing the thorn, but by giving grace to bear it, and by the assurance
that Paul's sense of weakness, caused by it, fitted him to receive the
divine strength.

Most gladly, therefore, will I rather glory in my infirmities. Because
his infirmities fit him to enjoy the power that Christ bestows. What was
true of Paul is true of every saint. It is when we feel our weakness
that God strengthens us.

[2 Corinthians 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 12:10</span></span>

Therefore I take pleasure, etc. The unparalleled distress, sufferings
and persecutions, described in [Co2
11:24-27](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024), even give him pleasure
because they bring him to a sense of his helplessness and then God makes
him strong.

I am become a fool in glorying. As he looks back on what he has written
he finds that he has done what he condemned as a folly, commended
himself; compelled to; a thing that ought not to have been necessary,
for the Corinthians ought to have commended him.

Behind the chiefest apostles. The false teachers who had claimed at
Corinth to be leading apostles.

Truly the signs of an apostle were wrought. While preaching at Corinth
he demonstrated his apostleship.

What is it wherein ye were inferior, etc.? They had enjoyed every
privilege of the most highly favored churches, and, perhaps, complained
that he had preached without charge to them. See notes on [Co2
11:7-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#007). If this was a wrong, he asked
forgiveness.

[2 Corinthians 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 12:14</span></span>

The third time I am ready to come to you. Then he had been there twice
before; once when he founded the church; once while preaching at
Ephesus, of which visit Acts gives no account. See also [Co2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001), and notes on [Co2
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001).

And I will not be burdensome to you. As before, he will maintain himself
this third time.

For the children, etc. As parents do with children, so will he, their
spiritual father, do. He does not ask them to provide for him, while he
feeds them the bread of life.

I will gladly spend, etc. As a loving father, he will gladly spend and
be spent for them; even without the return of his love.

[2 Corinthians 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 12:16</span></span>

But be it so, I did not burden you, etc. It was charged that even if he
did not burden them, there was guile about it and in some other way he
would secure their substance. Hence he asks: Did I make gain by any of
the messengers or helpers I sent you? Did they demand anything? He then
specifies: I desired Titus. He sent Titus and another brother, but they
asked no gain.

[2 Corinthians 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 12:19</span></span>

Think ye that we excuse ourselves unto you? He must guard against a
misapprehension. He is not defending himself before a human bar. He
speaks as before God; says what will tend to edify them. His only object
is to build them up.

For I fear, etc. He has been led to speak because he feared, unless he
spoke plainly, that when he came he would have to rebuke severely on
account of sins which he enumerates.

Debates, etc. The sins here given are those that belong to a divided
state.

And lest . . . my God will humble. Lest he be humiliated by the
prevalence of sensual sins also. The sins here named are the peculiar
Gentile sins which he has rebuked so severely in both epistles.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 13](co2013)

</div>
