<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2007)  [Next](co2009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 8:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Liberality of the Macedonian Brethren. Exhortation to the
Corinthians to Abound in the Same Grace. The Example of Christ. The
Spiritual Blessing of Liberal Giving. Titus and Another Brother Sent to
Corinth to Aid and Encourage Them.

[2 Corinthians 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 8:1</span></span>

We make known to you the grace of God (Revision). Paul now introduces
the great collection of which he spoke in [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001), and [Rom
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#026). See also [Act
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029); [Act
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017). It had always been the custom
of the Jews in foreign lands to send up to Jerusalem contributions for
the temple treasury, but Paul urges the contributions for God's
spiritual temple, the poor saints. The mother church was in need and the
abundance of the saints elsewhere was to be her supply. The cause of the
destitution of the Jerusalem Christians is easily found in the times.
Famine ([Act 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029)) had stricken the
land, this had been followed by the troubles and unsettled state of
affairs which were leading to the Jewish war. The uneasiness of the
public mind, as well as the tumults, disturbed business and labor. The
result would necessarily be close times and destitution. The lesson of
this great collection is that distance does not diminish the claims of
suffering brethren for help.

Churches of Macedonia. The Roman province of Macedonia embraced all
Grecian countries north of the province of Achaia. The churches of
Philippi, Thessalonica, and Berea, founded by Paul, and probably many
others, were in this province.

How that in a great trial of affliction. The language seems to imply
persecution. This might have been an excuse for not giving, if they had
sought one. See [Act 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#006) and [Th1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014). But, still, their joy in the
gospel and their poverty combined so that they contributed with great
liberality.

For to their power. It was not the greatness of their contribution, but
the fact that they gave not only up to, but even beyond their ability,
which made their liberality so rich. The widow who gave her mite did
more than the rich men who cast in out of their abundance.

Willing of themselves. Required no urging.

Praying us with much entreaty. They insisted on doing more than the
apostle felt that they ought to do.

And this . . . not as we had hoped. The thought is that they exceeded
our hope. They consecrated themselves, and hence, held that all they had
was the Lord's. When church members give their own selves, there will be
no complaint that their money is withheld.

[2 Corinthians 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 8:6</span></span>

We desired Titus, that as he had begun. This faithful fellow laborer of
Paul, when he had gone to Corinth when Paul's first epistle was sent,
had begun the collection which it commanded in [Co1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001). Now Paul directs that he return
and complete the collection before the arrival of Paul ([Act
20:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#001)).

Grace. The grace of giving.

As ye abound in everything. Instead of Macedonia setting the example to
Corinth, the latter ought to have led. Their church was rich in gifts.
See [Co1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005).

I speak not by commandment. He levies no tax by command. The giving must
be free and cheerful in order to be blessed. He encourages them by the
forwardness of others; the example of the Macedonian brethren, and by
that of Christ.

For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the chiefest of
motives to giving. Our Lord gave up all for us. He became poor that we
might be rich in heavenly riches. If he gave himself for us, what shall
we give for him? Compare [Phi 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#007).
Christ parted with riches and took poverty; with glory and took
humiliation; with bliss and took suffering, all for our sakes. The
passage compares Christ's pre-existent state with that he had on earth.

[2 Corinthians 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 8:10</span></span>

Herein I give my advice. Not a "commandment" ([Co2
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008)), but advice. That is, that it is
expedient to complete the work begun "a year ago," or as we would say,
"last year."

Therefore, perform the doing of it. Finish it up. As there was "a
readiness to will," let there be "a performance" by giving out of what
"you have."

For if there is first a willing mind. The willing mind had been shown in
the readiness "to will." The willing mind is essential to the acceptance
of the gift. If there be this pre-requisite, then God accepts the gift
and measures it according to a man's means.

I mean not that other men be eased. I wish all to give according to what
they have, other churches as well as you. Nor do I mean to burden you
that the saints at Jerusalem may be at ease.

But by an equality. There is a lack at Jerusalem; let your abundance
supply it. So, too, if you be in want, they must supply it if they have
abundance. The church is a band of loving brethren. Where one lacks
others should supply, that all may be equally provided.

It is written. In [Exo 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018). When the
manna fell, whatever each individual gathered, there was found to be, on
measuring, "an omer to a man." So brotherly love is to effect such a
distribution that no saint will be in want, and none have what is
superfluous.

[2 Corinthians 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 8:16</span></span>

But thanks be to God. Because Titus is ready to return to Corinth and
help in the work.

For indeed he accepted the exhortation. Readily accepted the work when
Paul suggested it; nay more, of his own accord, he desired and chose it.

We have sent with him the brother. Two brethren are sent with Titus.
These are not named, and we can only conjecture who they were. As [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019) says that he "was chosen of the
churches to travel with us in this grace," and as [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004) says that the Macedonian
brethren, Sopater, Aristarchus and Secundus did travel with him to
Jerusalem, one of these is probably meant. Many have held that Luke was
the person, nor is this improbable.

Chosen of the churches. Paul desired, for the reasons given in [Co2
8:20-21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#020), that the churches should send
along messengers in charge of their gifts.

Avoiding this. There were evil-minded persons who might charge that the
apostle had used the gifts of his own advantage unless the messengers
could report just how the funds were used. Paul was careful (21) to
provide what was honest, in the sight of God, for his conscience's sake,
and in the sight of men for his work's sake.

[2 Corinthians 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 8:22</span></span>

We have sent with them. With Titus and the brother named in [Co2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018). The brother referred to here and
commended so highly is nowhere named.

Whether any do inquire of Titus. The commendation given of these three
brethren is official. Titus had long been a fellow laborer, and had
recently visited Corinth. The other two were messengers of the
Macedonian churches. Not only of the churches but of the glory of
Christ, the Lord's messengers to show forth his glory in a great work of
mercy.

Therefore, shew ye to them. Since these are representative men,
delegates of the churches, and of Christ, receive them cordially. Give
proof of your love, and show that when we have boasted of your
excellencies that our boasting was not empty. An ill reputation would
not only reflect upon the churches, but upon Paul himself.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 9](co2009)

</div>
