<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2006)  [Next](co2008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul's Freedom of Speech to the Corinthians. His Anxiety Until
Titus Came. The Consolation of the News from Corinth. His Letter
Produced Sorrow; Then Repentance. His Severe Words not Due to Ill-Will
for the Offender, nor for Them, but to Lead Them to Clearing Themselves.

[2 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 7:1</span></span>

Having therefore these promises. Those named in [Co2
6:17-18](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017). This verse is properly in
that connection, and should not have been separated by the chapter
division.

Let us cleanse ourselves. See [Co2
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#017).

From all filthiness of the flesh. All sensual sins, such as those to
which the Corinthians were addicted.

And of the spirit. The spirit of a man is defiled by such sins as those
named in [Gal 5:19-21](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#019).

Perfecting holiness. Every Christian in purifying himself should strive
for greater holiness and constantly seek to attain to the ideal of which
Christ is the example.

[2 Corinthians 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 7:2</span></span>

Receive us. Make room in your hearts for us and our admonitions. Compare
[Co2 6:11-13](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011).

We wronged no man. In the severe charges of his first letter.

We corrupted no man. Probably this is an answer to the vile insinuations
of his adversaries at Corinth.

I say not this to condemn you. I do not accuse you of making these
charges against me. Yet he knew well that they had been made by
Judaizers and others at Corinth.

I have said before. See [Co2 6:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#011).
What follows is an expression of undying affection.

Great is my boldness of speech, etc. This verse declares that he is
overflowing with joyful feeling. The next section explains its cause.

[2 Corinthians 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 7:5</span></span>

For when we were come into Macedonia. He first came from Ephesus to
Troas ([Co2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012)), and expected to
meet Titus there with word from Corinth concerning the effect of his
first letter. Not meeting him, he went on to Macedonia in great distress
of mind.

Our flesh had no rest. Compare with this [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013).

Without were fightings. Conflicts with enemies of Christ.

Within were fears. Lest the church at Corinth might make shipwreck.

Nevertheless God . . . comforted us by the coming of Titus. Titus
brought to him the joyful news of repentance and reformation at Corinth.
This news turned his affliction to joy.

Not by his coming only. He rejoiced to meet again a well-beloved fellow
laborer, but rejoiced still more over the news which he brought.

Your earnest desire. To cleanse themselves from fault.

Your mourning. Over the reproof of their sins.

Your fervent mind toward me. Affection for and zeal to please me.

[2 Corinthians 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 7:8</span></span>

I do not repent. "Regret," as in the Revision. The Greek word rendered
repent in this verse, is not the one rendered repentance in [Co2
7:9-10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#009). The Revision preserves the
distinction throughout. His first letter made them sorry, and at one
time he regretted sending it, because he feared it would not work the
result he wished, but since it had, he did not regret that he sent it.

Now I rejoice. Not because they were made sorry, but that their sorrow
brought repentance. Observe, (1) that regret is not repentance; (2) that
sorrow is not repentance; (3) that godly sorrow ([Co2
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010)) works repentance, or, in other
words, repentance results from godly sorrow, or sorrowing in a way
pleasing to God.

Godly sorrow worketh repentance to salvation, not to be repented of. The
steps are (1) godly sorrow; (2) repentance as a result of godly sorrow;
(3) salvation secured by repentance; (4) this effect of repentance is
never regretted. See Revision. The difference of repentance from sorrow
and regret is seen when we bear in mind that it means the change of mind
and heart wrought by godly sorrow for sin. The state implied by
repentance always leads to a change of life. The Common Version here and
elsewhere has made confusion by translating two Greek words which mean
different things by the same English term. One, rendered by the Revision
"regret," is found in [Mat 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#003), [Mat
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#005); the other, properly rendered
"repent," is found in [Act 2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038).

The sorrow of the world. Not godly sorrow, but remorse. The sorrow of
Judas was remorse. In the case of many besides Judas, it has resulted in
despair, which has led to destruction of life, or to eternal death.

For behold this self-same thing. Here is proof that they "sorrowed after
a godly sort." They repented and brought forth the fruits of repentance.

What earnest care. No indifference any longer.

What clearing of yourselves. From all responsibility for the sins of the
incestuous person ([Co1 5:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001); [Co2
2:6-8](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#006)).

What indignation. Against the deed that disgraced the church.

What revenge. What punishment of the offense committed.

[2 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 7:12</span></span>

Though I wrote unto you, etc. The language that follows in this verse
has caused some confusion. Paul evidently means to say that he did not
write his stern charge, in 1 Corinthians, chapter 5, so much on account
of the wrong doer, the incestuous person, nor on account of the person
he had injured (his father), as to manifest his earnest care for the
welfare of the church.

Therefore we were comforted in your comfort. He still pours forth his
joy over the happy change in the church, a joy due to his great
affection for it.

For if I have boasted anything to him of you. If he had done so, their
prompt repentance showed that his boasting was well founded.

And his inward affection, etc. He had not been received with distrust or
coldness or stubborn disobedience, but in a humble and repentant
Christian spirit, which had greatly increased his affection.

I rejoice therefore that I have confidence in you. Rather, that I am
greatly encouraged concerning you.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 8](co2008)

</div>
