<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2001)  [Next](co2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul's Affliction Over the Sins at Corinth. His Rebukes Caused
by His Love for Them. The Excommunication of the Offender. He to be
Forgiven on Repentance. Paul's Uneasiness at Troas. His Departure to
Macedonia.

[2 Corinthians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 2:1</span></span>

I would not come again to you in heaviness. See [Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023). He desired not to come to
rebuke, but to rejoice with them. This verse seems to point to a time
when he had come in "heaviness." It is generally admitted now by
commentators that he did make such a visit, probably while preaching at
Ephesus, running across the sea, a voyage of two or three days, for a
short visit. This visit seems to be proved by [Co2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014), [Co2
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021), and [Co2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001). See Conybeare and Howson, Vol.
II, p. 27.

For if I make you sorry, etc. The thought is, your sorrow, because
rebuked, gladdens me on account of your repentance.

I wrote this same. What he had written in [Co1
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#005) concerning the delay of his
coming. He delayed, having confidence that they would reform, so that
all could rejoice together.

For out of much affliction and anguish of heart I wrote. The First
Epistle, which rebuked their divisions and immorality. He wrote sharply,
but in great sorrow, not to grieve them, but to demonstrate his love by
his assiduous care of them and rebuke of their sins.

[2 Corinthians 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 2:5</span></span>

If any have caused grief. The reference in this indirect way is to the
incestuous person named in [Co1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#001).
It was not Paul, only in part, that this man had injured and grieved,
but the whole church.

Overcharge you all. Lay too heavy charges on you.

Sufficient to such a man is this punishment. The excommunication of the
offender ([Co1 5:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004)).

Inflicted by the many. Literally, by the majority. This shows that the
whole church took action, and implies that there were dissenters. The
command of Paul was endorsed by the action of the church. So ought the
decision of the officers of a congregation always be submitted for
approval.

Ye ought rather to forgive him. The Apostle sternly commands
excommunication of the offender, but tenderly enjoins forgiveness of the
penitent sinner.

I beseech you that to confirm your love toward him. The object of the
discipline was to save ([Co1 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005)).
Since it had had the desired effect, the offender should be restored.

[2 Corinthians 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 2:9</span></span>

For to this end also did I write. One object of his writing was to test
their obedience. He commanded positively in 1 Corinthians, chapter 5.

To whom ye forgive anything, I forgive also. As your excommunication of
the man was my act, so also your restoration of him will be my act.

Forgave I it in the person of Christ. As Paul acted as the servant of
Christ, under his direct orders, his official acts represented in the
Master.

Lest Satan should get an advantage of us. Satan would gladly have kept
the sinful man in the church; since he has repented, Satan would gladly
have the church keep him out.

[2 Corinthians 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 2:12</span></span>

When I came to Troas to preach Christ's gospel. See [Act
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008) and [Act
20:5-12](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005). In Acts two visits to Troas
are named, but the one alluded to here is omitted. Troas was then a
large city, situated not far from the site of old Troy, and almost
within sight of Europe. There is now a small village there and extensive
ruins. See notes in Acts.

A door was opened. An opportunity for the gospel. Though he did not
tarry now, a little later we find a church there ([Act
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#005)).

I had no rest in spirit. Because he had expected to meet Titus there and
to get news concerning the state of affairs at Corinth. Hence he went on
soon, hoping to meet him on the way to Macedonia.

Now thanks be to God. He did meet him there, and heard news that filled
him with thankfulness.

To triumph in Christ. A Roman triumph was given because of victory; God
always gave the victory, through Christ, in the end. He had feared that
Corinth would be an exception.

Maketh manifest the savor of his knowledge. The figure is that of a
sacrifice. A sweet-smelling savor was diffused by the offerings. So,
through them everywhere, the knowledge of God was made known, and was
grateful to the saved.

A sweet savor of Christ. This fragrant odor of the gospel was diffused
both among the saved and the unsaved.

To the one we are the savor of death unto death. In the triumphal
procession, alluded to in [Co2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#014),
the captives were led, and when it closed were put to death. The
fragrant odors of the incense, flowers and sacrifices, were a savor to
them of their approaching death. So the savor of the gospel is a savor,
a sign, an intimation of death to those who reject it.

And to the other the savor of life. This savor to the saved is a sign of
life, and leads to eternal life.

Who is sufficient for these things? He seems to exclaim in astonishment
that such results should follow human preaching.

We are not as many which corrupt the word of God. The Greek figure is
taken from the tavern-keepers who adulterate the wine they offer for
sale. There were those at Corinth, Judaizing teachers, who adulterated
the gospel with ingredients of Judaism. These are the "false brethren"
([Co2 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#026)) with whom his whole
ministry was a struggle. On the contrary, he and his fellow-preachers
spoke the words of genuine sincerity and with a sense of responsibility
to God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 3](co2003)

</div>
