<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](col003)  [Next](th1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--A Charge to Masters. Prayer and Prudence Commended. Tychicus,
the Bearer of the Letter, Introduced. Onesimus Commended. Greetings from
Brethren at Rome. The Epistle of the Laodiceans.

[Colossians 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">col 4:1</span></span>

Masters, give unto your servants. See notes on [Eph
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#009). This verse ought to have been
joined to the section of the preceding chapter in which mutual duties
are enjoined. It should be remarked that such a charge as this is not
found in all the profane writings of antiquity. Even in the pages of the
moralists a slave was regarded as a chattel with which the master had a
right to deal according to his will. The Christian rule, at once
introduced into the church, was for the master to treat his servants as
he wished to be treated by his Master in heaven, and to expect the same
kind of treatment that he meted out.

[Colossians 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">col 4:2</span></span>

Continue in prayer. Prayer ought to be regular, habitual. The Christian
should every day have a season of prayer. See [Luk
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001); [Act
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#014); [Eph
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#018).

Watch. Watch that you pray aright, in earnest, and ask for what you
ought.

With thanksgiving. Let thanks for mercies given ascend as you ask for
new mercies.

Praying also for us. Note the spirit of this prayer; not a thought of
his ease, comfort, or even safety, but only that he may be given full
opportunity to preach Christ. So sublime a self-forgetfulness in a
suffering prisoner is almost divine.

The mystery of Christ. The gospel of Christ. It was a mystery, i. e., a
hidden truth until it was revealed. See [Co1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#001); [Eph
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#019); [Col
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#026); [Col
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#002).

In bonds. See notes on [Eph 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#020); [Phi
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#007).

[Colossians 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">col 4:5</span></span>

Walk in wisdom toward them that are without. Let your conduct be prudent
and sagacious. Do not provoke persecution.

Redeeming the time. Using every opportunity and seeking time to do them
good.

Redeeming. Buying by giving up your own pleasure.

Let your speech be always with grace. Use courteous speech, calculated
to attract rather than to repel.

Seasoned with salt. Food without seasoning is insipid. Let the speech be
so seasoned by "grace" that it will not be rejected with aversion.

That ye may know how, etc. So that your answer to every man may be such
as the case requires. The idea is to always say what is pertinent and
best for the occasion.

[Colossians 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">col 4:7</span></span>

All my state shall Tychicus declare. See [Eph
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#021) for note on Tychicus. He carried
the Epistle to the Ephesians, and that to the Colossians on the same
journey. He was probably a native of Ephesus, and was one of Paul's most
trusted evangelists. See [Act 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004);
[Ti2 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#012); [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012). It should be kept in mind that
all Paul's Epistles were sent by messengers. There were no postal
arrangements for carrying private letters such as exist in our times.

Whom I have sent. Not only to carry letters, but to ascertain the state
of the churches, and to instruct and comfort them. He came as an
evangelist to help them on.

With Onesimus. A peculiar interest is connected with Onesimus because he
is the subject of the Epistle to Philemon. He belonged to Colosse, was
probably a slave of Philemon, and had fled to Rome, and now returns as
"a faithful and beloved brother." Tychicus bore also at this time the
letter to Philemon.

[Colossians 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">col 4:10</span></span>

There follow Christian remembrances from several of Paul's companions.

Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner. A Macedonian from Thessalonica ([Act
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#029); [Act
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#004); [Act
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#002)). He accompanied Paul from
Jerusalem to Rome. He is named in Philemon 24.

And Marcus. The old companion of Paul and Barnabas on their first
missionary tour.

Sister's son to Barnabas. It is now conceded that this should be,
"Cousin to Barnabas." Since in this year (probably A. D. 62) Mark
attends Paul, it is inferred that Barnabas was dead.

Touching whom. Mark.

Commandments. Commendations.

Receive him. Perhaps these churches knew that at one time Paul had
refused to have Mark in his company ([Act
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)), and hence would not have
received him cordially without such a commendation.

And Jesus, which is called Justus. We only know of this man that, like
Mark, he was a Jewish Christian, of the circumcision, and highly
commended by Paul.

Epaphras. See note on [Col 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#007). He is
thought to have founded the church at Colosse.

One of you. A member of the Colossian church.

For you in prayers. In his absence from you he continues to labor
fervently for you in his prayers.

Them that are in Laodicea. The sister city near at hand across the
valley of the Lycus.

Hierapolis. Another city close at hand, in which a church had been
planted. Probably Epaphras planted it also.

[Colossians 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">col 4:14</span></span>

Luke. The historian. Note that two, Mark and Luke, were both with Paul
at this time. See Introduction to Luke. He was a Gentile.

Demas. Named also, and not to his credit, in [Ti2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010); also in Philemon 24.

Nymphas. An inhabitant of Laodicea.

The church which is in his house. "His" in the Old Version; "her" in the
Vatican MS., but the best authority renders it "their house;" i. e., the
house of Nymphas and his family. In the first century no church building
existed, and the Christians met in private houses. A portion, at least,
of those in Laodicea met in the house of Nymphas, and are greeted as
"the church in their house." See also [Rom
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#005); [Co1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#019); Philemon 2.

[Colossians 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">col 4:16</span></span>

Likewise read the Epistle from Laodicea. The Epistles addressed to these
contiguous churches were for each other. Tychicus no doubt bore also a
letter to the Laodiceans. Whether that letter was lost, whether it is
the Epistle to the Ephesians, or whether the letter was a general letter
to the churches of Asia, has been much discussed. My own opinion is that
more than one copy of the Ephesian letter was made, one being delivered
to the Ephesian church, and the other to the church at Laodicea. Space
will not permit of a discussion upon this point.

Say to Archippus. He is named in Philemon 2. He had some important work,
and was possibly a preacher.

The salutation by the hand of me Paul. Paul dictated his epistles to an
amanuensis ([Rom 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022)), but was wont
to add a salutation in his own hand ([Gal
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011); [Th2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017); [Co1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#021)).

Remember my bonds. Three times in this chapter he alludes to his chains,
in [Col 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#003), [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010), [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018). The thought is, "Be willing to
suffer for the gospel even as I do."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Introduction](th1000)

</div>
