<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph004)  [Next](eph006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Walking in Love. Flee All Impurity. Let Speech Be Pure.
Covetousness a Species of Idolatry. No Fellowship with the Wicked in
Their Deeds. Enjoyment to be Sought in the Spirit Rather than in Wine.
The Mutual Duties of Wives and Husbands. The Mystery of the Marriage
Union and of Christ with the Church.

[Ephesians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 5:1</span></span>

Be ye therefore. "Therefore" refers to God's kindness, spoken of in [Eph
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032).

Followers of God. Literally, imitators, "forgiving one another as God .
. . hath forgiven you" ([Eph 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#032)).

As dear children. As beloved children seek to do like their father.

And walk in love. Thus imitate God, and Christ who gave himself for us.

An offering and a sacrifice. In the Jewish temple there were offerings
which were not sacrifices. Christ gave himself as an offering and was
sacrificed.

A sweet-smelling savour. See [Gen
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021); [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009); [Co2
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#015). An expression denoting an
offering grateful to God.

[Ephesians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eph 5:3</span></span>

But. Sundry sins are now forbidden which were utterly opposed to the
duties just commended.

Fornication. This was hardly accounted a sin among the Gentiles.

Uncleanness. Every kind of impurity.

Or covetousness. This sin is emphasized. The Greek term means
"Greediness for more." It implies an insatiable desire for wealth and
for the things which gratify appetite. It is therefore a greed which
leads to many sins.

Let it not be once named. Such sins must be banished not only in deed,
but in word.

Neither filthiness. All kinds of indecency.

Foolish talking. Buffoonery.

Jesting. Wit of doubtful morality, words and suggestions of doubtful and
double meaning.

Are not convenient. Are not becoming. It is more becoming to Christians
to engage in thanksgiving.

No fornicator. No person of licentious life, words or thoughts.

Nor covetous man, who is an idolater. See note on [Eph
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#003). The covetous man gives his heart
to the object of his greed rather than to God, and hence is virtually an
idolater.

Hath any inheritance. None of these are heirs of the kingdom and hence
have no promise of heaven.

[Ephesians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eph 5:6</span></span>

Let no man deceive you with vain words. With artful pleas that sinful
things are not sinful.

For. Because of just such sins as they excuse, God's wrath will be
visited upon all who live in (the children of) disobedience.

Partakers. Have no share with them in their sins.

[Ephesians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 5:8</span></span>

Ye were once darkness. Not only lived in darkness, but gave off no light
and darkened others.

Now are ye light. Shining with the light that comes from Christ.

For the fruit of the Spirit. To walk as children of light is to bear the
fruit of the Spirit. This is shown by goodness and righteousness. See
[Gal 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022).

Proving. Showing by walking in the light what is acceptable to God.

[Ephesians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 5:11</span></span>

And have no fellowship. See [Eph 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#007).
Works of darkness are those which please the powers of darkness. The
Christian must have nothing whatever to do with these. We must not
countenance any sinful device, but rather reprove it. This would prevent
the patronage of many things which the world countenances.

For the things which are done by them in secret. In the works of
darkness are many secret sins, some too shameful even to be named.

But all things that are reproved. These works of darkness are to be
reproved by Christians ([Eph 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#011))
that their true character may be brought to light. If the light is
thrown upon them they will be seen.

Everything that is made manifest is light. Whatever is brought to light
is light. Even if wicked, when it is brought to light it enlightens men
by revealing its real nature.

Wherefore he saith. Who says, or where, is uncertain. There is a similar
thought in [Isa 60:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001) and [Isa
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#019). He probably means that God, in
substance, says.

Awake, thou that sleepest. The sleeper represents one not converted.

Arise from the dead. From death in sin ([Eph
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)). Conversion is often described as
a spiritual resurrection ([Rom 6:4-6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004);
[Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)).

And Christ. Christ gives light to all who come to him. The Greek
quotation is in verse, and has been translated,

[Ephesians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eph 5:15</span></span>

Walk circumspectly. The Revision makes the meaning clear.

Redeeming the time. Using every opportunity; buying them by giving up
present enjoyment.

Be ye not unwise. That is, so foolish as to not understand the will of
the Lord.

[Ephesians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eph 5:18</span></span>

Be not drunk with wine. Wine was at that time the usual intoxicating
drink. The passage forbids intoxication, which was a common vice of the
time.

Excess. "Riot," in the Revision. How true! Enjoyment is not to be
sought, as the world seeks it, in wine, but rather be filled with the
Spirit. Then your songs will not be bacchanalian.

Speaking to yourselves in psalms. Under the influence of the Spirit when
together you will sing psalms, such as those of the psalmist.

And hymns. Songs of praise.

Spiritual songs. Songs which express spiritual emotions. We find
Christian hymns in the church at a very early period.

Singing and making melody. While the lips sing, the heart must join in
the melody by an uplifting to God. Too much singing in the churches is
only of the lips.

Giving thanks always. This is often done in songs.

In the name. All our worship is in the name of Christ.

Subjecting yourselves. Filled with the Spirit, we "speak in psalms,"
etc. ([Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019)), "give thanks," ([Eph
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020)), and submit ourselves to each
other in the fear of God. This last duty belongs to the relations of
life. One of these relations is of husbands and wives ([Eph
5:22-32](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022)); another of children and
parents ([Eph 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#001)); another still of
servants and masters ([Eph 6:5-9](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#005)).

[Ephesians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eph 5:22</span></span>

Wives, submit yourselves unto your own husbands. Mutual duties are
named. The husband should "love his wife as Christ loved the church,"
and the wife should submit to this loving husband "as unto the Lord."
The husband is the "head" of the family, but must be willing to give
himself for it.

The husband is the head of the wife. Every organization must have a
head. The head of the family can only rule the wife in the most devoted
love ([Eph 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025) and [Eph
5:33](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#033)).

As the church, etc. The relation of the wife to the husband is like that
of the church in Christ, a close, tender relation, in which there is no
bondage, but freedom, because the service is that of the heart.

[Ephesians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eph 5:25</span></span>

Husbands, love your wives. We have here not only the duty, but the
measure of the duty.

As Christ loved the church. Loved so well as to be willing to give all
things, even life, for her welfare. The union of husband and wife were
here described is ideally perfect. The tenderest love on one side, and
loving obedience on the other.

That he might sanctify it. The great love of Christ for the church, his
bride, is shown as an example to Christian husbands. Christ gave himself
for the church. His object was to sanctify it, make it holy. In order to
do this it was needful to cleanse it with the washing of water by the
word. All commentators of repute in all bodies refer this to baptism.
All in the church pass through the waters of baptism. But the washing of
the water would be of no avail without the word. The power is in the
word of the Lord which offers the gospel and commands baptism.

That he might present it to himself a glorious church. A church cleansed
from sin; a bride without a blemish.

[Ephesians 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eph 5:28</span></span>

So ought men to love their wives as their own bodies. The church is the
Bride of the Lamb, but it is also Christ's body. As he loved his body,
so every husband ought to love her who by the mystery of the marriage
tie has become "bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh" ([Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023)).

No man ever yet hated his own flesh. Or his own body. Yet, wife and
husband are "one flesh" ([Eph 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031)).

We are members of his body. We are all members of Christ's body, the
church. But the church is his Bride. Hence the language of [Gen
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#023), where Adam declares that his
wife "is bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh," applies to our
relation to Christ.

[Ephesians 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eph 5:31</span></span>

For this cause. This verse is quoted from [Gen
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024). It speaks not only a fact of the
marriage state, but also implies that Christ left the Father for the
sake of his mystical Bride.

This is a great mystery. The wonders of this marriage tie, but
especially that the marriage of the first Adam should prefigure the
relation between the second Adam and the church.

Nevertheless. Without regard to the mystery, let every one, etc. The
rest of the verse states the mutual duties already so tenderly
explained.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 6](eph006)

</div>
