<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ephesians Index](eph)  
  [Previous](eph001)  [Next](eph003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ephesians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)

[Ephesians](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eph 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Our Spiritual Condition in a State of Nature. God's Saving
Mercy. Salvation by Grace Through Faith. No Longer Aliens and Strangers.
Peace Between Jew and Gentile Through Christ. All Built into the Lord's
Holy Temple.

[Ephesians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eph 2:1</span></span>

And you hath he quickened. In the closing part of chapter 1 Paul has
described the mighty working of the Divine power in raising Christ from
the dead, and his exaltation to the right hand of God. He now turns from
this mighty exhibition of power to another not less striking--the
resurrection of those who were spiritually dead to a new and holy life.

Dead in trespasses and sins. Spiritual death is meant. By their
trespasses and sins they were separated from God. To be without God is
to be in death. Trespasses are thought to refer to breaking known laws;
sins, to the corrupt state which leads to a constantly sinful life.

According to the course of this world. You lived in trespasses and sins,
in accordance with the spirit of the world.

The prince of the power of the air. Called elsewhere the prince of this
world, Satan. Why he is called "prince of the power of the air" is not
certain; various explanations are given. Probably his subtle influences
and whisperings pervade the air, and come upon us as unconsciously as
the vital fluid we breathe. The Jews held that the atmosphere was the
abode of evil angels.

The spirit that now worketh. This spirit, that of the world, of the
power of the air, is the one which inspires those who live in
disobedience.

Among whom also we all had our conversation. In [Eph
2:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#001) the second person is used,
meaning the Ephesians; here the person is changed to the first. Meyer
thinks that "ye" refers to Gentile Christians; "we" to Paul and his
Jewish brethren. The Gentile Christians had been dead in trespasses and
sins; nor had the Jewish Christians differed in this respect.

Fulfilling the desires of the flesh and of the mind. Not only fleshly
desires, but the impulses of a sinful mind, such as malice, envy, pride,
etc.

And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. This declares
that "we," now Jewish Christians, were once, when in a state of nature,
under condemnation, just as the "others," the rest of the world, or the
Gentiles. Some have held that this passage teaches innate, hereditary
depravity. I am sure that this was not in the apostle's mind. (1) Two
classes are spoken of, "you" and "we," Gentiles and Jews. (2) Both were
equally sinful, the first "dead in trespasses and in sins," and the
second "by nature the children of wrath, even as the others." (3) The
passage then simply affirms that Jews and Gentiles alike, before
conversion, were dead in trespasses and sins, and under the divine
condemnation. However, "by nature" is supposed to teach that the
depravity is innate, and that all are born under the wrath of God. Such
an interpretation would put the passage in conflict with Paul's teaching
elsewhere, and with that of Christ. For instance, [Mat
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#003) and [Mat
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014) are inconsistent with the view
that little children are born "under the wrath of God." Indeed, it is
taught in this passage that both classes have been brought into this
state of condemnation by walking in sin, not by their birth. But does
not by nature imply that they are born "children of wrath?" The word
rendered "by nature," is found in [Rom
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014); [Co1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#014); [Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015); [Gal
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#008). In only one of these passages can
it refer to natural birth at all, and there it refers to race ([Gal
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#015)). In not one passage does it
describe what is innate. It does describe custom, practice, and
unconverted state. No one would say that the Gentiles, who "do by nature
the things of the law," do so because it is innate. It means that they
do so without the revelation. In a similar sense it is used here, and
means that "we," as well as others, before we were converted by the
gospel, were dwelling in sin like others, and were like them, "the
children of wrath." The state of nature is the unconverted state.

[Ephesians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eph 2:4</span></span>

Having shown that both Jews and Gentiles were spiritually dead, Paul now
declares the spiritual resurrection of the saints. This lifting up from
death to a new life is due to God, rich in mercy, and on account of the
great love wherewith he loved us. The next verse affirms the fact.

Hath quickened us together with Christ. As he quickened Christ and
raised him, so when we were dead in sins he gave us spiritual life by
the gospel and lifted us to a new life. "We were planted in the likeness
of his death and resurrection" ([Rom
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)).

By grace ye are saved. Not by works of the law, as he has shown so fully
in the Galatian letter.

And hath raised us up together. Buried into the death of Christ, we are
risen with Christ ([Col 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#012)). We are
risen as new creatures to walk with the Risen Christ, with our minds on
heavenly things ([Col 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#001)).

To sit in heavenly places. In our present state, to have our minds above
([Col 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#002)).

That in the ages to come. In all coming time.

The exceeding riches of his grace. In saving, purifying and blessing his
children.

[Ephesians 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eph 2:8</span></span>

For by grace are ye saved through faith. Lest they might forget the
doctrine that he ever preached, he reminds them that works of the law
never saved them; that they were saved by God's grace shown in the
gospel; that this salvation was obtained through the faith. The definite
article is found before faith in the Greek, showing that the faith, or
the gospel, is meant.

It is the gift of God. The salvation is not due to ourselves, but is
God's gift. The grammatical construction of the Greek does not allow us
to make "faith" the subject of the last clause. It is not "faith," but
salvation through the faith, which is the gift of God. So says John
Wesley in his Notes: "This refers to the previous clause, That you are
saved, etc."

Not of works. The salvation is not due to works of law, or to our own
merit; hence there is no ground for boasting.

For we are his workmanship. It is God who saved us; as new creatures, he
had made us through the gospel. We are not saved by works, but are his
workmanship, created unto good works, designed henceforth to abound in
them.

Which God hath before ordained. It is his ordination that all who
believe the gospel and are saved should practice good works. God has
graciously quickened us, saved us, made us new creatures, and prepared
us unto good works.

[Ephesians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eph 2:11</span></span>

Wherefore remember. Remembrance of all that God had done would awake
gratitude.

The Uncircumcision. Gentiles were so called by the Jews, who were the
Circumcision.

In the flesh. There was a circumcision not in the flesh, not made with
hands, but of the Spirit, and in the heart ([Rom
2:28-29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028)).

Without Christ. The past state of the Gentile Christians is described
when they had no knowledge of Christ.

Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel. Not being of the race of
Abraham, who were in covenant relation with God.

Strangers from the covenants. The various covenants made with the
patriarchs which contained the promise of Christ, of which they were
ignorant, and hence not partakers of the hope.

Having no hope. No hope in the promise or in Christ.

Without God. Walking without the knowledge of the true God.

But now in Christ Jesus. Once so far off, separated from God, they have
been brought nigh, and the means that brought them is the blood of
Christ.

[Ephesians 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eph 2:14</span></span>

For he is our peace. It is the Crucified Christ that brought you nigh,
for he, he only, is our peace. The creator of peace between Jew and
Gentile; between alienated man and God.

Who hath made both one. Jew and Gentile one. The old distinctions are
destroyed. All are on the same footing before God.

Hath broken down, etc. Having broken down, or ended, the law of Moses
which built up a wall between the Jews and Gentiles.

Having abolished in his flesh the enmity. While he was in the flesh the
law condemned him and nailed him to the cross. In so doing it destroyed
itself. The old covenant ended at the cross, when the new covenant was
dedicated by the blood of Christ. Hence, the law, the wall between Jew
and Gentile, "the enmity," was taken away.

To make in himself of twain one. Thus, the difference between Jew and
Gentile being destroyed, both are made in the church one new race, "a
royal priesthood, a chosen nation, a peculiar people," at peace among
themselves.

That he might reconcile both to God. First, the cross makes peace
between Jew and Gentile; and second, the blood of the cross cleanses
both before God, and makes peace between them and God.

Having slain the enmity. Not only of Jew for Gentile, but of the sinner
for God. When the sinner once fixes his mind on the bleeding Savior, the
"goodness of God leads him to repentance."

Preached peace . . . afar off . . . were nigh. The Gentiles were "afar
off;" the Jews, "nigh." To both Christ preached with each other and with
God.

We both have access by one Spirit. The Spirit of adoption enables both
to cry, "Abba, Father." Both pray to one Father; hence, all are
brethren.

[Ephesians 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eph 2:19</span></span>

Therefore ye are no more strangers. Gentiles have been brought nigh, and
are fellow-citizens of the kingdom of God with the saints.

Built upon the foundation. They have been built into the temple of the
Lord. The word of God, declared by apostles and prophets, is the
foundation of their faith, Christ being the chief corner-stone. The
corner-stone was a stone of double size at the corner, which became a
part of both walls and joined them together. So he had joined the Jews
and Gentiles in the building. He is the foundation-stone on which the
building rests, and the stone of union. Compare [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016); [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042); [Act
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011); [Pe1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#007).

In whom. In Christ himself.

All the building fitly framed together. The several parts, or buildings,
are united in him, so as to form one holy temple. That is, all races,
Jews and Gentiles, are compacted in one church.

In whom ye also. The Ephesian Christians.

For a habitation of God. The Shekinah descended and dwelt in the
tabernacle between the cherubim; but God, by means of the Spirit, dwells
in the spiritual temple, in the hearts of believers. This temple is
composed of living stones ([Pe1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#005)),
has a holy priesthood, and spiritual sacrifices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Chapter 3](eph003)

</div>
