<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal005)  [Next](eph000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 6:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Restoring the Stumbling. Humility Commended. The Law. Reaping
and Sowing. Paul's Superscription. Glorying in the Cross. The Mark of
Jesus Christ.

[Galatians 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 6:1</span></span>

If a man be overtaken in a fault. Not gone into sin as a result of
sinful premeditation, but surprised by it. Those intending well are
sometimes caught unawares.

Ye which are spiritual. Who have continued to walk in the Spirit.

Restore such an one. Instead of judging severely and seeking to cut them
off, seek lovingly to lead them back from their error.

Considering thyself. We ourselves may be caught by temptation and sin.
Let us bear in mind that we are not infallible, and judge others gently.

Bear ye one another's burdens. Help each other, sustain each other; if
you see one about to stumble under his burden, hold him up.

So fulfill the law of Christ. The law of love. See [Joh
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034).

[Galatians 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gal 6:3</span></span>

If a man think, etc. If he thinks he is strong, needs no help, will
never need sympathy, etc., he deceiveth himself.

But let every man prove his own work. Instead of commenting upon the
weaknesses of others, let him test his own work. If his work stands the
test, there he can rejoice in it alone, not because he is superior to
another.

For every man shall bear his own burden. This seems at first to conflict
with [Gal 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002). The meaning of [Gal
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#002) is "Bear ye one another's burden
of trial and suffering;" of [Gal 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#005),
"Every one must bear his own burden of responsibility." The first is
aiding to bear the burden of another's infirmities; the second is the
burden of our account before God. The Greek had two different words for
"burden" in the two verses. It is unfortunate that the Versions do not
represent the difference by two words in the English.

Let him that is taught. Let those who are taught by the preachers and
teachers sustain those who instruct them.

[Galatians 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gal 6:7</span></span>

Be not deceived. Men often are. They do fancy that God may be mocked.
The immutable law of the spiritual kingdom shows that he is not.

Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap. A law not only of the
vegetable world, but of our bodies and spirits. Habit is only an
illustration of this law. The delirium tremens on the one hand, and the
purity of the aged saint on the other are due to the action of this law.

Soweth to his flesh. He who thus sows will reap a crop of fleshly lusts
and ills. His carnal indulgence will end in moral ruin.

Soweth to the Spirit. He shall reap spiritually, and as a final harvest
the spiritual life beyond, the life everlasting.

Let us not be weary in well doing. In sowing to the Spirit. Because, if
we hold out faithful, and faint not, we are sure to reap in due season.

As we have therefore opportunity. Doing good is well doing, i. e.,
sowing to the Spirit. The Christian rule is to do good, but above all
others to love, cherish and help the brethren.

[Galatians 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gal 6:11</span></span>

Ye see how large a letter. Rather as in the Revision. Paul used an
amanuensis in letter writing, but the superscriptions were written in
his own hand to show the genuineness of his epistles. See [Rom
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#022), and [Col
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#018). Some have supposed that his
"thorn in the flesh" was a weakness of the eyes which rendered it
difficult for him to write.

As many as desire to make a fair shew in the flesh. To comply with the
worldly demands. They desire to have you circumcised, because, if you
are not, and they fellowship you, the Jews will persecute them.

For neither they themselves. They do not keep the law in all its
details, but want to bring you under it that they may boast of their
Gentile proselytes.

Glory in your flesh. Glory because circumcision has made marks in your
flesh.

But God forbid. Not only will he not glory in what does away with the
cross ([Gal 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#011)), but God forbid that
he should glory in anything but the cross.

By whom. By this cross he also is crucified, so crucified that he is
dead to the world. It is separated from him.

[Galatians 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 6:15</span></span>

In Christ Jesus. See note on [Gal 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#006).
Circumcision in itself is a matter of indifference. To be a new
creature, neither Jew nor Gentile, but a child of God is essential.

This rule. The one just named in [Gal
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#015). A benediction is pronounced upon
all such.

And upon the Israel of God. Rather, Even upon, etc. The Greek word often
means even, and does here, as the Israel of God does not differ from
those who follow "this rule."

From henceforth let no man trouble me. Dispute my apostolic authority.

I bear in my body the marks, etc. He bore on his body too many evidence
of what he had suffered for Christ. As slaves were often branded by
their master's name, so he had the brand of Christ upon him in his
scars. Compare [Co2 11:24-25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#024).

Brethren. This is his parting benediction. It rests not upon the flesh
against which he had warned them, but upon the highest part of their
being, the spirit.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ephesians Introduction](eph000)

</div>
