<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Galatians Index](gal)  
  [Previous](gal002)  [Next](gal004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Galatians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

[Galatians](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gal 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Spirit Imparted to Galatian Christians Through the Gospel.
This, too, Before They Knew of the Works of the Law. Abraham Justified
by Faith, While Yet Uncircumcised. Those of All Nations, Who Believe,
Blessed With Abraham. All Condemned by the Law Since All Are Sinners.
Christ, Whom It Slew, Redeemed Us from Its Curse. The Covenant With
Abraham Which Included the Gentiles Made Before the Law. The Law Cannot
Disannul It. It Included Christ. All Believers Having Put on Christ, the
Seed of Abraham, Become Abraham's Children.

[Galatians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gal 3:1</span></span>

Who hath bewitched you? That they, Gentiles, instructed in the gospel,
should virtually deny Christ's death by seeking justification by the law
was inexplicable. Were they bewitched?

Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth. Paul,
while among them, had so faithfully and vividly preached Christ
crucified, that it might be said that he was pictured before their eyes.
Yet, if they were justified by the law, Christ was crucified in vain.

Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law? Let them answer this. He
had preached Christ to them, they had heard, believed and obeyed; not a
word was said of the works of the law; yet God had acknowledged the work
by imparting his Spirit.

Are ye so foolish? They had begun with a spiritual religion, and
received the Spirit. Did they expect to be made perfect by the fleshly
ordinances of the law?

Have ye suffered so many things in vain? If they turned from the cross
to the law for salvation, all that they had suffered for Christ was in
vain.

If it be indeed in vain. I take this to mean, "If it be possible that
you do turn to the law and make your sufferings vain."

He therefore that ministereth to you the Spirit. Did God bestow
spiritual gifts and miraculous powers among you as the result of works
of the law, or of the hearing of faith? Were these bestowed through the
law, or the gospel?

[Galatians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gal 3:6</span></span>

Even as Abraham believed God, etc. The Galatians would have to reply to
the questions of [Gal 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005), "By the
hearing of faith?" "Yes," says Paul, "Even as Abraham, who was accepted
as righteous by faith without the law." See [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006). This passage is quoted in [Rom
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003), [Rom
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009), [Rom
4:21-22](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#021), and in [Jam
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023).

Know ye therefore. Paul now states his great argument. Abraham's faith
made him righteous; he is the spiritual father of believers. Those who
believe upon Christ, the promised seed of Abraham, are the spiritual
children of Abraham and the heirs of the promise.

The Scripture, foreseeing. Looking forward to the salvation of the
heathen who believe on Christ.

Preached before the gospel unto Abraham. Announced it in anticipation,
in a great Messianic promise.

In thee shall, etc. See [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003).
Observe (1) that this promise is made to Abraham long before he was
circumcised. (2) It is a promise of a blessing for the Gentile nations
through him. (3) It is a promise of Christ, and hence the gospel in
promise before the law existed.

So then. Then this promise embraces Gentile believers. They are blessed
as believing Abraham was blessed. See [Gal
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006).

[Galatians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gal 3:10</span></span>

For as many as are of the works of the law. Having just shown that
believers through Christ are justified, he next shows that all under the
law are in condemnation.

It is written. See [Deu 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026). Compare
[Rom 3:19-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019). Not only those under the
law fail of justification, but the curse rests upon them, for all fail
to obey all the things in the law. See [Rom
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023).

The just shall live by faith. To seek righteousness by the law is also
contrary to the prophets, for [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004)
says that the just shall live by faith, not by the works of the law.

The law is not of faith. Is not a system of faith, but proclaims life by
doing the law, rather than by faith. The quotation is from [Lev
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005). But since none can keep it
perfectly, all are under the curse ([Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010)).

[Galatians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gal 3:13</span></span>

Christ hath redeemed us from the curse. From the curse of the law Christ
hath redeemed us by suffering for us.

Being made a curse for us. He took our curse on himself and suffered in
our stead.

For it is written. In [Deu 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023).
Compare [Mat 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028); [Ti1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#006); [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020); [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023); [Tit
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#014), etc.

That the blessing of Abraham. Christ took the curse upon himself that we
might be blessed with the believing Abraham ([Gal
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#006)). Hence Gentiles who believe have
the promise of justification, and of the Spirit. Compare [Gal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#002) and [Gal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#005). There it is shown that the Spirit
came by the faith, rather than by the law.

[Galatians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gal 3:15</span></span>

I speak after the manner of men. I will make a comparison with human
affairs.

Though it be but a man's covenant, etc. A covenant, or agreement, among
men, after it is ratified, cannot be annulled or altered without the
consent of both parties.

Now to Abraham and his seed were the promise made. The covenant with its
promises was made with Abraham and his seed. There were promises spoken
on several occasion. See [Gen 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003),
[Gen 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#007); [Gen
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#016); [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); [Gen
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#007). The promises of the covenant
were to the seed, as well as to Abraham, and hence did not terminate
with his death.

He saith not, To seeds, as of many, but . . . to thy seed. This passage
has excited much criticism. Many have thought that Paul made a
grammatical mistake. Even Luther says: "My dear brother Paul, this
argument won't stick." The criticism is that sperma, the Greek word
rendered "seed," is a collective noun and may include all Abraham's
descendants. Paul elsewhere shows that he knew just the meaning of
sperma ([Rom 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#018); [Rom
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#007)), but the question here is not one
of grammar, but of spiritual meaning. Paul does not mean that sperma
(seed) excludes plurality, but that it implies unity. Not the word
"children" or "descendants" is used. This would embrace the children of
Ishmael, of Esau, and of Keturah. But there is a seed to whom the
promise is given; a seed that embraces many, but is one. That seed is
Christ the head, and all in Christ. See [Co1
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012). The whole spiritual seed of
Abraham concentrates in Christ. The promise is to Christ and all in
Christ. Paul understood Greek as well as his critics, and also knew what
he meant.

And this I say. He returns to the argument introduced in [Gal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#015).

That the covenant. He has just shown that this covenant was not only
with Abraham, but with his spiritual seed, and hence must continue in
effect until Christ came. Hence the law, made over four centuries after
the covenant was given, could not disannul it. The covenant made with
Abraham is still in force.

Four hundred and thirty years. According to Usher's Chronology, the
promise was made to Abraham in B. C. 1921; the law was given at Sinai B.
C. 1491; the interval is 430 years. But some have held that Paul made a
mistake because in [Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012) it said
that Hebrews were in Egypt 430 years. The matter is easily explained.
The Septuagint Version of the Old Testament is the one usually followed
by Christ and his apostles. Its translators, following the Hebrew copy
before them, render [Exo 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012), "The
sojourning of the children of Israel who dwelt in Egypt, and in the land
of Canaan, was four hundred and thirty years." Whether this is right, or
our Hebrew text, does not matter. Paul gave the usually received
statement. His point was simply that the law was given many ages after
the covenant with Abraham.

If the inheritance be of the law. Law and promise exclude each other.
The legal heir receives his inheritance by law, if there be no will; one
not a legal heir may receive it by the promise of a will. The
inheritance was given to Abraham by promise; and ours depends on the
promise.

[Galatians 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gal 3:19</span></span>

Wherefore then serveth the law? What was its object then?

It was added in order to restrain transgressions among men, and
especially among the fleshly race of Abraham, until the promised seed,
to whom the promise was made, even Christ, should come. It was therefore
only to last until that seed came.

Ordained by angels in the hand of a mediator. Communicated through the
means of angels to the mediator between Israel and God; that is, to
Moses. See [Act 7:53](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#053); [Heb
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#002); [Deu
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#002), and [Deu
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#005).

Now a mediator is not a mediator of one. A mediator implies two parties
between whom he acts.

But God is one. The idea is that when God makes a promise by his
sovereign power no mediator is required. God acts alone. Thus it was
when the promises were made to Abraham. God, too, is One, the same,
always, and hence the law is not due to a change of the divine mind.

Is the law then against the promises? No. The law does not give life at
all. If it did, and could impart righteousness, then it might be said to
be opposed to the promises of righteousness by faith.

But. But none became righteous by the law. The Scriptures place all
under sin that the promise should be to them only who believe through
Christ. All hope is in the gospel. See [Rom
11:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#032).

Kept under the law. Before the faith was revealed we were confined under
the law, as it were in prison, in a state of preparation for the faith
that was to be revealed. The law was "added" (see [Gal
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#019)) in order to do a work of
preparation until the gospel was revealed.

[Galatians 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gal 3:24</span></span>

Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster. "Tutor," in the Revision. In
Roman families a trusted slave, a pedagogue, had charge of children,
preserved them from harm, and took them to school. The law is such a
tutor; not a schoolmaster, but a guide to lead us to the school of
Christ. There we are justified by faith.

After that faith is come. When once brought to Christ we do not need the
tutor any longer. We are no longer under him.

For ye are all the children of God. Faith has come to all of you. You
are all God's children by faith in Christ. Hence you are under the
schoolmaster no longer.

For. He now shows how their faith acted to bring them into Christ. As
Dr. Schaff says, "Faith always implies surrender." Faith leads to
obedience. The believer is baptized into Christ, and being found in him
has put on Christ. Being in Christ, a member of his body, a part of the
Son, the believer becomes a child of God. Compare [Rom
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003); [Co1
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#002), and [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019). "The baptized is surrounded by
Christ and covered by his merits. . . . The figure of putting on Christ
as a new dress afterwards gave rise to the custom of wearing white
baptismal garments."--Schaff, in loco.

There is neither Jew nor Greek. In Christ the old, worldly lines of
separation are all blotted out.

All one. One person, as it were, "one new man" ([Eph
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015)), of which Christ is the head.
All, without regard to race, blended into one whole.

If ye be Christ's. As Christ is the seed of Abraham, all in Christ
become the spiritual seed of Abraham, and hence heirs of the promise to
Abraham's seed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Chapter 4](gal004)

</div>
