<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](heb004)  [Next](heb006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Office of a High Priest. High Priests Chosen of God.
Christ a Priest of the Order of Melchizedec. He Learned Obedience
Through Suffering. The Need of Learning the Deeper Truths of the Gospel.

[Hebrews 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 5:1</span></span>

Every high priest taken from among men. Such as Aaron and all the high
priests of Israel.

Is ordained for men. He is appointed to officiate in holy things and to
intercede in behalf of his fellow-men. God did not need the high priest,
but men needed him.

That he may offer both gifts and sacrifices. "Gifts" were strictly
bloodless offerings, while "sacrifices" required the life of the victim.
These were offered in behalf of men, either by the high priest in
person, or under his direction.

Who can have compassion, etc. It is needful that the high priest be one
in sympathy with men, because he has experienced in person the common
infirmities of the race. Otherwise, how could he be a merciful high
priest touched by the infirmities of men?

And by reason hereof. Of his own infirmity, in that he was of men.

Ought, as for the people, so also for himself. As one of a sinful race
he needed to approach God in his own behalf, as well as in behalf of
men. He offered "atonement for his own sins and for the sins of the
people." This was shown forth in the very garments he wore when he
offered the national atonement once a year. On the shoulder of the ephod
([Exo 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#010)) were two onyx stones, on
which were engraved the names of the twelve sons of Jacob, the
representatives of all the tribes of Israel, of Levi the priestly tribe
as well as the others. As he stood before the mercy-seat interceding, he
bore all these names before the Lord.

[Hebrews 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 5:4</span></span>

And no man taketh this honor unto himself. He must be called to it by
God. Aaron was so appointed. See [Exo
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#001); [Lev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002).

So also Christ glorified not himself. Did not take the office of
himself, but God called him to his priesthood. The time is pointed out
when he was so called. It was when God said, Thou art my son, to-day
have I begotten thee. This refers to when Christ was begotten from the
dead, the first-born of the new creation. See [Eph
1:20-23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#020). At this time he entered
fully, at the call of God, upon his high priesthood in behalf of men.

A priest forever after the order of Melchisedec. Christ's priesthood
continues while time endures. He is not of the order of Aaron, but of
Melchizedek, a king as well as a priest. See [Gen
14:18-19](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#018). For a fuller discussion of
the priesthood of Melchizedek, see notes on [Heb
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001).

[Hebrews 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 5:7</span></span>

Who in the days of his flesh. Christ, while on earth, is referred to.

When he had offered up prayers, etc. A particular time when these
earnest supplications were offered is pointed out. The agony of
Gethsemane is meant. It was then that he said, "If it is possible, let
this cup pass from me." Even there he was heard. For an angel descended
to strengthen him.

Feared. Reverenced the Father in humble submission. A pious fear is
meant.

He learned obedience. He claimed no special exemptions because he was
the Son, but learned and taught obedience in the supremest test that the
world ever saw. He learned obedience experimentally.

Being made perfect. Fitted in all points to be our high priest by his
suffering; made, not a perfect man, for he was that already, but a
perfect high priest.

He became the author. Was able to offer the gospel to all nations, and
thus to save all them that obey him. He does not save men in
disobedience.

Called of God an high priest. When he had suffered he was called of God
an high priest, or entered upon his priesthood.

Order of Melchisedec. See notes on [Heb
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#006) and [Heb
7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001).

[Hebrews 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 5:11</span></span>

Of whom we have many things to say. Of Christ in his priesthood.

Hard to be uttered. Hard to be expressed so that you will understand.
The priesthood of Christ, after the order of Melchizedek, opens up some
difficult questions.

Seeing ye are dull of hearing. Of slow understanding.

When ye ought to be teachers. You have been disciples long enough to be
able to teach others, but still need some one to teach you first
principles. See notes on [Heb 6:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#001).

Oracles of God. God's word.

Every one that useth milk, etc. Those who only understand the A B C's of
Christianity are only babes in Christ, like the babes whose food is
milk. Such an one cannot handle the word of righteousness skillfully.

Strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age. When one has reached
manhood we do not expect him to live on the food of babes. So a church
member, as time goes on, ought to feed on strong meat, the higher
teaching of religion. There should be growth in knowledge.

Their senses exercised. The reference here is to the faculties of the
soul. A Christian ought to study, to gain a thorough knowledge of the
Scriptures and especially of the New Testament, to become able to teach
others, and to explain the higher principles of our religion. In
addition he ought to be able to discern the moral character of the
environments of life, to know not only what to accept and what to
reject, but how to warn his less instructed brethren.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 6](heb006)

</div>
