<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam000)  [Next](jam002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

SUMMARY.--Rejoicing in Trial. Seeking Wisdom. Stability Urged. The
Source of Temptation. The Fountain of All Blessings. Pure and Undefiled
Religion.

[James 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 1:1</span></span>

James. See Introduction concerning the writer. He is called by Paul and
by Josephus the brother of Jesus.

Servant of God and of the Lord Jesus Christ. It seems probable from the
title assumed that James was not an apostle. With only a few exceptions
the Epistles begin with a reference to the apostleship of the writer.

To the twelve tribes. The Jews are often so designated. See [Act
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#007).

Scattered abroad. Rather "of the Dispersion," a term applied to Jews
outside of Judea.

Count it all joy. Instead of murmuring over trials and temptations,
rejoice in them.

The trying of your faith by means of persecution and temptation worketh
patience, rather, enduring fortitude. We are strengthened by trials
overcome.

Let patience. Let endurance not be merely passive, but have her perfect
work; work out its complete results, that nothing may be wanting in your
lives.

[James 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 1:5</span></span>

If any of you lack wisdom. This may be one of the wants. If so, go to
God for it, that giveth to all men liberally. His people will hear, and
in answer to their requests he giveth liberally, and never upbraideth on
account of their requests as men so often do.

Let him ask in faith. This is an essential condition to prevailing
prayer. See [Mat 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#021); [Mar
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#023).

He that wavereth. Is undecided, of two minds.

Like a wave of the sea. Driven hither and thither.

A double minded man. A man of no fixed, decided purpose.

[James 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 1:9</span></span>

Let the brother of low degree. In the humble walks of life.

Exalted. To be a child of God, a brother of Jesus Christ.

The rich, in that he is made low. The one should rejoice in exaltation;
the other in humiliation. He is taught that his riches have no power to
save, and that his life is as uncertain as that of the grass of the
field.

For the sun. When the fierce sun of summer arises the grass in Palestine
dies. Thus shall the glory of the rich man fade.

[James 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 1:12</span></span>

Blessed is the man that endureth temptation. He that endures and
continues faithful shall have the crown.

Let no man say . . . I am tempted by God. Some men when they fall try to
throw the blame on God, as if God had tempted them. It is impossible
that God be tempted of sin, nor does he ever tempt men to sin, but: But
every man is tempted when he suffers his own lusts to lead and entice
him. There can be no temptation unless something within us causes a
sinful desire.

When lust hath conceived. The course of sin is described as that of a
birth. The sinful desire is the conception; the sinful deed the birth;
moral and eternal death the final result.

[James 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 1:16</span></span>

Do not err. Either about the source of sin or of all good gifts.

Every good gift, etc. All gifts that truly bless us are God's gifts.

Father of lights. God, the Creator of every light of the material world,
and the source of all moral light.

No variableness, etc. God is unchangeable, always the same, nor does he
cast a shadow of turning like the sun. The allusion is to the constantly
changing shadows of objects in the sunlight caused by the movement, not
of the sun, but of the earth.

Of his own will begat he us. Not in caprice, but our birth as children
of God was due to his eternal will.

Kind of first fruits. The early converts are often called first fruits
of the gospel.

[James 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 1:19</span></span>

Wherefore . . . be swift to hear. Let each saint hear and learn, but be
careful not to speak rashly, and especially in anger.

For the wrath of man. An angry man will show forth something very
different from God's righteousness.

Lay aside all filthiness. Every impurity of life.

Naughtiness. "Overflowing" of wickedness in the Revision. Wrath would
cause such an overflow.

The engrafted word. The word of God planted in your hearts.

Be ye doers. He who is only a hearer deceiveth himself. See [Mat
7:21-23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021).

If any be a hearer . . . not a doer. The point of the comparison is
this: Like a man who looks in the glass and soon forgets the impression,
so the impression of the word on such a man is soon forgotten. The word
must be impressed by the doing of it.

But whoso looketh into the perfect law of liberty. The gospel, which
sets men free. He who looks into it, is impressed by it, and obeys it
shall be blessed in the doing.

[James 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 1:26</span></span>

If any . . . seemeth to be religious. He who professes religion and yet
does not control his tongue is deceived. Unless he has grace enough to
rule the unruly member, he has not enough for salvation.

Pure religion and undefiled. Combining pure hearts and pure outward
lives. This genuine religion has two elements: (1) Kind and loving
deeds, exemplified especially in helping the helpless, such as widows
and orphans, and (2) living pure, unsullied lives, unstained by the sins
prevalent in this sinful world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 2](jam002)

</div>
