<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[James Index](jam)  
  [Previous](jam004)  [Next](pe1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Sins of Rich Men. The Judgments Coming Upon Them. Patience
Under Affliction. The Examples of Job and Elijah. Healing the Sick.
Effectual Prayer. Restoring Sinners.

[James 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 5:1</span></span>

Go to now. The same expression is used in [Jam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013). There it is a rebuke to those
who haste to be rich; here to those who use riches wickedly.

Ye rich men. James looks beyond the church of his day to be his nation
and to the church of after time.

Weep and howl. Because of coming judgments for your sins.

Your riches are corrupted. Even their riches in which they trusted are
"corrupted," or spoiled. Much of the wealth of that period was in stores
of various kinds which time or improper care would destroy.

Your garments are moth-eaten. The rich gathered great stores of
garments, carpets, etc. See [Mat
22:11-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#011). These would be liable to be
eaten by moths if not used.

Your gold and silver are cankered. Rusted from disuse. These metals do
not literally rust, but do tarnish from long disuse. The idea is that
they show they have been hoarded, not used.

A witness against you. The tarnish shows that you have hoarded instead
of using.

Shall eat your flesh. They shall punish you, as though heated by fire
and eating into your flesh. This hoarded wealth will curse the
possessor.

Ye have heaped . . . last days. Instead of laying up treasure in heaven
you have continued to pile up earthly treasure to the last, a matter of
extreme folly. What James then thought of as "the last days," the end of
his nation, country and Jerusalem, was close at hand.

Behold, the hire of the laborers. These rich men are censured for two
sins; viz., the improper use of wealth, and the sinful acquisition of
wealth. The Bible is everywhere the friend and protector of the laborer.
To keep back the hire of the laborer is denounced everywhere. See [Lev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#013); [Deu
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014); [Jer
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#013); [Mal
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#005); [Job
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#006).

The cries of them. Of the defrauded laborers. God will avenge them.

Ye have lived in pleasure. Have spent your wealth on your own pleasures.

Nourished your hearts, as in a day of slaughter. The meaning is not
entirely clear. Probably it is an allusion to the beasts which are
fatted and feasted for slaughter and food. They were feasting and
engaging in pleasure when the awful destruction was near.

Ye have condemned and killed the just. The murder of the Just One,
Jesus, was the crowning sin of Israel which brought upon them
destruction. It was the rich and influential, not the poor, who sought
his death.

He doth not resist you. Compare [Isa
53:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#007).

[James 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 5:7</span></span>

Be patient, therefore, brethren. James now turns from the rich, wicked
Jews, to his suffering brethren. Let them be patient.

Unto the coming of the Lord. That would bring relief. The primary
reference is to the relief from Jewish persecution which followed the
Lord's coming in judgment on the Jewish nation.

Behold, the husbandman. The tiller of the soil has to sow and wait long
in patience for fruit. Be you like him.

Early and latter rain. The early rain was the November showers which
prepared the ground for the seed; the latter rain, the spring showers
needed to bring the harvest to maturity. Compare [Deu
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#014).

Be ye also patient. Wait, like the husbandmen, for your harvest of joy.

The coming. The relief which the Lord's coming will bring is near. See
note on [Jam 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#007).

Grudge not. Do not bear grudges against one another. The Lord will
condemn this, and the judge standeth before the door, for the "coming of
the Lord is nigh."

[James 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 5:10</span></span>

Take, my brethren, the prophets. They suffered, were patient, endured to
the end and secured the blessing.

We count them happy which endured. We believe of them that all such have
had a final reward.

Ye have heard of the patience of Job. The enduring patience, which
refused to distrust God, is meant.

The end of the Lord. The conclusion in the case of Job wrought by the
Lord, and how his endurance was blessed. The blessing that came on him
is a demonstration that the Lord is very pitiful, and full of tender
mercy.

[James 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 5:12</span></span>

Above all things, swear not. This verse is an appropriation of [Mat
5:33-37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033), the words of Christ. See
notes there. Swearing is a besetting sin of the East unto this day.

Is any among you afflicted? Let him not swear, or engage in any improper
use of the tongue, but let him pray. God is the Helper in such an hour.

Is any merry? Let his joy be shown, not in wanton speech, but in singing
praises. Prayer and thanksgiving are the appropriate expressions for
each condition.

[James 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 5:14</span></span>

Is any sick among you. In the early church, when miraculous gifts were
imparted by the laying on of apostolic hands "as a sign to unbelievers,"
one of these was the gift of healing. In most early churches founded by
the apostles some one of the elders would have this gift. There is no
more reason for the descent of this gift to our times than of any other
miraculous power. This passage, then, describes what was peculiar to the
early church. The sick were anointed by the elders with oil, a symbol of
the Spirit, which effected the healing, hands were laid, and prayer
offered. See [Mar 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#013); also [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006), and [Luk
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034).

The prayer of faith. The prayer for the sick must be offered in faith to
be effectual.

If he have committed sins. Often our sickness is due to sins against our
body. The Lord, who raises the sick in answer to prayer, will forgive
these.

Confess your faults. This verse springs from the preceding. We all need
healing of our sins. Let the brother confess his faults as a
demonstration of repentance and let brethren pray for each other.
Repentance, confession and prayer are the conditions of the forgiveness
of sins committed by church members.

[James 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 5:17</span></span>

Elias was a man subject, etc. The last verse has affirmed the power of
the prayer of a righteous man. An example of its power is now given.
Elias was a man like ourselves, yet great results followed his prayer.
See [Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001), and following chapters.

He prayed earnestly that it might not rain. No mention is made in the
Old Testament of this prayer, but it is announced prophetically. He
prayed, either before or after, that rain might be withheld until Israel
repented.

Three years and six months. See [Luk
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#025). In the Old Testament the time is
not exactly stated. "In the third year" the Lord spoke to Elijah about
rain, but we are not informed whether the beginning of the "third year"
was when rain ceased to fall, or when he went to Zarephath. It is
probable that the latter is meant.

And he prayed again. See [Kg1 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#042).
This prayer was on Mt. Carmel after the trial which ended in the
overthrow of the priests of Baal, and was followed the same day by rain.

If any one of you do err from the truth. If a brother is led away from
the gospel. One might be led into false doctrine, or into false
practice.

And one convert him. Bring him back from his errors and restore him.

Let him know. As an inducement to engage in this work of love let him
know how great a work has been done.

Save a soul from death. Not physical but eternal death.

Hide a multitude of sins. The sins of those forgiven are said to be
covered or hidden. This passage means that all the sins of the restored
sinner, though many, shall be blotted out. See [Psa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Introduction](pe1000)

</div>
