<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh006)  [Next](joh008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Unbelief of the Brethren of Jesus. He Goes to the Feast of
Tabernacles. He Teaches in the Temple. The Discussions Among the People.
The Pharisees Send Officers to Take Him. The Last Day of the Feast. The
Report to the Officers.

[John 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 7:1</span></span>

After these things. The events narrated in the last chapter. About six
months of the ministry in Galilee intervened between the feeding of the
Five Thousand and the Feast of Tabernacles. During this interval the
Lord kept away from Judea on account of the enmity of the authorities
there.

[John 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 7:2</span></span>

Now the Jews' feast of tabernacles was at hand. It fell in the month
Tizri, covering part of September and of October, and lasted for a week.
It was one of the three feasts that all Jews were expected to attend.

[John 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 7:3</span></span>

His brethren said unto him. His brothers. [Joh
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#012).

Depart hence, and go into Judea. A long time had passed since he had
been at Jerusalem, and these brethren wished him to show his mighty
powers there.

[John 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 7:4</span></span>

If thou do these things. These brethren still were doubters. He differed
so from their idea of the Christ that they could not understand him, and
they hoped that at Jerusalem he would be made manifest. They afterwards
became believers.

[John 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 7:6</span></span>

My time is not yet come. For the full manifestation of himself. This
required his death and resurrection.

[John 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 7:7</span></span>

The world cannot hate you. Because then it would hate its own, but it
hated him because he rebuked its sins. They were of the world; he was
not.

[John 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 7:8</span></span>

I go not up yet. He does not say that he will not go, but he will not go
yet. He did not wish to go in the great multitude of pilgrims that were
en route, as there were reasons why he should go quietly.

[John 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 7:10</span></span>

But as it were in secret. After the crowds had gone, so that he could
travel privately. The multitudes hung upon him and had sought to make
him a king. In Galilee he was very popular at this time. His popularity
intensified the enmity of "the Jews."

[John 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 7:11</span></span>

The Jews sought him. "The Jews" in John almost always means the ruling
class at Jerusalem.

The people means the masses of the Jewish nation. The people were
divided in opinion, but dared not express themselves openly until they
saw what course the Jews would take.

[John 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 7:14</span></span>

About the midst of the feast. The middle. It lasted eight days in all.
Jesus seems to have appeared unexpectedly in the temple, engaged in
teaching.

[John 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 7:15</span></span>

How knoweth, etc.? The Jewish rulers were astonished at his learning,
since he had never attended the great schools of their doctors.

[John 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 7:16</span></span>

My doctrine is not mine. This is an answer to the question of [Joh
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#015). His knowledge came not from man,
but from God.

[John 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 7:17</span></span>

If any man will do his will, he shall know of the doctrine. The Common
Version is ambiguous. The Revision is clear: If any man willeth to do,
etc. The difficulty is in the way of the Jews recognizing the teaching
of Jesus as divine, was that they were not willing to do God's will.
This spirit of disobedience is the source of most, if not all,
skepticism. Unbelief is due, not to the head, but to the heart. He who
in his heart says, "Thy will be done, give me light and I will walk in
it," will find that Christ is just the teacher demanded by his soul, and
that the gospel meets his soul's want. Jesus will so meet the wants of
his soul that he will be satisfied and will know the doctrine, that it
comes from him who made the soul. The great German poet, Heine, was a
scoffer until old and tortured with chronic disease. Then he said: "I
have discarded my proud philosophy and learned to trust in the
consolations of religion." He had no more outward evidence than before,
but his heart had changed.

[John 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 7:19</span></span>

Did not Moses give you the law? Yet they were seeking to kill him in
violation of the law which they professed to keep.

[John 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 7:20</span></span>

The people answered. Not "the Jews," but the masses. They did not then
know that the rulers were seeking his death, and hence rebukes such a
suggestion.

Thou hast a devil. Such a mistake must be due to the whisper of a demon,
they thought.

[John 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 7:21</span></span>

I have done one work. He goes back to the cause of the enmity of the
rulers, the healing of the impotent man at the pool of Bethesda on the
Sabbath day, about eighteen months before (see chap. 5).

[John 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 7:22</span></span>

If a man on the sabbath day, etc.? The argument is this: You blame me
for healing an impotent man on the Sabbath; yet you break the Sabbath to
circumcise a child if the eighth day after its birth falls on the
Sabbath. You say that the law of circumcision was given to Abraham, is
older than the Sabbath law, and must be kept if the Sabbath is to be
broken. Now the law of love and mercy is older than Moses; why find
fault if it is kept on the Sabbath? They should judge righteously,
instead of by outward appearances.

[John 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 7:25</span></span>

Some of them of Jerusalem. Citizens who understood the purposes of the
rulers, of which the visitors were ignorant.

Do the rulers know, etc.? As they did not seize him according to their
purpose, the question arose what had changed the mind of the rulers. Had
they found out that he was the Christ?

Howbeit we know . . . whence he is. The Jews had an idea, due probably
to [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013), that when the Messiah
came no one would know from whence he came.

Ye know whence I am. This is a reply to their assertion that they did.
If they really did they would know that he came from God. They did not
even know God, or they would know him whom God sent.

[John 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 7:30</span></span>

They sought to take him. "They of Jerusalem" angered because he said
they did not know God. This was the attempt of a mob, not an official
act.

[John 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 7:31</span></span>

Many of the people believed. Not intelligently, but that he was a
teacher sent from God, and possibly the Christ. Compare [Joh
3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001).

[John 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 7:32</span></span>

The Pharisees heard. The bitterest enemies of Christ. When they heard
that the people were believing, they thought it time for action, so the
Pharisees and chief priests, that is, the Sanhedrim, sent officers to
seize him. This was an official act, the first official attempt of the
Sanhedrim to take Jesus. They had purposed it before, but had not taken
action.

[John 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 7:33</span></span>

Yet a little while I am with you. Aware of the counsel of the rulers, he
foretells his death and return to heaven.

Where I am, ye cannot come. Not while on earth, neither after life is
over, if they die in their sins ([Joh
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#021)). The Jews did not comprehend his
words, plain as they are to us.

[John 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 7:37</span></span>

In the last day. Probably the eighth day, possibly the seventh. The
eighth was a day of holy rest added to the seven days of the feast.

If any man thirsteth, let him, etc. Jewish writers say that water was
brought every day of the feast in a golden pitcher from the pool of
Siloam and poured upon the altar. It is thought that it was when this
water was poured out that Jesus cried out, and pointed to the living
water.

[John 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 7:38</span></span>

He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said. Notice that
"believing" corresponds to "coming" in the preceding verse, showing that
faith is the means that brings us to Christ. The reference is not to any
single passage, but to the spirit of the Scripture, notably such
passages as [Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001); [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011); [Psa
36:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008).

Out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. Christ is the living
water; he who believes upon Christ has Christ formed within him, and
hence must become a fountain to dispense the living water whatever he
goes.

[John 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 7:39</span></span>

This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should
receive. This declaration of John makes the second chapter of Acts the
best commentary on the preceding verse. Luther says: "So St. Peter, by
one sermon on the day of Pentecost, as by a rushing of water, delivered
three thousand men from the devil's kingdom, washing them in an hour
from sin, death and Satan."

Because Jesus was not yet glorified. Let it be noted, (1) That the Holy
Spirit was not given until after the death and ascension of Jesus. (2)
The disciples of Christ did not become "fountains of living water" until
the Holy Spirit was sent. This marks Pentecost as the beginning of the
preaching of the gospel authoritatively by his disciples.

[John 7:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 7:41</span></span>

Others said, This is the Christ. Others asserted that he was the Christ.
The opponents denied this, and based their opposition, not upon his
character, or his teaching, but upon the fact that he came from Galilee.
They did not know that he was born at Bethlehem, according to the
prophecies ([Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002)).

The seed of David. See [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); [Psa
89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036).

[John 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 7:45</span></span>

Then came the officers to the chief priests and Pharisees. These were
the temple police, Levites under the direction of the chief priests. In
[Joh 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#032) we are told that the chief
priests, instigated by the Pharisees, had sent the officers to arrest
him.

[John 7:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 7:46</span></span>

Never man spake like this man. The only answer the officers could make
to the demand why they had not carried out orders was, "Man never spake
like this man." The multitude had not overawed them, but the words of
Christ.

[John 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 7:47</span></span>

Then answered the Pharisees, . . . Have any of the rulers, etc.? The
Pharisees charge the officers in language of scorn. By rulers are meant
the Sanhedrim. In the matter of deciding on the claims of the Messiah
they hold that the judgment of the "rulers" must be decisive. They were
not probably aware that Nicodemus was really a secret believer, and that
another "senator," Joseph, would reveal himself at the proper time.

[John 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 7:49</span></span>

This people . . . are accursed. The argument was "Not the Sanhedrim, but
the rabble are the believers upon him. They are utterly ignorant of the
law and are accursed. On account of their ignorance they are easily led
astray."

[John 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 7:50</span></span>

Nicodemus. See [Joh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001).

Dost our law judge, etc.? Of course it did not, but for him to say a
word in defense of justice brought the charge that he was a follower of
the Galilean.

Out of Galilee ariseth no prophet. The rulers in their rage make a false
statement. Jonah ([Kg2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025)), Elijah
([Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001)) and Nahum ([Nah
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)) were all of Galilee.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 8](joh008)

</div>
