<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh015)  [Next](joh017) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 16:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Persecution Predicted. The Comforter to Come. He Will Reprove
the World of Sin; of Righteousness; of Judgment. Will Guide into All
Truth. Sorrow and Rejoicing. Overcoming the World.

[John 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 16:1</span></span>

These things have I spoken. The warnings found in the 14th and 15th
chapters. They were given beforehand lest they should stumble. To be
forewarned would be a help to their faith amid the dark scenes of the
next few days, and in the persecutions that would come later.

[John 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 16:2</span></span>

They shall put you out of the synagogues. Excommunicate you. The first
persecutions were Jewish.

Whosoever killeth you, etc. Even so Saul of Tarsus thought while
persecuting the saints. Fanaticism has always held the slaughter of
those who are deemed heretics to be praiseworthy.

[John 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 16:3</span></span>

These things will they do, etc. Had they known Christ, or the Father,
and received the Holy Spirit, they could not do thus.

[John 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 16:4</span></span>

These things I said not unto you at the beginning. He had made his
instructions as they were prepared to receive them, lesson by lesson.

[John 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 16:5</span></span>

Now I go my way to him that sent me. To the Father, by way of the Cross,
the Sepulcher, the Resurrection and the Ascension.

None of you asketh me, Whither goest thou? They had asked this question,
but in the stupefaction of their sorrow they had ceased to ask.

[John 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 16:7</span></span>

It is expedient for you that I go away. What seemed then a crushing
sorrow was a real blessing. His mission could never be accomplished
unless he went away.

For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come. While Christ was
present in person, in bodily form, the Holy Spirit, the representative
of the Godhead, could not come. Christ, as King, must send him, and on
the day of Pentecost Peter declared, "He hath shed forth the things ye
do see and hear."

[John 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 16:8</span></span>

Will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. The
Revision more correctly renders, "Will convict the world in respect of
sin." There are three points concerning which the world would be
convicted, concerning sin, righteousness, and judgment. The Holy Spirit
would effect these important results through some means. If we would
understand the methods we have only to turn over to the fulfillment of
these predictions recorded in the Acts of the Apostles. In [Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038), the Holy Spirit fell upon eleven
apostles and they spoke as "the Spirit gave them utterance." The words
that they spoke were the words of the Holy Spirit. In the record of what
was said by the mouth of Peter, we find that the Spirit convicted (1) of
sin, in that those who heard had rejected the Lord of life and glory;
(2) of righteousness, in that it was demonstrated by the manifestations
of that hour that God had exalted the Lord whom they had condemned to
his own right hand; (3) of judgment, in that they were assured of the
"wrath to come," and warned to "save themselves from this untoward
generation."

[John 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 16:9</span></span>

Of sin, because they believe not on me. In naming sin, the chief of all
sins is singled out. All sin springs from unbelief. To destroy sin, the
heart of man must be pierced with the sword of the Spirit. Hence, the
aim of the Spirit on Pentecost, and always, is to destroy unbelief.

[John 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 16:10</span></span>

Of righteousness, because I go to my Father. Human tribunals convicted
him of blasphemy, because he said he was the Son of God, and put him to
death. God exalted him to a throne, thereby showing that the
condemnation was wrong and that he was righteous. Of this the Holy
Spirit bore witness in words and by miracles.

[John 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 16:11</span></span>

Of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. In [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030), he declared, "The prince of
this world cometh." It was the prince of this world, the spirit of the
world, Satan, as the ruler of the world, who slew him. When Christ rose
from the dead, and all power was given into his hands, this was a
judgment in the court of the universe against the prince of the world.

[John 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 16:13</span></span>

When he, the Spirit of truth, is come, he will guide you into all truth.
He is about to go away and his own personal teachings will be ended, but
those things that he desires them to know will be taught them still. The
Spirit of truth will guide them into all truth.

[John 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 16:14</span></span>

He shall glorify me. "All things that the Father hath are mine," and the
Spirit "shall receive of mine and shew it to you." "These three are
one;" a striking illustration of the unity of the Godhead. They are so
united that what proceeds from one proceeds from all.

[John 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 16:16</span></span>

A little while, and ye shall not see me: and again, a little while, and
ye shall see me. On the morrow he would die, be buried, and for "a
little while" they would not see him; then he would rise, and for
another "little while," a space of forty days before "he went to his
Father," they would see him while he remained on the earth. When he
ascended to his Father, they, in a spiritual sense, would "see him
coming in the kingdom of God."

[John 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 16:20</span></span>

Ye shall weep and lament, but the world shall rejoice. How sad were the
broken-hearted disciples, as they wept at the tomb! At the same time
their enemies were gloating over their triumph. Soon all was changed,
for your sorrow shall be turned into joy. The glad news came, "The Lord
is risen!" Then they heard that "all power was his," saw him ascend into
heaven, and "returned to Jerusalem with great joy."

[John 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 16:22</span></span>

Ye now therefore have sorrow. Are in travail, but soon there shall be a
birth, "the First Born of the new creation" from the tomb.

[John 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 16:23</span></span>

In that day. After the Kingdom comes on Pentecost.

Ask the Father in my name. We must come to God through him. His is "the
only name." Before, when they prayed, he told them to say, "Our Father,"
etc. Now they must pray in the name of the ascended Lord.

[John 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 16:25</span></span>

Spoken in proverbs. In figures.

[John 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 16:31</span></span>

Do ye now believe? The disciples had just asserted that they did,
because they thought they understood him, but before morning their faith
would give way and, instead of clinging to him in the hour of trial,
they would leave him alone.

[John 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 16:33</span></span>

I have overcome the world. In this world his disciples would be
persecuted and have sorrow, but he bids them Be of good cheer. The world
can only afflict for a season; it is a conquered world; Christ has
overcome it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 17](joh017)

</div>
