<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh019)  [Next](joh021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 20:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Women at the Sepulcher. Peter and John See the Empty Tomb.
Mary Magdalene Seeth Jesus. The Lord Appeareth to the Disciples. After
Eight Days Appeareth to the Eleven. The Confession of Thomas. Why "These
Things" Were Written.

[John 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 20:1</span></span>

See notes on [Mat 28:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#001). Compare [Mar
16:1-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#001); [Luk
24:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#001).

Cometh Mary Magdalene. She was not alone. Mary, the mother of James and
Joses, and Salome were with her. Their object was to place spices about
the body of Jesus.

She runneth. To Peter and John to tell that the tomb is empty.

Simon Peter . . . went in. John looked in, but Peter went in. The grave
clothes were carefully folded and laid aside.

Mary stood without . . . as she wept. She still supposed that the body
was stolen, until the angels were seen.

Saw Jesus standing. The first sight of the risen Lord. The first to see
him was the loving Mary.

Touch me not. She was probably about to clasp his feet. She is told to
discharge a higher duty: to go to the brethren with the glad story.

[John 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 20:19</span></span>

Then the same day at evening, being the first day of the week. John
particularly marks the time of this important event. It is the third or
fourth appearance of the Savior upon this memorable day, and the first
one to the apostolic body. By a comparison with [Mar
16:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#014) and [Luk
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#036), we learn that at the moment of
his appearance they were discussing the story of the resurrection of
which many refused to be convinced, so incredulous were they.

[John 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 20:20</span></span>

He shewed unto them his hands and his side. The Lord showed his wounds
to convince them beyond a doubt that it was not a fantasy or an
apparition. A week later he shows his wounds to Thomas. The resurrected
body still bore these proofs of his suffering and love. Sixty years
later, when John, at Patmos, saw the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, he
beheld "a Lamb as it had been slain." Perhaps our Lord in glory
continues to bear the marks of the cross. Perhaps these will forever, as
we gaze in glory, remind us of the story of our redemption.

[John 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 20:21</span></span>

Peace be unto you: as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you. This
is the Great Commission, more fully developed in Galilee a little later,
and finally completed on Mt. Olivet, just before the Lord ascended. The
Lord had trained the apostles for three years in order to fit them for
this important work.

[John 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 20:23</span></span>

Whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, etc. It will be
seen at once, by a comparison with [Mat
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#019), that the keys then promised to
Peter are now given to all the apostles, and all have similar power to
open and shut, to remit sin, and to bind. The meaning is plain when we
consider, first, the charge that the Savior was making, and, secondly,
look forward and see how that charge was carried out; or, in other
words, observe the apostles "remitting sins" and retaining them. It is
the Great Commission to preach the gospel that the Savior gives for the
first time in [Joh 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#021). It is with
reference to carrying out that Commission that he speaks in [Joh
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#023). It was in order that they might
present the terms of that Commission infallibly to the world that the
baptism of the Holy Spirit was imparted, of which there is a
foreshadowing in [Joh 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#022). The great
end of that Commission was to declare to men "repentance and remission
of sins" in the name of Christ. The following facts are manifest: (1)
The Savior gave to his apostles his Commission that they might make
known his will. (2) He bade them preach "remission of sins." (3) He gave
them a measure of the Holy Spirit, and bade them wait until "endued with
power from on high" by the baptism of the Holy Spirit. (4) When the Holy
Spirit fell, they spoke as it "gave them utterance" ([Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004)). (5) They then declared, under
the influence of the Holy Spirit, the terms on which "sins could be
remitted." To anxious sinners they answer, "Repent and be baptized,
every one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of
sins." Here, then, they, directed by the Holy Spirit, "remit" and
"retain" sins by declaring the terms on which Christ will pardon. Thus,
also, they do in their preaching recorded through the Acts of the
Apostles the very thing that the Savior gave them power to do. This
power was not imparted to a hierarchy, nor to any ecclesiastical body,
but to the apostles, and was fulfilled by them in declaring to the world
the conditions of pardon and condemnation under the Commission of our
Lord.

[John 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 20:24</span></span>

But Thomas, one of the twelve, called Didymus, was not with them.
Didymus, which means the Twin, is the Greek for the Hebrew name, Thomas.
He was one of the twelve.

[John 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 20:25</span></span>

He said unto them, . . . I will not believe. At some time during the
week they meet him and tell their joyful story, but he meets it with
skepticism.

[John 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 20:26</span></span>

After eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with them.
It was on the second Sunday after the resurrection; the second Lord's
day in the history of the world.

[John 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 20:27</span></span>

Reach hither thy finger. Turning to the skeptical Thomas, he asks him to
apply the tests that he had declared would be necessary before he could
believe. His compassion for the unbelief of Thomas shows the patient
tenderness of the Savior with the difficulties of an honest seeker.

[John 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 20:29</span></span>

Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed. Thomas "saw"
(he did not need to handle) and believed. We have not seen, but
nevertheless believe upon the same Lord. Upon us he pronounces a special
blessedness, because we walk by faith instead of sight.

[John 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 20:30</span></span>

Many other signs truly did Jesus. Not near all that occurred, either
before or after the resurrection, is recorded. Each of the evangelists
records some features that the others omit, and they each reveal the
fact that they only outline the wonderful story.

[John 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh020.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 20:31</span></span>

But these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ,
etc. This is the object of all the gospel histories. They aim to so
reveal Christ as to produce faith in him. He is the one object of
belief. He is the Christian's creed. Faith in him, a faith that takes
him as the Christ, saves the soul. All who have such faith wrought by
the word of God will "have life through his name."

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 21](joh021)

</div>
