<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh011)  [Next](joh013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

[John](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joh 12:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Feast at Bethany. The Anointing by Mary. The Anger of
Judas. The Purpose to Put Lazarus to Death. The Entrance into Jerusalem.
The Greeks Seeking Jesus. "The Hour Is Come." The Voice from Heaven. The
Son of Man to Be Lifted Up. The Cause of Unbelief.

[John 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 12:1</span></span>

Jesus six days before the passover came to Bethany. From the other
Gospels we learn that he went from Ephraim beyond the Jordan and came
back through Jericho with the great company of Galileans who came to
attend the passover. The supper at Bethany was Saturday evening before
he was crucified.

[John 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 12:2</span></span>

There they made him a supper. For notes on this supper and the
anointing, see [Mat 26:6-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#006). Compare
[Mar 14:3-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#003) and [Luk
7:36-50](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#036).

Then saith one of his disciples. Judas Iscariot.

Three hundred pence. Silver to the amount of <span class="small">45,
equivalent to about <span class="small">300 now, owing to the change of
values.</span></span>

Against the day of my burying hath she kept this. Before a week he was
to be in the tomb. It was customary to anoint dead bodies for burial.

Much people . . . came. From Jerusalem to Bethany.

[John 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 12:10</span></span>

The chief priests consulted. Lazarus was a living proof of the Divine
power of Christ, and they wished him out of the way.

[John 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 12:12</span></span>

On the next day. Sunday. For notes on the entrance to Jerusalem, see
[Mat 21:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001). Compare [Mar
11:1-11](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#001); Luke 19:29-44.

[John 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 12:19</span></span>

The world is gone after him. The Pharisees observed the vast crowds that
attended him and were filled with alarm. The city was filled with
commotion ([Mat 21:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#010)).

[John 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 12:20</span></span>

And there were certain Greeks among them that came up to worship at the
feast. Among those who came to worship were Greeks, members of the
Gentile division of the race which embraced all that were not Jews.
These were not Jews who spoke the Grecian language and lived in Greek
countries; those are called in the original Greek Hellenistoi. We find
the latter in the Jerusalem church in large numbers. See [Act
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001). These who sought to visit Jesus
were Hellenes, a term only used of the Greek race. It is probable that
they belonged to the large class of "devout Greeks," met elsewhere by
Paul, who were sick of heathenism and were attracted by the grand Hebrew
revelation of the unity of God. On this great national occasion they had
accompanied Jews settled abroad as they returned to worship in the city
of David.

[John 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 12:21</span></span>

The same came therefore to Philip. The name Philip is Grecian, as well
as Andrew, and those of the seven deacons of Acts, chapter 6. It is not
unlikely that Philip was a Jew born among the Greeks, who spoke the
Greek language.

We would see Jesus. They wish to find out more about the great teacher
from Galilee.

[John 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 12:22</span></span>

Philip cometh and telleth Andrew. Andrew was also of Bethsaida, and he
and Philip seem to have been inseparable friends.

[John 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 12:23</span></span>

The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified. The answer of
Christ may have been to Philip and Andrew, and the Greeks may have heard
and understood it. The substance is, that the time of his glorification
had come and that glorification would draw all men, Greek, Gentiles as
well as Jews, to him.

[John 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 12:24</span></span>

Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone.
This statement, prefaced by the verily, verily, that gives solemn
emphasis, enforces a great truth. The grain of wheat may remain in the
granary for a thousand years and be preserved, but it is useless there.
It neither reproduces, nor is food. It is when it falls into the ground
and undergoes dissolution, that it brings forth fruit. It is fruitful by
giving itself up. So, too, Christ must give himself up. His death was
needful in order that he might impart life to the nation. There is a
lesson here for disciples who would "bear much fruit."

[John 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 12:25</span></span>

He that loveth his life shall lose it. He announces a principle that
underlies all exaltation. He gave his life and found eternal exaltation;
the grain gives its life and lives a hundred-fold; those who consecrate
their lives, give them up for others, dedicate them to their holy work,
will live eternally.

[John 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 12:26</span></span>

If any man serve me, let him follow me. This is Christ's direct answer
to the Greeks. His service is to be rendered, not by secret interviews,
but by obeying him, for so the word "follow" is to be understood.

[John 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 12:27</span></span>

Now is my soul troubled. It is the shadow of the cross and the tomb. The
best comment on this verse is to compare it with the account of the
agony in the garden. Here he exclaims: Father, save me from this hour.
There, "If it be possible, let this cup pass from me." Here, he adds:
But for this cause came I unto this hour. There, "Nevertheless, not my
will but thine be done." Here the perfect resignation that follows the
struggle in his soul is in the prayer, "Father, glorify thy name."

[John 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 12:28</span></span>

Then came a voice from heaven, saying, I have both glorified it. At
Gethsemane the angel came to strengthen him; here the Father's voice
speaks in approval. Three times the Father's voice was heard from the
sky: first, when Christ was buried in Jordan, a type of his own burial;
second, when Moses and Elijah talked with him on the holy mount about
his death; third, when he had his struggle of soul in view of death
portrayed here, and triumphed.

Will glorify it again. God had glorified his name by the wonders wrought
by Jesus; he would glorify it by his resurrection, his exaltation, the
scenes of Pentecost, and the triumphs of the church.

[John 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 12:29</span></span>

An angel spake to him. All heard the sound of the divine voice, but it
was not clear to all what it was.

[John 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 12:30</span></span>

This voice came not because of me. He had already won the victory before
the voice came. It was rather to confirm the faith of his disciples, who
still stumbled over the prospect of his death.

[John 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 12:31</span></span>

Now is the judgment of this world. Now, "this hour," the "hour" referred
to in [Joh 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#023) and [Joh
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027), the hour for which he had come
into the world, the hour of the cross; that was to be the hour of
judgment, the crisis, which should determine who should rule the world.
The cross became a throne. It gave him the crown.

The prince of this world be cast out. The cross cast him out, dethroned
him; he is now a usurper and shall finally be cast into the lake of
fire.

[John 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 12:32</span></span>

If I shall be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me.
Lifted up, first, to the cross; second, from the grave; third, to heaven
and the eternal throne.

[John 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 12:34</span></span>

We have heard out of the law that Christ abideth forever. The multitude
were perplexed. Their idea of the Messiah was an eternal king. Now he
spoke of death.

[John 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 12:35</span></span>

Yet a little while is the light with you. He refuses to answer their
questions directly, but imparts to them needed truths. The light was
then present with them. Let them seek the light and walk in it while
they had opportunity. The opportunity might soon pass away and the
darkness come.

[John 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 12:36</span></span>

Believe in the light, that ye may be the children of light. That they
might receive the light of the Light of the world they must believe on
him.

[John 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 12:37</span></span>

Yet they believed not on him. They had a kind of intellectual faith, but
were filled with doubts when they could not understand. There was no
real trust.

[John 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 12:38</span></span>

The saying of Esaias the prophet, etc. See notes on [Mat
13:14-16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#014). They were blinded because
they closed their eyes, and God's law is that those who will not see,
shall not see.

[John 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 12:42</span></span>

Among the chief rulers also many believed. Members of the Sanhedrim. We
have the names of two, Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus. See [Joh
19:38-39](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#038).

They did not confess him. For fear of excommunication. The Pharisees had
decided to excommunicate those who did. See [Joh
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#022). The two rulers just named
afterwards became bolder.

[John 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 12:47</span></span>

I judge him not. He shall sit on the throne of judgment, not to condemn
the world he came to save. The words he left in the world will decide
the destiny of every man. All shall be "judged by the things written in
the books" ([Rev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012)).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 13](joh013)

</div>
