<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat016)  [Next](mat018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 17:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Transfigured Lord. Moses and Elias. The Voice from the
Cloud. The Lunatic Healed. The Son of Man to Be Betrayed. Slain and
Raised the Third Day. The Tribute Money.

[Matthew 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 17:1</span></span>

And after six days. Compare [Mar
9:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#002); [Luk
9:28-36](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#028); [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014), and [Pe2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#018). Six days after the conversation
recorded in the last chapter. Luke says, "about an eight days." About,
not exactly. Luke's eight days include the fractional days at the
beginning and end of the day of the conversation and the day of
transfiguration. Matthew's six days are the six complete days
intervening between them.

Jesus taketh Peter, James and John. The three apostles who were chosen
to be nearest to the Lord.

Into a high mountain. Not Mt. Tabor, as tradition holds, but probably
Mt. Hermom. It could not have been Mt. Tabor, for, as we learn from
Josephus, who lived in that time, the top of Mt. Tabor was then occupied
by a town and fortress. On the other hand, the Lord was in the vicinity
of Mt. Hermon ([Mat 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#013), note);
Hermon was a "high mountain," ten thousand feet high, visible over most
of Palestine.

[Matthew 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 17:2</span></span>

And was transfigured before them. That is, transformed, changed in form.
The great object was to reveal to the disciples his Divine glory before
they beheld his humiliation upon the cross, in order to sustain their
faith in the hour of trial.

His face did shine as the sun. Thus John describes the glorified Savior
when he beheld him on Patmos: "His face as the sun when he shineth in
his strength."

His raiment was white as the light. Mark says, "white as snow." The
comparison may have been suggested by the snow of Hermon. It was a
vision of supernatural splendor.

[Matthew 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 17:3</span></span>

There appeared unto them Moses and Elias. (1) Among all the prophets and
saints of the Old Testament these were the two, of which one had not
died ([Kg2 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011)), and the other had no
sooner tasted of death than his body was withdrawn from under the
dominion of death and of him that had the power of death ([Deu
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006); Jude 9). Both, therefore, came
from hades, but from hades conquered. (2) Again, these two were the
acknowledged heads and representatives, the one of the law, the other of
the prophets (compare [Mat 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)).

And they were talking with Jesus. The subject of their conversation is
given in [Luk 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#031). It was the decease
(exodus, departure, referring to his death and ascension) which he
should accomplish at Jerusalem. In this brief interview between the
greatest worthies of the old dispensation and the Founder of the new
dispensation their conversation would be confined to the most important
theme of earth and heaven. That was the Savior's death.

[Matthew 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 17:4</span></span>

Peter answered. The words were spoken as they departed ([Luk
9:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#033)).

Lord, it is good for us to be here. It is too brief a converse, too
transient a glimpse and foretaste of the heavenly glory. He would fain
detain these august visitors.

Let us make three tabernacles. Three booths of boughs, like those of the
Feast of the Tabernacles. It seemed to him that the hour for the
long-looked-for reign had come.

[Matthew 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 17:5</span></span>

A bright cloud overshadowed them. Christ, Moses and Elijah are
represented as in the cloud which separated them from the disciples'
sight; and out of this cloud the voice spoke to the disciples. By the
disciples such a luminous cloud would be instantly accepted as a symbol
of Divine presence. A bright cloud, the Shekinah, is throughout the Old
Testament dispensation employed as a symbol of God's presence, being
very generally entitled "the glory," or "the glory of the Lord."

This is my beloved Son. The same voice which had once before been heard
at the baptism. Such a confirmation of the great confession of Peter was
never to be forgotten. Almost a generation later, when he wrote his
second epistle, the remembrance of this night was as vivid as ever: "For
he received from God the Father honor and glory, when there came such a
voice to him from the excellent glory."

Hear ye him. The Divine voice that spoke at Sinai and the baptism is
heard, declaring Christ's superiority to Moses and Elias, in that he is
"the beloved Son," and commanding all to HEAR HIM. Henceforth, not
Moses, or Elias, are the lawgivers of the people of God, but Christ. The
saints are bidden to turn from every human teacher, even those as
revered as Moses and Elias, to listen to our Lord. To hear Him will lead
from error and sin into truth, righteousness and fitness for heaven.

[Matthew 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 17:6</span></span>

They were sore afraid. Like the children of Israel at Sinai, they were
filled with awe at the Divine voice.

[Matthew 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 17:7</span></span>

Arise, be not afraid. So the Lord ever speaks to his disciples in danger
or fear.

[Matthew 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 17:8</span></span>

They saw no man, save Jesus only. When they rose from their prostration
the glorious vision was gone.

[Matthew 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 17:9</span></span>

Jesus charged them, . . . Tell the vision to no man. Even they
themselves did not yet understand what they had seen. Still less could
they, in present circumstances, make others understand. All was plainer
after Christ had died, risen, and had ascended to glory. The time had
not come to proclaim the mystery of the Sonship to the world.

[Matthew 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 17:10</span></span>

Why then say the scribes that Elias must first come? They knew that the
scribes, in their capacity as interpreters of prophecy, were wont to say
that Elijah must come before the Messiah could appear. They said this on
the strength of [Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001), and [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005). If Peter, James and John were of
those who asked this question, they were probably seeking to ascertain
if the vision they had seen was the coming of Elias and why he did not
remain.

[Matthew 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 17:11</span></span>

Elias (Elijah) is come already. John the Baptist, who came in the spirit
and power of Elijah ([Mar 1:2-8](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#002); [Luk
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017)).

Have done unto him whatsoever they listed. List and lust were originally
one word, meaning to desire or wish. The account of his martyrdom is
given in [Mat 14:6-12](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006); [Mar
6:21-29](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#021). See notes there.

The Son of man suffer of them. Henceforth he keeps the lesson of his
suffering constantly before their minds. After all, his disciples were
not prepared for it when the hour came.

[Matthew 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 17:14</span></span>

When they were come to the multitude. Come down out of the mountain.
Compare Mark 9:14-29 and [Luk 9:37-42](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#037).
Luke says this miracle occurred the next day.

[Matthew 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 17:15</span></span>

My son; for he is a lunatic. Epileptic, in the Revision. The symptoms
are those of epilepsy, in this case caused by demoniac possession. The
son was a child ([Luk 9:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#038)). He was
dumb as well as epileptic (Mark).

[Matthew 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 17:16</span></span>

Thy disciples. The nine apostles who had been left below when the Lord
with three ascended the mountain.

[Matthew 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 17:17</span></span>

O faithless and perverse generation. Intended especially for the
disciples who had failed in the cure from weakness of faith.

How long shall I suffer you? Bear with your shortcomings.

Bring him hither to me. The emphasis is upon me. This act of mercy could
have been done by his disciples had they been devout, prayerful and
believing.

[Matthew 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 17:18</span></span>

And the demon went out. Compare Mark and Luke.

[Matthew 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 17:19</span></span>

Why could not we cast him out? The answer is, Lack of faith.

This mountain. Lofty Hermon, in plain sight.

Nothing shall be impossible to you. Upon the condition of perfect faith.
Compare Heb. chap. 11. Faith in Christ, faith exercised in fasting and
prayer, are the conditions of power.

[Matthew 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 17:21</span></span>

But this kind . . . but by prayer and fasting. Compare [Mar
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#029). Only by devout waiting before
the Lord for strength. Such strength is always needful to the victories
of faith. Often, too, we have demons, envy, pride, covetousness, a
revengeful spirit, that must be cast out by prayer.

[Matthew 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 17:22</span></span>

While they abode in Galilee. [Mar
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#030), says: Departing thence (from the
vicinity of Mt. Hermon), they passed through Galilee. Compare also, [Luk
9:43-45](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#043).

[Matthew 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 17:23</span></span>

They were exceeding sorry. Because he said that he must be put to death.
There is only grief now, but no remonstrance.

[Matthew 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 17:24</span></span>

When they had come to Capernaum. They had now returned from the journey
north.

Doth not your master pay tribute? Not tribute, which would be a tax due
an alien, but the half shekel, an annual tax demanded of every male Jew
above twenty years for the support of the temple. It would be from
twenty-five to thirty-five cents, as the shekel is variously estimated
from fifty to seventy cents. The collectors were not publicans, but
Jewish authorities.

[Matthew 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 17:25</span></span>

He saith, Yea. Peter, as usual, answered before he reflected, and then
came to Jesus with the matter.

Jesus prevented. Peter came into the house to speak about it, but Christ
knew his thoughts and spoke first.

Of whom do the kings of the earth take custom? Not of their own
children, but from subjects. Hence, Christ, the King's Son, for whom the
temple was built, was not subject to tax for the benefit of the temple.
The Son of the King would not pay tribute to the King. For the origin of
this temple tax, see [Exo 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012), and
[Ch2 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2024.htm#005).

[Matthew 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 17:27</span></span>

Lest we offend them. While not compelled to pay it as a due, he would
pay it as a matter of expediency. Sometimes things are expedient for
which there is not the letter of the law.

Go to the sea. Of Galilee, close at hand.

Cast a hook. Peter was a fisherman.

Take up the fish that first cometh. A miracle. The Lord by his power
would draw the fish that had sought to swallow the coin to Peter's hook.

A piece of money. Greek, a stater, corresponding to a shekel, enough for
two. The Lord would pay the tax, but in a manner in accord with the
Divine dignity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 18](mat018)

</div>
