<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat007)  [Next](mat009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 8:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Leper Healed. The Servant of the Centurion Healed. Great
Faith. Sitting in the Kingdom with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob. Children
of the Kingdom Cast Out. Following Christ. The Storm on the Sea. The
Disciples in Terror. The Storm Quelled at His Voice. The Gergesene
Demoniacs Healed. The Swine Perish in the Sea.

[Matthew 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 8:1</span></span>

A leper came. Compare [Mar 1:40-45](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#040);
[Luk 5:12-15](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#012). Leprosy was a dreadful
and hopeless disease. It begins as a skin disease, defies medical skill,
and is a kind of living death. Dr. Schaff says: "Near the Jaffa gate of
Jerusalem I saw, in 1877, these miserable creatures with withered limbs
imploring aid, and visited a hospital of incurable lepers." There are
various forms of the disease, but white leprosy seemed most common among
the Hebrews. With it the sufferer became white from head to foot. The
leper, by the law of Moses, was regarded unclean, was separated from the
people, was regarded as death, and the disease was a type of sin. See
[Lev 13:1-12](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001); [Kg2
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#027); [Num
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002).

Lord. An expression of faith, as well as the words that follow.

[Matthew 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 8:3</span></span>

Touched him . . . straitway his leprosy was cleansed. To touch a leper
was forbidden, and carried ceremonial defilement, but at the touch of
Jesus the source of the defilement fled, and the leper was clean. At the
touch of Jesus all impurity flees.

[Matthew 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 8:4</span></span>

Tell no man. This was forbidden until the man was officially declared to
be healed. He could not enter society until the priest had so declared.
To blaze the story abroad as a miracle of Jesus might prevent such a
declaration on account of prejudice. Besides, the Lord often forbade
noising abroad his cures, for various reasons, chiefly because the
multitude so thronged him.

Offer the gift Moses commanded. See [Lev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#010), [Lev
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#022), [Lev
14:30-31](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#030).

For a testimony. An official proof of the miracle.

[Matthew 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 8:5</span></span>

When Jesus entered Capernaum. See note on [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013). His return to the place he made
his home after the Sermon on the Mount and healing the leper. Compare
[Luk 7:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#001).

There came unto him a centurion. A Roman military officer, corresponding
to our captain. All Palestine was under Roman military government at
this time, with headquarters at CÃ&brvbr;sarea, and soldiers in every
leading town. This centurion probably commanded the company stationed at
Capernaum. He was, of course, a Gentile. We learn from [Luk
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#003), he came to Jesus, not in person,
but by Jewish elders, whom he supposed would have more influence with
the Lord. These elders interceded more readily because he had built them
a synagogue ([Luk 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#005)), either to
secure favor, or because he was, like Cornelius, a devout man. In the
ruins of Tel Hum, supposed to be Capernaum, are yet found the
foundations of a synagogue, one known by certain characteristics to have
been built in the Herodian period, and there can hardly be a doubt that
it was the one built by the centurion, and in which Christ often
preached. See Edersheim's Jewish Social Life, page 255.

[Matthew 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 8:6</span></span>

Lord, my servant lieth at home sick of the palsy. Luke says his servant
"was dear unto him," and the whole account of Matthew indicates intense
solicitude. Paralysis, or palsy, was a common disease in those days.
(See [Mat 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).) Alford says, "The
disease of the text may have been tetanus, or lockjaw, which the ancient
physicians included under paralysis." Luke says that "he was ready to
die."

[Matthew 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 8:7</span></span>

He saith to him. Luke tells us that he started at once, but was
interrupted by what follows.

[Matthew 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 8:8</span></span>

The centurion answered. Through friends whom he had sent for this
purpose ([Luk 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#006)).

I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof. This humility
was partly due to his consciousness that he was a Gentile. Rigid Jews
did not hold social intercourse with Gentiles, and the centurion may
have supposed that so holy a Jewish teacher as Jesus would hesitate to
come under his roof.

Speak the word only. "Speak only a word" is the idea, and "my servant
will be healed." Not even Martha ([Joh
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#021)) thought that Jesus could have
saved her brother Lazarus without going to him. His faith was great.

[Matthew 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 8:9</span></span>

For I am a man under authority, having soldiers under me. The meaning
is: "If I, in my subordinate station, am obeyed, how much more thou, who
art over all, and whom disease serve as their master." As he could say,
"Go," to a soldier and was at once obeyed, so Jesus could say, "Go," to
the disease, and it would obey him.

[Matthew 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 8:10</span></span>

When Jesus heard it he marvelled. There are two cases in the Lord's
history where he is said to have marvelled; here and in [Mar
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#006). In one case he marvels at the
faith of a Gentile; in the other at the unbelief of the Jews.

I have not found so great faith, no, not in Israel. The greatness of his
faith is shown in his lofty conception of the power and dignity of
Christ. This great faith was found, not in Israel, but in a Gentile. In
one case beside, that of the Syrophoenician woman ([Mat
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#028)), also a Gentile, the Lord
commends the greatness of faith.

[Matthew 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 8:11</span></span>

Many shall come from the east and west. The terms, "the east and the
west," the extreme points of the compass, are taken to indicate the
regions that are far away, the whole world. The Lord means not only
those who are geographically far away from Israel, but those who have
been far away spiritually, Gentiles as well as Jews.

Shall sit down with Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. The Jews were
accustomed to speak to the delights of the Messiah's kingdom as a feast
with the patriarchs. The language implies intimate domestic intercourse
and fellowship.

The kingdom of heaven refers, here, rather to the eternal blessed state
than to the church on earth.

[Matthew 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 8:12</span></span>

But the children of the kingdom. The Jews, the natural children of
Abraham, the "Father of the faithful," heirs of the promises made to
him.

Cast out. Because they rejected the Messiah, in whom all the promises
center.

Into outer darkness. The history of the Jews for 1,800 years has been a
fulfillment of this passage.

There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. There is a hint at the
wretchedness of a future state of punishment.

[Matthew 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 8:13</span></span>

As thou hast believed. The centurion believed that Jesus could heal his
servant by speaking the word.

In that hour. At the moment these words were spoken the servant was
well.

[Matthew 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 8:14</span></span>

Peter's wife's mother. Compare [Mar
1:29-34](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#029); [Luk
4:38-41](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#038). Peter, whom the Catholics
make the first of the popes, was, therefore, a married man. See also
[Co1 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005). Malarious fevers are still
common in the vicinity of Capernaum, due probably to the adjacent
marshes.

[Matthew 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 8:15</span></span>

Touched her hand. He could heal by a word, or by his touch. At his touch
the fever left her.

Ministered. Was well, and able to prepare a meal for the Lord.

[Matthew 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 8:16</span></span>

They brought many. See also [Mar 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#032).

Possessed with devils. See note on [Mat
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#024).

Healed the sick. The sick were diseased in body; the demoniacs were
spiritually diseased.

[Matthew 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 8:17</span></span>

Spoken by Isaiah. In the beautiful picture of the Messiah in chapter 53.

[Matthew 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 8:18</span></span>

Now when Jesus saw multitudes about him. The multitudes had gathered to
listen to his teaching, or to behold his miracles. The sea was only six
miles wide, and the Savior often crossed it in order to secure
retirement. There is no deep recess in the eastern hills; no towns along
its banks corresponding to those in the plain of Gennesareth.

[Matthew 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 8:19</span></span>

A certain scribe said, . . . I will follow thee. Compare [Luk
9:57-62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#057). Though this scribe belonged
to a class which, as a body, rejected Christ, he was disposed to be a
disciple (see [Mat 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021)), but had not
counted the cost. See note on [Mat
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004).

[Matthew 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 8:20</span></span>

Jesus saith unto him. He rejects not this man's offer, nor refuses him
the liberty to follow him, only he will have him know what he is doing
and "count the cost."

The Son of man. It is the name by which the Lord ordinarily designates
himself as the Messiah--the Son of God manifested in the flesh of Adam;
the second Adam.

Not where to lay his head. He, as the "Son of man," did not possess what
the humbler animals claim, a home.

[Matthew 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 8:21</span></span>

Suffer me first to go and bury my father. There are two views. 1. That
his father was already dead, and he wished only to attend the funeral
and properly observe the last rites. If this view is correct, the Savior
meant to teach that the duty to the Lord is higher than any earthly
duty, and when one has to yield to the other it must be the lower one.
2. The view is also held that the disciple asked that he might be
permitted to remain at home until his father's death and burial, and
then follow Christ. That is the more probable view. It was the case of
"loving father or mother more than me."

[Matthew 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 8:22</span></span>

Follow me. The highest of all duties, now discharged by becoming his
disciple, obeying him and making his life our example.

Let the dead bury their dead. Those spiritually dead will attend to the
last rites of them who have died naturally.

[Matthew 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 8:23</span></span>

And when he was entered into a ship. Compare Mark 5:1-21; [Luk
8:28-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#028). Boat is a better rendering.
It was a small open row boat.

[Matthew 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 8:24</span></span>

There arose a great tempest in the sea. Mark says, "A great storm;"
Luke, "There came down a storm of wind;" the word used by Matthew
implies a tornado. The Greek word denotes a sudden and violent gust of
wind, such as frequently bursts on the lake. All travelers describe the
storms as very sudden and violent, caused by the cold air that rushes
down from the mountains into the heated depression of the lake.

[Matthew 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 8:25</span></span>

Lord, save us: we perish. The Lord was awakened out of sleep with these
words. Their language is that of extreme terror.

[Matthew 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 8:26</span></span>

O ye of little faith. According to Matthew, he characterizes them as of
"little faith; according to Mark he asked, How have ye have no faith?
according to Luke, Where is your faith? The spirit of the rebuke is the
same in all the accounts.

Rebuked the winds and the sea. Mark gives the very words of the rebuke:
"Peace, be still."

[Matthew 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 8:27</span></span>

What manner of man? The words express astonishment at this new proof of
his control, not only over demons and disease, but also over the winds
and waves, which obeyed him at a word.

[Matthew 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 8:28</span></span>

Into the country of the Gergesenes. Compare Mark 5:1-21; [Luk
8:26-40](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#026). Gergesa has been identified
on the east shore of Galilee; the "steep place" and "tombs" are still
seen. It was a village in the district of the Gadarenes. The Lord landed
here after the storm. The Revision has Gadarenes in Matthew, and
Gerasenes in Mark and Luke. The simple explanation of this difference
is, that Gadarenes and Gerasenes are different names for the inhabitants
of the same large district, so called from Gadara and Gerasa, two cities
of that region; while Gergesenes is the name of the people of a smaller
district within the other, and named from the city of Gergesa.

Two demoniacs. Mark and Luke mention only one, the fiercer one, who
spoke with the Lord.

The tombs. The tombs were caves, natural or artificial, cut in the rock
of the hill side, and, hence, suitable for a shelter.

Fierce. So violent as to be dangerous ([Mar
5:3-5](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#003); [Luk
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#029)).

[Matthew 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 8:29</span></span>

They cried out. This account shows: (1) That demoniacal possession was
not simply bodily or mental disease. (2) That evil spirits actually took
possession of and controlled human beings. (3) That these controlled the
actions and organs of speech of their poor victims. (4) We learn
elsewhere that sin prepared the way for the entrance of the demon.

Thou Son of God. The demons, like the devil, recognized him.

Torment us before our time. These words show that they expected the
final triumph of Christ.

[Matthew 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 8:30</span></span>

A herd of many swine. According to Mark, 2,000. They were an unclean
animal, kept probably by Jews in violation of the spirit of the Mosaic
law; or, if by Gentiles, kept in violation of God's law for the land of
Israel.

[Matthew 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 8:31</span></span>

Suffer us to go into . . . the swine. Why this request we do not know;
perhaps it was malicious; perhaps to have an animal habitation.

[Matthew 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 8:32</span></span>

Go. A permission, not a command.

Rushed . . . into the sea. Maddened, the swine rushed down the steep
declivity into the sea. If we knew all the facts we would see more fully
the righteousness of the Lord's permission. Perhaps the loss of the
swine was a punishment. Perhaps it was to show that evil works its own
destruction.

[Matthew 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 8:34</span></span>

The whole city came out to meet Jesus. Filled with wonder and fear by
the story.

Besought him that he would depart. Partly from awe of one with such
power; partly, perhaps, from fear of loss of more property. The Lord,
bidden to depart, never returned. In this fact is a significant lesson.
Mark tells us that the healed demoniac became a preacher of Christ in
his own country.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 9](mat009)

</div>
