<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 5:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Beatitudes. The Salt of the Earth. The Light of the World.
The Relation of Christ to the World. The Law Not to Be Disregarded. The
Law Modified; The Law of Murder; of Adultery; of Divorce; of Oaths; of
Retaliation; of Love.

[Matthew 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 5:1</span></span>

Seeing the multitudes. We gather from Luke, chapter 6, that the Lord
passed the night in the mountain in prayer; in the morning he chose and
ordained the twelve; he then came down to the plain, where he found a
vast multitude, whom he taught.

Went up into a mountain. Thought to be the "Horns of Hattin," a mountain
about seven miles south of Capernaum, near the Sea of Galilee.

When he was set. Eastern teachers usually sat while teaching.

His disciples came. Not the apostles only, but all anxious to learn and
follow him. Disciple means a learner.

[Matthew 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 5:2</span></span>

Opened his mouth and taught. This wonderful discourse of three chapters
is to the New Dispensation what the law given from Sinai was to the Old.
That was the moral law of Judaism, this is the moral law of
Christianity; that was given from "the Mount that could not be touched,"
this from the Mount of blessing. Compare Luke 6:20-49.

[Matthew 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 5:3</span></span>

Blessed. There follow nine beatitudes, each of which pronounces a
blessing upon those who have certain characteristics. The word "blessed"
is first applied to God, and means more than "happy," as it has
sometimes been translated. Happiness comes from earthly things;
blessedness comes from God. It is not bestowed arbitrarily; a reason
follows each beatitude.

The poor in spirit. The humble, in contrast with the haughty; those
sensible of spiritual destitution. The same state of mind is referred to
when he speaks elsewhere of a contrite and broken spirit.

Is the kingdom of heaven. Such shall become members of the kingdom that
Christ will establish. The Jews were rejected from this kingdom on
account of their spiritual pride.

[Matthew 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 5:4</span></span>

Blessed are they that mourn. Not all mourners, for there is "a sorrow of
this world that worketh death." Godly sorrow is meant, a mourning over
sinfulness. See [Co2 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#010).

[Matthew 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 5:5</span></span>

Blessed are the meek. The mild, the gentle, opposed to the proud and
ambitious, the kind who succeed in such a kingdom as the Jews expected.

Shall inherit the earth. The land; Canaan as the type of all blessings.
It is the heavenly land especially that is inherited. The especial
reference is to the Messiah's kingdom, of which "the land" of Canaan was
a type.

[Matthew 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 5:6</span></span>

Blessed are they that hunger, etc. This implies the same sense of
spiritual needs as [Mat 5:3-4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003). Hunger
is a felt want, in this case a want of righteousness before God, the
righteousness that comes from the forgiveness of sins. See [Luk
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#017).

[Matthew 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 5:7</span></span>

Blessed are the merciful. The merciful, those who, instead of resenting
injury, are ready to forgive, shall obtain the divine mercy. The fifth
petition of the Lord's prayer implies that we must forgive if we expect
to be forgiven.

[Matthew 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 5:8</span></span>

Blessed are the pure in heart. The Jew, under the tuition of the
Pharisees, cared little for the state of the heart, so that outward
forms were duly kept. Jesus, however, demands that the heart, the
affections, the mind, shall be purified, as the fountain from whence
flows the moral and religious life. A pure heart begets a pure life; an
impure heart, a corrupt life.

They shall see God. Not with the natural eye, but the spiritual vision;
by faith. In the pure heart the Lord will dwell and his presence will be
recognized. See [Joh 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023).

[Matthew 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 5:9</span></span>

Blessed are the peacemakers. Not the soldiers of a warrior king, such as
the Jews expected but the men who, in the name of the Prince of Peace,
go forth to proclaim peace and good will among men. Christ is the great
Peacemaker.

[Matthew 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 5:10</span></span>

Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness' sake. The Jews
expected a conquering kingdom, and its citizens to be lords among the
nations, but Christ pronounces a blessing on those who are persecuted,
not for misdeeds, but for righteousness. These shall have the kingdom.
Doubtless these words have sustained and cheered many a martyr.

[Matthew 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 5:11</span></span>

Blessed . . . when men revile you. This is a personal application of
what has just preceded. Some of those who listened were reviled by the
Jews, and persecuted unto death.

For my sake. In the preceding verse it is said "for righteousness'
sake." The two expressions mean the same.

[Matthew 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 5:12</span></span>

Rejoice, and be exceeding glad. On account of persecution. The reason
why they may justly rejoice is given: Great is your reward in heaven.

So persecuted they the prophets. Isaiah is said to have been sawed
asunder; Jeremiah was thrown into a dungeon and threatened with death;
Elijah was hunted by Ahab and Jezebel.

[Matthew 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 5:13</span></span>

Ye are the salt of the earth. Salt preserves from corruption. The
disciples of Christ preserve the world from general corruption. Whatever
becomes utterly corrupted is doomed to be destroyed.

But if the salt have lost its savour. Salt is worthless if it has lost
its qualities. It preserves no longer. It is fit only to be cast out and
trodden under foot. So, too, if those who are the salt of the earth
cease to communicate saving power, they are fit only to be cast out, and
Christ will cast such out of his mouth (see [Rev
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#016)).

[Matthew 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 5:14</span></span>

Ye are the light of the world. The business of the church is not only to
save, but to enlighten. Christ is light, and his disciples must be
light.

A city set on an hill. Anciently cities, for the sake of defense, were
placed on hills. Such cities are seen from afar. So must the church give
forth its light.

[Matthew 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 5:15</span></span>

Light a candle and put it under a bushel. A lamp, in the Revision, which
is correct. Candles and candlesticks were not used in Scripture times.
It would be foolishness to light a lamp and put it under a bushel
measure.

[Matthew 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 5:16</span></span>

Even so, let your light shine. Like the city set on a hill, or the
lighted lamp on a stand. We are told, 1. To let our light shine. 2.
Before men. 3. By good works. 4. That they may glorify the Father in
heaven. Christ is the Light; we will shine reflected light if we walk in
his light. If we give forth light it will honor God.

[Matthew 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 5:17</span></span>

Think not that I am come to destroy the law and the prophets. The
preceding verses were so opposed to the teachings of the scribes and
Pharisees that some might assert that he was a destroyer of the law. He
replies that he has not come to destroy it, but to fulfil. He does not
say that he has come to perpetuate it.

To fulfil. To complete its purpose. He was the end of the law. It was a
"schoolmaster to bring us to Christ" ([Gal
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#024)), but "after faith is come we are
no longer under the schoolmaster."

[Matthew 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 5:18</span></span>

One jot or tittle. Jot means the smallest letter of the Hebrew alphabet,
while tittle refers to a simple turn by which one letter is
distinguished from another. The expression, "jot or tittle," was
proverbial for the smallest part.

Till all be fulfilled. "Till," says Dr. Schaff, "implies that after the
great events of Christ's life, and the establishment of his kingdom, the
old dispensation, as a dispensation of the letter and yoke of bondage,
as a system of types and shadows, will pass away, and has passed away
([Eph 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#015); [Col
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#014); [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013)); while the spirit and substance
of the law, i. e., love to God and man, will last forever."

[Matthew 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 5:19</span></span>

Shall break one of the least of these. The Pharisees taught that some
commands were more important than others, and that it was a trivial
matter to break the smallest commands. The papists still divide sin into
mortal and venial. Christ shows that the spirit of obedience does not
seek to make such distinction.

Shall be least. He may get into the kingdom, possibly, but such a spirit
will give him a very low spiritual rank.

[Matthew 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 5:20</span></span>

Your righteousness shall exceed. The righteousness of the scribes and
Pharisees has just been referred to (see [Mat
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007)). They claimed to be the teachers
and examples of righteousness, but they lacked the humble spirit of true
obedience.

[Matthew 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 5:21</span></span>

Ye have heard. Jesus now gives the law a new form to adapt it to his
kingdom. It takes a new, a deeper, a more spiritual shape and meaning.

By them of old time. In this case, Moses. See [Exo
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013); [Deu
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#017).

Thou shalt not kill. One of the ten commandments. Christ, the Divine
Lawgiver, modifies it.

In danger of the judgment. The civil courts. The law provided in every
city a court of seven judges, who could sentence a criminal to death
([Deu 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018)).

[Matthew 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 5:22</span></span>

But I say unto you. Jehovah had spoken the Decalogue to Israel. Christ
assumes the right to amend it. Such a claim is based on a claim of
divinity.

Whosoever is angry with his brother. Jesus goes back of the murderous
act, and forbids the anger and the reproachful words that precede it and
are likely to lead it. He places the murderous heart on the level of
actual murder.

Raca. An epithet of contempt; "empty head," or "spit out," that is, a
heretic.

The council. The Sanhedrim, the highest court of Israel. It corresponded
to our Supreme Court, and had seventy members.

Thou fool. The original implies a stupid, wicked fool.

Of hell fire. The Greek is "the Gehenna of fire." The term Gehenna arose
from the valley of Hinnom, south of Jerusalem, where the Canaanites
burned human sacrifices to Moloch. After the return of the Jews from the
Captivity they made it a place of defilement, where the refuse of the
city was thrown and burned. The name was applied to the place of future
punishment by the Jews. The word is often used in the New Testament
([Mat 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033); [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029); [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028); [Mat
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#009); [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043)), and always denotes a place of
future punishment.

[Matthew 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 5:23</span></span>

Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar. This springs immediately
out of the modification of the law, Thou shalt not kill, which required
that there should be no anger with a brother. If about to offer a gift
on the altar, and the remembrance comes that a brother hath aught
against thee, leave the gift, go and make it right with him, and then
offer thy gift. This shows that one guilty of wrongs to his fellow-man
cannot offer acceptable worship of God.

[Matthew 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 5:25</span></span>

Agree with thine adversary quickly. By adversary is meant an opponent in
a lawsuit who is supposed to have a just claim, in this case a creditor.

Officer. The same as our sheriff. Under all the old laws debt could be
punished with imprisonment.

[Matthew 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 5:26</span></span>

Thou shalt not come out from thence. After the debtor was cast into
prison he was held until the debt was paid, and if it were not, he
remained in prison until he died.

Farthing. A small, insignificant copper coin. The warning against
lawsuits is clear, but there is a higher idea still. The Lord would warn
us to make everything right before it is too late. Before the judgment
there is a chance; after it there is nothing but payment.

[Matthew 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 5:27</span></span>

Thou shalt not commit adultery. The Jewish rabbins held that a man was
guiltless who did not commit the act. Christ, as he always did, lays the
laws upon the heart. If it is impure, full of unholy desires, one is
guilty. It is our duty to keep the heart pure.

[Matthew 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 5:29</span></span>

If thy right eye offend thee. The eye that giveth a lustful look. A
licentious passion, or anything that tempts to sin, whether thoughts
within, friends, or surroundings.

Pluck it out. Cast far from you what would lead to sin.

It is profitable. Better to suffer deep mortification by self-denial
than to be judged worthy of hell.

Body. Used for the whole man.

[Matthew 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 5:30</span></span>

If thy right hand. The same thought as in [Mat
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029), with a new illustration.

[Matthew 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 5:31</span></span>

Whosoever shall put away his wife. The divorce laws were very lax among
the Jews. A man could put away his wife "for any cause" ([Mat
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008)). Moses directed a legal letter
of divorcement ([Deu 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001)). Christ
positively forbids divorce except for unchastity. Marriage is a divine
institution, and the obligation is for life ([Mat
19:3-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003); [Rom
7:1-3](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001); [Co1
7:10-17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010)).

[Matthew 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 5:33</span></span>

Thou shalt not forswear thyself. (See [Lev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012); and [Num
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002).) The Jews held that this only
prohibited swearing falsely and by the name of God.

[Matthew 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 5:34</span></span>

Swear not at all. Christ does not forbid judicial oaths. Note, (1) God
sometimes swears by himself ([Gen
22:16-17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)); (2) Jesus made oath before
the Sanhedrim ([Mat 26:63](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#063)); (3) Paul
made oath to the Corinthians ([Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023)). He does forbid all profanity
and idle oaths, such as were common among the Jews, and still so defile
the mouths of men.

Neither by heaven. The Jews held that it was impious to swear by the
name of God, but that one could swear "by heaven," "by the earth," "by
Jerusalem." One was God's throne, the second his footstool, Jerusalem
the city of the Messiah King, all too holy for profanation.

[Matthew 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 5:36</span></span>

By thy head. Senseless, since the oath could have no meaning. Dr.
Thompson (The Land and the Book) says the Orientals are still terribly
profane, swearing continually by the head, the beard, the heart, the
temple, the church.

[Matthew 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 5:37</span></span>

Let your speech be, Yea, yea. All foolish appeals are forbidden. A
simple statement is all Christ permits. All beyond is evil, "and cometh
of evil." Indeed, it makes one doubt the truth of him who has to confirm
every assertion by an oath.

[Matthew 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 5:38</span></span>

An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth. The law quoted is found in
[Exo 21:23-25](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023) and [Lev
24:18-20](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#018). Moses intended it to protect
person and property by prescribing what punishment the law should
inflict. He who took a life should lose his life; he who robbed another
of an eye should be punished by the loss of an eye. The Jews perverted
it to justify private retaliation.

[Matthew 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 5:39</span></span>

Resist not evil. Jesus does not forbid the judicial application of the
law, but personal revenge, such as was common among the Jews. Instead of
turning upon those who injure us, and becoming a party to personal
broils, it is the duty of Christians to suffer meekly.

Turn to him the other. This must be the Christian spirit, the great law
of love, which "endureth all things." This is not a code to be slavishly
observed in the letter, but its spirit must always be preserved. See
[Joh 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022), and [Act
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#003), for the application.

[Matthew 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 5:40</span></span>

If any man would sue. That is, is about to sue thee.

Take thy coat. The inner garment, the tunic or shirt.

Cloak. The outer garment, the covering at night. It could not be held by
a creditor ([Exo 22:26-27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026)). Better to
give it up, too, than to engage in litigation. Many a poor soul has
realized this when it was too late, and the lawyers had divided his
property. Avoid lawsuits.

[Matthew 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 5:41</span></span>

Compel thee to go a mile. In those days, when there were no stages,
railroad trains, postal lines, or regular means of conveyance, it was
common for officers traveling to impress men to assist them on the
route. It was a necessary, but oppressive, exaction. Christ directs to
yield the service, and double it rather than refuse it.

A mile. A Roman word from mille, a thousand. A Roman mile was a thousand
paces, 1,520 yards.

[Matthew 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 5:42</span></span>

Give to him that asketh thee. Palestine swarmed with blind, lepers, and
maimed, who were dependent on charity.

Turn not away. The Lord does not bid to give to every one, not to loan
to every one, for this would not be a blessing, but to have a spirit
that will be ready to do so whenever it is right.

[Matthew 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 5:43</span></span>

Thou shalt love thy neighbor. See [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018). The Jews gave the command a
very limited application. For Christ's application, see parable of the
Good Samaritan ([Luk 10:30-37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)). It
embraces any one so near us as to need and to receive our acts of
kindness.

Hate thine enemy. A Jewish perversion of the meaning of [Deu
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#006). It exhibits the spirit of the
whole heathen world. Plato praises the Athenians because they hated the
Persians more than any of the other Greeks.

[Matthew 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 5:44</span></span>

I say . . . Love your enemies. The fundamental law of Christ's kingdom.
Henceforth love is to be boundless as the ocean. His own earthly life is
its perfect application. The enemies are to be conquered by love. See
[Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016). Love will return blessing
for cursing, good will for hating, prayers for evil treatment and
persecution. Christ on the cross prayed for his enemies; so did Stephen,
the first Christian martyr.

[Matthew 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 5:45</span></span>

That ye may be children of your Father. We are God's children when we
have the spirit of our Father. We are not if we have the spirit of the
world. Our Father above sends blessing, the rain, and the sunshine, on
the just and the unjust. He loves all, and even sent his son to have a
wicked world because he loved ([Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016)).

[Matthew 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 5:46</span></span>

Do not even the publicans so? The publicans, the gatherers of the Roman
tribute, were generally odious, and deemed the scum of the earth, but
even they loved those who loved them.

[Matthew 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 5:47</span></span>

Salute your brethren only. The Jews usually disdained to speak to a
Gentile, a publican, or a "sinner," but would salute orthodox Jews. Even
the Gentiles, the heathen nations, had enough of love for this. Unless
the disciples could love better than the Jews, they would be on a level
with publicans and heathen.

[Matthew 5:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 5:48</span></span>

Be ye therefore perfect. To carry out fully this great law of love would
lift man to the Divine standard of perfection. This must be the aim of
life. We have before us as a pattern for the perfect God; we have the
Divine perfection embodied in Christ. It will require a constant
struggle while in the flesh to come near so high an ideal, but it must
be our continual aim. This does not teach such sanctification that we
cannot sin, nor that we, here on earth, attain absolute perfection, but
we have placed before us, as a model, the perfect ideal, and we will
constantly ascend higher by striving to attain it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006)

</div>
