<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat006)  [Next](mat008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)

[Matthew](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mat 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Motes and Beams. Casting Pearls before Swine. Asking and
Receiving. The Golden Rule. The Broad and Strait Gates. Wolves in
Sheep's Clothing. The Tree Known by Its Fruits. The Kingdom Entered by
Obedience. The Wise and Foolish Builders. The Wonderful Teacher.

[Matthew 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 7:1</span></span>

Judge not, that you be not judged. The term "judge" is used in more than
one sense, but Christ's meaning is plain. 1. He does not prohibit the
civil judgment of the courts upon evil doers, for this is approved
throughout the whole Bible. 2. He does not prohibit the judgment of the
church, through its officers, upon those who walk disorderly, for both
he and the apostles have enjoined this. 3. He does not forbid those
private judgments that we are compelled to form the wrong-doers, for he
himself tells us that we are to judge men by their fruits. (See [Mat
7:15-20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015).) What he designs to prohibit
is rash, uncharitable judgments, a fault-finding spirit, a disposition
to condemn without examination of charges.

[Matthew 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 7:2</span></span>

With what judgment ye judge ye shall be judged. Not by men, but by God.
He takes note of the unkind, harsh, censorious spirit, and deals with
the man according to his own spirit. There is declared here a great
principle that runs through the moral government of God: Whatsoever a
man soweth, that shall he also reap.

[Matthew 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 7:3</span></span>

Why beholdest thou the mote that is in thy brother's eye? The Lord uses
a figure to show the absurdity of judging severely the faults of others,
while we have greater ones. The term translated "mote" means a little
splinter, while the beam is something very large.

[Matthew 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 7:4</span></span>

Thou hypocrite, cast out first the beam out of thine own eye. The man
who finds fault with another for sin, while he is more guilty, is a
hypocrite. A great many are very zealous to convert the world, who are
themselves unconverted.

[Matthew 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 7:6</span></span>

Give not that which is holy unto dogs. The dog was regarded an unclean
animal by the Jewish law. They probably represent snarling, scoffing
opposers. The characteristic of dogs is brutality. To try to instill
holy things into such low, unclean, and sordid brutal minds is useless.

Neither cast pearls before swine. The swine were also unclean. They
would have no use for pearls, and perhaps would rush upon those who
scattered the pearls. So, too, there are men so dull, imbruted and
senseless, as to reject the pearls of truth. It is our duty to help and
to try to save others, but we must use common sense.

[Matthew 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 7:7</span></span>

Ask, . . . seek, . . . knock. The terms are here used with reference to
prayer, and these constitute a climax. Ask implies a simple petition.
Seek indicates an earnest search. Knock shows perseverance in spite of
hindrances. The three represent earnest prayer.

For every one that asketh receiveth, etc. Every one of the class
concerning whom the Savior speaks. That class is those who can say, "Our
Father in heaven; Hallowed be thy name; Thy will be done."

[Matthew 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 7:9</span></span>

If his son asks bread, will he give him a stone? The assurance of an
answer to prayer is based on the fact that God is our Father. He treats
his children as a good and wise earthly parent would. No kind parent
would mock his child by answering his cry for bread with stones. Bread
and fish were the chief articles of food of the Galilean peasant.

[Matthew 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 7:11</span></span>

If ye, then, being evil. Men who have the natural affection of parents,
even though sinful men, will not do such things. Whoever believes that
the term Father, as applied to God, is more than a figure of speech,
must believe in prayer.

Give good gifts. [Luk 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#013), in the
parallel passage, says, instead of "good gifts," "the Holy Spirit," as
though this is heaven's greatest blessing.

[Matthew 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 7:12</span></span>

Whatsoever . . . do ye even so to them. This does not imply that we are
always to do to others as they wish, but what we would like to have done
to ourselves if we were placed in their condition and they in ours. We
might injure them by complying with their foolish wishes. A maxim
similar to the Golden Rule is found in the teachings of various sages;
Socrates among the Greeks, Buddha and Confucius among the Orientals, and
Hillel among the Jews. But the other teachers do not come up to Christ's
standard. Their maxim is negative and passive. They say: "Do not do to
others what you would not have done to you." It is a rule of not doing,
rather than of doing.

[Matthew 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 7:13</span></span>

Enter ye in at the strait gate. The leading thought of the whole
discourse is the kingdom of heaven and its conditions. Hence, when the
Lord says, "Enter ye in," he means into the kingdom of heaven. Nearly
every town in Palestine is surrounded by walls and is entered by gates.
The principal ones are wide, with double doors, closed with locks and
fastened with iron bars. The "strait gates" are in retired corners, are
narrow, and are only opened to those who knock.

[Matthew 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 7:14</span></span>

For strait is the gate. What is it, Augustine asks, that makes this gate
so strait to us? It is not that it is strait, or narrow, in itself, but
that we want to take in our pride, our self-will, our darling sins.

Few there be that find it. It has been to be sought. The reason that men
do not find it is not because it is hard to find, but because they
prefer to walk in the broad way.

[Matthew 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 7:15</span></span>

Beware of false prophets. The word prophet, as used in the Scriptures,
means any one who teaches authoritatively the will of God. A false
prophet is one who is a false teacher. Christ refers to the scribes and
Pharisees.

Come to you in sheep's clothing. While appearing as harmless as sheep
they are wolves.

[Matthew 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 7:16</span></span>

Ye shall know them by their fruits. This common figure is wonderfully
expressive. Not leaves (professions), or appearance, are the proper
tests of the life that is in the tree, but the fruit it bears. We are to
test men and every institution by this principle.

Grapes of thorns. Two of the most highly valued fruits of Palestine are
grapes and figs. Nothing is more common than thorns and thistles. Geike
says that it is the land of thorns and thorny plants. Good fruit cannot
be expected on such evil stocks.

[Matthew 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 7:17</span></span>

A good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit. The Lord points to the
uniform law of nature. Every tree bears after its kind. As is the tree,
so is the fruit. The same principle holds good in the moral world. A
good man will show forth good deeds, while a bad man will bear fruit
according to his nature.

[Matthew 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 7:19</span></span>

Every tree, . . . is hewn down, and cast into the fire. The test of good
and bad trees, good and bad men, good and bad systems, has been
presented. Now the figure is carried farther to show their destiny. The
Savior states a principle that seems to run through the whole government
of God. Whatever is useless and evil shall finally be swept away.

[Matthew 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 7:21</span></span>

Not every one that saith unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the
kingdom. The Lord has shown that the entrance into the kingdom is
through the "strait gate." He now shows more particularly what is needed
to enter. Certain ones are described who cannot enter in. "Not every
one" implies that some who say, "Lord, Lord," etc., shall enter in.
Those enter who do the will of my Father. No one can be a citizen of the
kingdom who does not obey the King.

[Matthew 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 7:22</span></span>

Many will say to me in that day. The great day of the Lord.

Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? The Lord chooses out of
the greatest class of non-doers to show that all such will fail of
entrance. They have omitted the one thing needful, a faithful obedience.

[Matthew 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 7:23</span></span>

I never knew you. "I never knew you" must be accepted in its deeper
signification of "recognizing the disciples." Augustine says that for
Christ to say, "I never knew you," is only another way of saying, "You
never knew me."

Depart, . . . ye that work iniquity. In spite of all their professions
they had been evil doers. Their religion expended itself in professions
and prayers. Hence, in "that day" they are commanded to depart. What it
is to so depart we may learn from [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041). It is evident from this passage
that many are self-deceived.

[Matthew 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 7:24</span></span>

Every one that heareth these sayings of mine. The words that he has
spoken in this discourse, and all his teachings.

I will liken him unto a wise man. The wise man, with wise forethought,
has built on a firm foundation. In a country with a rainy season and
heavy floods this was essential. The man who "hears and does" Christ's
words is building upon the rock ([Mat
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#016)).

[Matthew 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 7:25</span></span>

The rain descended . . . and it fell not. Palestine is a country of
torrents and sands. This verse gives a picture of the sudden violent
storms and sweeping floods which are so common during the rainy season.
The house founded upon the rock could not be undermined and destroyed,
but would stand firm. So, says the Lord, shall it be with those who hear
and obey. "They shall stand in the judgment" ([Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005)).

[Matthew 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 7:26</span></span>

Heareth these sayings . . . and doeth them not. The hearer who obeys not
is likened to the foolish man who built his house on the sand. Every one
knows how transitory and shifting is a sandy foundation. Whole towns on
the Missouri or lower Mississippi have been undermined and gone into the
vortex because they were built upon the sand. So will fall the
disobedient.

[Matthew 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 7:27</span></span>

Great was the fall of it. The Lord describes the thoughtfulness of the
builder on the sand, the storm and the utter destruction. There is an
awful solemnity about this close to the wonderful sermon.

[Matthew 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 7:28</span></span>

The people were astonished at his doctrine. At his teaching. No wonder
they were astonished. The whole world still wonders as it studies this
sermon.

[Matthew 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 7:29</span></span>

As having authority. He spoke, not as a man, with human doubts and
limitations, but as one who was omniscient. He came from God, and spoke
as one divine; not as a human, hesitating, halting, limping expounders
like the scribes, the interpreters of the Scriptures.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 8](mat008)

</div>
