<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](jam005)  [Next](pe1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

[1 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE GENERAL OF PETER.

Simon Peter, the author of this epistle, was by profession a Galilean
fisherman, the son of Jonah, the brother of Andrew, who first brought
him to Christ, and associated in business with the sons of Zebedee. When
he first appeared his home was at Bethsaida, on the northwest shore of
the sea of Galilee, but at a later period "the house of Andrew and
Peter" was in Capernaum, a city distant only a mile or two from
Bethsaida. Like almost all the early followers of Christ he was a
disciple of John the Baptist, by whom he was pointed to the Lamb of God.
A little later he was called from his nets, and, along with his brother
and the sons of Zebedee, he left all and followed Jesus. Henceforth,
during the ministry of the Saviour, he appears in the front ranks of the
disciples. Chosen to be an apostle he was one of the three who were
drawn more closely to Jesus, who were present when our Lord raised the
dead maiden at Capernaum, saw the wonders of the Transfiguration, and
were taken into the Garden of Gethsemane to witness its awful and
mysterious agony.

Always impetuous, it was Peter who first answered the great question of
the Savior at CÃ&brvbr;sarea Philippi, who leaped from the boat on the
wave to walk to his Master, who so vehemently declared that he of all
men would never deny him, who drew his sword to defend him, but who
denied him thrice in the palace of the high priest, and then went forth
to weep so bitterly over his failure in the moment of trial. He, with
John, was the first of the apostles who appeared at the empty tomb, as
well as the first of them to whom the risen Lord appeared. Fully
forgiven and restored at the sea of Galilee (John, chapter 21), when the
work of founding the church and preaching the Gospel under the Great
Commission began, Peter for years was the most prominent of the
apostolic band. It was he who came to the front on the day of Pentecost,
and his bold, aggressive leadership during the earlier years of the
church in Judea is unmistakable. More than once he was seized,
threatened, imprisoned, and when his fellow-worker, James, the brother
of John, was put to death, Peter would have shared his fate at the hands
of Herod, had there not been a divine deliverance.

As years pass the notices of Peter in the New Testament history are less
frequent. He was in Jerusalem when Paul came there from Damascus ([Gal
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/gal001.htm#018); [Act
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#026)); and also fourteen years later
at the council of Jerusalem (Acts, chapter 15; [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009)), and Paul met him again at
Antioch ([Gal 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011)), the first time he
appears elsewhere than in Judea. After this it is only his epistles
which give us hints of his further life and labors, but it is evident
from these and the traditions of the early church that as an "apostle of
the circumcision" he finally turned from Judea to evangelize his own
race in other lands.

This brings us to the questions of the Persons addressed in this
epistle, the Object in writing to them, and the Place from whence he
wrote. Our limits allow only the briefest answers. (1.) It was directed
to "the Sojourners of the Dispersion," who lived in five provinces of
the Roman empire, all of which had been evangelized by the apostle Paul.
See 1 Peter, chapter 1. The Dispersion was a term applied to the Jewish
race in lands outside of Judea. Hence, not forgetful of his apostleship
to the circumcision ([Gal 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#008)) he
addressed himself to Jews, but Jewish Christians, "the elect." (2.) His
object was apparently to encourage them to press on courageously under
trial and persecution. See [Pe1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#012).
This encouragement and exhortation is set forth in an impetuous torrent
which is thoroughly characteristic of the impetuous Peter. His style is
lively, energetic, and pleasing, if somewhat wanting in the logical
connection and precision of the great apostle to the Gentiles. An
indirect object of Peter in writing was, doubtless, to give his support
to the authority of Paul. The churches addressed were founded by Paul,
but in them had subsequently appeared Judaizers (see introduction to
Galatians) who had sought to undermine his authority. Peter recognizes
the work, and his teaching is an indirect endorsement of Paul. It served
to show the Jewish Christians that the two great apostles were in
harmony. (3.) One question remains, where was the epistle written? [Pe1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#013) shows that Peter was at Babylon
at the time. It seems strange that there should be any question in view
of the fact that in all the ancient world, the word Babylon without any
other explanations always mean the great city on the Euphrates, or the
territory adjacent, which took its name from the city. True, its former
greatness was gone, and it was a Roman province, but it had been the
home of tens of thousands of the Circumcision, the class to whom Peter
directed his labors, ever since the Captivity. We know that in the
latter part of the first century and in the second the Rabbinical
schools of Babylon vied in importance with that at Tiberias, and that
"the Prince of the Captivity" was a formidable potentate for a subject.
It is opposed to all the facts of history to contend that there was not,
at the date of this epistle, a great Jewish population on the banks of
the Euphrates, and an indefinite passage of Josephus belonging to a
period a generation earlier, would never have been used for this purpose
had it not been that it is essential to the argument of the Papacy to
give Peter a long residence at Rome. It is equally out of the question
to assert that Peter in a plain, matter of fact letter, speaks of Rome
by a name that was only applied to it later in a book of symbols, with
the statement that it is used as a symbol. Babylon had carried Israel
into captivity; when pagan Rome did the same thing she became a mystical
Babylon; and spiritual Rome also merited the designation by carrying
into captivity the church of God. There is no reasonable ground for
doubt that Peter extended his labors for his own race to Mesopotamia and
from thence wrote this epistle. It was probably written towards the
close of Paul's first imprisonment in Rome. There are reasons for
thinking that Peter had seen the Ephesian letter, one of the epistles of
Paul's imprisonment, and hence this Epistle was probably written as
late, at least, as A. D. 63.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 1](pe1001)

</div>
