<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Peter Index](pe1)  
  [Previous](pe1000)  [Next](pe1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

SUMMARY.--The Salutation. The Glorious Hope in Christ. It a Strength in
Trial. The Prophets Looking Forward Earnestly to Its Revelation. Even
the Angels Desiring to Look into the Mystery. A Godly Life Becometh
Those Who Have Such a Hope.

[1 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe1 1:1</span></span>

Peter, an apostle. The first letter of Peter opens as do the other
apostolic letters. Peter claims no superiority. The New Testament knows
nothing of his succession to Christ as the first of the Popes.

To the elect sojourners (Revision). He does not address Jews generally
but Jewish Christians primarily, though in portions of the letter he
seems to embrace Gentile Christians also.

Dispersion. The Jewish race outside of Judea.

In Pontus. The letter is directed to the churches in five provinces of
the Roman empire which Paul had evangelized, all lying in a group south
of the Euxine Sea and east of the Caspian. See map of Paul's travels.

According to the foreknowledge of God. Their election and salvation was
in accordance with God's predetermined purpose to save men through the
gospel, and hence, according to foreknowledge.

In sanctification of the spirit. The means by which they become elect
are pointed out. They were separated from the world by the gospel, the
word of the Spirit, a sanctification which signifies "a setting apart to
holy uses." They were thus separated unto obedience and sprinkling of
the blood of Jesus Christ. In obeying this they were "baptized into the
death of Christ" ([Rom 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)), and
their sins were pardoned. The sanctification in this case precedes
obedience and pardon.

[1 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe1 1:3</span></span>

Blessed be the God. The ground of special thanksgiving is that the
Father, out of his overflowing mercy, hath begotten us. Has caused us to
be born again as his children.

Unto a lively hope. As children we have a glorious hope of eternal life
through the resurrection of Jesus.

To an inheritance. The hope is not merely of eternal existence, but we
become heirs of God, joint heirs with Christ.

An inheritance incorruptible. It can never decay.

Undefiled. It is sinless and eternal.

Who are kept by the power of God. The inheritance is reserved for those
who are kept safe by God's power, through faith, so that they endure to
the end.

[1 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe1 1:6</span></span>

Wherein. In this glorious hope you rejoice.

Though now for a season. This implies that a persecution was in
progress, or threatened.

Manifold temptations. Trials which put faith and patience to the test.

That the trial of your faith. These persecutions try their faith as gold
is tried by the fire, and the faith that stands the test, more precious
than gold, will bear fruit unto praise and honor and glory at the
appearing. "The present afflictions work out a far more exceeding and
eternal weight of glory."

Whom. Jesus Christ.

Ye love. Though not having seen Christ, they knew him by faith.

Ye rejoice. Because they believe upon him whom they have not seen they
are filled with the unspeakable joy of a glorious hope.

The end of your faith. The object of the gospel, "the faith," and of
their faith was salvation.

[1 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe1 1:10</span></span>

Of which salvation the prophets have enquired. This passage implies that
the prophets used words and symbols, at the dictation of the Spirit, of
which they did not comprehend the full meaning. They spoke of Christ and
salvation, and then diligently inquired what the Spirit of Christ in
them did signify by these words.

When it testified . . . the sufferings. They spoke of the sufferings of
Christ (see Isaiah, chapter 53) but could not understand these
predictions any better than the Jews of Christ's time. See [Luk
24:25-26](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#025).

Unto whom it was revealed. The prophets were, however, taught that the
subject matter of their predictions related to a future time, not to
their own.

They did minister the things. The things which were fulfilled by the
gospel preached . . . unto you. Paul and his companions, who preached
under the influence of the Holy Spirit.

Which things the angels desire to look into. The profound mysteries of
the gospel were subjects of earnest inquiry to the angels, an indication
that like the prophets they could not understand until the mystery was
revealed.

[1 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe1 1:13</span></span>

Gird up the loins of your mind. A figure drawn from the custom of
girding the loins when about to start on a journey. So the Christian
must prepare himself as on a journey.

Be sober. Let there be sobriety of spirit.

Hope to the end. Never let the glow of your hope cease until the great
consummation, when Christ comes.

As obedient children. An invariable characteristic of all Christians.
The divisions between God's children and the children of this world
turns on obedience to God.

Not fashioning yourselves. The spirit of obedience would cause them to
turn away from their former sinful life when in ignorance of the gospel.

But as he which hath called you. God the Father, to whom the calling is
assigned in the Scriptures. Obedient children will seek to please and to
be like their father. Our Father is holy, and the duty rests upon us of
seeking holy lives.

Because it is written. [Lev 11:44](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#044), and
[Lev 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#002). We must not only submit to
God's commands but seek to imitate his holiness.

[1 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe1 1:17</span></span>

If ye call on the Father. In prayer and worship. All call upon him who
pray.

Who without respect of persons. He judges us and all men according to
the deeds, not station or race. Hence, those who seek his blessings and
promises should show a reverential fear. That is the first reason given
for being "holy."

Of your sojourning. The whole life is a period of sojourning on the
earth.

Ye were not redeemed. Gold or earthly wealth could never have wrought
our redemption.

From your vain conversation. Vain and profitless manner of life.

Handed down from your fathers. This was true of Jewish Christians, but
still more true of the heathen who had been converted.

But with the precious blood. The New Testament writers with one accord
refer to Christ as "the Lamb of God, who taketh away the sin of the
world." See [Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029); [Eph
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#004); [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027); [Col
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#022); [Heb
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#014).

Who verily was foreordained. See [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029). Christ was the center of God's
plans of salvation from the beginning.

But was manifest. Though Christ was God's plan from the beginning he was
only manifested in these last times. In that period, the end of the
Jewish age and near the end of the temple and of the Jewish nation.

For you. Christ was manifested for the sake of his people, who have
become his people by faith.

That your faith and hope might be in God. Faith, with Peter as well as
Paul, is essential to salvation. The salvation is of God, not of
ourselves, and is made ours by faith.

[1 Peter 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pe1 1:22</span></span>

Seeing ye have purified your souls. The Greek verb rendered "purified,"
occurs seven times in the New Testament. In four of these, [Joh
11:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#055); [Act
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#024), [Act
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#026); and [Act
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#018), it refers to ceremonial
purification. In the other three it refers to moral purification; the
cleansing of the life from its sins. That seems to be the sense here. It
refers not only to the forgiveness of sins but to the pure life that
should follow. This purification is obtained in obeying the truth. That
is, by obedience to the gospel.

Through the Spirit. The Spirit is inseparable from the gospel. The
gospel dispensation is that of the Spirit. See [Act
15:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008).

Unto unfeigned love of the brethren. The Spirit of Christ in our hearts
is the spirit of brotherly love.

See that ye love. How can one profess to follow Christ unless he loves
those for whom Christ died?

With a pure heart. With a sincere heart.

Being born again. At conversion. See [Joh
3:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001).

Not of corruptible seed. A birth always implies a moving cause. In this
birth the new life is planted by incorruptible seed, even by the word of
God. See also [Act 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#036), and [Jam
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#018). The gospel preached and lodged
in the heart, "the power of God to salvation" ([Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)) is the power that moves the soul
to a new life.

Which liveth. God's word is living and eternal. It has life in it and
hence communicates life. See [Heb
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012).

All flesh is as grass ([Isa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#006)).
God's word lives forever, but the flesh is as evanescent as the grass.
The fleshly life, like the grass, is soon felled by death, but a birth
from the living and eternal word is a birth to eternal life.

The word of the Lord endureth forever. Like its author it is eternal and
never loses its power.

This is the word. That word was the gospel, the very gospel preached to
them by Paul and his fellow ministers.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Peter Chapter 2](pe1002)

</div>
