<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2001)  [Next](pe2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--False Prophets and False Teachers. The Judgment on the Fallen
Angels. Judgment on the Antediluvians. The Perverseness of Wicked Men.
The Example of Balaam, the Son of Bosor.

[2 Peter 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 2:1</span></span>

There arose false prophets among the people. In [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019) the true prophets are referred
to. Here the false prophets are spoken of in contrast. By "the people"
Israel is meant. The term "false prophet" occurs several times in the
Old Testament. For example, see [Jer
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013). Christ foretells the rise of
false prophets ([Mat 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)).

There shall be false teachers. Teachers of false doctrines. Paul often
warns against such teachers. See [Act
20:30](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#030).

Damnable heresies. "Destructive heresies" in the Revision. Party
divisions caused by false teaching. A heresy is a schism, or that which
tends to produce schism.

Denying the Lord that bought them. This is the culmination of false
teaching in the church and has been fulfilled by those professedly
Christian teachers who reject the divinity of Christ and the atoning
power of his blood.

Swift destruction. Sudden destruction.

Many shall follow their pernicious ways. "Lascivious doings" in the
Revision. Immoral life is the result of false doctrine, and thus a
reproach is brought upon the truth.

And in covetousness. By their "feigned words," crafty speeches, the
false teachers shall use their followers as a source of gain.

[2 Peter 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 2:4</span></span>

For if God spared not the angels that sinned. In order to show that
judgments on these wicked teachers are sure, Peter cites examples. Even
angels when they sinned were subjected to punishment.

But cast them down to hell. The sinning angels were cast out of heaven.
The word rendered "hell" is not Gehenna, but Tartarus, a Greek term used
for the place of future punishment.

Delivered them into chains of darkness. "Pits" in the Revision; possibly
dungeons of darkness gives the idea. Compare Jude 6. Both passages point
to a time when angels sinned, fell, and thus became angels of darkness.

And spared not the old world. The case of the antediluvians furnishes
the second example of God's swift justice.

But preserved Noah with seven others. God did not then forget the
righteous.

A preacher of righteousness. By example as well as by word. See [Gen
7:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#001), and [Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020).

Turning the cities of Sodom and Gomorrha into ashes. The third example
of judgment on sin. See [Gen 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#029).

And delivered righteous Lot. The saving of the righteous is as marked as
the punishment of the wicked. See [Gen
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#001), [Gen
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#007).

Vexed, etc. See [Gen 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#005).

For that righteous man, etc. Lot, seeing and hearing the wickedness
around him, was sore distressed.

The Lord knoweth, etc. These examples show that the Lord knows how to
deliver the righteous from every species of trial, and to hold the
wicked in reserve for judgment.

Chiefly. Those next named will receive the greater punishment.

Who go after the flesh. Follow its dictates and live impure lives.

Despise government. Refuse to submit to authority.

Not afraid to speak evil of dignities. A characteristic of this class is
their presumption and a want of reverence for what is high and holy.

Whereas angels. The angels, superior in might and power, do not show
such presumption, or disrespect to any lofty power. Compare Jude 9.
There is so striking a parallel between a part of this chapter and a
part of Jude that it is thought that either Peter or Jude had the
epistle of the other before him. Jude shows us that even Michael did not
rail against Satan.

[2 Peter 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 2:12</span></span>

But these, as natural brute beasts. As if utterly irrational. The brute
beasts were destined to the slaughter for man's uses. So these men
blindly rush to destruction.

Speak evil of the things that they understand not. How often the scoffer
fulfills this description!

Shall receive the reward of unrighteousness. Their destruction is the
legitimate reward of their own wrong doing.

Count it pleasure to riot in the day time. Literally "in the day." I
believe that the idea is that, like dumb brutes forgetful of coming
destruction, they take pleasure in carousal for a day, regardless of the
morrow.

Spots and blemishes. Marring the brightness and beauty of the church.

Revelling in their love feasts (Revision). Converting even these into
scenes of revel.

Having eyes full of adultery. Looking around with a lustful appetite.

Having followed the way of Balaam, the son of Bosor. See Numbers,
chapter 31. Balaam sold himself out to an evil cause for the sake of
gain.

But was rebuked. By the voice that was put into the mouth of the brute
he rode.

[2 Peter 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 2:17</span></span>

These are springs without water. They promise much but disappoint.

Mists driven by a storm. The thought is the same. These mists promise
rain, but it fails to descend.

For whom. For these apostates the "blackness of darkness is reserved."

For. This shows how they promise great things and disappoint. They offer
great swelling words, and entice those who are about to be delivered
from error.

Promising liberty. Liberty from all restraint, complete freedom to serve
their own wills, such liberty as those who rail against God's law are
wont to offer.

Servants of corruption. Those who offer liberty are themselves slaves,
serving their own passions and lusts. He who is swayed by appetite or
habit cannot be free.

[2 Peter 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 2:20</span></span>

For if, after they have escaped the pollution of the world. If one who
has been converted is enticed back again into his sins, his state is
worse than before. That this is possible is taught in many places.

For it had been better, etc. To other sins there is then added the sin
of rejecting the way of righteousness after an experimental knowledge of
it.

For it is happened. Their relapse is described in the proverbs. See [Pro
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001); [Pro
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#011). Such a repulsive course can be
compared only with the most disgusting habits of unclean animals.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 3](pe2003)

</div>
