<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev003)  [Next](rev005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 4:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Voice from Heaven. The Throne and He Who Sat on the
Throne. The Twenty-four Elders. The Four Living Forms. Their Cry Night
and Day. The Doxology of the Twenty-four Elders.

[Revelation 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 4:1</span></span>

After this. "After these things," as in the Revision. After the letters
to the churches had been dictated. "The things which must be after this"
are yet to be shown.

I looked. Rather, "I saw in vision."

A door was opened in heaven. Heaven standing open so that the throne
within could be seen.

The first voice which I heard. The same voice that he had heard at
first. See [Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010).

Come up hither. Through the opened door.

The things which must come to pass hereafter. Hence, we know that what
John sees in the vision just opening belongs to events still future when
he wrote.

I was in the spirit. At once he was lifted to that spiritual exaltation
which enabled him to behold the heavenly visions.

A throne. The throne of God was revealed and One sat on the throne.

He that sat was to look upon like a jasper stone and a sardius. We learn
from [Rev 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#011) the qualities of the
jasper meant; a stone of dazzling brilliance, a mountain of light, clear
as crystal. The two probably symbolize the splendor, holiness and
judgments of God.

Rainbow round about the throne. The rainbow was a pledge of God's
faithfulness to his covenants ([Gen
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#013)). God sits upon the throne,
splendid, dazzling, terrible, but compassed about by the Covenant of
Grace.

[Revelation 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 4:4</span></span>

Round about the throne were four and twenty seats. Rather, "thrones."
The central throne was encompassed by twenty-four lesser thrones.

Four and twenty elders sitting. These ancients were (1) twenty-four in
number; (2) they were clothed in white, the color of victory and purity;
(3) on their heads were golden crowns, not the diadem which means a
kingly crown, but the golden crown of honor (Stephanos). Critics are not
agreed as to the signification of these elders, but most of them think
that they symbolize the glorified church of God gathered round the
throne. They disagree as to the significance of the number twenty-four.
There were twenty-four courses of priests. There were twelve tribes, and
twelve apostles. Possibly the number of the latter was doubled to
symbolize the entire church, Jew and Gentile. In a note below I will
give my own view of the Twenty-four Elders.

Lightnings and voices and thunders. These seem to portray the
threatenings and judgments which proceed from the throne.

Seven lamps of fire. These bright light-giving lamps symbolize the Holy
Spirit in the fulness of its manifestation, indicated by the seven
Spirits of God. See note on [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004).

A sea of glass like unto crystal. This deep, transparent sea before the
throne is supposed to symbolize the purity and calmness of the Divine
rule. It stands solid, calm and clear.

In the midst of the throne. The four forms which are next described were
to the right and left of the throne and in the midst between these
extremes. The throne was in their midst.

Four living creatures. See Revision. Four "beasts," as in the Common
Version, is an incorrect idea. The Greek for "beasts" is different. They
are four Zoa, "living forms."

Full of eyes. Their eyes looked backward as well as forward. The
description of these wonderful objects is next given. See notes at end
of chapter.

[Revelation 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 4:7</span></span>

The first creature was like a lion. It looked like a lion, but was not a
lion. It had other characteristics.

Like a calf. Had a body similar to that of the ox.

Had the face of a man. Otherwise its structure differed from that of
men.

Like a flying eagle. It will be seen that four departments of animated
nature are represented. That of the wild beasts of prey; that of
domestic animals, the human species, and the fowls of the air. Each is
represented by what, in the eyes of a Hebrew, would be regarded as its
highest type.

The four living creatures. Their common characteristics are now pointed
out. All have six wings; they are full of eyes, and they all unite in a
ceaseless cry of praise to God.

Full of eyes within. They were full of eyes before and behind, and when
the wings were lifted John saw that they were full of eyes within also.
The eyes, sleepless, possibly symbolize never resting, wakeful activity.

They have no rest. They never rest from praising the Lord.

[Revelation 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 4:9</span></span>

And when the living creatures shall give glory and honor and thanks to
him that sitteth on the throne. Shall utter such praises as are given in
[Rev 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#008). Then the twenty-four elders
also join in swelling the anthems. It will be noted that these two
classes, whatever they signify, are both about the throne, and both
engaged in harmonious praise of the Almighty.

Cast their crowns before the throne. There are four elements in this
worship: (1) They fall down; (2) they adore; (3) they cast their crowns
before the throne, an act of homage which gives Him who sitteth there
all the glory of their crowns; (4) they offer ascriptions of praise.

Worthy art thou, etc. The chorus in which they join ascribes all glory
to God as his right as the Creator.

Because of thy will they were. Not as in the Common Version. They do not
say that God created all things "for his pleasure," but that his will
was the efficient cause.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 5](rev005)

</div>
