<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev010)  [Next](rev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 11:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Temple Measured. The Holy City Trodden Down by the
Gentiles. The Two Witnesses. Prophesying in Sackcloth. The Forty-Two
Months. The Witnesses Slain. The Witnesses Exalted. The Fall of the
Wicked World. The Seventh Trumpet Blown. The Final Triumph.

[Revelation 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 11:1</span></span>

There was given me a reed like unto a rod. There are several points that
must be noticed: 1. Who measures? 2. The measure used. 3. What is
measured? (1) A reed is given to John to be used as a measure. It is not
an angel who measures, but an apostle, the sole representative of the
apostles then living. The apostle is a representative of the apostolic
body. It is the apostles who are to measure. (2) The measure is not a
human one. John did not make it, nor did any other apostle, nor any man,
or body of men. The reed was given to him. It is a divine measure.
Whatever is measured is to be compared with a divine standard. There is
a divine standard for measurement which was given by our Lord to the
apostles. This is the New Testament of Jesus Christ. (3) Measure the
temple of God. This cannot mean the literal temple. It was not in the
part of the world where John was, if it had been standing; nor was it
then standing. What is meant is that of which the temple was a symbol;
viz., the Church. See notes on [Co1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016).

And the altar. In the Jewish temple the altar was the place where the
worship centered. Without the altar worship was impossible, and the
altar is taken as a symbol of the worship. The sacrifices of the altar
were all typical of Christ's atonement. Hence, the measurement has a
relation to the death of Christ.

And them that worship therein. The measure shall be applied to those who
profess to be Christians. It will be seen whether they come up to the
standard.

And the court which is without the temple. This was the outer court, the
court of the Gentiles, the type of the world. This measurement does not
relate to the world so much as to the Church.

It is given unto the Gentiles. Not only it, but the Holy City. By the
Holy City Jerusalem is meant when the term is named literally, but
Jerusalem is used often by both Paul and John as a symbol of the Church.
See [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026); [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022); [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001); [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002). Hence, the prediction is to be
fulfilled by a prostration or desecration of the Church by worldly
influences.

Forty and two months. This period is given several times in prophecy in
varied forms. These will all be considered at once below. Here it will
suffice to say that this is a period of 1260 days, and a day being a
symbol of a year, the period meant is 1260 years.

[Revelation 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 11:3</span></span>

I will give unto my two witnesses. These two witnesses are witnesses for
the Lord. They shall bear witness for 1260 days, the forty-two months
the Holy City is trodden down. During this time they shall prophesy in
sackcloth, a symbol of sorrow and mourning. It implies that these
witnesses shall be in tribulation during the period named.

These are the two olive trees, and the two candlesticks. The olive tree
was the source of the oil used to provide for the candlesticks. The
candlesticks, burning the oil, gave forth light. The symbols imply that
during this period of 1260 days God shall have two agencies, bearing
divine witness, which shall give forth light to men. These agencies
shall be filled and sustained by the Spirit.

[Revelation 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 11:5</span></span>

Fire proceedeth out of their mouth. Whatever is signified by these two
witnesses, they have the power to destroy. In seeking for the two
witnesses we must find agencies which can save life and can destroy it,
can shut the heavens and open them, can prevent blessings from
descending upon the earth, can inflict curses and plagues on the
inhabitants of the earth. The witnesses have supernatural powers.

[Revelation 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 11:7</span></span>

When they shall have finished their testimony. The thought is, "When
they shall have made their testimony complete."

The beast that ascendeth out of the bottomless pit. The coming up of the
beast out of the abyss is named here, in [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), and in [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003). The powers that come from the
abyss are satanic. Compare [Rev 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#002)
with [Rev 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011). The beast, therefore,
represents some devilish power or influence. The word rendered "beast"
here, in [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001), and in [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003), denotes a savage wild beast of
prey. The beast from the abyss should be distinguished from "the beast
coming up out of the sea" ([Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)),
and from "the beast coming up out of the earth" ([Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)). They are all malign powers,
but the power of evil manifested in different forms.

Shall . . . kill them. Whatever the beast represents, that power shall
assail the witnesses, and shall slay them for a time.

And their dead bodies shall lie in the street. They shall not be buried,
but remain in plain sight. I believe that this is what is signified.
Though the witnesses were slain, their enemies could not get them out of
sight. They could not bury them.

Of the great city. This term is used eight times in Revelation. It is
never used of Jerusalem. It is in contrast with the Holy City. As the
Holy City is a symbol of the church, a wicked City would symbolize a
false religion, or apostate church.

Spiritually is called Sodom, and Egypt. Symbolically so called. Sodom,
with its sins, was a type of this city; Egypt, the house of bondage, is
also a type. It is a sinful organization which has enslaved the true
Israel.

Where also our Lord was crucified. Many commentators have insisted that
this refers to literal Jerusalem, but we must remember that the place is
one in which our Lord was spiritually crucified. This is done by
apostasy. See [Heb 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#006). That the
reference is to spiritual declension is plain.

Look upon their dead bodies three days and an half. During a period of
three and a half days their bodies shall be seen in the street of the
city slain, and all shall see them. They shall be conspicuous. This
would seem to point to a period of three and one-half years.

They that dwell on the earth. This expression, often used in Revelation,
always refers to enemies of Christ. These rejoice because the witnesses
are slain. They make merry over their death, because these two prophets
tormented them. These witnesses, then, prophesied; that is, they spoke
the will of God. Their warnings, exhortations, and denunciations of sin
tormented the dwellers of the earth.

[Revelation 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 11:11</span></span>

After three days and n half. After lying in a state called dead three
and a half years, they come to life again. God gave them life. The
effect of their appearance was to fill the people of the wicked city
with fear.

They heard a great voice from heaven. That voice called on the witnesses
to come up thither. To be exalted to heaven, symbolically, always means
to give power, prosperity and glory. This means that the witnesses now
receive power and influence over men. Their exaltation implies that
their prophesying is to be accepted as authority over men.

In that hour there was a great earthquake. The symbol of commotion, and
of political or religious changes. The earthquake is caused by the
exaltation of the two witnesses. The result is that the wicked city is
shaken, and a part of it falls.

A tenth part. A large part.

Seven thousand persons. Various explanations have been given for these
numbers. In my judgment seven is used because it is the perfect number.
Seven thousands would imply totality. The meaning is, therefore, a total
overthrow.

And the remnant. So complete was the overthrow from the earthquake, that
the rest were filled with fear and glorified God. The whole implies that
when the witnesses were lifted up, a commotion shook the false religion
or apostate church, and that it was destroyed by the commotion. A part
of its inhabitants were slain (perhaps spiritually), and the rest
repented.

[Revelation 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 11:14</span></span>

And the seventh angel sounded. This is the seventh trumpet of the
seventh seal. It should bring the end, the final victory, the grand
consummation. That is what the apostle now beholds in the vision.

The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ. Here is the final triumph. It is the brightness of Zion's
glad morning, the long deferred day of victory, the ushering in of the
conquering reign of Christ. The Agency by which this conquest is
effected is the exaltation of the witnesses, or the diffusion of the
Word of God. This exaltation causes the earthquake, the fall of a part
of the Great City, the destruction of a part of its inhabitants, and the
repentance of the remnant. These events are followed by the seventh
trumpet and the proclamation of the universal reign of Christ. Then the
heavenly inhabitants join in pÃ&brvbr;ans of victory and songs of praise
and thanksgiving.

[Revelation 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 11:16</span></span>

The four and twenty elders, which sat before God. These heavenly
princes, in some way identified with the work of redemption, join in
worship and praises. "The mystery of God has been finished in the days
of the voice of the seventh angel" ([Rev
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007)). The eighteenth verse will
sufficiently explain why this also should be called a woe trumpet. It is
the trumpet of judgment.

[Revelation 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 11:19</span></span>

I believe this verse ought to belong to chapter 12, and will there
consider it. If it is connected in meaning with [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018) it signifies that heaven is
opened at the close of the seventh trumpet, and that from thence come
judgments as well as blessings.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 12](rev012)

</div>
