<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev011)  [Next](rev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 12:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Vision in Heaven. The Woman Clothed with the Sun. Her
Offspring. The Great Red Dragon. The Conflict in Heaven. The War on the
Woman's Seed. Her Seed Caught Up. Her Flight into the Wilderness. The
Flood Cast by the Dragon. The Earth Helping the Woman.

[Revelation 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 12:1</span></span>

A woman clothed with the sun. A woman is used as a symbol many times in
the Scriptures. "Say you to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy salvation
cometh." ([Isa 62:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#011).) Here the
reference is to the Church. Again Paul ([Gal
4:31](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#031)) says, "Ye are not the children
of the bond woman, but of the free woman." All are agreed that here the
free woman represents the Church. Again ([Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002)), John sees the New Jerusalem
descending adorned as a bride to meet her husband. The bride, the Lamb's
wife, here and in [Rev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#009), indeed in
every place spoken of, is the Church. Once more: Paul speaks of
Jerusalem, the mother of us all, alluding again to the Church. This
symbol, then, is a common one to represent the Church, and we are
justified in declaring that to be its meaning in this passage. The fact
that she is clothed with the sun symbolizes the fact that the true
Church shines with the light of the sun of righteousness.

The moon under her feet represents the Old Testament, or dispensation,
which shone by a reflected right and is subordinate to the New Covenant
of the Church. The crown of twelve stars is explained by the twelve
apostles, lights of the Church and a crown of glory to it.

She being with child cried. Again we must let the Scripture explain its
own meaning. "As soon as Zion travailed, she brought forth her
children." ([Isa 66:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#008).) The travail of
Zion causeth an increase. See also [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001) and [Isa
49:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020), where the same figure is used.
The state of the woman therefore implies a Church in sorrow, a suffering
Church, but out of whose suffering there cometh an increase of the
saints. It is a period when the saints are multiplied in the midst of
persecution.

[Revelation 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 12:3</span></span>

Behold a great red dragon. Another wonder is seen, also in the sky, a
great serpent-like figure, red, with seven heads and ten horns. This
figure, we learn from [Rev 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#009), is a
devilish manifestation. The devil uses it for his purposes. The red
color implies a persecuting power. The seven heads are explained in [Rev
17:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#009), where the seven-headed beast
appears again, to be seven mountains, and also seven kingdoms; the ten
horns are there said to be ten kingdoms which did not yet exist. We have
also this monster appearing substantially in Dan., chapter 7. I will
discuss it more particularly in chapter, but will here say that there is
little doubt that it represents the persecuting powers of the earth
which have opposed God and his Israel; the great world powers arrayed
against God. This world power appears as Pagan Rome in the persecution
of the Woman; the Church. The dragon was the standard of Pagan Rome in
the third century, as testified by many ancient writers.

And his tail drew a third part of the stars. This may indicate the great
power of the dragon. Perhaps it has a more particular meaning. We have
found under the 8th and 9th chapters that the old Roman world was
divided into three parts, that the term third part was used of these
divisions. In the early part of the fourth century, when the great
triumph of Christianity over Paganism was about to be realized, the
Roman world shows this division; in two parts toleration is shown; in
the remaining third part there is the most bitter persecution, and
finally the ruler of this part, Maximus, enters upon war with
Constantine with the vow that if successful he will restore everywhere
the old Pagan religion. This may be symbolized.

And the dragon stood before the woman. This symbolizes an effort to
destroy the saints, the seed of the woman, the children of the Church.

[Revelation 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 12:5</span></span>

And she brought forth a man child. If the reader will turn to [Rev
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#017) he will learn that the remnant
of the woman's seed is "those who keep the commandments of God, and have
the testimony of Jesus Christ." The offspring of the woman, the "woman's
seed," then refers to the saints. The man child is a symbol of the
faithful members of the Church. But how shall they rule all nations with
a rod of iron. The Greek says "rule as shepherds with a rod of iron."
This implies a firm and permanent, but tender and loving rule, not a
stern rule. In [Rev 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027) it is
promised that whosoever overcometh shall rule the nations with a rod of
iron. In [Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015) the same thing is
stated of the Word of God. This is accomplished through the saints. They
shall yet possess the earth. Every knee shall bow, and every tongue
confess. The kingdoms of the earth shall become the kingdoms of the Lord
and his Christ. The man child, the woman's seed, the saints, shall have
a complete, an undisputed, a resistless dominion.

And her child was caught up. This figure always means a glorious
exaltation. It signifies that God will protect the saints and give them
victory. This was probably fulfilled when Christianity triumphed over
Paganism in the fourth century.

[Revelation 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 12:6</span></span>

And the woman fled into the wilderness. The flight into the wilderness
is alluded to again in [Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014).
There it belongs in order. Under that verse the meaning will be more
fully considered.

And there was war in heaven. The woman had been seen in heaven, and
there she is seen to be assailed. She has, however, a champion who
fights her battles. It must be remembered that Michael, the woman, the
man child, the dragon, the conflict, and the casting down of the dragon
are all symbols. This symbolism indicates the defeat of the dragon in
his attempt. He is not only vanquished, but humiliated, "cast down." The
first mighty attempt of Satan to "abolish the Christian name from the
earth," signally fails. We have already written enough to show the
reader that this represents the facts of history. Pagan Rome, the
dragon, struck at the heart of the Church. Blood flowed in rivers, the
blood of the saints, but the grandeur of their lives and the heroism of
their deaths struck fear and conviction to the hearts of their enemies.
Each martyr called forth an army who were ready to die for Christ. God
exalted the man child, caught it to his bosom, protected it, and Pagan
Rome went down. The dragon prevailed not. Baffled, he is cast to the
earth.

[Revelation 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 12:10</span></span>

Now is come salvation, etc. We have next the songs of triumph sung in
heaven. "Now is come salvation and strength and the kingdom of our God,
and the power of his Christ. For the accuser of our brethren is cast
down," etc. These songs of triumph are always heard when the symbolism
portrays any great triumph of righteousness. See [Rev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015). The triumphant songs here seem
to exult over the overthrow of Paganism in the fourth century.

And they overcame him by the blood of the Lamb. This shows how the
victory indicated in [Rev 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#008) was
won. It was won by the blood of Christ and the faithfulness of the
saints. "They loved not their life even unto death." They were willing
to give their lives for Christ.

Woe for the earth and for the sea. Not an imprecation but a prediction.
Satan, cast down, will take another form to do his wicked work.

[Revelation 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 12:13</span></span>

The dragon . . . persecuted the woman. In some other form, not as a
Pagan power defying Christ, but perhaps garbed as an angel of light, he
still persecuted the woman.

There were given two wings, etc. The meaning is that means were given to
the persecuted church to flee into the wilderness, into a place where
she would be hidden from view. The Church would disappear from sight.
There she would be a time, and times, and half a time, or a year, two
years and half a year, three and half years, forty-two months, 1260
days. See [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006) above, and [Rev
11:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002). This period we found under
chapter 11 to begin in A. D. 533, and to extend to about the close of
the last century.

[Revelation 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 12:15</span></span>

And the serpent cast out . . . a flood. He resorted to persecutions in
order to drive the true Church off of the face of the earth.

The earth helped the woman. In some way the flood of persecution was so
hindered that it failed to accomplish the object. I believe this refers
to the hindrances often interposed by secular powers to stay
persecution. The Hussites protected themselves under Zisca by force of
arms; the German princes protected Luther; the edict of Nantes gave
French Protestants a rest. These were times when "the earth" drank up
the flood.

And the dragon waxed wroth. Was angry at his defeat. He continued the
warfare by asking to destroy the woman's seed. I believe that this
vision reveals the persecution of the true Church, first by Pagan, and
then by Papal Rome, a persecution that results in the apparent
disappearance of the true Church from the earth. Though not visible to
the eye of the historian during this period, yet the true Church, fed of
God, survives in the hearts of the hidden and persecuted saints. The
period of her exile began about 533, in the reign of Justinian, and ends
about the beginning of the nineteenth century. Before the end of the
period, the Divine measure, the reed of the apostles, was used to
measure the temple, altar and worshipers, and, as the result, over
three-fourths of a century ago, the true Church began to appear as a
visible body, once more in the world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 13](rev013)

</div>
