<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev018)  [Next](rev020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 19:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Rejoicing in Heaven. The Bride Preparing for the Bridegroom.
The White Horse and the Word of God. Conquering the World for Christ.
The Great Battle. The Beast and the False Prophet Taken. Cast into the
Lake of Fire.

[Revelation 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 19:1</span></span>

After these things. Following the preceding scenes.

I heard a great voice of much people. These songs of rejoicing and
thanksgiving are seen in Revelation whenever any great triumph or
blessing is about to come. See [Rev
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013); [Rev
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012); [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015); [Rev
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010).

For true and righteous are his judgments. This is shown by the judgments
on the spiritual Babylon.

And the four and twenty elders. See [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004), [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006), and notes at close of that
chapter.

And a voice came forth from the throne. Not "out of the throne," as in
the Common Version. The speaker is not indicated. It is a call to praise
the Lord.

[Revelation 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 19:6</span></span>

I heard . . . a great multitude. This is in response to the call from
the throne.

The Lord God omnipotent reigneth. This is demonstrated in the overthrow
of the wicked.

For the marriage of the Lamb is come. The blessed union of the Lord with
his chosen Bride, the Church. The consummation of this marriage is
described in [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002).

His wife hath made herself ready. The Church has to prepare herself for
this event before it can take place. The Lord will not accept a bride
who is not purified and fit for the Heavenly Bridegroom.

[Revelation 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 19:8</span></span>

To her was granted. By divine grace.

That she should be arrayed. She must be arrayed in spotless white. What
this white raiment is not left in doubt. It is woven by the pure and
holy lives of the saints.

And he saith unto me, Write. This always implies a very important
message.

Blessed are they which are called unto the marriage supper of the Lamb.
The blessing is upon those who have a part in the blessedness of this
holy union. Those will be called who have wedding garments pure and
white of fine linen. See [Rev 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#008).

[Revelation 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 19:10</span></span>

And I fell at his feet. In this passage and in [Rev
22:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#007), the apostle offers worship to
a fellow creature, an angel. In each place the prohibition is prompt.
This episode is introduced in order to teach the sinfulness of all
creature worship. It is likely that the fact that the fate of a great
apostate church, in which worship is offered to its human head, is being
declared, is the reason why here this symbolical act occurs. Man created
in God's image is to worship only that which is divine.

The testimony of Jesus. The angel declares himself of thy brethren. In
[Rev 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#009), he adds, "of thy brethren,
the prophets." Here the explanation is added that the testimony of Jesus
is the spirit of prophecy. In testifying of Jesus the angel became one
of the prophets.

[Revelation 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 19:11</span></span>

And I saw the heaven opened. This implies the opening of a new vision.
See [Rev 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001); [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019). Where a former vision is
continued the formula is "After these things." We now have a series of
pictures symbolizing the closing events that inaugurate the Millennium.
The first of these is the one before symbolized by the angel that flies
through heaven with the everlasting gospel, but now presented in a grand
vision of the triumphant march of the Word of God.

Behold a white horse. Always the symbol of conquest and triumph. See
notes on [Rev 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002).

He that sat upon him called Faithful and True. It is the Lord, who comes
as the Word of God. His conquests are effected by the word, but the
march is really the march of Christ.

His eyes were as a flame of fire. See note on [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014).

Upon his head were many crowns. Diadems. All kingly authority is
concentrated in his hands. He is King of kings.

A name written that no man knew. Probably the new name of [Rev
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017), a name which will be disclosed
to those invited to the marriage supper of the Lamb ([Rev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#012)).

He is arrayed in a garment sprinkled with. See Revision. The word in the
best Greek MSS. is not Bebammemnon ("dipped"), but "sprinkled." The
usual idea is that the sprinkled blood is that of his conquered enemies.
I believe that the thought is the sprinkling of his own blood, the blood
through which he conquers.

And the armies which were in heaven followed him. These armies are the
armies of the saints, purified, holy, a conquering host, led by Christ
to victory.

Out of his mouth goeth a sharp sword. See note on [Rev
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016). This symbolizes the word by
which he achieved his conquests.

He shall rule them with a rod of iron. See notes on [Rev
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027) and [Rev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005). This implies not a stern, but a
firm and lasting rule.

He treadeth the winepress. He shall inflict God's judgments on the sins
of the earth. See notes on [Rev
14:17-19](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017).

He hath on his vesture and on his thigh. This probably signifies that
the name was written on his vesture, even on his thigh. The Greek may be
so translated.

King of Kings. Of the various titles given to Christ in this passage
this is the highest and marks him as supreme. There are four titles
given in the passage: (1) in [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011); (2) [Rev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#012); (3) [Rev
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#013), and (4) in [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016).

[Revelation 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 19:17</span></span>

And I saw an angel standing in the sun. And riding with the sun in his
course. From this position in the heavens and riding through the heavens
he can call all the fowls of heaven together.

Unto the great supper of God. Unto the feast for birds of prey caused by
the carnage of God's judgments on his enemies.

That ye may eat. The picture drawn is that of the terrible slaughter of
a mighty defeat, which leaves the earth covered with the slain of every
degree. The conflict meant is that named in next verse.

[Revelation 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 19:19</span></span>

I saw the beast. See notes on [Rev
13:1-10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001). This beast represents the
world power opposed to Christ under its changing forms. The Roman Pagan
Empire, and the Roman Papal secular power, are two forms. But it
continues even after these forms pass away. The form in which it will
manifest itself in this conflict will be better known when the
fulfillment takes place. The beast marshals the kings of the earth as
his supporters to oppose the Lamb and his armies.

And the beast was taken. It is the beast's last appearance. He is now
finally overthrown.

And with him the false prophet. The false prophet, the beast, and the
dragon have been named in [Rev 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013)
as calling the kings of the earth to the battle of Armageddon. See notes
there. This is the same conflict. Here the result of the conflict is
given.

That wrought the signs. This description identifies the false prophet.
He is the lamb-like dragon of [Rev
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011), the false spiritual despotism,
the apostate church. This false prophet is now taken.

They twain were cast alive into a lake of fire. In [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008) it is said that Babylon shall be
burned with fire. Here the false prophet, both symbols of the same
power, is cast into the lake of fire. The symbol indicates utter
destruction. What is cast into this lake is seen no more.

And the rest were killed with the sword of him, etc. This is probably
symbolic. If these who had been sinners and supporters of the powers of
evil were incapacitated for that support longer, it would be their death
(separation) from that cause. It may be that this remnant were converted
by the word.

And all the birds were filled, etc. If this is a symbol its
signification is that the victory was complete.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 20](rev020)

</div>
