<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev019)  [Next](rev021) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 20:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Satan Bound for a Thousand Years. Thrones and Saints Reigning
with Christ. The First Resurrection. Satan Loosed at the End of a
Thousand Years. The Gathering of Gog and Magog and of the Nations. Their
Attack Upon the Saints. Their Destruction. The Devil Cast into the Lake
of Fire. The Great Judgment.

[Revelation 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 20:1</span></span>

And I saw an angel come down from heaven with a chain, and the key of
the abyss. The abyss is named in [Rev
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#001), [Rev
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011); in [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007), and [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008). It is the present abode of Satan
and his evil spirits. The things seen by John are symbolical. They imply
that in some way the power of Satan shall be virtually destroyed upon
the earth.

He laid hold on the dragon . . . and bound him a thousand years. The
chain I suppose to be the Word of God. At this period of the triumph of
righteousness the gospel takes such hold of the hearts of men that Satan
loses his powers over them. We can easily see how this is accomplished
by what takes place under our own eyes. A man may be drunken and
lawless, but if he repents under the influence of the gospel he ceases
to serve Satan. The devil loses his power over that man. When that
period shall come for which the saints in all ages have wistfully
looked, when the laws of God shall be written upon every heart, then
Satan, bound with a chain, the chain of truth, shall be deprived of
influence on the earth.

And cast him into the abyss. During this millennial period the chained
enemy of man is cast into a prison house, but not the lake of fire. Had
he gone there he should never more return. He shall go there as his
ultimate fate (see [Rev 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#010)), but
after the thousand years, he is to return to the earth for a little
season, and until the final effort of his long struggle against God he
shall be confined in the abyss, from whence there is the possibility of
escape, instead of being cast into the lake of fire, which is an eternal
doom. In the bottomless pit the great deceiver shall remain till the
thousand years are ended, when for a little season he shall regain his
power.

[Revelation 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 20:4</span></span>

And I saw thrones and they that sat upon them. These thrones are symbols
of rule. It implies that they who sit on them shall have sway.

And judgment was given to them. They shall exercise a moral judgment
over humanity.

I saw the souls of them. Of the martyrs. Note that it is the souls that
he observes.

And they lived and reigned with Christ. John saw that those who sat on
the thrones reigned with Christ a thousand years. "In the last days the
mountain of the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the
mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and all nations shall
flow into it." [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002). Will Christ
come visibly to reign in person as an earthly monarch? The personal
coming of the Savior is placed by all the sacred writers as the last
event before the great judgment day. This great epoch is placed after
the millennial period, and also after the overthrow of Satan in his last
conflict. If the Savior, then, during the millennial period, is not
visibly present upon the earth, how can he reign? Just as he reigns over
each saint now. Those who know the Lord accept him as king, but in this
period "the knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters do
the channels of the sea." All men shall hear and obey the gospel, and
all shall submit to the beneficent sceptre of Christ.

Souls of them that had been beheaded. These are they "who lived and
reigned with Christ for a thousand years." Is this a literal
resurrection from the grave? I answer decidedly in the negative. (1) The
apostle does not say one word about the resurrection of the bodies of
the martyrs, nor does he say that he saw the martyrs themselves. He is
particular to say that he saw the souls or spirits of the martyrs living
and reigning with Christ. (2) They had been put to death in the body,
and their souls were unseen upon the earth, but there is no intimation
in Scripture that their souls had ever ceased to exist. They were alive
with Christ, but now they live in some sense different from that
existence which they had before. It cannot mean that their souls came to
life, for they had never ceased to have existence. (3) What, then, does
the affirmation mean? That as Christ reigns upon the earth during the
millennial period by his truth, so the spirit of the martyrs is revived
and lives in the Church. The souls of the martyrs live because the
Church is composed of those who love Christ better than goods or liberty
or life. This glorious reign of Christ pervades the earth because the
souls of the martyrs are resurrected and live in all who name the name
of Christ, and who are filled with the spirit of ancient martyrs. (4) If
any should think such an interpretation of symbolical language far
fetched, let him compare Scripture. This explanation is not forced nor
the interpretation of the language unusual. It was predicted by the
prophets that Elias must come again before the Messiah. He did come in
spirit and power, not in person, but as the stern, fearless, upright
reformer of the wilderness of Jordan. In the same sense Ezekiel speaks
([Eze 37:12-14](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#012)) of the return of the
captive Jews to their own land: "I will open your graves, oh my people,
and cause you to come up out of your graves, and bring you into the land
of Israel." When Martin Luther was engaged in deadly struggle with the
Papacy, Pope Adrian sent a brief to the German Diet at Nuremburg, which
contained these words: "The heretics Huss and Jerome are now alive again
in the person of Martin Luther."

A thousand years. I am not prepared to say that this blessed period
shall be limited to a thousand years, but am rather disposed to believe
that a thousand years, a round period of great duration, is chosen to
show to the longing student of the prophets that there shall be a long,
long period of righteousness upon the same earth that has been reddened
with blood, filled with crime, and made foul by sin. The characteristics
of this golden period of the human race are clearly pointed out by the
prophets.

But the rest of the dead lived not. If "the souls of the martyrs" live
again spiritually and morally upon the earth in the millennial period,
as I have explained, then this statement is to be explained in harmony.
The rest of the dead lived not until the end of the thousand years. The
sublime faith of the martyrs pervades the saints during this period, and
other men, wicked or less noble, sleep in silence, unseen and unknown,
without influence upon the earth, until the millennial period is ended.
They have no part of the first resurrection, of the spirits of the
martyrs.

Blessed and holy is he that hath part in the first resurrection. In this
great moral and spiritual resurrection that brings in the Millennium.

On such the second death hath no power. The second death is the sad doom
of eternal death. See [Rev 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#014).

[Revelation 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 20:7</span></span>

When the thousand years are expired, Satan shall be loosed. The earth
shall have its golden age but it shall not last forever. Satan shall,
when many ages have rolled away, be loosed for a little season. From
some cause, that is wrapped in the darkness of the future, righteousness
shall wane; wickedness shall revive; the great adversary shall in part
regain his influence over our race. But it is cheering to know that his
triumph will be short. He shall be loosed only "for a little season."

And shall go out to deceive the nations. Again he shall marshal the
hosts of sin and renew his old conflict.

The four quarters of the earth. From the whole earth.

Gog and Magog. See [Gen 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) and [Eze
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze038.htm#002). Josephus says that Magog
represented the Scythians, a great race spread over the country now
occupied by Southern Russia.

And they went up over the breadth of the earth. They spread over it.

Compassed the camp of the saints and the beloved city. Assailed the true
Church and sought to destroy it. How the Church shall be assailed cannot
now be told, but there will be a determined attempt to extirpate it. The
beloved city, the spiritual Jerusalem, the Church, shall be surrounded,
but in the day of her extremity the Lord will hear her cry for help.
Fire from heaven will descend on her enemies. Christ shall come. "As the
lightning flashes from the east unto the west, so shall the coming of
the Son of man be." Then shall the Lord consume the wicked "with the
spirit of his mouth and the brightness of his coming." "The day of the
Lord shall come, when the heavens shall pass away with a great noise,
and the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and all its works shall
be burned up."

Fire came down from God and consumed them. For a comment on this read
[Th2 1:7-10](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#007). They shall come in
flaming fire to destroy his enemies. The time will have come for the arm
of the Lord to be revealed in might.

And the devil that deceived them was cast into the lake of fire. This is
Satan's last battle. His time has come. The great deceiver is not cast
into the bottomless pit now. The lake of fire is opened, and we discover
there the beast and the false prophet, but they have gone whence none
ever return. There the devil is cast in and locked up to abide with his
allies in wickedness forever.

[Revelation 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 20:11</span></span>

And I saw a great white throne, and him that sat on it. This is one more
act in the great drama. The throne of judgment is set. The nations,
living as well as dead, are called to stand before God. The white throne
indicates purity, triumph, and glory. It is the color of the light.

From whose face the earth and the heaven fled away. See [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001). There is to be a new heaven and
earth. The old ones are destroyed to be reconstructed.

And I saw the dead, small and great. As we learn from the next verse the
dead of every land, of earth, and sea and hades deliver their dead and
all come to judgment.

The books are opened. The records that contain all the deeds of men.

Another book. The book of life in which the names of the saints are
recorded. From these books all are judged according to their works.

The sea. A symbol of the lost dead of whom no man knoweth.

Death and Hades. The unseen world which hides from our view those who
have departed from earth. The thought of the verse is that all the dead
shall be judged.

And death and hades were cast into the lake of fire. After this judgment
day "death and hades" also, death and the unseen land of the dead,
disappear forever. This is the significance of being cast into the lake
of fire, the eternal prison house. Until the end of the Millennium and
the final judgment men shall die, but after the grand epoch in the
history of the Universe, there shall be no more death. The last enemy,
death, shall be destroyed. Then shall come to pass the saying that is
written, "O! death, where is thy sting? O! grave, where is thy victory?"
And whosoever was not found written . . . was cast into the lake of
fire. Into the same lake of fire, that prison house to which have gone
the false prophet and the beast, to which has been consigned the dragon,
"that old serpent the devil," the "eternal fire which has been prepared
for the devil and his angels." There shall also be banished those whose
"names are not written in the book of life." This is the second death.
As far as Inspiration throws its light upon the sad lot of those
consigned to that "lake of fire," theirs is an eternal fate. When some
one has shown that doors of this final prison of the Universe have
opened to permit the escape of those who have been consigned to its
keeping, then we may perhaps indulge some hope that its prisoners will,
in the lapse of endless years, escape from their sad environment.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 21](rev021)

</div>
