<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev012)  [Next](rev014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 13:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Beast that Rises Out of the Sea. Power Given to the Beast
by the Dragon. The Head Wounded to Death and Healed. Power Given to
Continue Forty-two Months. The Lamb-like Beast that Had the Voice of a
Dragon. His Service to the Seven-Headed Beast. The Number of the Beast.

[Revelation 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 13:1</span></span>

I saw a beast coming up out of the sea. The 12th chapter has shown the
relentless hostility of the dragon, "the old serpent, called the Devil,
and Satan," to the woman, a hostility that has manifested itself in
changing forms. The last verse declares his purpose to make war on the
seed of the woman. This chapter is intended to show the organized forms
in which he has carried on this warfare. The apostle sees a beast, a
wild savage beast, arising out of the sea. The restless ocean is a
symbol of commotion.

Having seven heads and ten horns. The beast bears the old dragon mark
([Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003)) of seven heads and ten
horns. It must therefore be some manifestation of the same power.
Indeed, it is the dragon who has called the beast forth from the sea.

On his horns ten crowns. These crowns are diadems (Revision). They are
the sign of royal authority. They represent ten kings or kingdoms ([Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012)). In the 12th chapter, the seven
heads had the diadems; now the horns wear them. There is a reason for
this that we shall see in the sequel.

And upon his heads the name of blasphemy. If these heads should
arrogantly claim divine honors, not belonging to them, these would be
names of blasphemy. These heads are said to be seven kings. Sometimes
kings have claimed to be gods, as Alexander, who asserted that he was
the son of Jupiter Ammon, and the Roman Emperors, who all claimed divine
honors and required men to worship their statues and to offer them
sacrifices.

And the beast . . . was like unto a leopard. It was a composite beast
which united the characteristics of the beasts seen by Daniel in his
vision ([Dan 7:1-6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)). The animals
combined are all cruel, terrible beasts of prey; a terror to man.

And the dragon gave him his power. That is, this beast was called forth
to do the dragon's work, and acted by the dragon's authority.

[Revelation 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 13:3</span></span>

I saw one of his heads as it were wounded to death. The Greek says
"slain." This deadly wound of the head was a deadly wound of the beast
itself. See [Rev 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#012). This wound was
given by the sword; that is, by war. See [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014). It is in [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014) suggested that the beast was
restored after the wound by the efforts of the second beast first named
in [Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011). The symbolism implies
that a mortal wound was inflicted on the power represented by the beast;
that when it was dead, or about to perish, its power was restored by the
arts of the second beast.

All the world wondered after the beast. Gave it their wonder and
admiration.

They worshiped the dragon. In following after and obeying the beast they
really gave worship to the dragon which had given the beast his power.
Their worship was, however, directed to the beast itself.

Who is like unto the beast? This language implies giving the beast
superhuman honors. Similar language is often used of God. See [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011); [Psa
113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005); [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018). The dragon, cast down, receives
worship through the beast.

[Revelation 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 13:5</span></span>

And there was given . . . a mouth speaking great things. He would make
blasphemous claims. Daniel affirms the same of the beast seen in his
vision ([Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)).

Forty and two months. The same period named in in [Rev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006), in [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002), in [Rev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003), and in [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025). The period referred to here,
when the beast shall prevail against the Church, is one of 1260 years.
This is evidently the period of the world's dominion over the Church.

He opened his mouth in blasphemy. Three kinds of blasphemy are named:
(1) against God; (2) against his tabernacle; (3) against those to whom
God has opened his tabernacle. The first would be accomplished by
usurping God's prerogatives; the second by maledictions upon the true
Church, and the third by curses on the true worshipers.

It was given unto him. He had power to make war on the saints and to
overcome them for a long period. Compare [Rev
12:14-17](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014). His dominion was also one
that seemed universal, and he claimed rule over all kindreds . . . and
nations.

[Revelation 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 13:8</span></span>

And all that dwell upon the earth shall worship him. All except the true
and faithful saints, hidden in obscurity but known above and recorded in
the book of life, shall give him homage.

If any man have an ear, let him hear. Let him give heed. The words to be
heeded are in [Rev 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).

If any man is for captivity, into captivity he goeth. The meaning is
"Whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap." "With what measure a
man metes, it shall be measured to him again." If the beast and his
adherents lead the saints captive, they shall finally be made captive;
if they slay with the sword, so shall they be slain.

Here is the patience and the faith of the saints. The assurance that God
will, in the end, right all their wrongs gives them faith and patience.

[Revelation 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 13:11</span></span>

I beheld another beast coming up out of the earth. John sees this second
monster coming up out of the earth, a beast that has two horns like a
lamb, and a voice like the voice of a dragon. There is a close
connection existing between the ten-horned and the two-horned beast. The
latter (1) exercises the power of the first beast before him, (2)
causeth the earth to worship the first beast, (3) says to the earth that
it should make an image of the first beast ([Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014)), (4) gives life unto the image
of the first beast, and (5) causes those who will not worship the image
to be slain ([Rev 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015)). These
statements show that there exists a close connection between the two,
and that the last is the supporter and restorer of the first. We have
found the first to be a symbolical representation of the temporal power
of Rome. Most Protestant commentators see in the second beast the
spiritual power of Rome, the power which gave life to, and built up, the
temporal dominion of the Papacy. The Papal claims are two-fold, both of
spiritual and temporal dominion. St. Peter with the sword and the keys
is always represented as the symbol of the Papal power; the sword of
temporal sway, and the keys of the kingdom. The Pope not only claims to
be the vicar of Christ, but the rightful ruler of the kings of the
earth, and in this capacity, in the days of his greatness, has made and
deposed kings, and granted kingdoms.

Two horns like a lamb . . . spake like a dragon. There is a similitude
like the Lamb of God; a counterfeit representation; but a voice like the
old dragon of pagan Rome. Both features show themselves. It professes to
be Christian power. Sometimes its servants do a really lamb-like work,
but then again we hear the dragon's voice. It can hardly be necessary to
state that symbolism could choose no language more appropriate to
represent the harsh, arrogant utterances of Rome when she puts forth her
power, or asserts her authority. Whoever has heard the harsh orders of
the priest to his flock, has heard the dragon's voice. How appropriately
this language describes the bulls of Popes, or the fulminations of
anathemas and excommunications against their enemies!

He maketh the earth . . . to worship the first beast. The spiritual
power of Rome is exercised before, or in the presence of, the temporal
power. They have dwelt together, and it is the spiritual power that has
made those that dwell upon the earth regard and pay homage to the
temporal. If an earthly ruler refused to heed the mandates of the Pope,
his subjects were absolved from allegiance and bidden to depose him. If
they refused, the whole kingdom was laid under interdict, the churches
were closed, religious rites were suspended, the dead were not buried in
the consecrated grounds, and a superstitious population soon demands
deliverance by submission. It was by the terrors of the spiritual power
that the earth was brought into subjection to the imperial temporal sway
of the Popes. The second beast has made men worship the first.

[Revelation 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 13:13</span></span>

The second beast did great wonders, pretended to perform miracles, and
thus "deceived them that dwell upon the earth." Rome has claimed the
possession of miraculous power in all ages, and no fact in history is
better established than that she has continually resorted to lying
miracles.

And deceiveth . . . by reason of those miracles. The object of these
false miracles was to rivet the chains of the spiritual dominion, so as
to build up the temporal sway of the papacy. The dragon-lamb commanded
men to make an image of the beast, and to offer it homage.

[Revelation 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 13:15</span></span>

And he had power to give life unto the image of the beast. The image of
the beast, of the old Pagan power, this eighth head, which is the beast
and of the seven, is not a lifeless image. The arts of the dragon lamb
gave it life. The spiritual power built up the temporal and gave it
imperial and despotic dominion. It had power to slay all who would not
worship it. The awful dragonnades in Southern France, the frightful work
of the Inquisition, the merciless persecution in Holland, the scenes of
blood and death caused by Rome in many lands, are the fulfillment.

He causeth all . . . to receive a mark. The mark of the beast is some
stamp or sign, by which all its worshipers should be known. In ancient
days slaves were sometimes branded, as cattle are in our own age. The
brand or mark of the beast would be some indelible sign which would
designate with certainty those who were subject to his authority. A mark
in the hand is supposed by some to represent the practice, while a mark
in the forehead indicates the profession of life. It is remarkable,
however, that a mark on the forehead, the sign of the cross made with
water, converts a person into a Roman Catholic, and without this mark
none are regarded as heirs of salvation.

No man might buy or sell, etc. It has been common for Catholics to be
forbidden to patronize those who were not loyal to the Pope. At least
three councils are named, those of Tours, of Constance and the Lateran,
which have expressly forbidden business intercourse with heretics.

[Revelation 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 13:18</span></span>

Let him that hath understanding count the number of the beast. [Rev
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#017) speaks of the name of the beast.
It has, then, a name. It also speaks of the number of its name. Its
name, then, is some number. We wish to discover its name, and if we can
count the number, we will find its name. "The number of the beast," that
is, the "number of its name" is the number of a man, and that number is
six hundred and sixty-six. It is, then, plain that the number six
hundred and sixty-six is the number of the name of the beast, and this
is the man's name. Six hundred sixty-six is English. John did not write
in English, hence those words in English will not give the word we seek.
666 are the Arab characters for the numbers, but they were unknown until
many hundred years after John wrote, and hence afford no help. John
wrote in the Greek language for readers who understood that tongue. The
number is evidently, then, to be expressed in Greek characters. The
Greeks did not express numbers by figures, but by letters, just as among
the Romans, X stood for ten and C for one hundred. Six hundred and
sixty-six could be expressed by spelling out the words in the Greek
language, or by using the letters which were symbols for various
quantities. Let us try the latter method: 30=L, 1=a, 300-t, 5=e, 10=i,
50=n, 70=o, 200=s. 666=Lateinos. And what is this name? The number of a
man; the Greek method of spelling the name of Latinus, the reputed
founder of the Latin race. The Romans were a Latin race and spoke the
Latin language. The Romish Church is continually officially called the
Latin Church, to distinguish it from the Greek Church, the other branch
of the great ancient schism; the Catholic sacred books are written in
the Latin tongue; the worship is conducted in every country in the Latin
alone, and when a Catholic council convenes, all its conferences are
conducted in the tongue of the ancient Latins. There is, then, a Latin
Church, whose official and sacred speech is the Latin language, which
has for its seat the ancient Latin capital. That Church is the great
Apostate Church, upon whose head the names of blasphemy have been
written, which has claimed universal dominion upon the earth, and has
slain the saints of the Most High. Its name is the number of the beast,
and that name, Lateinos, the name or number of a man, is 666. It does
not destroy the force of this that these numerals and letters can be so
combined as to spell out other names. This name is one that at once
points to a power which has displayed every mark which is assigned to
the beast.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 14](rev014)

</div>
