<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom007)  [Next](rom009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 8:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--No Condemnation to Those in Christ. Walking After the Spirit.
To be Carnally Minded, Death. To be Spiritually Minded, Life and Peace.
The Spirit of Adoption. Heirs of God. The Sufferings of Saints. The
Groanings of the Creation. All things Working for Good to Saints. The
Purpose and Foreordination of God. God's Protection of His Children.

[Romans 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 8:1</span></span>

There is therefore. The "therefore" points to the argument of chapter 7
which shows that in Christ we are delivered from sin and from the curse
of the law.

No condemnation to those in Christ Jesus. As those in Christ have died
with him ([Rom 6:1-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#001)), they have in
him satisfied the law, and hence they cannot be under condemnation. He,
the sinless One, "was made sin for us;" so we, forgiven through him, are
"made the righteousness of God in him" ([Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)). This blessed condition depends
on a vital union with Christ. "Baptized into Christ," we must walk in
him, not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. Compare [Joh
15:1-7](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001), and [Eph
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#023).

For the law of the Spirit of life. The Spirit of life must be the Holy
Spirit. The whole phrase is equivalent to the Gospel, which has been
given to men by the agency of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit has quickened
us into a new life, and as we have died to the law and to sin, we are
freed from them. Wesley says that the meaning is the "Gospel has freed
us from the Mosaic law." That the law of the Spirit of life describes
the Gospel is shown by [Rom 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003), which
explains [Rom 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#002).

What the law could not do. Because of the resistance it met in human
nature. It was not strong enough to overcome the tendency of the flesh,
the carnal nature, to evil. God did this by sending his own Son in the
likeness of sinful flesh. When Christ came in human form he took the
likeness of sinful flesh.

And for sin. As a sacrifice for our sins. See [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029).

Condemned sin in the flesh. To "condemn" is to sentence and to devote to
destruction. Sin is condemned, (1) By the spotless life of Christ. In
the flesh he was without sin. (2) By his death for sin our past sins are
forgiven. (3) By our vital union with his death and life we rise to walk
in a new life, with a new spirit, and hence, not under the power of the
flesh. See [Rom 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004).

That the righteousness of the law. The righteous demand of the law, its
substance, is a loving obedience to God (see [Luk
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)). By the Gospel the love of God
is shed abroad in our hearts through the Spirit. Hence, we comply with
its righteous demands when we walk, not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. To walk after the flesh is to obey the dictates of the flesh; to
walk after the Spirit is to obey its dictates. It dwells in the believer
to help him, but its dictates are found in the "words of the Holy
Spirit."

[Romans 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 8:5</span></span>

They that are after the flesh. The unconverted. Those still in a state
of nature. These are put in contrast with the converted, believers, who
are after the Spirit. These classes are easily distinguished. The first
obeys the dictates of the flesh; the other obeys the dictates of the
Spirit. "The things of the Spirit" are not revealed to us by internal
impulses, but by the words of the Spirit, the Holy Scriptures. The
indwelling Spirit helps the new man in Christ to keep these words.

To be carnally minded. To be under the dominion of the fleshly impulses
of the body.

Is death. Is sure proof that one is spiritually dead and under
condemnation.

To be spiritually minded. To be walking in obedience to the Spirit of
Christ. This gives life to the soul, maintains a vital union with
Christ, and brings peace, or conscious enjoyment of the grace of God.

Because the carnal mind is enmity to God. Is opposed to God's law, and
demand for a righteous life. Hence, since it fights against God, it is
under condemnation. He does not say that it is impossible for a wicked
man to become good, but that it cannot be done while he retains a carnal
mind. He must be converted first.

So then. The result naturally follows that a "carnally-minded man," one
"in the flesh" and under its dominion, "cannot please God." This is
impossible while he continues to mind the things of the flesh.

[Romans 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 8:9</span></span>

But ye are not in the flesh, etc. It has just been shown that he who is
under the sway of his fleshly passions is at war with God, cannot please
him, and is spiritually dead. But the Christian is under the influence
of the Spirit if the Spirit of God dwells in him. It does dwell in him
if he is a new creature, "minding the things of the Spirit."

Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. The
proof that we have this indwelling Spirit is that we "mind the things of
the Spirit" ([Rom 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#005)), and bear its
fruit ([Gal 5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)). Observe that the
Spirit is spoken of in this verse both as the Spirit of God, and the
Spirit of Christ.

But if Christ be in you. Christ is in us by his Spirit. Notice that the
indwelling of the Spirit of God, having the Spirit of Christ, belonging
to Christ, having Christ in us, are all varied expressions of the same
great fact.

The body is dead because of sin. Our bodies have died physically because
death came into the world through sin.

But the Spirit is life. Our spirit is made alive by union with Christ,
and partaking of his righteousness.

But if the Spirit of him, etc. The Holy Spirit. That Spirit in us is a
pledge that God will raise us, even as Christ was raised from the tomb.

Shall also quicken your mortal bodies. Though the body be doomed to
death "because of sin," it shall be "quickened" for those who have God's
Spirit dwelling in them. Even our mortal bodies shall be raised, not in
corruption, but in incorruption ([Co1
15:42-44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#042)).

[Romans 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 8:12</span></span>

Therefore. Seeing that we are to enjoy such glorious privileges in
Christ. These are described in this section.

We are debtors. Under obligation. Since the flesh, or carnal nature is
death, we are under no obligation to obey its dictates.

But if through the Spirit. By following the Spirit, "minding the things
of the Spirit," we secure life. This is shown in [Rom
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#011).

The deeds of the body are the sinful deeds suggested by the fleshly
desires. We cannot in our own strength mortify, i. e., put an end to,
the deeds of the body. It is accomplished by the aid of the Spirit,
helping our spirit in the effort.

For as many as are led by the Spirit. Those who "through the Spirit
mortify the deeds of the body" are led by the Spirit. They obey it
rather than the flesh. The presence of the Spirit in leading them shows
that they are sons of God. How are they led? (1) They have given up
their own wills to do God's will, and seek to obey him in all things.
(2) To them the Spirit is given as a helper of their weakness ([Rom
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026) below), and by its aid they
overcome the flesh.

Sons of God. We become sons of God when we are born again, born of water
and the Spirit ([Joh 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#005)), and we
maintain the sonship by being led by the Spirit.

For ye did not receive the spirit of bondage. The time is referred to
when they were born again, and entered the kingdom of God. They did not
receive the spirit of bondage, of slavery to sin, so that they would
obey its dictates, and thus be in fear of death. Instead, they received
the Holy Spirit according to promise ([Act
2:38](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#038)).

The Spirit of adoption. The Spirit God bestows upon those who are
accepted as his children. Paul was writing to the Romans, among whom the
adoption of children, not their own by nature, was common. They would
understand this to mean that those converted, or born again, are adopted
as children of God; upon those thus adopted he bestows his Spirit; this
Spirit in their hearts produces a loving trust that enables them to
address God as Father.

Abba, Father. Abba, Chaldee for Father.

The Spirit himself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the
children of God. The Spirit of God is one witness to the fact. Our
spirit is a corroborative witness. How do each bear witness? (1) Witness
is usually borne in words, but not always. God's Spirit bears witness in
words (see [Heb 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#015)). The Holy
Spirit shows us how we must become God's children, and how to continue
the Christian life. (2) It bears testimony in our lives by its fruits.
Do we bear the fruit of the Spirit? (See [Gal
5:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#022)). (3) Does our own spirit
testify that we "mind the things of the Spirit?" Does our consciousness
recognize its fruits, inward as well as outward? If the testimony of our
spirit is that what God's Spirit witnesseth of the sons of God is true
of us, then they concur in the testimony that we are the children of
God.

If children, then heirs. Observe the chain of argument: (1) We are the
sons of God. (2) This is shown by our having received the Spirit of
adoption. (3) Both God's Spirit and our own spirit witness together that
we are children of God. (4) But children are heirs; hence we are "heirs
of God; joint heirs with Christ." Under the Jewish law the older brother
had a double portion, but Christ admits all to a joint share of the
great inheritance.

If so be that we suffer with him. In the figure, we suffer with him when
we are "baptized into his death" ([Rom
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#003)). We are crucified ([Rom
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#006)); become dead ([Rom
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)); "are buried with him" ([Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)); "are planted in the likeness of
his death" ([Rom 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#005)). Hence, in these
respects we have the "fellowship of his sufferings" ([Phi
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#010)). But we must be ready, for his
sake, to bear the cross through life. If we do all these things, we
shall be "glorified with him also." We shall share with him in all
things.

[Romans 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 8:18</span></span>

The sufferings of this present time. The Christian of our time has
little conception of the sufferings of the ancient saints, counted as
outcasts, despised, persecuted, slain (see [Rom
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#036) below; also [Co2
11:23-28](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023)). Yet Paul counted these as
nothing in view of the hope of eternal glory.

Revealed in us. In the saints when they shall have received the
inheritance which God bestows in Christ. The comforts of the saint in
the midst of suffering are now given: (1) The hope of glory for which
all creation, ruined by the Fall, is looking. (2) The present help of
the Spirit. (3) The overruling providence of God.

The earnest expectation of the creature. "Creature" is rendered creation
in the Revision, and this rendering is approved by all the best critics.
Chrysostom says "Paul personifies the world, just as the prophets do
when they make the floods to clap their hands." The whole world is
represented earnestly looking forward to that day of future glory when
the sons of God will have reached their high estate and be revealed as
his children. It is a fine, poetic figure, a grand conception.

For the creature was made subject to vanity. The creation was subjected
to vanity; i. e., became empty; lost its original significance. The
Greek word rendered "vanity," means "to seek without finding." God
placed "the creation" under man's dominion, and when man fell the whole
was subject to vanity by God.

In hope. A hope was left to creation in its fallen estate. A promise of
final redemption was made to fallen man ([Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015)), and the creation is represented
as sharing that hope.

Because the creature itself shall be delivered. The Revision reads, "The
creation was subjected . . . in hope that the creation itself also,"
etc. Though "subjected to vanity," it still retained the hope of final
deliverance.

Bondage of corruption. Decay and death.

Into the glorious liberty. "The liberty of the glory." The present state
is "bondage to corruption." The hope is deliverance from the bondage
into "the liberty," etc. In the day of the revelation of that glory,
"all things shall become new" ([Rev
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#005)).

[Romans 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 8:26</span></span>

Likewise the Spirit also helpeth our infirmity. While we are waiting in
hope, but suffering, the Spirit is a helper of our weakness. It not only
strengthens us, but helps us in prayer.

We know not what to pray for as we ought. We often do not know, in our
ignorance, what is best. This is especially true in the times of the
greatest trial. It was even an experience of our Lord in extremity ([Joh
12:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#027)) and of Paul ([Phi
1:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#022)).

But the Spirit itself. Observe the climax: The creation groans; we
ourselves groan; the Spirit himself groans. The Spirit within us
intercedes by groaning which are his, in that they are prompted by the
Spirit. Augustine says: "It is not in himself, nor in the substance of
the Eternal and Blessed Trinity that he groans, but in us because he
makes us groan."

Groanings that cannot be uttered. Speechless groanings.

Knoweth what is the mind of the Spirit. These speechless groanings are
understood by God, because it is according to his will that the Spirit
intercedes.

[Romans 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 8:28</span></span>

All things work together for good. The third ground of encouragement to
saints in suffering is now given. To them, under God's providence, all
things, even their sorrows, trials and persecutions, work together for
blessing. This precious assurance is not to all mankind, saint and
sinner, but is limited to a class.

To them that love God; the called according to his purpose. These are
those who enjoy the blessed assurance just given. These two expressions
are different ways of describing the same class. Notice the order in the
Revision, which is the order of the Greek. The love of God is the very
foundation of the Christian life. See [Luk
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#028), and [Joh
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#023). The expression, "Those that
love God," is synonymous with "Followers of Christ." See [Co1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009); [Eph
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#024); [Ti2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008); [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005).

The called. These have been called by the gospel and have accepted the
call. Many others are called, Jews and Gentiles, but only those who hear
and obey are chosen ([Mat 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016); [Mat
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014)). Paul uses the term of the
latter class; those who hear and obey. The evidence that we are "the
called" is that we love God.

According to his purpose. This call was purposed from the time that God
promised a Deliverer of the fallen race.

For whom he foreknew, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the
image of his Son. To foreknow and to predestinate are not the same
thing. One is an act of foreknowledge, or knowing something before it
occurs; the other is to decree something. We only have knowledge of the
past, but God foresees the future even as he sees the past; foresees it,
not because he has decreed it, but because there are no limitations on
his knowledge. Augustine says: "There can be no predestination without
foreknowledge; but there can be foreknowledge without predestination."
Whom does God foreknow? Those who shall love God. As he looked into the
future these were present to his mind; foreknown. What did he
predestinate of them? Not that they should love God. Not that they
should believe; nor that some should be saved and others damned; but
that those who he saw beforehand would love God, should be conformed to
the image of his Son. The only thing predestinated, or foreordained, is
that those who love God as revealed in Christ shall become Christlike in
life, and like Christ in eternity. This is the only decree in the
passage.

Whom he predestinated. He now shows how this is accomplished for those
thus foreknown as the lovers of God.

He also called. They are "called" by the preaching of the gospel, as in
[Th2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#014) : "Whereunto he called you
by our gospel." It is not stated that these alone are called. We know
that many others are called.

Justified. The called, accepting the call, are justified. Their sins are
blotted out.

Glorified. These are made heirs of eternal glory. As stated by Godet,
the purpose of the whole passage may be expressed as follows: "I see
thou dost love God; art a believer; I therefore decree of thee that thou
shalt become like my Son and be glorified with him." The steps by which
this is accomplished are calling, justification, and final
glorification.

[Romans 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 8:31</span></span>

What shall we say to these things? The rest of the chapter is a hymn of
triumph over this assurance of salvation.

If God be for us. What has been shown shows that he is for all who love
God. If he is on our side, we must prevail.

He that spared not his own Son. If he gave his Son to die for us, it is
impossible that he should refuse us anything that will help or bless us.
He has nothing he values more than his Son.

Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect? No one can, since
God himself has justified them.

Who is he that condemneth? There can be no condemnation ([Rom
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001)) since Christ died . . . is risen
. . . and maketh intercession for us. There is no condemnation in Christ
Jesus.

Who shall separate us from the love of Christ? Can anything? Can the
sufferings of the Christian calling in a time of persecution, such as
the prophet described and the early Christians suffered?

As it is written. In [Psa 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#022). Will
such persecution lead us to abandon Christ?

Nay. Not all these sufferings can lead us from Christ, for in all these
things we are more than conquerors. We overcome by the aid of him that
loved us.

For I am persuaded. No hostile power of the universe can lead us away,
is the apostle's holy confidence.

Death nor life. These adversaries seem to advance in pairs. Death is
named first, because death by martyrdom threatens. The next pair is
angels, and principalities and powers. "The angels" are good angels,
while malignant angels are meant by the other terms.

Nor things present, nor the things to come. The present or the future.

Nor height, nor depth. Perhaps, the things which exalt us and the things
which cast us down. Things high and things low.

Nor any other creature. Any other created thing.

Shall be able. None of these, "I am persuaded," shall have power enough
to tear us away from Christ, by causing us to apostatize.

The love of God, which is in Christ. God's great love for us is all
shown through Christ. Nowhere has Paul shown more exultation, more
overflowing emotion, than in this close of a profound argument, which
shows the complete and full salvation of those who believe upon Christ
and are found in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 9](rom009)

</div>
