<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom013)  [Next](rom015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 14:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Differences Concerning Food and Holy Days. We May not Condemn
One Another for Things Indifferent. Let Us not Judge One Another. Let Us
be Charitable to Each Other. The Kingdom Higher than Meats, Drinks, or
Days. Do Nothing Doubtful in your Mind.

[Romans 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 14:1</span></span>

Him that is weak in the faith. Not firmly established; "not rooted and
grounded in the faith;" not fully instructed in Christian knowledge.

Receive ye, etc. Take him into your fellowship, but not to discuss and
pass judgments on any doubts he may entertain. "Literally, not acting so
as to make distinctions about disputatious reasonings."--Conybeare and
Howson. The idea is that disputes over doubtful questions must not be in
the way of Christian fellowship.

For one believeth, etc. The apostle now names one of those differences
of opinion that had made trouble. Differences had risen over food. The
flesh of animals offered in idol sacrifices was offered in the markets,
and one buying could not always be sure that he did not get it. Others,
Jewish Christians, or of Judaizing tendencies, believed it wrong to eat
any food forbidden by the law. Perhaps others believed, like the
Essenes, that the regenerate man should eat only vegetables, like the
primitive race in Eden. Hence, for one or all of these causes, some
thought meat ought to be abstained from entirely. Disputes arose over
the difference.

Let not him that eateth despise, etc. Look with contempt on what he
considers the weakness of the other.

Let not him that eateth not judge, etc. Condemn as guilty of sinful
practices.

For God hath received him. God hath taken him into his church without
making conditions concerning meats. Hence, you have no right to reject
him.

Who art thou that judgest another man's servant? Since God has received
him, he is God's servant, and his accountability is not to you, but to
God.

God is able to make him stand. In spite of what some of you think is an
error, he shall stand, for God is able to keep him. This conduct shall
not cut him off from the grace of God in which we all stand.

[Romans 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 14:5</span></span>

One man esteemeth one day above another. A second difference of opinion
is now cited. Some, Jewish converts or Gentiles who did not understand
that the old covenant was ended, believed that the Jewish Sabbaths and
new moons should be kept sacred. Compare [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016), and [Gal
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#010).

Let every man be fully persuaded in his own mind. Let each act as he
thinks right. If he thinks he ought to observe the days, let him do as
his conscience demands. If he thinks otherwise, let him not observe
them.

He that regardeth the day, etc. It is regarded unto the Lord if he keeps
it, because he thinks it is the Lord's will. If another refuses to keep
it, because he believes it is the Lord's will that he should not, his
non-keeping is to the Lord.

He that eateth. Meats. See [Rom 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#002).
He who obeys what he regards the Lord's will in this, either eating or
abstaining, does it with reference to the Lord.

For none of us liveth to himself. No Christian lives to please himself,
but with the conscious aim of pleasing the Lord.

We are the Lord's. While living, the aim must be to do the Lord's will,
and even when we die we will be fully resigned to his will. We are not
at our own disposal.

For to this end Christ both died, and rose, etc. The life of the
Christian is a new life that springs out of Christ's death ([Rom
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#004)); we die with him; we rise with
him; hence, since our life comes from him, and springs from his death
and resurrection, these make him our Lord, whether we be living or dead.

[Romans 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 14:10</span></span>

Why dost thou judge thy brother? Christ, the Lord of all, is his Lord.
He shall judge him and us alike. We are not the judges, for we shall all
stand before the judgment-seat of Christ.

For it is written. In [Isa 45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023). The
passage quoted declares that the whole world will yet make humble
acknowledgment of the sovereignty of Jehovah.

So then every one of us shall give account. God's universal sovereignty
gives him the right to call every mortal to account. Hence, we should
leave judgment to God.

Let us not therefore judge one another. Since God is to judge us all,
brethren should not condemn each other for differences of opinion over
some untaught question.

But judge this rather. Rather condemn severely throwing a
stumbling-block in a brother's way. A stumbling-block is anything which
might cause a brother to fall.

[Romans 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 14:14</span></span>

I know . . . in the Lord Jesus. The conviction is that of a mind in
communion with Christ, enlightened by his Spirit.

That nothing. No kind of food.

Is unclean of itself. Is by its own nature such that it is a sin to
partake of it. The legal distinction between clean and unclean animals
is abolished.

But to him. If one, uninstructed, considers anything unclean, to his
conscience it is so. It is wrong for him to eat it.

If thy brother is grieved with thy meat. If his feelings are hurt
because you eat food that he thinks it is sinful to eat, it would be
charitable for you to abstain from it for his sake.

Destroy not him. His grief, and the effect upon him of seeing you do
what he regards as sinful, may be to destroy him. It is kinder to give
up the meat than to risk his destruction. If Christ died for him, you
surely can do that much.

[Romans 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 14:16</span></span>

Let not then your good be evil spoken of. You have greater knowledge
than these weak brethren, and know that "nothing is unclean." That is
"good." But if you sternly insist on your right to do what the weak
regard as sinful, your "good" will be evil spoken of.

For the kingdom of God. Christ's dominion; the church visibly;
personally, his sway over your soul. This does not depend on meat and
drink. It rises higher than food questions. Personally, its essence is
not in external things. It consists of righteousness. Justification; the
forgiveness of sins.

Peace. Reconciliation to God, and peace of soul as the result.

Joy in the Holy Ghost. The rejoicing of those who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. Seek these rather than to eat and drink
what you will.

[Romans 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 14:19</span></span>

Let us therefore follow . . . peace. Hence, charitably yield what
grieves a brother.

May edify. Build up and make strong. Compare [Th1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011).

For meat destroy not. A rigid insistence on eating the meat so offensive
to some of the brethren may rend the church.

All things indeed are pure. All kinds of food are morally clean. See
[Rom 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#014).

But it is evil. It is morally unclean to him who eateth with hurt to his
conscience.

It is good neither to eat flesh, etc. If eating any kind of food, or
drinking wine, is the way of your brother's peace and security, it is
better to abstain from both. Deny yourself rather than offend a brother.
Compare [Co1 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#013). This maxim applies
to all things indifferent. It applies to wine-drinking at our time. No
Christian ought ever to set an example that may destroy another.

Hast thou faith? Art thou strong in the faith, and possessed of
knowledge that the weaker brethren have not? Let God take not of it, but
do not parade it before the weak.

Happy is he that condemneth not himself, etc. If one "allowed" that he
had the right to eat all kinds of meats, etc., and did it to the injury
of his brother, he would condemn himself, because he trampled on the law
of love.

He that doubteth is damned if he eat. He is contrasted with him "who has
faith" ([Rom 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#022)). He has not faith,
or does not believe that it is right to eat these meats. Hence he is
condemned ("damned") by his own conscience.

Whatsoever is not of faith is sin. The context shows that Paul means
that whenever actions are done by a Christian which he does not believe
are right, he sins in doing them. If he is doubtful whether they are
right, he must not do them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 15](rom015)

</div>
