<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom008)  [Next](rom010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 9:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Paul's Deep Sympathy for His Nation. God's Promise to the
Jewish Race not Void. The Argument that it is not. The Promise is not to
the Seed According to the Flesh, but a Spiritual Seed. God has a Right
to Choose what Race He Will. As the Potter has the Right to Choose what
Race He Will. As the Potter has the Right to Shape His Clay, so God can
Exalt or Reject a Race. The Acceptance of the Gentiles and the Rejection
of the Jews Foretold. A Remnant of Israel Saved.

[Romans 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 9:1</span></span>

I say the truth in Christ. This affirmation is made so solemn because
the Jews charged Paul with having forsaken his race. He speaks as in the
presence of Christ, with a conscience enlightened by the Holy Spirit.

That I have great heaviness, etc. Not so much that his countrymen are
estranged from him, as that they were without the blessing of Christ.

For I could wish myself accursed from Christ. He could wish this, if
that would avail anything, to save his Jewish brethren.

Accursed. "Anathema," in the Revision. Rejected from Christ and lost.

My brethren. His Jewish brethren, those of the same Jewish stock as
himself.

Who are Israelites. He now enumerates some of the glories of the Jewish
race. Jacob, their ancestor, had been called Israel ([Gen
32:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#028)) by the angel. This means a
Prince with God, and this proud title was borne by his descendants.

Whose is the adoption. Six high privileges of the chosen people are
named in [Rom 9:4-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004). They were adopted
as the chosen people ([Deu 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006)).

And the glory. The presence of the ark of God and the glory of the
Divine Presence ([Sa1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#021)).

The covenants. The covenants made with Abraham and at Sinai.

The giving of the law. The law of Moses given to the children of Israel.

And the service of God. The worship of the tabernacle and temple.

And the promises. Especially the blessed promise of Christ.

Whose are the fathers. The patriarchs and prophets.

Of whom . . . Christ came. Greatest of all, Christ, in his fleshly
nature, was of their race, of the tribe of Judah, and of the seed of
David.

Who is over all. See [Mat 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#018). He is
our King and our Judge.

God blessed forever. More than man; Divine.

[Romans 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 9:6</span></span>

Not as though the word of God hath taken none effect. The Jew might
reply, "Why, then, if Israel had such privileges, covenants and
promises, is the nation rejected? Has God, if Jesus is really the
Christ, made his word of none effect?" The apostle in the rest of the
chapter answers this objection. The first point is that there is a
wider, greater Israel than that of the flesh. Those of Israel are not
all Israel. There is an Israel according to the promise as well as
according to the flesh.

Neither because they are Abraham's seed are they all children. Abraham
had other children besides Isaac, notably Ishmael, but none of these
belonged to the chosen people, for it was said ([Gen
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#012)), In Isaac shall thy seed be
called.

That is, not the children of the flesh, etc. Since Ishmael, born
according to natural laws, was not of the chosen race, but Isaac, the
child of promise, born contrary to natural law, because the chosen
people, it follows that the children of God are not the children of the
flesh, the mere fleshly descendants of Abraham, but the children of the
promise; those who are of the seed according to the conditions of the
promise. This argument is a reply to those who based all upon their
fleshly relation to Abraham: "We have Abraham to our Father" ([Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009)). In order to show this more fully
Paul recalls the incidents recorded in [Gen
18:10-14](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#010).

This is the word of promise. This promise was made when Sarah was far
beyond the natural age of bearing children, and when Abraham was an old
man. So the chosen seed are children of promise.

[Romans 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 9:10</span></span>

And not only this. The first argument is that the true seed are children
of the promise, a spiritual seed rather than of the flesh. The second
argument, now begun, is that God has the right to reject what nation he
will, including the Jews, and to choose other races if he will. This is
shown by facts from history. He did exercise the right of choice when he
chose Jacob as the chosen nation, instead of Esau. The facts are recited
to show this.

For the children. The children, yet unborn, were both Isaac's seed
according to the flesh; hence, according to the flesh, of the promised
seed, and both equally without works, neither having done good nor evil.

That the purpose of God according to election might stand. That it might
stand forth that he made the choice of his own will, freely. Of his own
will he chose Jacob, yet unborn, to become the head of the chosen race,
rather than Esau. Note that this election was not to eternal salvation,
but to become the head of a people. As Moses, Samuel, and John the
Baptist were raised up for a great work of God, so was Jacob.

It was said unto her, The elder shall serve the younger. See [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023). It was said to Rebecca, "Two
nations are in thy womb, . . . one people shall be stronger than the
other, and the elder (people) shall serve the younger" Esau never served
Jacob, but the Edomites, descended from Jacob, served the Israelites.
The election here is that of a race.

As it is written. In [Mal 1:2-3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002). The
language of Malachi, in its connection, shows that this is spoken of the
two races. [Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003) says, "I hated
Esau and laid waste his mountains and his heritage." This was not true
of Esau as a person, but was true of his descendants. One race was loved
and the other race hated. God has then asserted his right to freely
choose or to reject races. There is not the slightest hint of electing
some persons to eternal salvation and others to damnation.

[Romans 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 9:14</span></span>

Is there unrighteousness with God? Does not this liberty of God, in his
election of races, do violence to his justice? Is it not unjust that God
should choose one nation and reject another? The answer to this is now
given. Paul shows that the Scriptures recognize this liberty, and these
Scriptures, reverenced by the Jewish objector to whom he is writing,
would not assign injustice to God. The argument is wholly scriptural.

I will have mercy upon whom I will have mercy. This is in [Exo
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#019), and is in answer to a request
of Moses for a high privilege. The Lord grants it, not because he merits
it, but of grace, because he "will be gracious to whom he willeth, and
will have mercy where he will." The passage, as applied by Paul, asserts
that God favors nations according to his pleasure. He exercises free
choice.

So then it is not of him that willeth. When God is gracious, it is not
because a human will (him that willeth), or a human work (him that
runneth) lays him under obligation, and forces him to give, but the gift
is of him, due to his mercy, which he has the right to bestow where he
will. Isaac willed to bestow the blessing on Esau, and the latter run to
obtain the venison ([Gen 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#005)), but
Jacob had been chosen to become the founder of the chosen people, and
received the blessing, which promised that he should be the father of a
great nation.

The Scripture saith to Pharaoh. [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016). It is not said that Pharaoh was
born for, but was raised to the throne for a particular purpose. That
purpose was that I might shew my power in thee. It is not said that God
raised him up to destroy him. His power might have been shown by Pharaoh
yielding to his power. Pharaoh's conduct made it necessary to abase him.
Here, again, the election is not of an individual to destruction, but of
a man to be a king for a particular purpose. The destruction came upon
him because, in that position, he resisted God.

Therefore hath he mercy. [Rom 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#015) has
shown that he hath mercy according to his own sense of right, not
according to any human code. The case of Pharaoh shows, in addition,
that whom he will, he hardeneth. "What must not be forgotten, and what
appears distinctly, from the whole narrative in Exodus, is that
Pharaoh's hardening was at first his own act. Five times it is said of
him that he himself hardened, or made heavy his heart ([Exo
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#013); [Exo
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#022); [Exo
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#015); [Exo
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#032); [Exo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#007)), before the time when it is at
last said that God hardened him ([Exo
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#012)), and even after that it is said
that he hardened himself ([Exo 9:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#034)).
Thus he at first closed his own heart to God's appeals; grew harder by
stubborn resistance under God's judgments, until at last God, as a
punishment for his obstinate rejection of right, gave him over to his
mad folly and took away his judgment."--Godet. At first Pharaoh hardened
his own heart; God's judgments only made it harder, and then God "gave
him over." God only made harder, by his judgments and by leaving him to
his folly, one who had already hardened his own heart. That he was given
over to madness is shown in the record. Even his magician said, "This is
the finger of God" ([Exo 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo008.htm#019)). He
himself once said, "I have sinned; the Lord is righteous" ([Exo
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#027)). Had he not hardened himself
again, the result would have been different. Then God gave him up to his
own folly, "to hardness of heart and reprobacy of mind." The Jews
approved of all this in the case of Pharaoh, but held that God could
never abandon them on account of their sinful course. Paul's argument
is, that if they, the favored people, should pursue Pharaoh's course,
they might experience Pharaoh's fate. They, also, hardening themselves,
might be "delivered over to hardness," for God is not limited by race,
or by any limitation, but hardens whom he wills. He wills to harden
those who harden themselves. I have dwelt upon this passage at greater
length than usual because it is so little understood. Godet well says
that in this whole passage Paul is not writing theology, but answering
the arrogant pretensions of Jewish Pharisaism, and hence he asserts the
Divine liberty. Had he been replying to those who have exaggerated this
liberty into a purely arbitrary and tyrannical will, he would have
brought out the opposite side of truth.

[Romans 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 9:19</span></span>

Who withstandeth his will? He now meets another objection of the Jewish
adversary. If God's will is paramount, why should he find fault, for no
one nation can withstand his will. If God hardens, the nation that is
hardened only submits to him. Paul does not stop to show that this
objection is far-fetched, and illogical, but in substance says: "Let
that be granted. Then what right has the Jewish nation to object? It is
nothing but a lump of clay in the hands of the potter."

Who art thou that repliest against God? Shall men charge God with
injustice? We have no right to strive with our Maker. He has the right
to declare his own conditions upon which he will have mercy.

Hath not right over the clay? So God, as far as right is involved, has
the right to make of his creatures what he will. It is not said that we
are as clay in the potter's hands, but that God has the right over us
that the potter has over his clay. One lump the potter can use for a
splendid vase; another for a vessel for base uses.

What if God. Now if God, in the exercise of his undoubted right, has
done something like this, in his dealings with the Jew and Gentile.

Willing to show his wrath. Though provoked to visit punishment on the
Jewish nation for its sin in rejecting Christ, and thus to demonstrate
his power, yet thus far he has endured with much long-suffering the
vessels of wrath. The unbelieving Jewish nation, so sinful before God,
yet long endured, is meant. God, in the exercise of his sovereign will,
has thus far deferred the exhibition of his wrath in its destruction.
This verse began with a question. It implies, If God does all this,
where is the fault?

And that he might make known. "The vessels of mercy" are both Gentile
and Jewish believers. What if God endured vessels fitted for destruction
([Rom 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#022)), was there wrong in this?
What if he thus made known the riches of his glory on vessels of mercy,
was there wrong in this?

Which he had afore prepared unto glory. The preparation referred to is
not that of individuals for eternal life, but the preparation made was
to save the Gentiles as well as Jews. The next verse shows what is
meant.

Even us whom he hath called. He "endured the vessels of wrath" that he
might make known his mercy in calling both Jews and Gentiles. The
destruction of the Jewish nation, predicted by the Savior in Matt. 24,
was delayed in mercy until tens of thousands of Jews, as well as of
Gentiles, accepted Christ. The whole passage shows that God suffered the
sins of the Jewish nation, without cutting it off, because its existence
was essential in his plans for saving the world. Of it Christ came. From
it the apostles were chosen. In it the church was formed, and from it
went forth the gospel preachers.

[Romans 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 9:25</span></span>

As he saith also in Hosea. [Hos 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023).
That it was God's plan aforetime to call the Gentiles to salvation he
shows by this prophecy. In [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010),
there is a prediction of the same import, which Paul quotes in [Rom
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#026). Both passages show that the
gospel call to the Gentiles is only in harmony with the long-declared
purpose of God.

And Isaiah crieth. [Isa 10:22-23](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#022). Not
only do the prophets show that the Gentiles are to be called, but that a
great part of Israel is to fall from God. The passage says that though
the people of Israel become numerous as the sands of the seashore, only
a remnant shall be saved. This prophecy originally applies to the return
of the Jews from the Captivity, but, like many other prophecies, has a
double application.

For he will finish the work. This verse, quoted from Isaiah, shows why
only a remnant will be left. God's righteous judgment will cut the rest
off from his favor.

As Esaias said before. Isaiah spoke this before he wrote what is quoted
in [Rom 9:27-28](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#027). This is found in [Isa
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#009). This passage, like the other,
shows that only "a remnant of Israel shall be saved."

We had been as Sodom. Sodom and Gomorrah had perished on account of
their sins. Had it not been for God's mercy, Israel would have been
blotted out for the same cause.

[Romans 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 9:30</span></span>

What shall we say then? What conclusion shall we reach? It has been
shown that the word of God is not of none effect ([Rom
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#006)), for it has foreshown all that
has taken place. The conclusion is this: That the Gentiles, who followed
not after righteousness, had no knowledge of it, had secured
righteousness by accepting Christ, through faith in him, while ([Rom
9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031)) Israel, following after the law
of righteousness, hath failed of righteousness before God through
unbelief.

Wherefore. Why this failure on the part of Israel? Not because God
willed that they should be rejected, not because of any foreordination,
but because of their unbelief in Christ.

They sought it not by faith. Sought not the righteousness that comes
from faith in Christ, but a righteousness of works by keeping the law of
Moses.

They stumbled at the stumbling-stone. At faith in Christ, in a Crucified
Christ. This is the one cause of Israel's failure. They fell through
unbelief.

As it is written. That Christ would be a stumbling-stone to Israel had
been foretold in [Isa 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#014), and [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016). When Jesus came as a lowly one,
and was crucified, the Jews, who expected the Christ to be a mighty
earthly king, stumbled and fell.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 10](rom010)

</div>
