<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom014)  [Next](rom016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 15:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--The Strong Must Bear with the Weak. Not to Seek to Please
Ourselves. Christ Did Not. As Christ Received Us, So We Should Receive
Each Other. Christ the Savior of Both Jews and Gentiles. Paul's
Apostleship. His Work Among the Gentiles. His Purpose to Visit Rome.

[Romans 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 15:1</span></span>

We that are strong. In the last chapter Paul contrasts the strong and
the weak. The first are those, like himself, who know that no kind of
food "is unclean of itself," and are emancipated from Jewish prejudices.
These strong ones are to bear with the "infirmities of the weak," as has
been enjoined in the preceding chapter. The lesson is a practical one of
all ages.

Let every one please his neighbor. We are not to seek to please
ourselves, but to please others. Nor are we to seek to please them for
our own selfish purpose, as is often the case, but for their good to
edification, with a view to their good and upbuilding in Christ.

For even Christ pleased not himself. Our duty to others is enforced by
the example of Christ. He forgot himself in his work of saving men. So
ought we to do.

As it is written. In [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009). The
passage affirms that the Messiah, instead of pleasing himself, became
the subject of "the reproaches of them who reproached" his Father.

[Romans 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 15:4</span></span>

For whatsoever things were written. The passage just quoted applies to
Christ, and all things written in the Old Scriptures are for our
instruction.

Learning. Instruction.

Might have hope. The purpose of the Scriptures is to impart a present
blessed hope through the patience and the comfort they impart to those
who suffer for God.

Grant you to be like-minded one toward another. The apostle does not
pray that they may be of the same opinion, but that there be harmony of
feeling.

According to Christ Jesus. Let each be so conformed to Christ that all
may be of one mind. See [Phi 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi002.htm#005).

That ye may with one mind, etc. That being in full accord you may with
one voice (mouth) utter the praises of God.

[Romans 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 15:7</span></span>

Wherefore receive ye one another. Let the strong receive the weak, all
receive each other into full fellowship, even as "Christ has received
us."

To the glory of God. All must be done so as to glorify God. So Christ
hath done.

Now I say. Rather, "For I say." The work of Christ is given to show the
spirit we ought to have.

A minister of the circumcision. Christ became a minister of the
circumcision; that is, a Jew, of the seed of Abraham, for the truth of
God. The Scriptures had declared that he would be of the seed of
Abraham.

To confirm the promises. Had he not been of the circumcision, the
promises would not have applied to him.

That the Gentiles might glorify God. It was a part of this plan, all the
while, that Christ, "born under the law," should save the Gentiles, and
enable them to glorify God for his mercy to them.

As it is written. Various passages from the Old Testament are now quoted
to show God's purpose to give the gospel to the Gentiles.

For this cause, etc. This quotation is from [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049), and implies that God shall be
confessed, and his praises sung among the Gentiles.

Rejoice, ye Gentiles, etc. This is found in [Deu
32:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#043), and is a direct command to
Gentiles to worship with the Lord's people.

Praise the Lord, all ye Gentiles. This command to the Gentiles, still
clearer and stronger, is found in [Psa
97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001).

Again Isaiah saith. The quotation that follows is from [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), a chapter which is throughout a
prediction of Christ and his kingdom. Jesse, the father of David, was an
ancestor of Jesus. The passage quoted shows very clearly that Christ was
to be the Savior of the Gentiles.

[Romans 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 15:13</span></span>

Now the God of hope fill you with all joy. Paul has quoted from Isaiah,
"In him shall the Gentiles hope," and follows it by a prayer that the
God who has given them the blessed hope may fill them with joy and
peace, so that they may abound in hope. The hope we have in Christ is
the source of a great part of our joy.

Filled with all knowledge. Compare [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001); [Co1
7:10-11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010). It is evident that the
knowledge of spiritual truth, professed by the strong in faith, is
meant.

Able also to admonish one another. Therefore having less need of the
admonition of the apostle.

Nevertheless, brethren. Though they were able to admonish each other, he
has written to them boldly and plainly, as was his right, because of the
grace, the apostleship to the Gentiles, given him of God.

That I should be a minister to the Gentiles. This is the grace just
referred to.

Ministering. The Greek reads, "Ministering in sacrifice." The figure is
that of Paul, as a priest, bringing the converted Gentiles as offerings,
which are placed upon the altar of God and dedicated to his service.
This offering, the Gentiles, is made acceptable through the gospel, they
being sanctified, set apart, by the Holy Spirit. See [Rom
8:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#001).

[Romans 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 15:17</span></span>

I have therefore whereof I may glory. Because of his wonderfully
successful ministry among the Gentiles. Yet he glories not in himself,
but only through Jesus Christ. See [Co1
15:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#031).

In those things which pertain to God. In his ministry as an apostle of
Christ.

I will not dare to speak, etc. The meaning is: "I will not dare to speak
of the signs of grace and the work of others, but only of the mighty
works of God hath wrought through me to make the Gentiles obedient."

Through mighty signs and wonders. This describes what extraordinary help
had been given--the power to work miracles and the gifts of the Holy
Spirit.

So that from Jerusalem, and around about unto Illyricum. Jerusalem was
near the southeast corner of the Mediterranean; Illyricum lay north of
Greece, on the Adriatic, so that his gospel labors had embraced a
circuit clear around the east and northeast shores of the sea.

Yea, so have I strived to preach. He declares the fixed policy of his
ministry not to preach where Christ had been heard, but in new fields.
Where other apostles or evangelists had laid a foundation, he did not
seek to build. Compare [Co2 10:12-16](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#012).
As no apostle or great evangelist had yet visited Rome, his letter to
the Romans was no violation of his principle.

But as it is written. In [Isa 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015).
The passage declares that God's name shall be carried where it was
unknown; hence, Paul's course was in harmony with the will of God.

[Romans 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 15:22</span></span>

For which cause I have been much hindered. The greatest hindrance to his
coming to Rome hitherto was the duty of preaching in places where Christ
was unknown.

But now having no more place in these parts. Everywhere around the
eastern Mediterranean the name of Christ had been preached, so that
churches were formed in all the chief cities. Hence, Paul wished to seek
new fields.

Having a great desire . . . to come unto you. See [Rom
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#011), and [Act
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#021).

Whensoever I take my journey into Spain. It was his purpose to go to
Spain as a new field. The New Testament does not record that he ever
carried out this purpose, though it is the testimony of the early church
that he did.

To see you in my journey. He only intended to stop for a season, in
passing through, for the reason that there was already a church there.
God willed that it should be otherwise.

[Romans 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 15:25</span></span>

Now I go unto Jerusalem, etc. See [Act
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003), for account of the undertaking
of this journey. Also [Act 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#017). He
is going to Jerusalem to minister to the poor saints.

For it hath pleased them of Macedonia, etc. Concerning the contribution,
see [Co1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#001); [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001), and [Co2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#002).

Certain contribution. The Greek word is the same rendered fellowship in
[Act 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#042).

Their debtors they are. It pleased these Gentile Christians to help
those at Jerusalem, and, besides, they were under obligation to them,
for the church at Jerusalem was the center from which the gospel had
been spread abroad.

[Romans 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 15:28</span></span>

When therefore I have performed this. As soon as he has discharged this
office, it is his purpose to start to Spain, and to take Rome in on the
way.

Sealed to them this fruit. Made this contribution safe to them. What is
sealed is made secure.

I am sure that, when I come. He assures them that his coming will be
full of blessing to them in Christ. Godet says, with force, "Would a
forger of this epistle, in the second century, have drawn a picture of
the future so opposite to the way in which things really came to pass?"
These allusions to his future movements are positive proof that this was
written before Paul was a prisoner.

[Romans 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 15:30</span></span>

Now I beseech you, etc. This urgent request of the apostle for his
brethren's prayers, shows a strong confidence in their faith and
devotion. Compare [Rom 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029).

That I may be delivered. Paul knew too well the bitter hostility of the
Jews to him, and that his visit to Jerusalem would be beset with
dangers. He goes there with some forebodings. See [Act
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#022), and [Act
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#013).

And that my service . . . may be accepted of the saints. We learn from
[Act 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#021), that the Jewish brethren
looked with great prejudice on Paul's work among the Gentiles, and that
various rumors were circulated among them.

That I may come, etc. Three things he desires through their prayers: (1)
That he may be delivered from his Jewish enemies; (2) be cordially
received by his Jewish brethren; (3) come unto them with joy by the will
of God. He did come to Rome, submissive to the will of God, but not "in
joy," though no doubt God was with him and "refreshed" him.

Now the God of peace be with you all. Amen. Asking their prayers, it was
but natural that he should ask God to bless them. Compare other
benedictions, in [Co2 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011); [Phi
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#009); [Th1
5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 16](rom016)

</div>
