<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom001)  [Next](rom003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--He who Condemns Others Condemns Himself. God's Judgments
According to Truth; without Respects of Persons or Race. Having the Law
does not Justify without Obedience to the Law. The Jews Condemned by
their own Law. Circumcision Cannot Save. The True Circumcision that of
the Heart.

[Romans 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 2:1</span></span>

Therefore thou art inexcusable. Paul has just shown that the Gentiles
are great sinner, and are without excuse before God ([Rom
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)). The Jew, however, would
pronounce that conclusion just, but would excuse himself. Hence Paul
makes the application to them also.

Whosoever thou art. [Rom 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017) shows
that the Jews are in the apostle's mind. Besides, the Jews, filled with
spiritual pride, were greatly given to judging others.

Another. The Greek says "the other;" the other division of the world,
the Gentiles.

Thou condemnest thyself. Because he practices the very thing he condemns
in others.

The judgment of God is according to truth. According to the facts, to
character. God does not show partiality. All guilty persons are under
condemnation alike, whether Jew or Gentile.

Thinkest thou. It seems to us strange folly for the Jew to regard
Gentile sinners under condemnation, but fancy that he might do the same
things, and yet escape the judgment of God. Still this error is not
confined to the Jews. Many a sinner persuades himself that his own sins,
the very sins he condemns in others, will go unpunished.

Or despisest thou? Dost thou go further still, and not only expect to
escape God's wrath for sin, but dost thou even abuse his love?

The riches. The overflowing abundance.

Long-suffering. Shown in long bearing with the sinner.

Leadeth thee to repentance. The purpose of God's goodness and
forbearance is not to encourage sin, but to appeal to man's better
nature, give him further opportunity, and lead him to repentance.

But. Instead of being led to repentance by God's mercy, the sinner has
abused it with a hard and impenitent heart, and thus has aggravated his
sin.

Treasured up . . . wrath. By continuing in sin he has made his guilt and
condemnation greater.

Against the day of wrath. The day, surely to come, when God's judgments
will be inflicted.

Revelation of the righteous judgment. This will only be fully revealed
at the day of judgment. That day is meant.

Who will render. Sinners escape punishment for a time, and hence think
they will escape altogether, but God will render, at the final day of
judgment, to every man according to his works, whether he be sinner or
saint, Jew or Gentile.

To them. First, the apostle speaks of the reward that shall be given to
those that live holy lives.

By patient continuance. No one can please God who only lives a holy life
at times. The Christian life is not spasmodic. There must be constant
effort, patient perseverance, a constant seeking. [Luk
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#015), in the parable of the sower,
says the good ground represents those "who have the Word, keep it, and
bring forth fruit with patience."

Seek. Future salvation is thus described as an object of pursuit. It is
"glory," because of a glorious life; "honor," because it is a reward.

Immortality. This is rendered by the Revision, "Incorruption;" it is not
subject to decay.

Eternal life. This sums up what God bestows on those who seek glory,
etc., by "a patient continuance in well doing."

But unto them. God rewards the righteous according to their works as
described in [Rom 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007); so also the
wicked, as this verse describes.

Contentious. Who seek their own way, instead of God's way, and contend
against God.

Do not obey the truth. God's law is truth. Sinners fight against God and
"obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness." This verse describes the
character of the wicked. The next verse declares God's judgment upon
them.

Tribulation and anguish. God, the righteous ruler, is displeased and
indignant, and hence sends the sore punishment of "tribulation and
anguish." "One refers to the external weight of affliction; the other to
the inward sense of that weight."

Upon every soul. Upon every evil doer, whether Jew or Gentile.

Of the Jew first. The Jew stood first in opportunity ([Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016)); hence is first in
responsibility.

The Greek. The whole Gentile world is meant, as in [Rom
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#016); the great race whose culture had
spread over the world being taken as the representative of all but the
Jews. The emphatic thought is that the Jew, as well as the Gentile,
shall be rendered unto according to his works.

Glory, honor, peace. The blessed reward of those who work good, in
contrast with him that "worketh evil," is presented in these terms. See
notes on [Rom 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007).

Peace. Full content. He whose cup of blessing is full enjoys peace in
its fullest sense.

There is no respect of persons. Greek, as well as Jew, if he works good,
shall have the same blessed rewards. Compare [Act
10:34-35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#034). God is impartial in the
blessings conferred, as well as in his punishments.

For as many as have sinned without law. As many as shall be found in
sin, at the judgment, without a special revelation of the law of God.
While the Mosaic law is in the mind of the apostle, the statement is
general. The principle is one of universal application. Those have
sinned who have not lived up to their light.

Shall perish without law. They shall be judged and condemned without
reference to the standards of revealed law. Law, in this verse, has no
article in the Greek. When so used it means law in general. When, as
occurs so often in Romans, it has the Greek definite article before it,
the Mosaic law is meant. Observe that the Revision omits the article
(the) in this verse.

As many as have sinned under the law. Under a revelation of God's will.
These shall be judged by it, and condemned for disobedience to its
commands.

For not the hearers of the law. Not the law, but a law, as in the
Revision. The possession of a revelation will not save, but obedience to
it. While a general statement is made, Paul has an eye upon the Jews.
Their law could not make them righteous unless it was obeyed.

Justified. Accounted righteous; not held to be guilty.

When Gentiles, which have no law. No revelation, such as the Jews had.
They had a law of nature ([Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018),
[Rom 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032)).

Do by nature the things of the law. Paul has shown how the general
principle that God "will render to every man according to his works"
applies to the Jews; they will be judged by law, and only law-doers will
be justified. He now shows that the same principle applies to the
Gentiles. They have no revealed and written law like the Jews, but in
case Gentiles, without it, should keep the things contained in the law,
the moral principles of the law of Moses, they are a law unto
themselves. Their consciences and moral sense are a law. The apostle
does not say that this was the rule among the Gentiles, but applies the
principle to the very rare instances of Gentiles of pure character.

Which shew. Such Gentiles, not having the law, are a law to themselves,
for they show forth in their lives that the essential principles of the
law are written in their hearts. Not only do their outward acts testify,
but their consciences, which condemn or approve their own acts, or those
of others. That is, their consciences testify as to distinctions between
right and wrong. They have a moral sense.

In the day. These principles of judgment shall prevail in the day when
God shall judge the world.

The secrets of men. Men's lives are often hidden from their fellow-men,
but at the judgment every secret shall be made manifest. He now adds
that this judgment, which all are ready to admit, will be through Jesus
Christ. He shall be the Judge; and it will be according to the gospel
which Paul preached. The gospel will save or condemn men. By the words
of Christ shall men be judged.

[Romans 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 2:17</span></span>

Behold, thou art called a Jew. Already, in the argument of Rom. 2:1-16,
Paul has shown that all men, Jew or Gentile, will be judged according to
their deeds, whether they have the law or not. Now he applies the
argument directly to the Jew, in order to show his need of the gospel as
well as the Gentile. [Rom 2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017)
state what the Jew claimed for himself.

Called a Jew. To him the word "Jew" had a meaning much like "Christian"
to us. It meant to him one of God's people.

Rested upon law. There is no article before law in the Greek. The Jew
had law, in this case the law, for his foundation.

Makest thy boast of God. Boasted of God's favor to his race.

Knowest his will. As revealed in the Old Testament Scriptures in the
hands of the Jews.

Approvest the things that are more excellent. Instructed in the law, the
Jew approved by word its excellent moral principles.

A guide to the blind. It was God's purpose that in choosing Israel the
Israelites should become teachers of the truth; but their sin was that
while they boasted of this privilege they failed to do their duty. Such
a boast as this was current among the Jews of Paul's time. He heaps
phrase on phrase to exalt their claims, in order to show in what follows
how far short their lives fell of their professions.

Which hast the form of knowledge. In the law they had the form, the
pattern, of knowledge and of the truth. The truth in its fulness came
with Jesus Christ ([Joh 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017)), but the
law was the pattern, the typical form, of this truth.

Thou therefore who teachest another. Having just described the proud
claims of the Jews, he next inquires how their practice corresponds. He
who teaches others how to live, does he teach himself how to live?

Dost thou steal? Some of the essential principles of the law which the
Jews supposed to teach to others. The decalogue forbade stealing, but
the Jews were already proverbial for their tricky methods of trade.

Commit adultery. In spite of the strictness of their decalogue and moral
code, the lax divorce practices of the Jews permitted adultery ([Mat
19:8-9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008)), and the Talmud says that some
of the most celebrated rabbis were guilty of the same sin. See also John
4.

Thou that abhorrest idols. The question that follows has caused much
discussion. The best rendering is, Dost thou rob temples? or, Are you a
temple robber? Schaff suggests that the meaning is as follows: "Dost
thou abhor idols, according to thy law, and yet engage in traffic
whereby thou makest gain off the temples where this idol worship is
practiced?" Macknight says that the reference is to robbing the temple
at Jerusalem of what was due it. I think not. The apostles refers to
practices which dishonor God among the Gentiles.

Dishonorest thou God? The first part of this verse is a summary of the
claims of the Jews as given in [Rom
2:17-20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017); the last part is a decisive
answer, in an interrogative form, of the four reproachful questions just
asked. Through the whole passage privilege and practice are contrasted.

For the name of God. The name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles on
account of the vices of the Jews. They make the religion which God has
revealed contemptible among the heathen. They judged their religion by
the scandalous conduct. Outsiders always judge a religion by the conduct
of its votaries.

As it is written. In [Isa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005) is
found the passage to which Paul refers.

[Romans 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 2:25</span></span>

For circumcision verily profiteth. The Jew was wont to fall back on his
circumcision, as some still do on some outward ordinance. His answer to
Paul is, Are we not the circumcised? Are not the circumcised the people
of the covenant? He replied, "I admit that circumcision availeth, if one
keeps law. The outward observance profits if one be a law-doer; that is,
complies with its moral commandments. But if he fails to do this, his
circumcision is as worthless as though he was uncircumcised." The effect
of habitual transgression is to annul the covenant.

The converse of this is also true. If the Jewish law-breaker can annul
his circumcision thus, then if the uncircumcision (the Gentiles) keep
the righteousness of the law, his uncircumcised state will not be
counted against him. He supposes the possible case of a Gentile who
might render such an obedience to the moral precepts of the law as a
pious Jews could render, and argues that his uncircumcision would not
make his obedience less acceptable. Circumcision is not, then, the thing
that the Gentile needs, but righteousness. The disobedient Jew virtually
becomes a Gentile, and the obedient Gentile virtually becomes a Jew.

Uncircumcision which is by nature. The Gentiles, who are of
uncircumcised races. If such an one keeps the essential principles of
the law, his obedience is a rebuke to the Jewish transgressor who has
covenanted to keep the law.

For he is not a Jew. He is not a Jew, in the religious sense of one of
God's chosen people, who is one outwardly alone.

Neither is that circumcision, the true circumcision, that which makes
one a member of God's covenanted church, "which is outward in the
flesh."

But he is a Jew, such a Jew as just described, who is one inwardly,
whose heart is given to God; and circumcision is that of the heart.
Circumcision of the heart is a figurative expression for inward purity,
as old as the book of Deuteronomy. See [Deu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016), and [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006); also [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026). This circumcision is not an
outward mark in the flesh of the body, but is in the spirit. The spirit
of man is under the influence of the Spirit.

Not in the letter. Not literal.

Whose praise is not of men. The Jew, as we have seen, made his boasts,
and praised his privileges, but though the true Jew, such as Paul
describes, shall be ill-spoken of by men, but shall have praise of God.
The whole section shows that religious privileges, resulting from birth,
the revelation of God's will, ritual observances and knowledge, increase
the guilt of those whose morality does not correspond. The Jews,
especially the Pharisees, were very eager for the praise of men, but the
true Jew, the real child of Abraham's by faith, will have what is
infinitely better, the praise of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 3](rom003)

</div>
