<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom006)  [Next](rom008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 7:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Death Releases from the Power of the Law. This Illustrated by
Marriage. But We are Dead to the Law. It Slew Christ and We Have Died
with Him. We are also Dead to Sin. While the Law Reveals Sin It is Holy.
The Struggle of the Carnal Nature Under the Law. The Deliverance Through
Jesus Christ.

[Romans 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 7:1</span></span>

I speak to them who know the law. Not the law, but law; know the powers
of law. The argument of the Jews was that the law of Moses was of
perpetual obligation, but they knew that death released a man from its
power. It reigned only over the living.

For the woman who hath an husband. This principle of law is shown from
the marriage relation. Death severs it, and after it the marriage
covenant is not binding. A woman can marry again without committing
adultery.

Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are dead to the law. This principle,
under the figure of marriage, is applied to those church members who
were once under the law of Moses. They were then related to it as a wife
to a husband. But in chapter 6 it has been shown that all disciples of
Christ had died, been buried, and risen with him ([Rom
7:2-5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002)); hence, having died, they had
been released from the law. As new creatures, they could, as those freed
from the marriage to law, be espoused to another, even Christ.
Christians are so united to Christ, living by vital union with him,
being found in him, that whatever was done to him is said to have been
done to them in his person, or through his body. The church is
spiritually the Body of Christ.

[Romans 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 7:5</span></span>

For when in the flesh. When we were in an unconverted condition, under
the influence of our carnal nature. The insufficiency of law to deliver
us from its power is now shown.

The motions of sins. The sinful passions.

Which were by the law. How the law set in motion these sinful passions
is set forth in [Rom 7:7-8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007). See notes
on them.

Did work in our members. Seized the control of our bodily organs, and
thus made us so sin as to be subject to the penalty of death. See [Rom
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#021); also [Jam
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#015).

But now we have been delivered from the law. By death. Having died in
Christ ([Rom 6:2-4](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#002)), we are released
from the dominion of the law. See [Rom
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#001).

So that we should serve in the newness of the spirit. This service of
Christ is the new service of those living new lives. It is a spiritual
service: "God must be worshiped in spirit and truth." God's law under
the new covenant is "written in the hearts" ([Heb
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010)); hence it is not a bondage, but
a free, willing service.

[Romans 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 7:7</span></span>

Is the law sin? In [Rom 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#005) Paul
intimates that the law was the occasion of sin. Does he mean that the
law in itself sinful? This thought he indignantly repels.

Nay, I had not known sin, but by the law. The restraints of the law
brought to his knowledge his own sinful nature. Paul describes his own
experiences when seeking the righteousness of the law, and thus
describes those of human nature. The experiences here given are his own,
but what he says is applicable to all men. The experiences are those of
Saul of Tarsus; not those of Paul the apostle.

For I had not known lust. Greedy desire for the possessions of others.
All evil desire is embraced.

But sin, taking occasion by the commandment. Strange a psychological
fact as it is, it is nevertheless true that to the carnal nature what is
forbidden seems especially desirable. Adam and Eve would hardly have
desired the forbidden fruit had it not been forbidden. When sinful men's
freedom is limited, he rages against the limitation. One of the agnostic
Ingersoll's pleas against the Divine government is that it is a
limitation of freedom.

Concupisence. Evil desire.

For apart from the law sin is dead. Apart from law. There is no article
before law. If there was no law to be broken, sin would be quiescent,
and would be lifeless. The restraint of law makes it spring into
vigorous life. Our carnal nature rebels whenever it is restrained.

For I was alive once without the law. Without law. It would be much
better if the translators would omit the article where Paul did not use
it. Paul was alive, that is, was unconscious of condemnation, once. His
conscience did not trouble him. He was like the young Ruler who said of
the commandments: "All these have I kept from my youth up." "As touching
the righteousness which is of the law, he was "blameless" ([Phi
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#006)).

But when the commandment came, when he realized that it required a heart
service as well as an outward service, then sin revived. The dormant sin
was brought to light when restraints came.

I died. Realized that I was a sinner; was convicted of sin. It is
possible that reference is made to some supreme struggle. Perhaps in the
stern persecution of the saints he was struggling for the righteousness
of the law. Perhaps it was when Christ said, "I am Jesus of Nazareth,
whom thou persecutest," that he first realized that "Christ was the end
of the law," and he died.

And the commandment, which was ordained unto life. The commandments had
a promise of Life. "The man which doeth those things shall live by them"
([Rom 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005)).

I found to be unto death. When he found that, instead of keeping the
commandments, he had broken them, he realized he was under condemnation.

For sin, taking occasion by the commandment, deceived me. Sin is always
a deceiver, however. I cannot explain this save by referring it to a
period of life when he was self-deceived, and sinned, thinking he was
doing God service. It exactly describes the persecuting Saul of Tarsus.
Sin deceived him. When he found he was deceived, it slew him. He was
convicted before God.

Wherefore the law is holy. The law is holy; it occasions sin only
because our carnal nature rebels against its holy restraints.

[Romans 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 7:13</span></span>

Was that then which is good made death to me? He has just shown that the
law, even though it occasions sin, is just and good. He also showed that
through it sin slew him. Is the law death? Nay, far from it. It is sin,
not the law, that is the source of death. Sin is so exceedingly sinful,
that it seizes upon the law, that which is holy, and just, and good, to
work death. It stirs up the carnal nature to rebel against the law, to
break it, and hence, to pass under the condemnation of death. Thus the
commandment shows forth sin as exceeding sinful.

[Romans 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 7:14</span></span>

For we know that the law is spiritual. The apostle continues still
further to show that, not the law, but sin is the source of death. The
law is "spiritual," that is, is divine and adapted to our spiritual
nature. While there were "carnal ordinances," its essential principles
were spiritual.

I am carnal. Paul describes his condition while under the law. It was
spiritual; but he was carnal, and hence, there was a conflict.

Sold under sin. Hence, in a state of slavery. Though Paul uses the
present tense, in order to make the description more vivid, he describes
his condition before he became a Christian.

If then I do. Rather, "But if I do." If he sins, against his purpose and
inclination, he condemns his sin, and thus acknowledges the law, which
he disobeyed, to be just and good.

Now then it is no more I. Not Paul as a freeman who sins, but Paul as
the bond-servant of sin (see [Rom
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#015)), and hence it is sin who reigns
over him, who sins in him, as the instrument. He describes the sinful
state as one of bondage. How often a man does what he "would not!" For I
know that in me, that is, in my flesh. In his unregenerated human
nature. In this dwells no good thing. The tendency of the carnal nature
of man is evil. Its conflict with the will and conscience is now
described.

To will is present with me. Who has not had the same experience? How
often we resolve to do better, and break out resolves as soon as
temptation comes!

The good that I would I do not. This verse proves the statement of the
last one. It is the strongest expression of sinfulness yet made. What
could better demonstrate the bondage to sin? Yet how true to human
experience!

But if what I would not, etc. This experience sustains [Rom
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#017), and shows that sin had
predominated over human nature and rules it. Sin controls, rather than
good intentions. A man wills one thing and does another.

I find then a law. It is then the law of our unregenerate state that,
even if we would do good, and purpose to be better, evil will be
present, and will be practiced.

For I delight in the law of God. The inner man, the better nature, our
spiritual being, approves of and delights in the law of God. This is the
part of our being that "wills to do good," spoken of in [Rom
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#021), but is overcome by evil.

But I see another law in my members. One law of our being is the
approval of righteousness; another is the inclination of the flesh to do
evil. This law wars against the law of the mind, the conscience and
will, and brings it into captivity. It prevails. Hence, unregenerate man
is a captive. There is a struggle in the nature of man; of the "inward
man," with the flesh, with the result of captivity of the soul.

[Romans 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 7:24</span></span>

O wretched man that I am! Wretched because he has no power in himself of
deliverance.

Who shall deliver me from this body of death? He is a captive, a captive
to the body, the members of which are controlled by sin. Hence, he is a
helpless slave of sin, and as such is under the condemnation of death.
The body, the seat of the fleshly desires, has become "a body of death,"
since it is controlled by sin. Who shall deliver him from its power? In
[Rom 7:14-24](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#014) Paul has described the
bondage of the will to the flesh which is the condition of the natural
man, and closes with the cry for deliverance.

I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Through him the deliverance
comes.

So then with the mind I myself. I myself, that is, by myself and without
Christ. In that state of mind delights in the law of God ([Rom
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#022)), but the flesh is devoted to the
service of sin. Hence the struggle, the captivity, the bondage, the cry
for deliverance. Hence the failure of the law to deliver, and the need
of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 8](rom008)

</div>
