<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](col004)  [Next](th1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE THESSALONIANS.

This epistle bears the distinction of being the first in the order of
time of the letters written by the Apostle Paul which have been
preserved. Indeed it is the earliest of any of the epistolary Books of
the New Testament, the beginning of that body of writing to which the
churches are so much indebted. It was written at least five or six years
before the great doctrinal and ecclesiastical treatises known as the
Roman, Galatian, and the Corinthian Letters, and with the Second Letter
to the Thessalonians which followed it by only a few months, it shares
the distinction of being the only epistles that came into existence
before the beginning of Paul's third great Missionary journey. These
epistles, so long antedating the others, differ also from them in
character. Written only a short time after the church at Thessalonica
was founded, and called forth by the trials and needs of a young
congregation which he felt it in his heart to visit again, but was
prevented, they illustrate the apostolic instruction given to a newly
organized church, composed of Gentiles, suffering under the persecution
of both Jewish and heathen adversaries. They are fresh in allusion to
the experiences of Paul while among them, and reveal his deep solicitude
when forced away.

When the apostle, on his third missionary journey, passed into Europe,
he first planted a church at Philippi, but after a little season was
driven from there by heathen persecution. Then, attended by Silas and
Timothy, he went westward along the great Egnatian Way, the Roman road
which led through Greece to Macedonia. He did not pause until he reached
Thessalonica, nearly a hundred miles westward, the chief city of
Macedonia, situated around a noble harbor at the head of the Aegean Sea.
Its situation on the great Roman thoroughfare, its position on the
extremity of the sea, and the rich country in its rear, had contributed
to make it a great commercial city, with a mixed population of Greeks,
Romans and Jews, the first being the most numerous. Here, where there
was a synagogue, the apostle paused, found employment to meet his frugal
wants, and began to preach among his own countrymen. "And some of them
believed, and consorted with Paul and Silas; and of the devout Greeks a
great multitude, and of the chief women not a few."

But soon after the unbelieving Jews stirred up an uproar which made it
necessary for Paul and Silas to leave, and the brethren sent them away
by night. Going from thence to Berea to the southwest, they first
labored there, and later the apostolic labors were extended to Athens
and to Corinth. Shortly after Paul's departure from Thessalonica, the
persecutions which had driven him away turned upon the church ([Th1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#014); [Th1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003)), a circumstance that made him
yearn to return ([Th1 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005) ). Twice he
resolved to do so but was prevented ([Th1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#018)). Finally he sent back Timothy
from Athens ([Th1 3:1-2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)), and when
Timothy returned to him at Corinth, to which he had proceeded, the
message which he brought was the occasion of this epistle, an epistle
full of comfort, instruction and encouragement, but withal, containing
also the instruction in righteousness so much needed by a congregation
of those so recently heathen and addicted to heathen vices.

It is interesting to know that this church, honored with the first of
the apostolic epistles, long continued to enjoy a glorious history. It
was afterwards visited by the apostle more than once; and is often
mentioned in the history of the church. Though for more than four
hundred years under the sway of the Turk, the majority of its population
has always continued to profess the religion of Christ. The city is
still great and flourishing, in point of commerce the third in the
Turkish empire, possessing a population estimated all the way from
75,000 to 100,000. Of these about one-half are Greek Christians, and the
remainder nearly equally divided between Mohammedans and Jews. The
excellence of the harbor makes it a constant object of eastern
diplomacy, and at this time one of the obstacles in the way of settling
the "Eastern Question" is to determine what power shall be awarded
Thessalonica.

As to the date of the epistle, it can be nearly determined. About A. D.
52, the church here was planted. From thence the apostle went to Berea
and Athens. From the latter, probably several months after leaving
Thessalonica, he sent Timothy back. Several months more would intervene
before Timothy could return at Corinth. It is therefore probable that
the letter was written in A. D. 53, perhaps at least a year after the
planting of the church. It was not written at Athens, as an unauthorized
addition in the Common Version states.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 1](th1001)

</div>
