<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2000)  [Next](th2002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

SUMMARY.--Salutation. Patient Waiting Under Tribulation. The Revelation
of Christ for Judgment. The Punishment of the Disobedient.

[2 Thessalonians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 1:1</span></span>

Paul, Silvanus and Timotheus. See note on [Th1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001). The first two verses are nearly
identical.

[2 Thessalonians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 1:3</span></span>

We are bound to thank God. In [Th1
3:9-13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#009), he states that he prayed
ceaselessly for the Thessalonians. Here he points out how his prayers
were answered. The messenger who had returned to him told him many
things concerning the church which filled him with thankfulness. One of
these was that their faith groweth exceedingly. Though persecuted, their
faith did not fail, but became stronger. And with their faith their love
. . . toward each other also abounded.

So that we glory. On account of these things he spoke their praises in
the churches, those of Achaia, where he then was. It is always a
stimulus to report to the churches the good work elsewhere, Churches of
God. A designation given by the apostles to the churches oftener than
any other, though also spoken of as churches of Christ.

Your patience. There was a patient endurance of trial for Christ.

A manifest token of the righteous judgment. Your sufferings are a proof
of judgment to come. The wicked are not receiving their deserts; the
righteous are suffering. A future judgment, hence, must come, because
God is righteous.

That ye may be counted worthy. Their sufferings not only proved a
judgment to come, but tried them, purified them, and prove them worthy.

[2 Thessalonians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 1:6</span></span>

Seeing it is a righteous thing. Your trials prove a coming judgment,
because it is a righteous thing for God to punish those who trouble you.
They must be requited for their wrongs.

And not only that, but it is a righteous thing that he give to you who
are troubled rest. That rest would come when there would be no
persecutors, no stripes, no stonings, no prisons. It shall be when the
Lord Jesus shall be revealed. At the Lord's coming. Compare [Mat
24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030).

In flaming fire. The flaming fire denotes brightness, glory, purity, and
also destruction to adversaries. Dazzling brightness is always
associated with his coming. God was revealed at Sinai in flaming fire
([Exo 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#002); [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018)).

Them that know not God. Know him not because they refuse to know him.
See [Rom 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028).

And obey not. This class refuse to accept and obey the gospel. Their day
of grace will end with the day of the Lord.

Who shall be punished. Those who obey not the gospel shall be punished.
The punishment is eternal destruction. This does not mean annihilation,
but an eternal banishment from the presence of the Lord. In [Mat
25:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#041), the doom of the wicked is,
"Depart from me." The saints are "ever with the Lord;" the wicked are
driven forever from his presence.

When he shall come. These final judgments shall be when he comes to be
glorified in his saints. The saints risen, glorious, rejoicing in
salvation, shall be a glory of the Lord.

Admired in all them that believe. All believers will look upon him with
wonder and admiration.

[2 Thessalonians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 1:11</span></span>

Wherefore we pray always. In view of this glorious judgment, he prays
that they may stand and be counted worthy.

Of this calling. The Christian calling.

Fulfill all the good pleasure of his goodness. The idea is "Perfect in
you the love of goodness and the work of faith."

That the name of our Lord . . . glorified. Holy lives glorify the Lord.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](th2002)

</div>
