<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Thessalonians Index](th2)  
  [Previous](th2001)  [Next](th2003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Thessalonians Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)

[2 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th2 2:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--Not to Be Troubled Supposing the Day of the Lord at Hand. An
Apostasy Must First Come. Then the Revelation of the Man of Sin. The
Wicked One Destroyed at the Lord's Coming. Exhortation to Stand Fast.

[2 Thessalonians 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th2 2:1</span></span>

By the coming. Rather, concerning the coming. His importunity is
respecting this and "the gathering of the saints."

That ye be not soon shaken in mind. Be not agitated, or in distress
(troubled).

Neither by spirit. By some one who says he has a revelation of the
Spirit.

Nor by word. Nor by one who claims to quote a word or letter from us. It
is thought that a forged letter had been circulated to which Paul
alludes. In the close of this Epistle he shows how his letters may be
known to be genuine. Some suppose, however, that by "letter" he refers
to an incorrect interpretation which was placed on his first letter.

[2 Thessalonians 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th2 2:3</span></span>

Except there come a falling away first. An apostasy must precede the
Coming. That is, there shall be a general falling away from the purity
of the faith. No apostasy of magnitude occurred in the history of the
church for centuries, which could answer to Paul's description, but the
gradual declension, corruption, and departure from the ancient faith,
which was fully developed a few hundred years later, has always been
spoken of by Protestant church historians as The Apostasy. There is no
good reason for doubting that it is to the apostle refers.

And that man of sin be revealed. He shall be revealed then in connection
with the apostasy.

The son of perdition. This expression occurs once elsewhere, and is
there applied to Judas, an apostate. Here it evidently has a similar
application. Some power, once Christian, falls away and becomes opposed
to Christ.

[2 Thessalonians 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th2 2:4</span></span>

Who opposeth and exalteth himself. I shall endeavor in a few words to
identify this power. Various explanations have been given, but there is
only one power that exhibits all the marks given by Paul. Observe these:
(1) The man of sin exalts himself above God. (2) He sits in the temple,
that is, in the church, for that is always the sense in which Paul uses
the term. He is a church power. (3) He claims powers that only belong to
divinity. (4) He shows off signs and lying wonders ([Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)); or, in other words, lays a claim
to miraculous powers. Every one of these marks applies to the papacy:
(1) Its development was simultaneous with that of the apostasy. (2) Its
development was let (hindered) until the pagan Roman empire fell, but
was rapid after it was taken out of the way ([Th2
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#007)). (3) The papacy has set aside
divine laws and has made other spiritual laws to bind men, and has
claimed divine prerogatives. A newly-elected Pope is adored and styled
"Lord God, the Pope." (4) It is in the temple of God, that is, it arose
in the church, and still claims to be the "Holy Catholic Church." (5)
The claim of Infallibility is "sitting as God in the temple." (6) The
papacy has always claimed miraculous powers, and it is a fact well known
that it has often worked off lying wonders ([Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009)). No fact is better established
than that the hierarchy of the church have often deceived by false
miracles. Indeed, these have often been detected and explained.

[2 Thessalonians 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th2 2:6</span></span>

Ye know now what withholdeth. They knew because Paul had told them when
with them. We have not that advantage, but I believe that he told them
that this development could not take place until pagan imperial Rome
fell. We know that it did withhold, or prevent it.

For the mystery of iniquity. This revelation of the man of sin. It was a
mystery, that is, something yet hidden.

Doth already work. Causes are beginning to work which will lead to it.

Only he who now letteth. He that hindereth must first be taken out of
the way. There was no room for an arrogant spiritual power in Rome as
long as imperial Rome continued to persecute the church. A persecuted
church cannot be a haughty church. Two things were needful before the
papal power could be developed; viz., the overthrow of paganism, and the
removal of the capital of the Empire from Rome. When these things were
done, it was free to seize the old Roman scepter.

Then shall that Wicked be revealed. After the hindering power is
removed.

Whom the Lord shall consume. The Wicked power will be destroyed by the
Lord's coming, and will continue to exist, possibly, until that event.

Whose coming. That of the Wicked power.

Is after the working of Satan. That is, it will deceive men as Satan
does.

Lying wonders. False miracles.

Deceivableness of unrighteousness. Unrighteous delusions which will be
accepted by its votaries, them that perish. Those that perish, receive
not the love of the truth. They have a disinclination to receive it.

[2 Thessalonians 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th2 2:11</span></span>

For this cause God shall send them strong delusion. Because they do not
receive the truth. He who refuses to receive the truth will at last
believe lies. It is the law of human nature. God sends the delusion by
natural laws.

Be damned. Because "they had pleasure in unrighteousness."

[2 Thessalonians 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th2 2:13</span></span>

Chosen you to salvation. In contrast with those who fall victims to the
man of sin, the Thessalonian Christians had been chosen to life.

From the beginning. From the beginning God had determined on the
salvation of the Gentiles, and arranged the plans by which they were
saved. See notes on Romans, chapter 9, for a full discussion of this
subject.

Through sanctification of the Spirit. This clause tells how God chose
them to salvation. To this there are two sides, the human and the
divine. On the human side they believed the truth. On the divine side,
God sanctified them by the Spirit. He had chosen from the beginning all
that believe and accept the truth.

Whereunto he called you. See how God calls! It is by the gospel.

Therefore, stand fast. In view of your calling.

Hold the traditions. Instructions.

Everlasting consolation. God's consolations are eternal in their
effects.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Chapter 3](th2003)

</div>
