<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](th2003)  [Next](ti1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO THE FIRST EPISTLE TO TIMOTHY.

Four of the epistles of Paul are addressed to persons; one, that of
Philemon, on personal matters; the other three to evangelists who had
long labored under his directions, and who were charged at the time they
were written with responsible trusts in which they needed his
instructions. From the circumstance that Timothy and Titus were each
exercising the care of the churches of a district these have been called
the Pastoral Epistles. Yet the words Shepherd or Pastor, flock, and feed
do not occur in them, as they do in [Joh
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#016); [Act
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028); [Eph
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#011); [Pe1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#002), but at the same time the duties
implied in those relations are strongly urged. They deal more intimately
with church organization and church culture, than any of the other
epistles.

If the generally accepted view of the date of these three epistles is
received they have the common feature of belonging to the closing years
of the apostle's life. The epistles of Ephesians, Philippians,
Colossians and Philemon, are the epistles of the captivity. On the
hypothesis of Paul's release from the first imprisonment at Rome, in
accordance with the universal statement of the early church, these
epistles are held to have been written after his release, and after he
had once more made a tour of the churches which he planted in Asia and
Europe. Conybeare and Howson assign First Timothy to the date of A. D.
67. Certain allusions in these epistles can only be explained by
assigning them a date as late as this. The apostle had, after a circuit
of the churches of Asia Minor, come into Macedonia, and from thence sent
back to Timothy, who had been left in charge of the work in the city and
district of Ephesus, instructions and admonitions which would be of
service to him in his duties. Well aware of the difficulties he would
meet at Ephesus, of the factious spirit of certain false teachers, the
epistle is written not only to show him how he ought to act, but in
order to support him by its authority. It was probably written a little
more than a year before the apostle's martyrdom at Rome.

Timothy, to whom it is directed, was his own "son in the gospel." From
the Acts and the Epistles the outlines of his history are easily
gathered. He was born in the Asiatic district of Lycaonia. His father
was a Greek but his mother a Jewess. From his infancy he was instructed
by his mother and grandmother, who names have been preserved, in the
Hebrew scriptures, but had remained, probably at the demand of his
father, uncircumcised. Converted by Paul, showing good gifts among the
Lycaonian churches, Paul determined to make him a traveling assistant,
and as it would aid much in enabling him to reach Jews, he had him
circumcised. Indeed a Mamzer, a "bastard," as a child of a Jewish mother
and heathen father was called by the Jews, would have had no access to
the synagogue without circumcision.

From this time the allusions to Timothy in connection with Paul's work
are so frequent that, did space permit, we could easily trace his
course. Finally, we find him attending Paul to Jerusalem on the occasion
when Paul was made a captive. During the imprisonment at CÃ&brvbr;sarea
he was probably absent, sent to the churches by Paul, but after the
arrival at Rome, as we learn from "the Epistles of the Captivity," he
again joined him. He had probably attended him on his last tour of the
churches of Asia, was left behind at Ephesus, was there the recipient of
two letters, which are the last allusions to him in the New Testament,
unless he be "the angel of the church of Ephesus" named in [Rev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001), as some have supposed.

The genuineness of the Pastoral epistles was never questioned in the
primitive church. They are the oldest translation of the New Testament,
the Peshito, which belongs to the second century, are in the oldest
canon of the New Testament books, the Muratori, which is assigned to the
date of A. D. 170, are quoted by several of the Fathers of the Second
Century, and are declared by Eusebius in his church history to be
"universally received." Some objections have been raised to them by
certain rationalistic German critics, such as Baur, but these objections
have been fully answered. The space that our plan allows us will not
permit me to consider these, further than to say that if they differ
somewhat from the keen logic of Paul's earlier letters that is easily
accounted for by the fact that they are personal, and are addressed to
the most intimate of personal friends, to whom he writes in unreserved
freedom and with the tenderest affection. The style of every writer
differs according to the subjects treated and the persons addressed.

It only remains to be added that nothing has ever been written which
contains, in the same space, so much that is indispensable to the
preacher, the pastor, and to every church official. These classes may
consider themselves especially addressed in the persons of Timothy and
Titus, and they should study and reflect upon these letters until every
charge, every truth and every admonition is written upon their hearts.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 1](ti1001)

</div>
