<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Timothy Index](ti2)  
  [Previous](ti2002)  [Next](ti2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*The People's New Testament*, B.W. Johnson, \[1891\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Timothy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

[2 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti2 3:0</span></span>

SUMMARY.--False Teachers Predicted. Enemies of the Truth Described.
Paul's Life Known to Timothy. His Example Commended. The Holy
Scriptures.

[2 Timothy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti2 3:1</span></span>

In the last days. In the last ages of the world. The expression is often
used of the gospel dispensation.

Perilous times. Grievous, times of distress.

For men shall be. Some of the characteristics of men in that period are
given. Such men probably exist in all ages, but at the time referred to
by Paul they shall be in the predominance.

Lovers of their own selves. Selfish.

Truce-breakers. "Implacable," in Revision. Those who will not make or
keep peace.

Heady. Headstrong.

Lovers of pleasures. Lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God.

Having a form of godliness. This implies that the persons described
professed to be religious, worshipers of God in outward form. A godless
church is described.

Denying the power. Rejecting its power. Their lives are not moulded by
it.

From such turn away. This implies that some of this formal, godless
religion had begun to show itself even at that time.

[2 Timothy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti2 3:6</span></span>

This sort are they. Men of this sort are they who form a party by
creeping into houses and by their seductive influences lead silly women
captive. Not the sensible, pious women, but silly women already laden
with sins. Hence, easily led away.

Ever learning. Listening with greedy ears to every one that comes along,
but never learning anything.

[2 Timothy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti2 3:8</span></span>

As Jannes and Jambres. These were the traditional names of the Egyptian
magicians who opposed Moses. See [Exo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011). Paul adopts these names in
referring to them. As these opposed Moses, so do the false teachers just
described oppose the truth. These names are found in a Jewish Targum on
[Exo 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#011), and [Exo
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011).

Reprobate. Have abandoned the faith.

They shall proceed no further. They shall be exposed, and their folly
revealed to prevent them from further success. As Jannes and Jambres
could not stand before Moses, these men shall fail before the truth.

[2 Timothy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti2 3:10</span></span>

Thou didst follow my teaching (Revision). Timothy had known his teaching
and manner of life, and followed it.

Persecutions . . . at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra. See Acts, chapters
13, 14. These persecutions befell Paul in the part of Asia where Timothy
was reared, and hence he would be familiar with all.

Out of them all the Lord delivered me. Hence, let Timothy cheerfully
suffer, if need be, and trust the Lord.

All that will live godly. In that age persecution was inseparable from a
devoted Christian life. The same has been true, to a certain extent, in
all ages. If the church was less worldly it would be more persecuted.

Evil men and seducers. The men who hate the church shall become worse
and worse.

Seducers. Enchanters, men who lead astray.

[2 Timothy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti2 3:14</span></span>

Continue thou. Refusing to heed the evil men, continue in the truth.

Knowing of whom thou hast learned them. Of pious parents first, but more
especially of Paul.

And that from a child. Taught by his grandmother, Lois, and his mother,
Eunice, he had learned to know the Scriptures from childhood.

Holy Scriptures. The Books given by inspiration. The Jewish Scriptures
are primarily meant, but a part of the New Testament was already
written.

Make thee wise. Give thee the wisdom that leads to salvation. If the Old
Testament could make him wise, how much more the New!

Through faith which is in Christ Jesus. This is essential. Unless the
Scriptures lead to Christ, there is no salvation.

All Scripture. The Revision is much better. "Every Scripture inspired of
God is also profitable," etc. Whether it is, depends on its inspiration.
For instance, the Apocrypha is called Scripture, but is not inspired.

For doctrine. For teaching.

That the man of God. The preacher. See [Ti1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#011); [Kg1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001); [Kg2
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#006).

May be perfect. Fully fitted for his work. The sense is "complete."

Thoroughly furnished. Fully equipped. If he is master of the Holy
Scriptures, he is so equipped. If this was true when Paul wrote, with
only a part of the New Testament written, with what emphasis may it be
said now when we have both the Old and New Testaments in full!

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Timothy Chapter 4](ti2004)

</div>
