<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index.md)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ms202)  [Next](ms204.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Magic Songs of the West Finns, Vol. 2*, by John Abercromby, \[1898\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span> <span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

###### THE MAGIC SONGS OF THE FINNS

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span> <span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

# THE MAGIC SONGS OF THE FINNS

#### § 1. PRELIMINARY.

##### a

How at such time is one to speak, and how should one interrogate when a
time of danger is at hand, a day of jeopardy impends? Already I, poor,
wretched lad, have met with some embarrassment, with toilsome tasks,
with a very difficult work, (when summoned) to eject attacks of
sickness, to relieve from pain, to banish ailments wrought by spells,
and overcome the enemy. Now they have need of me, they need me, and
require that I divine an origin profound, and a great injury remove.
Shall I begin, make venture now, shall I catch hold, shall I make bold
to grip with hands a pestilence, to attack a devil (Perkele) with my
hands, to give a hideous one a squeeze, and trample a gigantic one? I
cannot anything effect without, maybe, the grace of God, without the
true Creator's aid. May the Creator help bestow, O may the Lord
assistance give, may God accord his aid to me after receiving my request
and after he has touched my hand. May Jesus’ fluent mouth into my mouth
transform itself; may the ready tongue of Jesus turn into mine; may
Jesus’ pliant fingers into my fingers fit themselves. Where my words
cannot reach let God's word reach; where my hands cannot pass let God's

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

hands enter in; there where my fingers will not serve let the Creator's
fingers serve; and where I can't breathe in a breath may the Lord
breathe in a breath instead.

##### b

If haply I 'm not man enough I'll send a better one than I; I'll raise
the earth-matrons from the earth, the mounted heroes from the sand, to
strengthen me, to give me force, to shelter me, to give support in this
extremely toilsome work in a time of sore distress. If haply I am not
the man, if Ukko's son is not the man, from a damp dell let men arise,
men of the sword from out the mire, glaive-men from out a sandy heath
and horsemen from beneath the sand, that in the earth have lain for
long, that in the ooze have long reposed, to help a well-beloved son, to
be a famous fellow's mate.

##### c

If haply I am not the man, if Ukko's son is not the man, cannot effect
deliverance, nor of this bogie (*riena*) riddance make, Louhi! mistress
of Pohjola, come to effect deliverance and of this bogie riddance make.
If haply I am not the man, if Ukko's son is not the man, O Päivätär,
thou doughty maid, come to effect deliverance, to remove these plagues,
to release from spell-wrought woes. If haply I am not the man, if Ukko's
son is not the man, old mother Kave, Nature's daughter, O beautiful and
darling Kave, come to effect deliverance, to banish sickness wrought by
magic, to free from evils brought by curses. If haply I am not the man,
if Ukko's son is not the man, O Hiisi, come from Hiitola, thou humpback!
from the home of gods to cast out that which needs must be cast out and
cause the monster's death.

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

##### d

I that am one of little strength, a full-grown man weak-spirited, shall
blow a horn towards the sky, shall through a cloud-rift sound a pipe;
I'll shout a cry of dire distress, send forth an agonising cry through
earth, through Manala, through the level sky, its gates will burst apart
whence favours issue forth. A thousand friends will then arrive, a
hundred warriors of the Lord, from the heavens up above, from earth's
foundations down below, to strengthen me, the feeble man, to give the
weak man manliness in these exceeding toilsome tasks, in these affairs
that have no end.

#### § 2. DEFENSIVE MEASURES.

##### a

O where shall I, a powerless man, defend myself, protect myself? There
I, a powerless man, defend myself, protect myself, at the open door
beneath the shelf, beside the door-post of the hut, at the yard entrance
to the lane, at the last gate. There I defend myself against the female
throng. If these defences are not strong, these safeguards not reliable,
I, powerless man, shall guard myself, I, wretched man, defend me thus
against the throng of full-grown men. I'll dress myself inside a copse,
in growing bush five suits I'll don on a blue stone's back, where two
roads part, at an undulating pool, at a rippling spring, at a rapid's
wildly foaming surge, at a whirlpool of a violent stream. There I, the
helpless man, shall guard myself, protect myself; I'll put on me an iron
shirt, I shall invest myself in steel, equip myself in copper socks,
shall gird me with a copper belt ’gainst water, land, ’gainst fire and

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

flame, against a variegated stone, against the grindstones of the
sky. <span id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) With an iron cap, an iron coat,
with an iron helmet o’er my neck, with iron gloves upon my hands, with
iron boots upon my feet, with them I'll enter Hiisi's lands, I'll wander
over Lempo's lands, and sorcerers’ arrows will not hurt, nor the
knife-blades of a witch, nor the instruments of men that shoot, nor a
diviner's steel.

##### b

May the fiery fur-coat of my sire, to serve as a fiery covering, may my
mother's fiery shirt, to serve me as a fiery shirt, be brought from
Tuonela and put on me, so that no sorcerer's arrows penetrate nor an
archer's shooting instruments. If that is not enough, let the might of
Ukko from the sky, the might of the Earth-mother from the earth, and old
Väinämöinen's strength come forth to help and favour me, to strengthen
me and give me might, lest Piru's arrows penetrate, or the arrows of a
sorcerer.

##### c

Wizards there are in every dell, and sorcerers at every gate, diviners
are at every fence, soothsayers are on every path. But I am not at all
alarmed, I am not in the least afraid. I clip the wool from off a stone,
fluff from a stone that has lain a winter there, I break the hair from
off a rock, and from the gravel pluck coarse hair. A shirt of defence I
make of that, ’neath which I sojourn every night and occupy myself by
day, lest the sorcerer eat too much, lest the witch should wound
o’ermuch. If that is not

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

enough, ten adders shall I yoke, set saddles on a hundred snakes, here
at my side to glide along; from his chains I'll slip a bear, from his
headstall loose a wolf, to rush in front of me, to course in rear of me,
to gobble up the village spells, to overwhelm the envious, the sorcerers
in every dell, the witches in every lake, the soothsayers on every path,
the envious in every place.

##### d

A maiden darted from a cloud, a holy handmaid—from the sky, and sat down
suddenly to weep upon a honeyed, grassy knoll. There she sat down and
also wept. Three rivers flowed from a single maiden's tears; one was of
water, one of mead, and fiery rapids formed the third. In the rapids was
a fiery reef, on the reef was a fiery birch, a fiery eagle was on the
birch, its beak was like a sorcerer's nose, its talons like five
reaping-hooks, (fitted) to draw a wizard's arrow out, to overcome the
powerful ones, to snatch away the soothsayers, to keep watch over
jealous folk, so that no sorcerer's arrows hurt, no sorcerer's darts, no
witch's knife, no pointed iron of soothsayers. May all the sorcerers in
dells through their own arrows come to nought; those that use
witchcraft—through their knives; diviners—through their tools of steel;
all other strong men—through their strength.

##### e

If I exert myself, let nine exert themselves; if I spring up with two,
let eight spring up in haste to side with me that am a lad, to encircle
me that am alone. Let my great kinsfolk rise like a mountain's solid
slope, my splendid

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

kindred like a long-drawn bank of cloud, <span
id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_12.md) to stand near me, at my side to march
against a mob of enemies, ’gainst places that are perilous.

##### f

What did I hear? what did they say when I was staying in this land, when
I was living in the world, a very long time ago? Thus did I hear, and
thus they spoke: My darling God, my powerful haltia, ever assisted me
when among those sorcerers, in the neighbourhood of soothsayers, he
helped me with his gracious hand, with his mighty strength; for a whole
day he carried me, at eve he let me go to rest.

#### § 3. AGAINST ENVY.

##### a

Envy I cannot guard against, nor from opponents shield myself, when
dealing with these toilsome tasks, these difficult affairs. May the
Envy-matron keep good watch, may Väinämöinen me defend. Whoever looks
with jealousy, looks pryingly with eyes askew, resentful glances casts,
or some malevolence prepares, may his eyes shed blood, let trickle rheum
into the fire of hell, the evil power's flames; into his eyes may the
lashes grow, thick as a hatchet-haft, a bowstring long; may these pour
blood along, and across his cheeks. Whoever without envy looks may Jesus
bless him so that he shall honeyed eyes possess, shall wend his way with
honeyed mind.

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

##### b

Whoever looks with envious glance, keeps turning round with jealous eye,
causes bewitchment with his mouth, or imprecates with 'words,' may the
slag of Hiisi fill his eyes, the soot of Hiisi soil his face, may a
fiery bung plug up his mouth, may Lempo's lock clinch fast his jaws, may
his mouth get overgrown with moss, the root of his tongue be broken off,
may one of his eyes like honey run, like butter may the other flow into
the raging fire, into Hiisi's bin of coals, may his head dry into stone
and skin grow on the top,

##### c

Whoever happens to o’erlook, or from one side intently stares, may he
look with honeyed eyes, may he peer with a honeyed glance. But if
envious persons look, if cockeyed people pry, may a twig tear out their
eyes, may a branch pluck out their eyes; may a withered fir-tree grow,
an iron-branched tree throw out thick shoots, an iron-branched tree with
jagged top, before that envious person's house, on which he shall fix
his eyes, on which he shall his glances cast, so that unless set free he
won't get free, unless set loose he won't get loose, during the span of
earthly time, while the moon sheds its golden light.

##### d

If envious persons look, if the cock-eyed open wide their eyes, from
windows shall grimaces make, shall over farmyards peep about, keep
listening at the cattle-sheds or meditate near the homestead fence; may
the bloody cloak of Hiitola \[*v*. Panula\], may Hiisi's \[*v*.
Tapiola's\] gory rug, that needs five men to lift, be bound across the
eyes, be fastened round the ears, and the hat of Hiisi round the

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

napes of those that sit at windows, that stand at the end of a bridge,
that spy at the end of a cattle-shed, that lie in ambush not far off, so
that with eyes they can't be seen, so that with ears they can't be
heard.

#### § 4. VENGEANCE.

##### a

Whoever incites to anything, or makes his precious \[F. golden\] tongue
to wag, may he receive his words again, may his thoughts of malice roll
till they reach his house, or at his cottage land; may they eat into his
heart, of his liver may they taste, entwine themselves about his lungs,
keep dancing in his lap; upon his body may they seize, down to the quick
may they penetrate. Whoever shall repeat my words, may they from his
head pass out, from his brains may they slip down, like needles with
points of steel, sail-needles with spiky points, may the root of his
tongue be twisted round, may the hair of his head be rubbed away.
Whoever shall with curses curse, pronounces maledictive words, down his
throat may a fiery plug, down his gorge may a copper wedge, may the gag
of Hiisi ’tween his teeth, may Lempo's lock upon his jaws be forced, may
his tongue turn into stone, may his mouth be overgrown with moss.

##### b

Whoever has pronounced a curse, with his tongue whined out a curse, with
his lips has mumbled out a curse, with his teeth has bitten off a curse,
may the stones pronounce a curse on him. He that has melted any one, may
the boulder stones melt him; he that has roasted any

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

one, him may the flat stones roast; he that caused injury by spells, may
an atrophy injure him; whoever may have borne a grudge, may the grave
bear him a grudge; whoever has bewitchment used, on him may death
bewitchment use, may his tongue rot off, his mouth get overgrown with
moss.

#### § 5. TO DISCOVER THE CAUSE.

##### a

Of thy old mother I'll inquire; I'll make thy mother call to mind why
thou, Disease, hast made attack, why thou, Elfshot, hast found thy way
into a wretched human skin, the body of a mother's son. I know not who
thy maker is, I cannot tell who sent thee forth. Art thou a sickness by
the Creator made, a bane decreed by God, or art thou caused by human
art, both wrought and brought by another man, sent hither for reward,
procured with harmful pelf to do the stipulated deeds, to execute work
paid in coin, to destroy a person that was born, to ruin one that has
been made? If thou be a sickness by the Creator made, a bane decreed by
God, on my Creator I fling myself, I cast myself upon my God; the Lord
abandons not the good, the Maker killeth not the virtuous. If thou art
caused by human art, a disease produced by another man, I'll get to know
thine origin, surely thy birthplace ascertain. Thence have attacks of
sickness come ere now, thence elfshots have been shot, from the regions
of divining men, from the grazing grounds of singing men, from the
homesteads of vile miscreants, from the trampled fields of sorcerers,
from the humid dells of wizards, from the hilltops of ecstatic men, from
spells pronounced by harridans,

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

from the witchery of long-haired hags, from the distant limits of the
north, from the wide country of the Lapp, from spots where reindeer
throw their young, from sandy heaths where stags career, from the house
of the spectral host (*kalmalaiset*), from Manala's eternal huts, from
mouldering heaps of soil, from earth that often must be moved, from the
rolling gravel, from the rustling sand. <span
id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_13.md)

##### b

I do not know at all just now, the reason I cannot surmise, why, Hiisi,
thou hast entrance made, hast, devil (*Perkele*), made, thyself at home
in a guiltless heart, in a belly free of blame. From waters of witches
hast thou come, from the lilies on a landlocked lake, from Nixies’
(*lummekoira*) haunts, from a water-Hiisi's hole, from the sea's black
mud, a thousand fathoms deep, or from the heath of death (*kalma*), from
the interior of the earth, from a dead man's belly, from the skin of one
departed for eternity, from the armpit of a spectral form
(*kalmalainen*), from beneath the liver of a shade (*manalainen*), hast
thou been torn from a cross's base, been conjured up from women's
graves, beside a decorated church, from the edge of a holy field, or
from great battle-fields, from the slaughter-fields of men?

##### c

From where, wretch, hast thou sent thyself, whence, Lempo, hast thou cut
away, whence, filthy one, torn thyself away, why, Hiisi's refuse, hast
thou shamed thyself? Who created thee, who formed thee, wretch, to eat,
to gnaw, to

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

bite, to crunch? Out of the water hast thou rolled, from the froth of
water poured thyself, from rushing streams, from roaring falls, from a
rapid's seething foam, from burning swirls, from the great ridges of the
sea, from billows capped with foam, or from still waters, running
streams, from unfrozen pools, from rippling springs? Or hast thou issued
from the earth, ascended from a field, thou wraith (*peiko*), from
clearings bare, from land unploughed, from humid dells, from mossless
swamps, from near mud-castle, from a watery ridge, <span
id="fr_15"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) from a forest-Hiisi's hole, from the cleft
of five great hills, from a copper mountain top, from the peak of a
copper Fell, from Bruin's stony grot, from a bear's den of
boulder-stones, from the tracks of a running wolf, from the steps of one
with a down-turned snout, from places where the foxes bark, from
pairing-places of the hare, hast thou been poured from froth of calves,
been gathered from the foam of dogs? Or from fireplaces hast thou come,
been raked up from the burning brands, hast thou arrived from heated
stones, from amid the smoke of a bathing-house? Or by the wind hast thou
been rocked, by a wintry blast hast thou been swung in the level sky,
behind light clouds, by the wind's path hast thou come here, along the
course of a wintry blast, from places shaken by the wind, from where the
wintry tempest drives?

#### § 6. REPARATION FOR HARM.

##### a

Approach to discern thy work, to heal the evil thou hast wrought, to
anoint the wounds, to souse the sores, before I tell thy mother, and to
thy parent say aside: 'Thy son

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

has done an evil act, thy child—a deed of infamy.' More is a mother's
grief, great is a parent's suffering, in healing sicknesses, in dealing
with grievous injuries, when her son is doing wrong, her child does
damage recklessly.

##### b

Come hither, hurry up, at thy deeds to feel ashamed, to smell the wounds
thyself hast caused, to lick the sores thyself hast made, with thy
honeyed lips, with thy honeyed tongue. Into thy mouth put thou the
sores, under thy teeth the nasty smell, into thy jaws the suffering,
into thy belly smarting wounds, seeing thou wroughtest this infamy,
seeing thou causedst the evil deed, evil for thee, evil for me, evil
indeed for both of us. If thou hast acted wrongfully, better thou dost
to make amends; it will be nicer for thyself, more advantageous for thy
life.

#### § 7. AGAINST INFLAMMATION AND ANGRY SYMPTOMS.

##### a

May the raging of angry wounds depart, may a pure blessing come instead,
when I have spoken with my mouth, when I have breathèd with my breath.
May the inflammation roll into a lake, sores sink into the earth, as a
stone sinks in the waves, as iron—in the sea.

##### b

So may thine angriness dissolve, as salt has melted in the sea, so may
thy malignity subside, as in the water sand has sunk; may thy vexations
melt away, as wax has melted in the fire, may thy bitterness evaporate,
like the

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

dew upon a sandy heath, from a poor human being's skin, from the body of
a mother's son. <span id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_15.md)

Fluid is tar when being made, and fat when being melted down, may thine
angriness more liquid be, more meltable than that. May thine angriness
as fluid be, as butter when it melts, as milk in summer when it's
milked, as an ice-hole in the winter-time.

##### c

Eat up thine angriness thyself, put in thy mouth thy malignity, thy
spell-wrought horrors—down thy throat, the pains thou occasioned—down
thy gorge; like brandy drink thine angriness, like ale the anguish thou
hast caused, like 'sour water' thy bitterness, like milk thy spell-sent
malady, like honey thine acerbity, like buttered eggs thy
fever-fits, <span id="fr_17"></span>[2](#fn_16.md) down through thy bony
jaw, through thine aching teeth, through the dry channel of thy throat,
through thy tongue's root, into thy golden belly, thy copper paunch,
into thy dainty liver and thy yellow lungs,—let them be coiled about thy
heart, and into thy gall let them be brought.

#### § 8. EXPULSION.

##### a

How, formerly, was needless harm removed, how were malicious deeds made
good? By those ere now was needless harm removed, by those were
malicious deeds

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

made good, by those words that are handed down, by pronouncing the deep
origin. By them remove, thou needless harm, by them take flight, thou
evil one; remove when driven to remove, decamp when driven to decamp,
The needless harm must now remove, the evil power must flee away; now is
the time for thee to move, the starting time for thee to start from this
poor human being's skin, from the body of a mother's son.

##### b

On snow-skates, Hiisi, now depart, thou evil man, begin to flee, tall
fiend, begin to scud away, Satan, begin to hurry off before the rising
of the sun, the dawning of the god of dawn, the uprising of the sun, the
crowing of the cock. Now it is Hiisi's time to skate, the time for Satan
to hurry off, the time for the evil power to jog, a very timely hour of
flight. A road is made for thee to use, more than enough to glide upon,
moonlight thou hast to travel by, there is light for thee to wander by,
on a horse along the road, on snow-skates o’er the hill, or across the
water in a boat to the distant limits of the north, that there thou
mayst remain so long as there is neither sun nor moon.

##### c

Why formerly in days of yore the solid gates of a castle moved, its iron
hinges shook again, the turrets of the castle reeled, the castle's
bulwarks flashed with fire, the castles moved, the lakes were stirred,
the copper hills quaked suddenly; the atmosphere from its socket moved,
with a crash the earth shook out of joint, great clouds were broken
through and through, the sky was riven into holes, all the atmosphere
into apertures (F. windows), at

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

the coming of the hour of God, when the help of the Lord approached; So,
why dost thou not likewise move, not move, thou uninvited shape, why,
evil one, not flee away, why not withdraw, thou good-for-nought, at the
expiry of this hour, the termination of this term? Now is the precious
time of grace, the solemn festival of God, the priests are going to the
mass, proceeding to the preaching-house.

##### d

Thou hound of Hiisi, disappear, be ashamed, thou shameless dog, from my
belly sally forth, thou brute, from my liver, monster of the earth,
bugbear (*riena*) of Hiisi, cease to rage, cease to abuse a living man.
Wilt thou not quit when thou art loosed, not quit with him that lets
thee loose, when he causes the deliverance, when he effects the grievous
task, when he ejects the injury, when he ousts the troubles caused by
spells?

The Sun's son formerly escaped, when Päivätär let him escape; from a
cell (F. ring) the moon formerly escaped, from the inside of an iron
'barn.' Kave released from the cell the moon, released the sun from the
rock, by which it had by Kuume been circled round, had by a devil
(*Pirulainen*) been concealed in a stony rock, in an iron 'barn.'

#### § 9. POSTING.

##### a

If thou shouldst ask to travel post, shouldst for a driving horse
beseech, I'll give thee, troth, a posting horse, I shall procure a dark
grey horse, that thou mayst travel home, to thy country mayst return.
I'll make for it hoofs of stone,

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I'll have cast for
it copper legs, I'll bit it with a sinew bit, and if the sinew will not
hold, I shall prepare an iron bit. If that should insufficient prove,
I'll give a stronger posting horse, a better runner I will add. From
Hiisi take a horse, from the mountain choose a foal. A good horse lives
in Hiisi's place, a black-maned horse among the Fells, for one that can
hold the reins aright, for one that driveth skilfully in iron harness,
in copper driving gear. Its head is made of stone, in copper is its body
cast, its back is made of steel, of iron are its legs built up, its
muzzle scatters fire, its legs spirt sparks. Its hoofs slip not upon the
ice, its legs crack not against a rock, e’en on the air's slippery path,
even of Kalma's icy track.

##### b

If thou the mountain cannot climb, cannot ascend the Hill of Pain, good
horses live at Hiisi's place, on the mountains there are first-rate
foals. From Hiisi take a horse, from the hard land a trotting horse, the
chestnut nag of Hiisi with forelock of fire, with iron mane, which from
the housetop must be bridled, which must from the fence be
saddled; <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) the mountains it can well
ascend, it can gallop over every rock; its feet don't slip, its hoofs
don't knock when it hurries over stones, when it rattles o’er the beach;
on its croup is a lake, clear water on its back-bone lies, water of
which the sorcerers drink, fire-throated ones, who drinking make it
hiss. Harness the fiery foal upon the fiery plain, drive furiously over
rocks, make the dens of Hiisi to resound, like a spark flash past, like
a fleet hound rush, for Hiisi's gelding does not sweat, nor the beauty
of Manala turn a hair.

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

#### § 10. PAIN OR SICKNESS.

##### a

Thither I send the pains away, thither I shove the grievous aches, into
the middle of the open sea. The vehement maid of Kipula is sitting in a
lazy way on the lower end of a speckled stone, on the edge of a bulky
flag, spinning pains on a copper spinning-staff, into a ball she winds
the pains, into a bundle gathers them, into the water she flings the
ball, to the depths of the sea she hurls it down, whence it may never
more be fetched during the span of worldly time, while the moon sheds
its golden light.

##### b

Three maidens, Luonnotars, are sitting as they sob and weep where three
roads part, four rivers flow; they gather pains, torments they cram into
a speckled chest, a copper box; they bark their hands, they tear their
breasts, their annoyance they bewail, if pains perchance should not be
brought. For only then would it be nice, if I brought pains and
sicknesses in the evening, morning and again at noon. Cease weeping,
surely I'll give you pains, I bring this moment a walletful, a lapful I
present, that came from a wretched human skin, from the body of a
wretched beast, that bears upon it a hundred hairs, that sheds a
thousand hairs.

##### c

A kettle is owned by Kivutar, the daughter of Väinö has a pot in which
she boils up pains in the middle of the Hill of Pain (*Kipu-mäki*), on
the summit of Mount Suffering (*Kipu-vaara*). At the hill's centre
stands a thorp, in

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

the middle of the thorp a field, in the middle of the field a spring, in
the middle of the spring a stone with nine holes in it, bored with a
borer, with an auger drilled. The centre hole is nine fathoms deep and
into it the pains are flung, the dreadful sufferings are thrust, the
dangerous wounds are cast by force, the calamities are pressed, so that
by night they cannot act, so that by day they can't escape.

##### d

The old wife of sickness, Kivutar, was carrying a fiery bugle-horn in
the middle of the Hill of Pain, on the summit of Mount Suffering; one
spark dropt off, the red fire fell on the summit of Mount Suffering and
became inflammatory burns, turned into sickness for men.

The girl of Tuoni, Maid of Pain, herself in pain was weeping tears, was
lamenting in her suffering, as she bustled about with her knees in hot
ashes, her arms in the fire, collecting the pains with stone gloves on
her hands. She boils the pains and sickness in a wee kettle, an iron
baking pan, at the end of an iron bench, that no one should receive a
pang, that no one should receive a hurt.

#### § 11. REPROACHING.

Who bade thee do the deed, incited thee to a sneaking act, to raise thy
nose, to turn thy snout, to do these deeds, to execute these deeds of
death?

Did thy father order thee, thy father or thy mother or the eldest of thy
brothers or the youngest of thy sisters or some great one of thy family,
a brilliant member of thy race, when thou didst commit the spiteful
deed, didst perpetrate the needless act?

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

Thy father did not order thee, thy father nor thy mother nor the eldest
of thy brothers nor the youngest of thy sisters nor some great one of
thy family, a brilliant member of thy race. Thyself hast done the
spiteful deed, hast perpetrated the ghastly act, abundance of evil thou
hast wrought, entirely on thine own account, contrary to the will of
God, to the dignity of the Blessed One.

#### § 12. FALLING INTO ECSTASY.

##### a

My Nature I shall try to raise, <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) I
shall summon my genius (*haltia*): my Nature, from thy hole arise, my
Haltia, from under a fallen tree, my Helper, from beneath a stone, my
Guide, from out the moss; come, dread-inspiring Death (*Kalma*), come at
a time of anguish dire, to give support, to safeguard me, to help me and
to strengthen me for the work that must be done, the hurt that must be
known about. <span id="fr_20"></span>[2](#fn_19.md)

##### b

Arise, my Nature, reliantly, awake, O Genius (*haltia*) of my life, from
under a tree, O Brilliant Eyes, from under a flag, O Spotted Cheeks, my
Nature that is hard as stone, my hair that is tough as iron; O Nature of
the old man and wife, my mother's Nature and my sire's, the Nature of my
ancestor in addition to my Nature rise; may I be clothed with a burning
coat, with furs of fiery red, that Hiisi's folk may be confused, earth's
awful beings may be abashed while this sorcerer uses magic arts, while a
Laplander is uttering words.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

##### c

My Flesh, bestir thyself in me, in a fellow's neck, O Strong desire;
arise, my Nature, reliantly, my Genius, with austerity to seize with me,
cause fright with me, to conquer enemies, to crush the warring hosts;
rise, cease from slumbering, from reposing in a leafy copse. Thou hast
lain in the ground for long, a long while in a gloomy place, so thou art
no better than a corpse, no handsomer than a defunct; arise, as thou
hast risen afore, when I try to raise thee up. Hills flowed like butter
then, rocks like the flesh of swine, blue forest-wilds like mead, the
land-locked lakes like ale, low land rose up, high land sank down at the
coming of the hour of God, when the help of the Lord approached, when I,
the child, was conjuring, when trying to inspire myself.

#### § 13. IN DISTRESS.

How do they sing and how lament when a time of danger is at hand, when a
day of jeopardy impends? Thus may they speak, thus ask in truth: may the
hour of God arrive, may help from the Lord approach the while this
elfshot is giving thrusts, this loathsome thing is torturing, when a man
is shouting in distress, when a man in pain is yelling out. Thou 'hound
of the Hiisis,' avaunt! avaunt! thou 'cur of Manala' leave off from
striking one that has been born, from destroying one that has been made.
If thou, O Hiisi, art from hell, or a devil (*piru*) from Pimentola, if
thou of devils (*perkele*) the smallest art, of Satans the most
glorious, then, Hiisi, go to hell, thou devil, to Pimentola, they need
thee there, thy coming they expect, thy father is weeping there, thy
parent is bewailing thee on bloody beds, on bolsters red.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

#### § 14. BOASTING.

##### a

No sorcerer bewitches me, no Lapp can place me under spells; for my
bewitcher I bewitch, my would-be conqueror I subdue, I gouge the eye of
a jealous man, I tweak the nose of a sorcerer, let him be any man alive,
a black-complexioned countryman, or any woman now alive, a reddish
brown-complexioned witch, or a woman of complexion fair, of any
complexion—’tis the same. When I begin to sing, begin to speak, I split
his shoulders by my song, bisect his jawbone by my lay, I rend the
collar of his shirt, from the breast-bone I tear it off; then on his
head by song I bring a cap, and underneath the cap a sheaf of Viborg
worms, of hairworms quite a heap. Him that would eat me up I feed with
these, and make them bite whoever would bite me. I feed the best
divining-men, the sorcerers, the jealous ones, on toads with all their
feet, on lizards with their wings, on snakes, black snakes with their
venom, paws and all.

##### b

Hither I have not come indeed without my skill, without my art, without
my father's force of mind, without my father's armaments, to a place
where men are eaten up, to a place where full-grown men are drowned. Let
them eat a sheep raw, an uncooked one tear, but not a man like me, nor
yet a worse man, or a clumsier. With a man's girdle I am girt, with a
man's buckle I am clasped, am fastened with a hero's brooch. Sorcerers
once were bewitching me, three Laplanders attempted it, three cruel
sorcerers, nine extra wicked ones, three summer nights, nine autumn
nights, completely bare, without a rag of clothes; this

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

much they profited by me, just this much they got out of me, what an axe
gets from a stone, a borer from a rock, a stump from slippery ice, or
Death (*Tuoni*) from an empty room.

##### c

Not me will the arrows pierce, not on me the sharp iron take effect. The
wizard's arrows will not pierce, nor the diviner's steel; I should make
blunt the points, into a hook I'd twist the heads. I have a sandy skin,
a hide of iron-slag, a body made of steel, ta’en from the branches of a
fir. If I desire to match myself, with the men to compare myself, I sing
the sorcerers with their darts, the archers with their instruments, the
witches with their iron knives, the diviners with their steel into the
mighty Rutja \[*v*. Turja\] Falls, into the awful midstream broil,
beneath the highest cataract, beneath the most tremendous swirl, amid
the rapids' stones, amid the burning boulder stones, to blaze like fire,
to sparkle like a spark. There may the sorcerers fall asleep, there may
the jealous ones repose, until the grass shall grow through the head and
the tall cap, through the shoulders of the sorcerer, right through the
muscles of the neck of each sleeping sorcerer, each slumbering jealous
one.

##### d

Perchance I am not after all a person to be termed a man, born of a
powerful mother, or by a steady-going woman rocked, if I be eaten
without a cause, though innocent be torn to bits. I am a sorcerer's
youngest son, the 'calf' of an old divining-man; I to a smith's went
formerly, went formerly, went yesterday, again this very day, where
things of steel were being made, where things

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

of iron were being wrought; I ordered shoes of steel, I had a coat of
copper cast, which a sorcerer's arrows will not pierce, a sorcerer's
arrows, witches’ knives, the sharp weapons of divining-men. May all
spells that the sorcerers cast, all things that the seers see, that the
roadside prowlers snatch, all charms the Laplanders repeat, return to
their proper homes, arrive at their tents again; may they cast spells
upon themselves, over their children sing their charms, may they destroy
their families, may they dishonour kith and kin, may the sorcerer wither
up, may the roadside prowler be transformed, may the magic-drummer
(*Käsikannus*) fall, may the Laplander be killed by the sharp tools
himself has made, by the spell-sent harm himself has caused, let the
sorcerer perish by his darts, the wizard by his steel, the witch by her
iron knives, by his songs the Laplander.

##### e

Not me do the sorcerers bewitch, the wizards lay no hands on me, that I
should die upon the road, on the journey should fall faint, though young
should fall asleep, though ruddy should expire. My mother washed me
naked on a nether stone, three times upon a summer night, to become a
wizard on every road, a skilful man in every land, to be a singer when
at home, a good performer when abroad. Troth, formerly in days gone by,
the sorcerers were bewitching me, the sorcerers bewitched, the 'vipers'
cursed, had a mind to lay me down, were threatening to sink me down, to
serve as a plank on the swampy spots, to serve as a bridge on the miry
bits, but being a capable man indeed I was not much concerned thereby; I
set myself to cast a spell, myself began to utter words, by

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

song I turned the best of singers into quite the worst, brought a
pigskin o’er their eyes, a dogskin o’er their ears, brought stony shoes
upon their feet, and stony gloves upon their hands, a lump of stone upon
their necks, and a stony tall cap on their heads.

##### f

I am the son of a Northerner, that by a Turja girl was rocked, by a
Laplander was swung in a cradle made of iron; the old man (Ukko) rumbled
in the sky, the old man rumbled, the earth did quake, like water the
Creator's clouds got wet, the heaven crackled like a fire at the
creation of this boy, when he was brought upon the world. I should term
that man a man, consider him a full-grown man, who could draw my bow,
could tighten my crooked bow. ’Twas only yesterday I drove the shaft of
my spear a fathom deep into a clay-bottomed field, into the unyielding
earth; I milked fierce adders with my 'nails,' with my hands I handled
snakes, I armed a thousand men with swords on a single summer's night;
bruin I visited at home, at his own house a brindled bear, I bitted
wolves, I shackled bears to a she-Lempo's tether-post, on Hiisi's
gallows I hung them up.

##### g

On me another man can't put his shoes, nor his laces tie. I put my own
shoes firmly on, I draw the laces tight, I stick an arrow in the floor,
an oaken shaft into trampled ground, lest a sorcerer eat too much, lest
witches wound excessively. If that be not enough, a chestnut stallion I
possess, a splendid-looking horse upon whose croup is a lake, on whose
backbone clear water lies, a fountain where

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

the collar sits, the water of which the witches drink, the jealous folk
of the village swill, fire-throated ones who drinking make it hiss. But
the wizard did not know the least I had already drunk therefrom, before
the sorcerer had risen, the jealous person had awoke. Of gravel I made
my mitts, my gloves of stone with which I handled adders and with my
fingers gathered snakes; I took ten adders, a hundred snakes to go with
me, to speed with me, to course in front of me, to wander at my side, to
eat the spells of villagers, their incantations to devour.

##### h

Already in days gone by three attacks of sickness came, to the danger of
my wretched self; one came along the swamp, the second came by other
ground, by water came the third. The one that came along the swamp had a
pole-like neck; the one that came along the ground had a crooked
arch-like neck; the one that came by water was the hardest of the three
attacks. But, being a capable man indeed, I was not much alarmed
thereby; from an eagle I took the claws, the talons from a hawk, from a
bear the paws, from bruin the crooked hands, with which I clawed the
miscreant, for all time checked the hideous thing, elfshots I squeezed
with them and smashed the arrows of disease.

##### i

No man is eaten without a cause, no man is slain without disease,
without the great Creator's leave, without the death-decree of God. If I
am not the proper man, can't recognise this cruel pain, from spell-sent
troubles can't give release, my comrade is the proper man. He dwells

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

with Hiisi's folk, on the mountain roams around. If I should take him as
a help, to strengthen me, to give me might, then no oaken club will
break a bone in my knee nor will a copper hook from my neck draw blood,
nor the most violent gust of wind raise from my ears a single hair.

#### § 15. TO STILL VIOLENCE.

##### a

Thou 'hound of Hiisi' disappear, cease, 'dog of Manala,' get wearied,
'shameless cur,' unchristened and unbaptized, of deranging a christian
man, of rubbing one that is devout, of eating the core of the heart, of
twisting up the lungs, of stamping on the wame, of cutting gashes in the
paunch, of gnawing at the navel cord, of laying hands upon the loins, of
boring at the sides, of gliding along the vertebræ, of crunching joints,
of fracturing the ends of bones, of rending the bones of the thigh, of
smashing the bones of the shins, of dislocating arms, of causing
rattling in the chest, of nibbling the skull, of scraping the scalp.

If I am not the proper man, I that am rather strong can't help, then I
shall send a better man to remove this malady, to effect this grievous
task, to destroy the monstrous thing. A man from the sea displays
himself, he shakes his furs, flips his coat of skin; his hose are a
fathom at the knee, two fathoms wide below the knee; here now let him
show himself to remove this malady, to bring about deliverance. But if
it pays no heed to him, nor speedily removes itself, there is the Ogress
(*Syöjätär*) in the sea with a mouth in the middle of her head, a tongue
in the middle of her throat, who has eaten a hundred men, destroyed a
thousand

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

full-grown men; may she now also eat thee up, as the bread she eats, as
the feast she holds.

If little good results from that, if still it pays no heed at all, I'll
raise the earth-matrons from the earth, the first house-fathers from the
field, all the swordsmen from the ground, the mounted-heroes from the
sand; I'll raise the forests with their men, with their folk the clumps
of juniper, fir-thickets with their families, with their bairns the
landlocked lakes, a hundred persons armed with swords, a thousand heroes
with swords of iron, to strengthen me, to give me might, to be my
refuge, my support, in this my terrible distress, this specially
laborious task.

May the aerial god himself, old Väinämöinen and the smith Ilmarinen
themselves make their appearance here, to recognise these fearful pains,
to give release from spell-sent harm, to grind this Hiisi, and this
Juutas crush.

##### b

With what shall I the elfshots squeeze, check the sickness caused by
fairy darts (*amputauti*), with what extract the sorcerer's bolts, with
what the bloody needles draw from a wretched human being's skin, from
the body of a mother's son? Quite lately, only yesterday I was in
company with smiths, on the trampled floor of hammerers; I got made for
me little tongs, a pair of splendid nipping-irons with which I'll lift
the sorcerer's bolts, I'll draw the spears of Keito out.

A bear has brawny paws, I've paws thrice brawnier, five, six times more
effectual with which I'll seize the malady.

But, if it pay no heed to that, I'll take the hands of one deceased, the
fists of one that has disappeared, that in the

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

earth has lain for long. More dreadful are a dead man's hands, those of
a corpse more horrible, with them shall I the elfshots squeeze, tightly
compress the fairy darts, shall jerk the bloody needles out, shall drive
the pointed things away, shall snatch the 'bristles of the pig' from a
naked skin without a stitch of clothes; with them I shall the nightmare
put below the earth, below the ground, below a plough's black soil,
below five coulters and below a mountain's copper edge.

#### § 16. MENACING.

##### a

If thou remove not speedily, motherless dog, dost not depart, thy old
mother I'll interrogate, thy mother I'll inform; a mother first of all
is milked, the boy is afterwards let drink of his mother's milk, his
parent's own white milk.

If thou shouldst pay no heed thereto with willows I'll belabour thee,
I'll fustigate with rowan shoots, I'll flog thee well with tips of fir.

If that be not enough, if thou remove not speedily I'll raise a ram with
twisted horns, procure an ox with outspread horns, I'll order it to butt
at thee, I'll make it strike thee with its horns. If little should
result therefrom, I'll take the hands of one deceased, from under the
ground a dead man's fists, from a burial-place I'll rout up hands; with
them I'll claw the 'toads,' the Satans I shall hurt with them.

If that be not enough, from an eagle I shall take the claws, the talons
from a hawk. There is an eagle, a famous bird, plashing on the water of
the sea, dwelling on

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

the billows of the sea, one of its wings the water skimmed, the other
nearly touched the sky; with its hard claws I'll chase the sudden
maladies away, I'll crush to bits the 'murderers,' the evil-doers I
shall squeeze.

If it should pay no heed thereto, have no intention to remove, from a
bear I'll take the claws, from a blood-drinker hook-like claws; an eagle
has cruel claws, a squirrel (F. firbranch bird) rake-like nails, the
paws of bruin are crueller, the claws of a bear more terrible; with them
I'll claw the miscreant, for ever check the hideous wretch.

Now, if it pay no heed thereto, I still remember other means, I know
more words of magic power and mightier antagonists. In a den I've a
hairy-nosed black dog, it was formerly my father's dog, precisely was my
parent's hound. Its mouth is burning with fire, its throat is glowing
with flame, its teeth resemble cinder-rakes with a tongue shoved in
between, of iron is its heart composed, of copper the entrails in its
paunch. It has eaten already a hundred men, destroyed a thousand
full-grown men; by it I'll have thee eaten up, have thy father and
mother eaten up, I'll make it eat thine ancestor and thy other mighty
relative; it will bite thee bones and all, it will crunch thee bones and
all, till thou canst not shake thy head, till thou canst not draw thy
breath.

##### b

Hast thou regarded me as dead, missed me as if I'd disappeared? I have
not died at any rate, I have not wholly disappeared. Quite lately, only
yesterday, I was at bruin's home, at the house of an iron\[-coloured\]
bear; I bitted by my song the wolf, the bear I fettered with iron
chains. I walked upon a viperous field, I ploughed the

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

viper-swarming soil, turned up the snaky earth with a keen-edged plough,
with a copper share. I held the vipers in my nails, in my hands the
snakes; ten of the vipers I put to death, a hundred of the swarthy
snakes; with vipers’ blood my nails are still besmeared, my hands with
the fat of snakes. I take my viperous gloves, my snaky mitts, with which
I drive the 'monster' off, I crush to atoms the 'murderer,' I make the
'flesh-devourer' budge, I make the 'bone-biter' slip away, make the
fiery 'dog' cease eating up, the evil 'cur' from mangling cease, cease
injuring a christian man, destroying one that is baptized. If thou
shouldst injure a christian man or destroy a man that is baptized,
christening perchance will injure thee, baptism will haply thee destroy.

#### § 17. EXORCISMS.

##### a

The evil beings I send away, the kobolds \[*kehno*\] I incite away,
destructive beings I force away, malicious beings I drag away, to
sproutless clearings run to waste, to lands unploughed, to swampy dells,
to untraversed swamps in which frogs spawn, where muck-worms crawl, to a
nameless meadow, unknown by name, where from the earth no herbage
sprouts, from the sward no grass exalts itself. If there thou findest
not a place, thee I conjure away to the head of the waters of Sumukse,
to dark Sariola, to the mist of the sea, to the haze of the lower air,
to the feather-tip of a swan, right under the tongue of a pintail duck.

If that be not enough, thee I conjure away down the mouth of Antero
Vipunen, down the belly of him that is rich in means, who in the earth
has slept for long, long lain

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

like a tree that is waterlogged. Now, go where I command, into the
sleigh of a brindled cat, into the cart of a dusky cock, that the
brindled cat may carry thee, that the dusky cock may hurry thee to the
solid shutters of a gaol, to its creaking gate.

If that be not enough, thee I conjure away to the fleay cavern of a fox.
Get into the fox's sleigh, on the gliding runners of the sledge, the fox
has a low-built sleigh, easily the runners glide, the fox will draw thee
to the beach and into the water roll thee down. Now, go where I command,
where I command and order thee, to the end of a rolling log, to the top
of a stump of juniper, into the mouth of a shrieking crow, into a
croaking raven's throat, into an ermine's stony hole, to a
summer-ermine's paws, into an iron-horned ram's head, into an iron
stallion's mouth, into an elk's coarse-fibred flesh, the shoulder-blade
of Hiisi's elk, under a summer-reindeer's tongue, into the groin of a
tame reindeer, into the mouth of a running wolf, under the tail of a
dusky dog, into a bear's hard bones, a black bear's hip, into casks of
unripe cloudberries, inside an iron 'egg.'

##### b

If from Kalma's chambers' thou art come, from the 'huts of the spectral
host' (*manalaiset*), from raspberry-covered heaps of stones, from the
border of a 'holy field,' just make endeavours to go home to 'Kalma's
heath,' to the mouldering heaps of soil, to earth that often must be
moved, into which a people has fallen prone, a mighty crowd has quietly
sunk, where families are enclosed, a deadman's heirs are hidden away. It
is good for thee to live, pleasant for thee to pass the time in a 'house
of fir,' in a 'pinewood

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

nest'; like a golden cuckoo thou wilt sing, like a silver turtle-dove,
in thy lofty home, in thy lovely house.

##### c

If thou hast bolted from a corpse \[*Kalma*\], into a corpse just
disappear, go, Kalma, to a burial-ground, to the edge of a holy field,
to the home of a man deceased, to the house of a vanished one, to the
bed of one that has collapsed, under the rug of one that swooned. There
it is pleasant for thee to be, delightful ’tis for thee to live; there
thou hast bread of sifted flour, fat delicacies ready made, elbows
enough are there and much fat flesh for a hungry man to eat, for one
that longs for it to bite. A dead man will not greatly weep, one gone
for ever will not cry, if in thy lust thou make a gash, take a bite in
thy strong desire.

##### d

I order smarting pains away, I cause the sufferings to sink at the brink
of fiery rapids, in the whirlpool of a holy stream, which by the root
drags trees along, causes great-headed firs to fall, destroys the
heather in its bloom, sweeps grass and all its husks away. In the rapids
is a fiery reef, on the reef is a fiery bull, whose mouth is burning
with fire, whose throat is aglow with flame; to Mana it will bear the
pains, the sufferings to Tuonela, whence all their life they won't
escape, will nevermore be fetched away.

##### e

Where I command, there get thee gone, into the hateful Ihari \[*v*.
Ilari, Inari\], into the boisterous Kalari, into the violent Rutja
\[*v*. Turja\] rapids, into the gurgling, foaming

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

surge, into the roaring rapids, into the rapid water's swirl, into the
burning whirl, which the trees fall into with their heads, oaks topple
into, crown and all, upsetting firs by their root-end, broad-headed
pines with spreading crown, in which the stumps of birch are smashed,
the roots of aspens are snaps in two, the grass with its roots rushes
noisily, and heather tumbles with its bloom.

##### f

Where I command, there get thee gone, to the fiery rapids’ centre point,
into the violent Vuoksi falls, into the space between two rocks, into
the awful midstream broil, whence all thy life thou won't escape, thou
wilt never get away, unless by the Creator freed, without the Almighty's
providence. If thou raise thy head from there or exalt thy snout, may
Ukko pain thy head with sharply pointed needles, with packing-needles,
or with iron hail.

##### g

Now move thy quarters, 'toad,' change, Murderer, thy dwelling-place,
Monster, begin to move away, Plague of the land, to take to flight.
Begone whence thou hast come, I cannot bear thee company. Be more
impetuous than wind, more rapid than a waterfall. Not here is thy proper
place, transfer thy tent to somewhere else.

If thou a master shouldst possess, away to thy master's seat; if thou a
mistress shouldst possess, away to thy mistress's feet; to the mouth of
thy brother's door, to the end of thy sister's floor, ere the close of
day, ere the setting of the sun. Then on thy arrival there, when thou
hast reached thy home, the abode of him that fashioned thee, thine
originator's place, on thy arrival give a sign, a secret

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

signal on reaching home, cause a crash like a thunder-clap, cause a
glare like a lightning-flash. Kick open the courtyard door, fly down
like a cock to the cattle-shed, like a chick to the dwelling-house,
right down on the refuse heap. Kill the mare on the cattle-stand, crush
the horse in the stall, the horned ox in the cattle-shed. Into the dung
stick in its horns, on the floor let its tail fall down, its legs upon
the earthen floor, on the threshold strew the hoofs, and scatter the
hair upon the walls.

If little should result therefrom, draw the window-shutter back, through
it transfer thyself within, into the room like a whirlwind fly, seize by
the sinews of the heel, by the hindmost leg, by the narrowest heel, the
masters in the farthest nook, in the door-corner the mistresses; of the
master break the neck, twist this head awry, draw his eyes askew, of the
mistress smash the head, and into a hook bend her fingers round.

##### k

Go to thy home, thou 'toad,' flee to thy country, Evil One, to the
tongue of him that incited thee, to the palm of him that commanded thee.
Dog, if thou reach thy home, thy loathsome father's house, commit a
spiteful action there, perform one of corpselike hue; pass the threshold
on thy hands, on thy knees through the door of the porch, to the
shoulder of him that directed thee; enter within by his eye, by his
guts, by the bladder, the muscles under the arm deep down to the flesh
of the heart; into a bundle twist his heart, by the forelock lug him
down, shake the framework of his breast, cause his head to rattle, his
bones to creak, the back of his head to strike the ground till he cannot
draw a breath,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

If little ensue therefrom, blow up the glowing coals, heat furiously
Lempo's forge in the hollow of the begetter's heart, claw thy mother's
womb, twist thy parent's paunch, in her liver set thy tent, thy cellar
in her lungs, give her veins a sudden squeeze, make her blood-pipes pipe
a tune. If still that has but small effect, kill the boy that's in the
porch, the eldest child that's on the floor, make it fall senseless as a
stump, into a hook twist round its nose, in a twinkling break its beak.

##### i

Scoundrel of Hiisi! to thy home, to thy family return. Thy relatives are
greatly vexed, thy family is alarmed that thou from thy country hast
gone away, that thou from thy place hast fled. For thou hast tarried
long, hast vegetated long at village thresholds, at alien gates, at
screeching hinges, at creaking doors. Thy home is gloomy, thy dwelling
desolate, thy mother seeks about the house, thy parent sore bewails,
feels a sinking of the heart, moves here and there with downcast eyes,
at the gate she constantly awaits the coming home of her 'Dog.' Thy
mother says, thy parent shrieks:

'My luckless boy is journeying in a houseless tract; who now will
snowshoe after elks, will halter reindeer, fetter bears, put heavy bits
in mouths of wolves?'

In his house thy father weeps, thy grandmother gives vent to grief, thy
brother's eyes with water pour, with gory water, with tears of blood.
And there thy son is lying sick, thy sore tormented son shrieks out. For
the soul's departure they prepare themselves with bloody beds, with gory
rugs, in bloodstained clothes, in horrid gory coats, with bloody mouths,
with bloody heads, with all their hair

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

embrued with blood, thy father at the maiden's spring, thy mother in
Äijö's den, thy son at the fountain of Vuojela, thy daughter under the
Tyrjä falls.

##### j

If thou art caused by human art, art an evil sent by any one, a disease
produced by another man, an evil raised by a sorcerer, or by a scheming
woman wrought, by a strong woman shaken out, return to the man that cast
the spell, to the jaws of him that sang the charm, to the throat of him
that pronounced the curse, to the heart of him that incited thee, to the
breast of the witchcraft-using man, to the chest of him that conjured
thee, before the rising of sun, the uprising of the 'morning star' (F.
sun), the dawning of the god of dawn, ere the cock's crow is audible.

##### k

If, Disease, thou wert thrown by another man, by another thrown, by
another brought, sent hither for reward, for the sake of money wert
procured, thou now art ordered without reward, without any money to run
away, without any gold to turn thy steps to thy mistress's morning meal,
to the egg-scraps of thy grandmother. There, wicked pagan, eat under the
bench, poke in thy head, from there don't raise it up before the
flooring rots, the wall-beams get o’ergrown with mould, and the ceiling
loosens overhead.

##### l

If from Metsola thou art, go seriously to Metsola, to the famous village
of the woods, to sharp-sighted Tapiola, to places with knotty roots, to
places of hard dry stumps, or between two stumps, beneath three birches’
roots, to the

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

home of an old he-bear, to the house of an old she-bear. In there is thy
buttery bed, thy milky sleeping-place, thy bacony couch, thy pillows of
linen stuff. If time permit thee not to sleep, thy mind won't carelessly
repose, crawl on the ground like a snake of the earth, like an adder
through withered grass, run through deep forests like a bear, like an
otter hurry through a lake, like a squirrel through boughs of fir, like
an ermine through holes in stones.

##### m

Thee I conjure away to murky Pohjola, to the doors of the gate of
Pohjola, to the homes of the 'speckled lid,' where there is neither moon
nor sun, nor ever any day. ’Tis well for thee to go there, over the
trees or along the ground, to rustle in among the firs, to go tumbling
in among the pines; huge is the gateway of the north, hingeless the Pass
of the atmosphere, for a great devil (*perkele*), for a small, for a
tall devil to scamper through.

’Twere well for thee to slip in there, there it is well for thee to
live; a sea-beach thou hast to scamper on, gravel thou hast to rattle
along, fine sand to shuffle through, a lovely heath to shamble through.
Raw flesh is there, cooked flesh is there, lying in pairs at the
kettle's spout, there is boneless flesh, there are headless fish for a
hungry man to bite, for one with an appetite to bolt. An elk is hanging
from a tree, a noble reindeer has been killed, a portly ox lies roasted
there, a great animal lies slaughtered there for a voracious man to eat,
for one a-hungered to devour.

##### n

Thither I send thee forth, thee I command and exorcise across nine
woods, nine forests and a half, to the fires of

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

the sons of the North, to the flames of Lapland's bairns. Blazes are
made upon the trees, upon the trees, across the ground, by which thou,
stupid, canst tell the way, though a stranger, canst quickly find the
track. The path is built of iron, is provided with posts of steel, so
that a great or a little man or a middle-sized may also reach the hovels
of the North, the ground near Lapland's Gulf. There it is well for thee
to live, pleasant for thee to pass thy time; there a place is made for
thee, a delicious bed to rest upon, something to eat is there set out,
something to drink is quick prepared, stags of the forest have been
killed, beasts of the field been put to death, there is boneless flesh
to eat, the blood of game to drink. There thou canst eat without a care,
canst munch according to desire, when thou art hungry gnaw the elk's
coarse-fibred flesh, the fat reindeer's flanks, the fleshy armpit of a
bear, or a bear's hard bones, in a pigstye sleeping all the night, in a
sheep-pen all the day.

##### o

Thee I conjure away, I command and order off to great battlefields, to
the slaughter-fields of men, where men are battling with the sword, in
combat are fighting hand to hand. There it is well for thee to live,
’tis easy to visit thy relatives, to eat flesh raw, to drink blood warm;
there blood is as high as the knee, filth on a level with the leg, there
heads are (plentiful) as hills, hair (plentiful) as withered grass.

##### p

Whither I order, thither go, in front of some great cannon's mouth, down
the throat of the 'copper bow,'

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

down the gorge of the 'iron churn,' among the war-horse's feet, ’mong
the hoofs of a battle-foal, where there is blood for thee to drink, and
flesh for thee to gobble up; by eating, the food will not fall short, by
drinking, the drink will not grow less, there blood is as high as the
shin, red blood is the height of the knee.

##### q

If thou art from the sky, from the limit of the rainless clouds, mount
up to the sky again, ascend into the air, through by the moon, and below
the sun, up to the level of the sky, to the dripping clouds, to the
twinkling stars, like a fire to flame, to sparkle like a spark on the
orbit of the sun, on the circuit of the lunar ring, on the seven stars’
back, in the sky behind.

##### r

Thee I conjure away into moaning hills, into sighing firs, to the top of
a copper hill, to a copper mountain peak, where the clouds surround the
hill, a steam rolls over the stones, into an iron mountain rift, into
the space between two rocks. Tormentor, shriek, O Nightmare, howl, in
the deep valleys of the hills, in the fine mountain cleft, whence all
thy life thou won't escape, wilt never extricate thyself.

##### s

Thee I conjure away to the Norja mountain's dell, to the flank of Turja
Fell, to a snowy mountain peak, to the northern side of the hill, with
thy mouth in snow, thy head in rime, thy hands in the bitter storm,
there by the wind to be propelled, be buffeted by the raging storm until
thou dry into a rag, become the plaything of the storm.

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

##### t

Where shall I warn the pains away, where exorcise the hurts from a
wretched human being's skin, from the body of a mother's son? Thither I
warn the pains away, thither I force the bitter pangs, the pains to
swamps, the pains to fields, the pangs to clearings now run wild, into
moving gravel, into rustling sand. If they pay no heed to that surely I
know another place. I'll whisk away the pains, I'll squeeze the
intermittent pangs into stony rocks, into iron heaps of stone, to pain
the stones, to torment the flags. A stone weeps not at pain, nor does a
flag bewail its sufferings, though many should be laid on it, be flung
on it unstintingly.

##### u

I warn the pains away, I force the evil pains inside a variegated stone,
into the side of a bulky flag; I'll break the stone in two, the
flagstone into three; into the water I'll roll the pains, down under the
deep sea waves, into the skin of a kindly seal, who to the deep will
bear the pains, will float them to the open sea, or under the inky mud,
the dust of other times, that there they may remain so long as there is
neither moon nor sun, nor human beings in the world, nor any dwellers
under heaven.

##### v

Sickness, if thou wert brought by wind, brought by the wind, by the
water dragged, art a present from the chilly wind, art whisked here by
an icy blast, take, Wind, what thou hast brought, what thou hast given,
Chilly Blast; into thy cradle take the pain, place it below thy powerful
wing, that thou mayst hurry it away to creaking weathercocks, to

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

whistling winds, to hissing clouds, to be rocked by winds, to be handled
by the clouds.

##### w

Thee I conjure away to other, to foreign lands, to Sunku's great
farmyards, to the adjoining Russian land. There it is well for thee to
live, pleasant for thee to pass thy time, in a pig-stye sleeping all the
night, in a sheep-pen all the day. If there thou canst not find a place,
go there where I command, to other, to distant lands, to other waters
that are black, which by the eye have not been seen, were never heard of
by the ear, to priestless places, un-christened lands, where thou’lt be
heard of never more, whence thou wilt never show thyself.

##### x

If from the water thou hast rolled, into the water roll forsooth, creep
on the ground like a little snake, like an otter rush along the shore,
to the unstable sea, to Lapland's ample bay \[*v*. to Väinö's open
sea\], into an iron burbot's mouth, into the teeth of a steely pike, who
will eat thee bones and all, with thy bones will crunch thee up; to the
eye of a blue sik-fish, to the tail of a salmon red, that travels in the
waves, swims in the rapids’ foam, dwells under swirling pools, whirls
round below the stream. The sik will bear thee to the deep, will float
thee to the open sea, far will the salmon carry thee, transport thee
further off, down under the deep waves, down on the inky mud, where not
a breath of wind is felt, no ripples on the water move.

If thou raise up thy head from there, Ukko will split thy head with a
golden club, with a silver wedge.

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

##### y

If from the water thou art come, I exorcise thee far away to the clear
surface of the sea, to the endless waves. There it is luck for thee to
live, pleasant for thee to move about, there the wind will rock thee to
and fro, the windward shore will cradle thee, the swell of the sea will
make thee sway, the gentle water make thee shake. The wind affords
security there, a wave will drive towards thee a perch, the small
sik-fish at thy side thou’lt eat, and the salmon that are close at hand.
Three swelling waves are on the sea, at the head of each swelling wave—a
fire, in front of each fire there stands a man, in each hand he holds a
spit, on the spit there is roasted flesh, here is an elk and here an ox,
and there the head of a whale. These are the best of roasted meats for a
hungry man to eat, for one with a crave to gobble up.

##### z

Sternly I warn the pains away from this human being's skin. May the
pains be shot, may the torments sink into the cup of Kivutar, into the
box of Vammatar, into the bed of Vaivatar, down on the pillows of
Päivätär. If there no place is to be found, may the torments into the
water roll, may the suffering subside into the sea's dark depths, to the
lower parts of Saarva lake, nine fathoms deep, whence they will never
more escape, will be heard of never more in this long period of time, in
all my length of days.

#### § 18. TO MAKE FAST.

##### a

Now move to where I ordered thee, where I conjured and ordered thee, to
pass thy weeks and spend thy months

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

till I shall come to let thee go, till I appear to liberate, shall come
to carry thee away, myself arrive to let thee loose with nine rams born
of a single ewe, with nine bulls, calves of a single cow, nine
stallions, foals of a single mare.

##### b

Begone to where I ordered thee, commanded thee, exhorted thee, whence
unless loosed thou’lt ne’er get loose, unless set free wilt ne’er be
free, while this world lasts, while the Lord's moon shines. No liberator
liberates thee, no releaser set thee free unless I come to liberate,
myself approach to set thee free in company with my three dogs, with
five or six of my 'woolly tails,' with seven white-collared dogs, with
my eight hounds, with stallions nine, brought forth by a single mare.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[68:1](ms203.htm#fr_12.md) Perhaps the variegated
stone and the grindstone mean the moon and sun, for in Finnish riddles
'the golden grindstone, a tin whorl,' is used for the sun.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[70:1](ms203.htm#fr_13.md) *i.e.* in a serried line
like the solid slope of a hill or a long bank of cloud.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[74:1](ms203.htm#fr_14.md) The last four lines
refer to a place of burial where the ground is often dug up.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[75:1](ms203.htm#fr_15.md) *i.e.* From mud-banks in
the water where fish live.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[77:1](ms203.htm#fr_16.md) As the past tense is
used in the similes, perhaps it implies that the exorcist, while
pronouncing the words, threw salt and sand into water and wax into the
fire, as a symbolical act.

<span id="fn_16"></span>[77:2](ms203.htm#fr_17.md) *i.e.* drink them with
readiness and avidity, as thou wouldst drink brandy, ale, etc.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[80:1](ms203.htm#fr_18.md) On account of the
horse's height.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[83:1](ms203.htm#fr_19.md) *i.e.* I shall try to
inspire my nature or inner man.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[83:2](ms203.htm#fr_20.md) Var. to help the man
that throws the lots.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Words of Healing Power](ms204.md)

</div>
