<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](ms205)  [Next](ms207) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Magic Songs of the West Finns, Vol. 2*, by John Abercromby, \[1898\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PRAYERS.

#### § 110. IN THE MORNING.

Welcome! for showing thy countenance, for dawning forth, thou golden
Sun, for rising now, thou 'morning star'! From under the waves thou hast
escaped, hast mounted above the clumps of firs, like a golden cuckoo,
like a silver dove hast risen up to the level sky, to thy former state,
on thy ancient tour. Rise ever at the proper time, after this very day
as well, bring as a gift on coming home, give us completest health, into
our hands convey the game, the quarry to our thumb's tip, good luck to
our hook's point;

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

go on thy circuit pleasantly, conclude the journey of the day, at eve
attain to happiness.

#### § 111. TREASURE-SEEKING.

Kinsman of Hiisi! rise, awake, thou mountain haltia, to show a man the
path, to point to a full-grown man the place where booty is to be
obtained, treasures can be opened up before a man who is making search,
a fellow creeping on his knees.

#### § 112. AGAINST ELF-SHOTS.

From the earth rise, Ghostly Shade (*manalainen*), like a horror,
hairless one, like a hideous fright, clod-headed. one, approach to take
away thy blast, to take possession of thine own; the injury thou dost,
force down into Tuoni's turf, to the end of the hut of Manala, not into
a human being's skin or into a creature's (*kave*) hide.

#### § 113. AGAINST WASPS.

O Siilikki \[*v*. Huijutar\], woods’ daughter-in-law, pray discipline
thy wee 'winged bird,' hide away thy 'feathered chick,' bind up its
wings, confine its claws, to prevent it stabbing with its pike, to
prevent it sharpening its steel. Kuutar, conceal thy children now, hide,
Päivätär, thy family, and follow not a wizard's wish, don't be made
jealous by jealous folk.

#### § 114. AGAINST TOOTHACHE.

##### a

Come, boy, from Pohjola, boy of the north, and iron-kneed, to grind this
Hiisi, this Juutas crush. String a fiery

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

bow, draw a copper crooked bow with a fiery string ’gainst thy left
knee; feather a fiery bolt with all an eagle's plumes, with the feathers
of a sparrow's tail, to be used with the fiery bow; shoot with it
Tuoni's grub,' fell the bone-biter with a bang, shoot through the teeth
the eater of bone, the biter of flesh, that it cease to eat, to crunch,
to fret, to gnaw, that Hiisi's cat' cease shattering, that 'Lempo's dog'
cease tearing up, cease ravaging the jaws, cease hacking down the teeth.

##### b

Short maiden, Tuoni's girl, take from the teeth this 'cur,' this Lempo
from the jaws; press down thy maladies, force down thine injuries, fling
down thy filthiness into an iron baking-pan, at the end of Piru's tongs,
’mong Hiisi's coals, in the fire of the evil power. Thou'lt frizzle,
Tuoni's grub, thou’lt simmer, worm of earth, thy head will be badly
scorched, thy despicable tongue will swell in the iron baking-pan, at
the end of Piru's tongs, ’mong Hiisi's coals, in the fire of the evil
power.

##### c

Heigh! old man, my aunt's son, thou old white-bearded man, just strike
with thy whip the ground, with thy thong produce a crack, that a mist
from the ground may rise, in the mist a little man, on the shoulder of
whom is a bow, in his fist a little bolt; the bow is made of steel, in
copper the bolt is cast. I'll shoot with it Hiisi's son, that he cease
to eat and gnaw, that he cease to bite and bore, that 'Lempo's cur'
shall cease to rend the cherished teeth, the poor cheek-bones.

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

#### § 115. FOR HORSES.

##### a

Expert St. Stephen (*Tapani*), come, to keep watch close at hand when I
send a horse to grass, drive out my small one on the yard, from under a
lovely shed, from under a double roof, to the summer grazing-grounds, to
the summer sheltered spots, to the honey-dropping sward, to the honeyed
grassy knolls. Let it stay happily at the edge of a holy field, to
delight me in the afternoon, in the forenoon to make me pleased.

##### b

Lord of horses, Tahvanus \[*v*. Timanter, v. Rukotiivo\], a god that
cleans the mangers out, over my herds keep watch, give fodder to my
steeds, devoid of speech, devoid of strength, devoid of guilt, devoid of
guile. As thou hast watched them ’neath the shed, defended them ’neath
shelter-boards, so watch when they are roofless too, defend them in the
bushy woods, when on beds of pine-tree sprays, on pillows made of twigs,
that not a hair be broken off, not half a one should come away, against
the will of God, despite the intentions of the Blest. If a hair be
broken off, e’en half a one should come away, I shall at once demand a
brace, I'll sternly make request for three.

##### c

O Iki Tiera \[*v*. Hiki Tiera, Niera's \[Miera's\] son, <span
id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_47) snow-hoofed <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_48) and bony-hoofed, pray come to keep watch
close

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

at hand, to overlook most carefully when I send out a horse to grass,
let loose a mare upon the plain, when I throw the halter on the ground,
the horse's bell upon the sand. Stand brush in hand at night and holding
a comb by day, brush till it gets a lynx-like skin, the coat of a
forest-animal (kave).

#### § 116. WHEN GORED BY AN OX.

Let thy father Santta Säitäri, thy lovely mother Pullukka, come to keep
watch close by, to overlook from very near, so that the boy shall not
depart, the mother's son not slip away from a life by the Creator made,
fashioned by God Himself. O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother,
pitiful, pray sanctify with words, prohibit with thy sentences, for holy
are thy words, and potent are thy sentences.

#### § 117. AT A BRIDAL PROCESSION.

##### a

From whom shall I <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_49) ask help for my
protection, my support, while this girl is being given away, this man is
being betrothed, unenvied by the envious, by an evil wisher undisturbed?

From yonder person I ask for help, from yonder woman I cry for aid: from
the gravel, bony-fingered, rise, steel-jawed, from the muddy strand,
from the spring, O maiden, rise, 'blue-socks,' from a corner of the
swamp. If thou no leisure hast thyself, the uprightest of thy lassies
send, the best of all thy serving-maids to cover up this family, this
bridal party to conceal. O woman (kave), old

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

wife Luonnotar, thou darling woman (*kave*) and beautiful, begin to
indicate the path, to rectify the road to where the girl is given away,
the bride is in procession led. May the paths be opened up, may broken
roads be rendered smooth; if a fallen tree should block the way, shove
it aside, that the great may pass, the small may pass, the weak may move
along.

If that is not enough from yonder person I ask for help, from my father
in the sky, from my mother in the depths of earth, from whom enduring
mercies come, familiar help proceeds. Come, father, from the sky, my
mother,—from the depths of earth, to give away this maiden's hand, to
lead this man to be betrothed, to overthrow the envious, to overcome the
enemy.

##### b

Plenty there are of hissing mouths, of husky throats, of sorcerers
beside the path, of envious people in every place, while a bridal party
trudges past, a man is led to be betrothed.

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the god that over journeys rules, that holdest
fast the clouds, that governest the fleecy clouds, O come from the sky
like fire, quiver like a burning brand, having the size of a forest fir,
the stature of a swamp-grown pine, though not against myself, nor
against my followers, but against the enemies, against tremendous
accidents. Start with us, come in company to conduct my bridal train, to
tear up spell-cast injuries, to scatter all impediments, to crush the
criminals, to snatch away the sorcerers, to squeeze the fiend, to
overthrow the spook (*kamulainen*), to break the devilish weather up, to
trample down roads broken up, while I am travelling by

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

land, or I on the water row, am on the mountains wandering or roving
o’er low-lying ground. Should some one stand across the path, send him
aside; if a snake should lie along the road, break it in two at once; if
there are trees or fallen trees, shove them aside, if logs are on my
path, from the path remove the logs, let the tree-placer become a tree,
let the log-maker become a log.

#### § 118. FOR CATCHING HARES.

##### a

O forest's mistress, Elina, a woman with body undefiled, now bring the
game from further off, from the foot of the forest-fort, from the side
of the honeyed woods, from the rear of the copper hills; permit a 'bandy
legs' to run, a squinting eyes' to lob along, to come this way without
alarm, bobbing along without demur, let a big one come or a little one,
or one of medium size approach directly towards my trap, towards my
snare, to tread with its feet upon my gin, that stands in front of its
two paws, avoiding other people's snares, shunning the traps of other
men.

##### b

O Tapio's daughter, Lumikki, thy snow-white creatures (*lumikki*) stir,
release thy 'gold' <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_50) to wander forth,
thy 'silver' <span id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_50) to rove around; turn
hither a 'bandy legs,' a 'slender paws' to the centre here, under the
firmament of air, towards a man in search of it, towards a stately
full-grown man, towards one of a woman born. If from the track it turn
away, from its furrow it diverge, by the tail just pull it on the track,
or by the ears just set it right, let

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

it run with rapidity, let it hurry with hasty foot, without a wizard's
knowing it, without being heard by a 'fiery throat,' across the edges of
the field, the lower side of untilled land, past other peoples’ cords,
under the snares of other men, to the place where I set my gins, to my
traps that should be trod, in front of a man in search of game, to the
steps of one demanding it.

##### c

Distinguished maiden, Varvutar, Mikitär, forest's daughter-in-law, the
daughter of Tapio, Annikki, give me when I request, when I with a golden
tongue complain; cause thy 'sheep' to come this way, cast out thy
'distaffs bound with wool.' Bestow them heartily from the deep forest
dells in threes, in fives, in sixes from the copse, in sevens from the
abandoned fields, in eights from clumps of juniper, before the man in
search of them, at the steps of him that walks along.

#### § 119. AGAINST CABBAGE GRUBS.

Thou famous maiden, Kulotar, thou lovely woman Kanarvatar, remove thy
'dogs,' eject thy 'curs' from my life-sustaining herbs, these
food-producing plants, ere their destruction comes, ere Ukko breaks
their heads with drops from the clouds, with iron hail. O 'witch-ball'
(*tyrä*) <span id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_51) a mother, Maarana, at the
end of a blue bridge sit, holding an iron hook; when thou seest the
'witch-ball' come, make a rattle with thine iron, make a clatter with
thy hook.

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

#### § 120. FISHING.

##### a

Foam-mantled Ahti \[*v*. Ahto\] of the sea! reed-bearded old man of the
sea, throw over thee luck-bringing clothes, put on gift-giving shirts,
at this thy time for giving gifts, on this my day for catching fish;
give me thy gift, abundantly and promptly draw the crowd that fills the
watery tent, the dwellers underneath the wave; from sand-banks gather in
the fish, the perch with short and crooked necks, to listen to the music
here, to Väinäinöinen's melody.

##### b

O Ahti \[*v*. Ahto\], master of the waves, the ruler of a hundred caves,
give me some perch, impel thy 'spiky-backs,' to where this net is lifted
out, to where the hundred-eyed' is dropt; take a stake five fathoms
long, a pole of seven fathoms seize, with which to persecute the seas,
to stir the bottom of the sea, to raise a shoal of bony ones, to
frighten the fishy herd from the fishy bays, from the salmon holes to
waters where the nets are cast, to where this net is lifted out.

##### c

O water's mistress, Vellamo, water's old wife with reedy breast, come
here to exchange thy shirt, to change thy clothes. On thee is a shirt of
reeds, on thee is a sea-foam cloak, made by the daughter of the wind,
the gift of Aallotar; I give thee a linen shirt, of linen entirely made,
by Kuutar woven and spun by Päivätär \[*v*. Kaunotar\].

##### d

O water's golden king, damp-bearded and with slouching hat, forget thy
long enduring hate, thy long protracted

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

niggardness; come along with me to fish, as a mate to catch fresh fish,
give me some full-grown perch, abundantly of 'crooked necks,' of
slippery siks, of dark grey pike. May the dear fish rush into my traps
on holidays as formerly a squirrel rushed, alarmed in a clump of firs,
jumped suddenly on the swaying boughs, on the leafy trees.

##### e

Old wife of the sea with reedy breast, give me some perch from the great
centres of the sea, from the gloomy depths, from where the sun ne’er
shines, from where the sand is undisturbed, from the open sea's black
mud, from the bosom of a bulky wave; frighten the fishy shoal, stir up
the swarm of bony ones, chase it from the grots below, from the holes of
the reefs in the sea to tug my lines, to make my threads resound; give
thy big fish, till the little ones enlarge, cede thy fat fish till the
lean ones fatten up.

##### f

On the water I cast my net, I fasten my sinks of stone; thou fair old
wife, Juolehetar, the water's mistress, benevolent, rise hither from the
mud, to give thy well-beloved from thy capacious magazine. Send forth
the fishy herd to seas that of old are full of fish, to where I intend
to cast the nets; give those for which I beg, bring those for which I
ask, from the holes of the reefs pray lift them out, and from recesses
of the rocks.

#### § 121. BEAR-HUNTING.

Louhi, the mistress of Pohjola, thrust forth thy woolly fist, turn round
thy hairy palm before a man in search of

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

game, close to a full-grown walking man. By the Maker ’twould be
allowed, by the Creator be vouchsafed, by Tapio be wished that I should
get big game, that I should prostrate 'honey paws.'

When I am going to the woods, to the door of bruin's room, pray, oldest
of the island, say, speak, lovely Taaria, who art nine sleeping-places
away from here, a hundred stages to the rear: 'My "little hay stack,"
"cock of hay," my "little apple," my wee bear, pray don't disturb
thyself at all, don't take it in the least amiss; with virgin honey
thou’lt be fed, new honey thou wilt have to drink ’mong full-grown men,
in a crowd of men.'

O forest mistress, Mielikki, O Tapio's daughter, Annikki, O Tapio's
maiden, Tellervo, thou tiny little forest lass, come hither, there is
need of thee, to the hill's north side. Collar thy 'dogs,' <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_52) restrain thy 'hounds,' in a dogwood sty,
in an oaken shed; bend a rowan band or prepare an oaken one with which
to muzzle bruin's mouth, lest he open up his jaw while I am coming to
the shed, to the court-yard of 'tiny eyes,' to the trampled ground of
'level nose.'

#### § 122. AGAINST A BEAR.

##### a

Old man of Juumi, Juumi's old wife, Juumi's former inhabitants, keep in
your 'dog,' restrain your 'hound' from the tracts where the cattle
range, from these wide tracts of underwood. From the mould a brown one
has attacked, a grey one from a sandy heath, a 'big foot' from the swamp
has risen, a 'broad paws' from a leafy grove, a 'badger' from the earth
has come, from the copse an

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

enemy has hurried into evil deeds, has taken to dirty deeds. May the
forest bear be choked with a honey ball in his mouth, so that his jaws
won't open up, that his teeth won't come apart, that the 'central flesh'
won't move, that the tongue won't freely wag.

##### b

When the king of forest wilds, the forest's grey one, few of teeth, from
his chamber hustles forth, from his castle sallies forth, then
forest-mistress, Mielikki, daughter of Tapio, Tuometar, anoint his claws
with wort, with honey foment his teeth, that he may never touch a thing,
not even when in haste, when trampling over cattle-grounds, when roaming
up and down the swamps.

If he pay no heed thereto, but still continues doing harm; Kuitua \[*v*.
Kuittola\], forest king, Hongas, the mistress benevolent, keep in thy
'dog,' restrain thy 'hound' with collars of gold, with silver straps,
behind nine locks, ten bars that open from behind, so that the
headstrong cannot run, 'broad brow' can't scuffle with his feet,
'homespun breeks can't roll along, 'blue socks' can't slowly plod to
places where my cattle range, to my bullocks’ grazing-grounds.

##### c

King of the forest, Kuippana, thou lively grey-beard of the woods,
inhibit now thy son, prevent thy bastard son from seeking my live stock,
from meddling with my herd. If that is not enough, is still an
insufficient guard, prevent the motion of his tongue, the quivering of
his pointed nose, stick a mushroom up one nostril and an apple up the
other one, lest the cattle's breath give forth a smell, the

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

scent of the cattle should be exhaled; over his eyes bind silk, over his
ears a bandage tie, lest he should hear the trampling herd, lest he
perceive the wanderers.

##### d

Good mistress, Hongatar, observant woman, Tapiotar, come, when thou art
needed, here, approach, when thou art summoned here, the evil actions of
thy son, thy child's outrageous deeds to see. Here damage has come to
pass, an accident occurred, thy son has done an evil deed, thy child an
act of villany; the villain broke his oath, ate his honour like a dog,
when he took to evil acts, began committing hideous deeds.

#### § 123. TO BENEFIT CATTLE.

##### a

Distinguished woman, Suvetar, Nature's old wife, Etelätär, that art a
watcher of the herd, a keeper of the mistress's flock, arise to cleanse
the byre, to watch the cattle of the byre, bring hither luck to calves,
toss in to the oxen luck. Shape out a golden comb, furnish a silver
brush, provide with a copper comb the doorposts of the door, on which
the cattle can rub themselves, the mistress's flock can comb themselves.
Pray go with a brush in hand at night and holding a comb by day, without
being seen by any one, without alarming any one, and beautifully watch
the herd, tend the flock with diligence, comb them as smooth as a lynx's
coat, as the downy coat of a forest 'ewe,' that the cattle be
beautified, that the mistress's flock may thrive, before the mistress
makes her rounds, before the herding lassie looks, a mistress who is
good for nought, a witless herding-lass.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

##### b

O Jesus consecrate my flock, watch, Jesus, o’er my herd, this summer of
Jesus, this important summer-time of God, when from the cowhouse I
discharge, send forth my kine to the leafy grove, drive out my cattle to
the heath, conduct them to great wooded tracts, along the 'yard of
God,' <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_53) along the ground of Mary dear,
to 'cattle-sheds without a hole and windowless.' <span
id="fr_60"></span>[1](#fn_53) Ukko, the golden king, the god that in the
sky abides, come watch my herd beautifully all summer-time; as thou hast
watched them ’neath a shed, watch them among the heather too, as thou
didst tend them in the house, so tend them in the clumps of fir, tend
them among the firs, rule over them near boughs of pine.

##### c

King of the forest, Kuitua, Hongas, the mistress benevolent, daughter of
Tapio, Tellervo, thou tiny little forest lass, when I send out my cows
to the delightful Metsola, set a shepherd of willow wood, tall lassies
of mountain-ash, cow-watchers of alder wood, of wild bird-cherry to
drive them home, without a shepherd's driving them, without a
herding-lassie's care.

##### d

I crave from the Creator leave, and confidence from God; Creator, watch
my herd, preserve, kind God, my herd in every place without a hurt,
without a scratch, uninjured by a neighbour's spell, that the wind
sha’n’t dangerously blow, the rain not dangerously fall, that bitter
cold shall hurt it not.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

##### e

Distinguished woman, Suvetar, Nature's old wife, Etelätär, pray bring
thy horn from further off, from the centre of the sky; from the sky a
honeyed horn, a honeyed horn from the depths of earth. Then blow upon
thy horn, toot on thy famous one, that lakes of milk may issue forth,
that streams of butter begin to flow. By blowing beflower the knolls,
make beautiful the sandy heaths, make exquisite the abandoned fields,
make pleasant the leafy groves, into liquid honey turn the swamps, and
swampy pools into wort of malt, on which thou’lt feed my herd, wilt
nourish up my kine, wilt increase the milk of my Hermikki, augment the
yield of my Tuorikki, wilt feed them with honeyed food, wilt treat them
to honeyed grass from verdant knolls, from honeyed turf, wilt feed with
golden withered grass, with silver heads of grass, from golden knolls,
from silver wastes; water my cattle afterwards, water them well with
honeyed drink from pools of whey, from gushing springs, from foaming
cataracts, from running streams, that never fail from age to age, that
never come to an end at all.

##### f

Thou son of Tapio, Nyypetti, art appointed herding-lad to watch my herd
on the summer cattle-grounds; watch well my herd, watch o’er the herd,
give the drove to drink, give food to the wretched colts on the summer
pasturage, along the swamps, along firm ground, ’long the waters of
Pohjola.

##### b

Forest Nikki \[*v*. Hitsi\], forest Nikki \[*v*. Hätsi\], of the forest
the golden king, grey-bearded and with a mossy

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

cap! thou kindly mistress of the woods, fair woman of woods’ winding
ways from the deep forest-dell arise, awake from thy pine-bough bed, to
my beasts give peace, to the hoof-footed ones—repose, full freedom to
the calves, to the shepherd the best control. Take care of the weaker
kine, the weaker ones, the smaller ones, lest they should come to grief,
should stumble into shame; let Kirjo range o’er wooded wilds, along the
'yard of God,' along the ground of Mary dear; while the evening bath is
being prepared, drive thou my cattle home rejoicing to the great
court-yards before conclusion of the day, before the setting of the sun.

##### h

O Katrinatar, woman fair, the girl of night, the maid of dusk, pray take
five serving-girls, six who obey command, to watch my herd, to tend my
kine, that the herd may freely rove, that the 'small hoofs' shall not
fear, that the calves sha’n’t be alarmed, that the cold weather sha’n’t
scatter them. May a wolf bar up his mouth, may the tooth of a bear be
broken off from summer night to winter night. But if it pay no heed to
that, construct an iron fence, erect a fence with stakes of steel round
my live stock, on either side of my herd of kine. Cause the fence to
reach from the earth, from the earth as far as the sky, that the son of
a toad can't injure them, a 'forest cur' can't injure them this summer
of Jesus, this important summer-time of God.

##### i

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the mighty father of the sky, that livest in
luck, in a bright and pleasant residence, make

<span id="page_214">p. 214</span>

the summers beautiful, make pleasant the leafy groves, make exquisite
the abandoned fields, make the morasses placable, cause the forests to
be amiable, make the blue woodland mannerly. Roll forward a bulky cloud
as a covering for my herd, lest death should seize it in his mouth, lest
envy slash it excessively. Little indeed I have for Death to hold in his
mouth, or to drive to abandoned fields, to send to an unburnt spot. When
a 'backwoods wonder' prowls about, a hulking creature makes its rounds,
change my dear cows into other shapes, transform my dear herd suddenly;
turn into stones my cows, my beauties into heads of stumps, my hand-fed
calves into gravel stones, my bullocks into knolls when encountering a
'forest dog,' when face to face with a greedy one. If that is not
enough, from the sky shove a bar or a golden pole into the greedy
creature's gums, put Tuoni's lock upon its jaws, the stone of Manala
down its throat.

##### k

Thou son of Tapio, Nyyrikki, blue-mantled son of under-wood, cut marks
on rowan trees, landmarks on mountain clefts by which my herd can go, my
property can find its way. Place tall and thick-stemmed pines,
broad-headed firs with branching crowns as bridges over miry spots, as
patches across bad ground, across mere swamp and sloppy ground, across
the shaking water-pools, that the 'crumpled horns' may tramp, the
'cloven hoofs' may trudge, may reach each one of them the smoke, <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_54) without a hurt, without a scratch, without
their sinking in the swamp, without their sticking in the mire.

<span id="page_215">p. 215</span>

##### l

O Pihlajatar, tiny lass, O Katajatar, lovely girl, cut a birch from a
leafy grove, from a humid dell a branch, from the rear of Tapio Hill,
from t’other side of Tuomi Hill; then drive the cattle to the farm, to
where the bath is heating up, the homestead cattle to their home, and
the 'forest herd' to the Forest Home (*F. Metsola*).

#### § 124. AT THE ASSIZES.

Earth's master! from the earth arise, ancestral master—from the field,
all swordsmen—from the earth, the glaive men—from the sandy heath, the
riders—from the miry pools; arise, O Forest, with thy men, with thy
people, Clump of Junipers, with thy family, Clump of Firs, with thy
children, Land-locked Lake, to speak on my behalf, and on my side to
plead, lest evil should befall my head, destruction fall upon my pate.

If that is not enough, not quite sufficient, not enough, the Creator's
golden wattled cock! come here where there is need of thee, like a
golden cuckoo fly, like a dear silver dove, to speak on my behalf, and
on my side to plead; stop up the judge's ears, bribe all the jurymen,
make the sheriffs well disposed, bind silk across their eyes, with a
bandage tie their hands, lest in their hands a pen should move, in their
fists a quill should fit.

#### § 125. TO INCITE A DOG.

Louhi, mistress of Pohjola, distinguished woman, Penitar, from thy 'son'
remove impediments, from the 'money-seeker,' all obstacle; let the pup
give tongue, the dog bark openly, remove the stoppage from its nose, the
block across

<span id="page_216">p. 216</span>

its 'scenting-horn.' From far afield convey the scent, transport it from
far ahead, like fire to nostrils of the dog, like smoke to the puppy's
nose, from gloomy Pohjola, from under Tapio's window-hole; permit the
dog to run ahead, the pup to trot with haughty gait, lead him to bruin's
home or to a reindeer's flanks.

#### § 126. TO SILENCE A DOG.

##### a

Old man, old woman of the North! Raana, mistress of Pohjola! begin to
stop the bitch's mouth, to hide the puppy's tongue, lest my dog should
be deceived, the 'money-seeker' make mistake, should bark at every
branch of pine, should bay at every leafy bough. I do not live on boughs
of pine, I fatten not on leafy boughs, I live on them that skip on
boughs, that ’neath fir-branches make their way.

##### b

Field maiden, farmyard girl! O golden king of earth, here where they
need thee, come from the field with thy family to close the mouth of a
dog, to plug the nozzle of a whelp. Bind silk across its eyes, tie a
bandage round its ears, a mushroom up one nostril thrust, an apple up
the other one, lest it should scent the breath of man, perceive the
smell of a full-grown man, lest it should hear a passerby, lest it
should see a wanderer.

##### c

O Hiisi \[*v*. Juutas\], shut the dog's mouth up, Lempo \[*v*.
Perkele\], the jawbone of the dog, fetch, Hiisi, thy tall hat, Lempo,
thy broad-brimmed cap with which to stop the

<span id="page_217">p. 217</span>

puppy's nose, to bung its 'scenting-channel' up. Place a bar before its
mouth, a gag between its teeth, between its tongue-strings lay a check,
so that it cannot ope its jaws, nor separate its teeth. If that is not
enough, take the backmost hedge-stake of the field, the lowest railing
of the fence to stop the mouth of the hunting-dog, to press with it the
puppy's head, so that it can no more give tongue at any man that passes
by.

#### § 127. WHEN SHOOTING RAPIDS.

##### a

Stone Kimmo \[*v*. Kiikka\]! Kammo's \[*v*. Lempo's\] son, come here
where we have need of thee, with a borer bore a hole, with a chisel cut
a hole through the stone in the cataract, through the evil boulder's
side, so that a wooden skiff sha’n’t stick, a boat of fir shall receive
no harm. King of water, Litvetti, <span id="fr_62"></span>[1](#fn_55)
water's master beneath the stream, make the rocks to be like moss, like
a pike's bladder make the boat, while passing through the surge, while
traversing projecting rocks. O gracious woman, Meletar, give me thy
serviceable oar with which I'll steer, I'll shoot the spell-bound
streams, past a jealous person's house, under a sorcerer's window too,
without my pinnace sticking fast, without my boat receiving hurt.

##### b

O golden water-king, O gracious Ahti of the sea, steer with thy sword,
push with thy sheathless sword, so that my wooden craft may run, the
pine-built boat may bowl along without the pinnace sticking fast,
without the cutter getting fixed between those boulder-stones, among the
stony rocks.

<span id="page_218">p. 218</span>

Shove with thy breast the waves, the billows with thy bosom turn, twist
in thy bands the curly ones, in thy fist collect the foam, lest they
should dash against my breast, should rattle down upon my head. A stone
is in the river's midst, a flat stone at the surge's crest; lower the
boulder's side, press down the flagstone's flank before my scarlet
skiff, out of the way of my tarry boat.

##### c

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the god above the clouds, roll a bulky cloud,
from the west send a lumpy one down on the rapid's foaming surge, into
the dreadful midstream whirl; make rowing seats of steel, cast copper
oars with which I'll ascend the spell-bound streams, I over hostile
streams shall glide between these boulder-stones, along recesses of the
rocks, lest sorcerers eat me wholly up, lest witches gash me overmuch.

#### § 128. WHEN IN GREAT PAIN.

##### a

Kirsti, thou maid of pains, that sittest on the stone of pain, there
where three rivers flow, three \[*v*. five\] waters part, grinding away
with the stone of pain, twirling the hill of pain, go gather up the
pains into the hole in a bluish \[*v*. speckled\] stone, or into water
roll them down, tumble them into the ocean depths, where the wind is not
perceived, where the sun doth never shine.

##### b

Pain-maiden! Äijö's girl, come here where there is need of thee, holding
a cup of pain, with a box of torments ’neath

<span id="page_219">p. 219</span>

thine arm, to garner up the pains, to gather up the sufferings into a
little speckled cup, into a little copper box, to dash them down into a
stream, full tilt into the humid sea to generate their kind, to bring
their children forth.

##### c

Good mistress, Kivutar, distinguished woman, Vammotar, take from the
Maker's mouth a plume, a wing from Väinäimöinen's belt, and sweep away
the awful (F. holy) 'sparks,' cause the awful (F. holy) wounds to
disappear. Put the pains inside thy glove, the grievous sores inside thy
mitts, then fling thy glove away on the summit of the Hill of Pain. On
the summit is a bulky stone, a bulky stone, a thick flat stone. Break
the stone in two, the flat stone into three. Poke the glove inside the
stone, the mitts inside the flat stone's side, unite the stone together
again, and roll it down to the ocean depths where the moon ne’er gleams,
where the sun ne’er beams.

##### d

Pain-Maiden! Tuoni's girl, huge maiden, Akäätär! winnow the pains with a
winnowing fan, sift the torments in a sieve, in order to torment the
stones, to make the flat stones suffer pain. If a stone bewail its
sufferings, a flat stone its calamities, ’tis better a stone should
scream, ’tis better a flat stone yell, than one of a woman born, or by a
creature (*kave*) brought to birth.

##### e

Lovely old wife of pain! good mistress, Kivutar, come here where there
is need of thee, where a man is crying

<span id="page_220">p. 220</span>

in distress. Thou art not summoned causelessly, thou art not wished for
needlessly. Come to see the sufferings, to seize the pains, to make the
torment cease, to still the smarts in a poor human being's skin, in the
body of a mother's son. In a bundle wrap the pains, in a packet—the
grievous aches, take the bundle to a stony cleft, the torments to a
mountain rift, to the cellar of pains, to the room of sufferings, inside
a bluish stone, inside a liver-coloured chink, where they will ne’er be
heard of more, whence they will never more escape.

##### f

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, merciful, come here in thy
fleet shoes, in thy fine skirts come fluttering, in thy white stockings
wander forth, in thy black socks march proudly here to seize the pains,
to remove the plagues, from spell-brought troubles to release, to remove
the spell-wrought injuries. Into the water roll the pains, plunge them
down to the ocean depths, apportion torments to the wind, give them to
chilly wind, so that the sick may get to sleep, the weakly man may find
repose.

##### g

Old wife Kave, Nature's daughter, thou 'golden' Kave and beautiful, that
art the oldest of womenkind, first mother of individuals, come now to
view the pains, to mitigate the calamity, to accomplish this laborious
work, to remove the plague. Great pains are penetrating here, a calamity
has supervened, the ground below already cracks, the sky is splitting up
above while the sufferer is crying out, while the man in pain bewails
himself,

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

##### h

O Hiisi, come from Hiitola \[*v*. Rise Hiisi from Hell\], thou
hump-backed—from the home of gods \[*v*. Perkele from Pimentola\]—come
hither with thy sons, with thy sons and thy serving-girls, with thy
whole nation too, with utmost speed to crush, to eat this evil thing, to
lap this monstrous evil up. From Esthonia bring a scythe, from hell a
mowing-iron, and put it in my right hand, with it I'll cut the evil
thing, I'll hack out this impediment from the roaring man, from the
groaning full-grown man.

##### i

An eagle dwells in Turja land; that eagle, famous bird, with steely
beak, with iron claws, with one wing cut the water and with the other
grazed the sky. Its mouth is a hundred fathoms wide, its gullet is like
three cataracts, its beak is like five reaping-hooks, on its wing-tip
there are eyes, others there are behind its back. O eagle, come from
Turja land, from Lapland fling thyself, O bird, 'stone-talons' come to
tear, 'iron-claws' to cut to bits with thine iron gums, with thy steely
jaws, to devour this pain, to lap this 'broth' from a poor human being's
skin, from the body of a mother's son.

#### § 129. TO CHARM AWAY STRUMOUS SWELLINGS ON THE NECK.

##### a

O Ukko, 'golden' king, the 'silver' governor, pray bring thy golden
scraping-knife, thy silver axe, with which I shall remove the growths,
shall pull off 'Hiisi's filth,'

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

shall shear off 'Lempo's lumps' from the narrow muscles of the neck,
from the 'breathing-hole,' where it is rubbed. <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_56) I'll make the tumors move away, the knobs
to crumble up, the lumps of gore to roll away from throttling a throat,
from squeezing tight the breath, to a path that can't be known, nor be
apprehended in a dream.

##### b

Maiden of swellings, Kullatar, <span id="fr_64"></span>[2](#fn_57) the
active girl, the packer-up, pack thy 'needless packages' away, remove
thy monstrous-looking things from the 'taking-place,' from where the
'breathing-hole' is rubbed. Thither conduct the 'frogs,' thither
transport the wens, from the narrow muscles of the neck, from the
purling veins to the branch of an apple-tree, to an oak-tree's level
top.

#### § 130. WHILE SOWING.

##### a

Ho! Ukko, kindly god, the powerful father of the sky, prepare a misty
atmosphere, create a tiny little cloud, send from the west a lumpy
cloud, from the south let one arrive, let water drizzle from the sky,
let honey trickle from the clouds on the work that's being done, on the
seed that's being sown.

##### b

O Etelätär, youthful maid, the boisterous, the jolly girl, just cause a
honeyed cloud to rise in the honeyed sky; from the west despatch a
cloud, from the south let one arrive, lead water from the sky, rain
honey, liquid honey

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

down on the growing shoots of corn, on the rustling growing crops.

##### c

Old wife below the ground! Earth's mistress, the soil's old wife, cause
the grass to force its way, the powerful earth to push forth shoots,
earth shows no lack of strength, nor the grassy sward—of sustenance, if
the Gift-givers are inclined, if the Food-mothers \[*v*. Nature's
daughters\] so desire. Arise, O Earth, from slumbering, Creator's
field!—from sleep, cause the straw to grow up well, the stalks to grow
in size, in thousands let the tips come up, in hundreds let the branches
fork, where I have ploughed, where I have sown, where I have toiled
exceeding hard.

#### § 131. TO STUPEFY A SNAKE.

O Kasaritar, lovely girl, milk thou the snake, let the venom \[*v*.
'milk'\] drip into a copper-handled pail, into an iron milking-can;
upset it for the earth's benefit, dash it against a mossy knoll. May the
earth retain the milk and the Holy Ghost—the de’il (*perkele*).

#### § 132. TO INCREASE THE YIELD OF MILK FROM COWS.

##### a

O excellent woman, Suvetar, Nature's old wife, Etelätär, open the ground
down underneath, bore holes through the headlands of the fields, cause a
honeyed stream to flow, a liquid honey brook to roll on both sides of
the cattle-grounds. Sink a golden' well from which the herd can drink,
can suck up honeyed juice into their udders swollen

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

hard, into their tight-distended teats, so that the veins begin to move,
rivers of milk begin to flow, milk-rivulets to issue forth,
milk-cataracts to foam, milk-pipes to spout, milk-channels to
squirt—begin to give each time, begin to flow each milking-time, so that
with butter the children choke, get suffocated with the cream, in spite
of a person wishing harm, despite an ill-wisher's handiwork, that the
milk to Mana sha’n’t be brought, that the yield of kine sha’n’t
disappear.'

##### b

O excellent woman, Suvetar, Nature's old wife, Etelätär, go now and feed
my Syötikki, water as well my Juotikki, increase the yield of Hermikki,
augment the milk of Tuorikki, give milk to Mairikki, fresh thickened
milk to Omena, from the splendid heads of grass, from the beautiful
hair-grass, from verdant knolls, from hillocks moist and fresh, from the
honey-dropping sward, from ground begrown with berry stalks, from the
maiden of the heather's bloom, from the maiden of the grass's husk, from
the milk-daughter of the cloud, from the maiden of the sky's mid-point,
to make the udders full of milk, the udders always swelled, for a short
woman then to milk, for a tall woman too to press.

If to the village it's been brought, has at a neighbour's been retained,
fetch from the sky the herding-horns, from the clouds let fall the
pipes; begin to toot upon the horns, to pipe upon the pipes, through
which the milk shall run, the milk escape the restraining spell, and
roll from the village like a stream, shall flow like a river to its
home, shall come to its rooms as fresh-drawn milk, to its sleeping
quarters as a juice, to its original abode, its former place, past the
evil-wisher's mouth, to the well-wisher's mouth.

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

##### c

Old wife of cattle, now arise, awake, O *haltia* of kine, before a
sorcerer rises up or a jealous person shall awake. Ascend the buttery
hill, to the summit of the milky hill; from Mana fetch my milk, my milk
from him that keeps it back. Descend the hill with a flask, hurry down
with a keg; the milk to Mana must not go, nor my cream to Tuonela.

##### d

Poor Para! come to life, butter and milk to bring. O 'Stick-shanks' come
to life, 'stick-shanks' with the yarn-ball head, harden the crust upon
the milk, thicken the film of curdled milk. Hither, poor Para, come, to
churn with noisy platter-dash, into fat work up the milk, into yellow
butter turn the fat, beat out the very smallest drop so that the butter
harden well. Luck-bringer, hither come, if thou in coming bring good
luck, for thee ’twill all the better be, a better present wilt thou get:
each month I shall convey, shall place for thee as recompense at the
field's end a little calf, and into a bush I'll push it too.

#### § 133. TO EXCITE LOVE.

##### a

O Jesus, wash my little girl, my 'wee snow-sparrow' purify from women's
and from harlot's talk, from the facetiousness of men, from the tattle
of mustachioed ones, from the tattle of the beardless ones. Wash my
'snow-sparrow' clean, make white a woman's child, by washing make her
bloom for the moon, make her sweet for the sun. Arouse to action, Love,
cause her renown to spread, for

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

men to take a fancy to, for full-grown men to ask about. Whoe’er looks
at her from above, or gazes at her close at hand, may he look with a
honeyed glance, may he smile with eyes of love.

##### b

Jesus! thy little bullfinch,' wash, make white thy tender babe, wash her
as brilliant as the moon, to be enchanting as the sun, as white as the
ocean's foam, as brown as a bulrush of the sea; cause golden ornaments
to chink, and silver ornaments to clink; with the golden shirt of kings,
the silver cloths of lords, may she be clothed and be arrayed, to gain
the delight of men, to be run after by the youths, to be desired by
wooing swains, to be observed by every one, by an important suitor to be
seen, by a young unmarried man, by man and woman too, yes, by a
full-grown married man.

##### c

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, merciful, arise to awaken
Love, to cause Renown to blossom forth; Now is the time for Love to
move, time for Renown to blossom forth. O free the lass from
spell-wrought harm, from village people's powerful words, from
tittle-tattle, jabbering, from machinations of old hags. Break off a
bath-switch, in a copse, in honeyed Metsola, close to three rapids, from
the highest birchen trees; cut up a tree of mountain-ash, break into
bits the 'murder' tree; <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_58) stealthily
heat a bath, hurriedly prepare the fire, cause nature's steam to rise, a
love-inspiring steam to float through the stony stove, through the
heated roof-ridge beam; soften a honeyed bath-

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

switch well on a honeyed flattish stone, a bottle of pure water fetch,
bring some of golden hue, wherewith 'bullfinch' shall wash herself, the
'wee snow-sparrow' cleanse herself, the 'village flower' shall scour
herself, 'earth's chosen one' shall wash her white, to get well thought
of by the men, to be desired by wooing swains. Hither let come without a
fear, arrive without an injury, the best and not the worst, the
handsomest of warriors, the best of the parsonage, the smartest of the
village folk; if in these parts he can't be found, O bring him from some
other part, from six church parishes away, or from across eight
chapelries.

##### d

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, pure and with a mother's look, eternal
mother of the earth, the benefactor of all time, release the girl from
her distress, my daughter from useless spells; dig water from a rock,
let water from a fountain pour by means of thy golden stick, thy silver
staff; wash my little one therein, my 'wee snow-sparrow' purify, remove
the pig-skin from her eyes, the dog-skin from her ears, the wicked
gossip from her head, the villagers' great sorceries. Spread thy lovely
linen cloth, throw thy golden cloak about this youthful maid, round the
figure of this child, blue silk upon her eyes, upon her temples threads
of gold, good silver trinkets on her head, to honour the distinguished
girl. Cause Love to issue from the maid, Love to ascend from out the
girl, cause Love to rise and float about, her renown to blossom forth,
cause her to glisten like the moon, to sparkle like a star, to turn the
minds of men, to set on fire their hearts, draw them towards this girl,
to this child's side, till their senses

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

fume like honey and blaze up like a fire. Let come from far away, let
hurry from remoter parts the best of the throng of lads, the smartest of
the lot, to this young maiden's house, on horseback along the road, by
water in a boat or on snow-shoes o’er the hill.

##### e

Rise, maiden, from the spring, O 'grey-eyes' from the pool, to be a
darling woman's help, the comrade of a famous wife. Arise and water
fetch, some water from the spring of Love \[*v*. of Vento\]. Pray give
me water as a loan for ever, for as long as the moon sheds a golden
light, with which I shall my 'bullfinch' wash, my wee 'snow-sparrow'
purify, shall beautify 'earth's chick,' make her luxuriant in form and
beautiful of countenance, make bright her eyes, make her temples bloom,
make nice her breasts, make her bosom full, to be observed by all, to be
a wonder to herself.

##### f

Arise, O Love, to hover round, Honour of maidens! to advance, maiden's
Renown! to blossom forth o’er six church parishes, through seven
parishes and through eight towns. Here is a beauty unbeheld, a splendid
maiden unbetrothed, a rosy blonde not led away, a famous daughter that's
unknown: She was not wed in the wedding year, nor affianced in the
wooer's year, last summer she was not carried off. Hey! Love, wake up! O
Love, arise without being lifted by a cord, without being hauled by a
tarry rope, to turn men's inclinations, to dispose their thoughts, to
set on fire their hearts, to make their bellies seethe, their hearts to
flicker like a flame, to sparkle like a spark and that it shall not
cease at night, shall not diminish

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

in the dark. O Love, arise to dance about, to vibrate like a fiery
brand, arise without being conjured up, without being cursed bestir
thyself, for moons have risen, suns have risen, yet still thou hast not
risen up. So rise at once, remove the cloud that shrouds the girl, cause
the 'sun' to shine, the Creator's 'moon' to gleam. Fetch men from far
away, pray seek them from remoter parts, conduct them from a hundred
isles, from a hundred castles’ environs, unto this maid's vicinity, this
daughter's close proximity.

##### g

Old man of rut! old wife of rut (*kirki*)! raise Kirki from a
rutting-swamp, from a rutting-mountain top, Erotic Heat from a
rutting-heath, cow's bulling-lust from an alder grove, from a copse the
lewdness of a bull, a stallion's passion from its stall, a mare's hot
passion from its shed, a cat's hot passion from a stove, a little
kitten's from a crib, from under a bench a dog's desire, a puppy's from
beneath a form, a wolf's more passionate desire, the rougher passion of
a bear, the quicker passion of a fox, the lust of a swiftly-scudding
hare, the black raven's lust as well, and the passion of a dark-grey
hawk, in order that this girl be wed, this beauty may be beheld. Raise
into ecstasy his mind, <span id="fr_66"></span>[1](#fn_59) to
intoxication—his desire, take from the glowing coals a coal, from a
stove of stone a heated stone, into a flame ignite his heart, his belly
into glowing flame, that his hinder parts shall move, that his hips
shall sway; the sinews of his back shall twitch, his toes get tremulous,
his nails begin to itch, his hands to scratch, so

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

that he get no sleep at night, and no repose at all by day, unless he
see our darling maid, and make acquaintance with the girl.

#### § 134. TO WEAN A HEART FROM ANOTHER'S LOVE.

Poke, evil one, thy twirling stick, Hiisi!—thy pole for stirring coals
between the pair of loving ones; may an icy stone from ’neath the earth,
may the sultriness of Christmastide begin to freeze their hearts, to
give their inward parts a chill, that from each other they shall part
and one another shall not know, shall neither know nor recognise nor
make an effort to unite. There are three icy stones, three swarthy
snakes, three fragments of a bath-house stove with which I'll walk
between the pair, shall nine times walk and force the sinners’ hearts
apart from one another for all their life, for all their time, for all
their days, for all their term.

#### § 135. EXCISING SUPERFLUOUS FLESH.

O Hikityttö, Hiisi's girl, come here where there is need of thee, make
tough the iron, give the knife the hue of wheat; sharpen the edge with
sweat (kiki), with honey's froth besprinkle it, for the blade to cut and
not to tear nor cause the blood to flow. Into the flesh if it should
slip, into the blood should turn aside, smear honey on the iron edge,
sweet ointment on the wound.

#### § 136. FOR CATCHING BIRDS.

##### a

O golden forest-king, the feather-hatted woodland lord! Kind
forest-mother that givest gifts, old mistress of the

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

feathered flock I O tiny little forest maid, the fair-cheeked maid of
swarms of birds, the rearer of a hundred broods, that rockest to sleep a
thousand swarms, lead thy covies here, thy bevies and thy flocks of
birds, above nine men in search of them, above eight men that look for
them. I am the chiefest searcher here, I am the best that looks about,
of the nine men in search of birds, of the eight men that look about.
Make flutter and make fly this way thy flocks of birds before the man
that seeks at night, the rover of the woods by day. Conduct thy
blackcock here, thy grey-hens here transport; into the trees may the
blackcock fly to bill and coo at my decoy, may the blackcocks take
delight in it, may the grey-hens cluck. Bind up their wings with twine,
confine their instruments of flight, entwine their legs with string,
roll up their toes in wax, that with their wings they cannot fly, that
with their feet they cannot run till I am ready with my bow, till I can
turn to my hand-bow. <span id="fr_67"></span>[1](#fn_60)

##### b

Lord of the wooded wilds, the island's oldest man, old man of 'feathers'
with rumpled beard! O kindly mistress of Metsola, O Hollow Fir, <span
id="fr_68"></span>[2](#fn_61) old wife of down! bring a 'feather' from
the genial land, send a 'downy feather' from the west to jerk my honeyed
snares, to spring my honeyed nooses set on a honeyed knoll in the
luscious wooded wilds. From the copse take a switch, from the scrub a

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

copperheaded one, from the coppice chase the birds and drive them from
the abandoned fields to flutter with a whirring sound, till for their
wings there is no place. May the twigs sink down as the birds approach
these trapping grounds, these passages <span
id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_62) that must be trod. Bind round their mouths
with silk, twist their heads awry, lest they damage my flaxen noose,
lest they destroy my hempen snares.

##### c

Laaus, the master of Pohjola! grant me to take a full-grown bird <span
id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_63) from these clean sticks, from the whitened
twigs, <span id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_64) as a present for the folk at
home. I'll give thee thanks for it, I'll bow before the famous man, for
it extol thy worthiness, if thou wilt give a full-grown bird <span
id="fr_72"></span>[2](#fn_63) as a present for the folk at home.

#### § 137. ON GOING TO BED. <span id="fr_73"></span>[4](#fn_65)

Welcome! O Earth! welcome! dry land! Welcome! O master of the earth!
welcome to him that welcome gives! With the leave of the Earth, I go to
bed, with the leave of the Earth, with the leave of a Tree, with the
leave of all the house, in terror of the holy field. <span
id="fr_74"></span>[5](#fn_66) May the Earth be a good defence, the
Omnipotent a guard, may the Creator lock the door, may a saint draw-to
the bolt, may Jesus be a shield, Mary—a sword. May Mary lull to

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

may Jesus raise me up to thank my God, to give sleep, to give Jesus
praise.

#### § 138. STARTING ON A JOURNEY.

Dry land's old wife! from the earth arise, Primeval Master!—from the
field, in aid of an only son, as comrade of a famous man, to travel
jollily with me, to help unharnessing the horse, in taking the collar
off, and the bow between the shafts, on the journey of a famous lad,
during the drive of a splendid man \[*v*. wedding party\].

#### § 139. HUNTING IN THE FOREST.

##### a

When for the forest I set out, I, a full-grown man, intend to hunt, O
Forest, take me as thy man, as thy full-grown man, O Tapio, as
arrow-boy, <span id="fr_75"></span>[1](#fn_67) O Wilderness, as an extra
comrade, Knoll! <span id="fr_76"></span>[2](#fn_68) Take a fellow to
salute, to behold the heavenly bow, to greet Great Bear and to eye the
stars.

Forest! be kind; be friendly, Wilderness! be gracious, Air of the gods!
be well inclined, dear Tapio! kind Mistress! be well disposed; be
complacent to my men, be propitious to my dogs, guide a fellow to a
wooded isle, transport him to the knoll, whence quarry can be procured,
the journey's object can be gained, where heads shall be portioned out,
portions shall be distributed.

##### b

O Kuutar, bake a suet cake, a honeyed bannock, Päivätär, with which I'll
make the Forest kind, make Backwoods

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

well disposed on my hunting days, at my periods for seeking game.

Forest! be kindly to my men; Backwoods! be friendly to my dogs, the men
with us are half-grown men, the archers are uncertain shots, the dogs
with us are puppy dogs, our bows are sticks, the arrows tipped with
wood, they will not carry far, the shooting instruments won't hit. Of
honey let the forest smell, the blue backwoods—of mead, of melted
butter—the sides of swamps, of wort—the abandoned fields. Backwoods! let
the cuckoo call; O Forest, on the zither play, so that the 'gold' <span
id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_69) shall lend an ear, the 'silver' take
account of it under a pine with branching head, under a bushy fir.

##### c

O Grove, be kind! be friendly, Wilderness! O blue Backwoods, be amiable!
that I may ramble through the woods, may jostle through the wooded
wilds. Forest, be friendly to my men! Backwoods, be kindly to my dogs!
be appeased by these peace-offerings, by these inducements be mollified,
with which the Creator was appeased, the Omnipotent was mollified. Marry
our men, introduce our full-grown men to the pleasant daughters of the
woods, to the downy-breasted chicks. The eyelashes of other men are not
more smooth, nor the eyebrows more magnificent than those that our men
have. The gait of other men, the silken ribbons on their socks, the
silver laces to their breeks are not more elegant. The bows of other men
are not formed out of gold, nor of silver are their narrow skates, nor
of copper are their skating staffs.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> The hunting dogs
of other men are not more dear (F. golden), more dear or more renowned,
than those that our men have.

##### d

Old man of the forest with light grey beard, of the forest the golden
king! O forest-mistress, Mielikki! Miiritär, forest-daughter-in-law!
mount up on a sloping birch, ascend a bent-down alder-tree, to listen to
my songs, whether my songs are suitable. Gird the forests with a sword,
place a glaive in the backwoods’ hand, clothe the forest in homespun
cloth, dress in German linen the wooded wilds, array in coats the
aspen-trees, the alder-trees in lovely clothes, with silver adorn the
firs, deck the pines with gold, put flowers on the heads of the pines,
and silver on the heads of firs, gird round old pines with copper belts,
the firs with silver belts. Clothe them as in the days of old, in thy
periods for giving gifts, on my days for seeking game, and at the times
I went to shoot. When to the forest I had gone, had attained the far
backwoods, had ascended to the wilderness, had arrived on a mountain
top, the aspens were in silver belts, the birches decked with golden
flowers, pine branches glistened like the moon, the spreading fir-tops
like the sun, like the moon the famous lad shone forth, like the sun—the
doughty full-grown man.

##### e

Old man of the knoll with golden breast, with a hat of twigs, with a
mossy cap! O forest-mistress, Mielikki! O Tapio's daughter, Tellervo
\[*v*. Annikki\], the forest-daughter, the kindly maid, the tiny little
forest lass I blue-mantled old wife of the copse I red-stockinged
mistress of the swamp! O lovely being of the heath! show me the path,

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

open the door, proceed to indicate the path, to give instructions for
the way, to set up posts along the road and landmarks make. O son of
Tapio, Nyyrikki, spruce fellow with a tall red cap, cut marks along the
country side, establish landmarks on the hills, that I, though stupid,
can find the way, I, though a stranger, can repair to the
hunting-grounds of other men, to special woods of full-grown men. Make a
slow-footed man to scud, by the breast of his jacket lug him on, by the
hole of his snow-skate shove him on, lead him by the ferule of his staff
across morasses, across firm land, across the backwoods of Pohjola;
conduct him to a wooded isle, transport him to the knoll where 'gold'
will afford him sport, 'silver' will make him glad, where pines have
flowers on their heads, the firs have silver on their heads, birches
have golden earrings on, alders are dressed in lovely clothes, the
aspen-trees—in pale grey stuff, the heather flowers—in gold.

##### f

O forest-mistress, Mielikki, famed 'golden buckle of the woods,' pray
come along to give a hand, to stretch thy right hand forth on these my
days for seeking game, at the times I go to hunt. Take the golden keys
from the ring at thy side, step to the storehouse on the hill, into the
cellar lightly trip, open quickly Tapio's magazine, disturb the
forest-tower, set free the gold to move about, the 'silver' to wander
forth towards a white man, the colour wholly of the birch. <span
id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_70) But pray be on thy guard that the quicker
ones don't slip away, for tardy I am at snowshoeing, am slow at shoving
along.

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

##### g

O forest-mistress, Mielikki, the mother with a lovely face, get ready my
reserve, make my allotted share leap up in the blue backwoods, at the
centre of the 'golden' knoll. Open quickly the honeyed chest, disturb
the honeyed box, set free a drove to run about, a file of animals to
skip before the man in search of them, at the steps of him that craves.

If thou thyself be disinclined, then send thy serving-maids, direct thy
thralls, command the obeyers of commands. Thou art no mistress, so to
speak, if thou keepest no serving-maids, keepst not a hundred
serving-maids, a thousand that obey commands, that keep watch over all
the herd, that tend the forest animals, that regulate the lengthy flock
and guide the great string of animals. I keep a single serving-lass that
is in her movements brisk, is energetic at her work and open-handed with
her gifts.

##### h

King <span id="fr_79"></span>[1](#fn_71) of the forest, Kuuritar, that
maketh hoofs, that bendeth paws, open thy 'money' magazine, unbolt thy
store, set free a drove to run about, a file of animals to skip; let a
'golden fur-coat' issue forth, a homespun cloth' come trotting down
along the silver path, along the copper track from the wild creature's
place of birth, from the rearing-ground of 'precious pelts' (F. money
hair), to the places where I set my gins, to the passages that must be
trod. Whoe’er is quick at galloping, keep in check with reins, with a
bit keep straight, whoe’er's not quick at galloping, strike with a
switch to quicken him,

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

with a rope's end give a thwack, with a cock's beak tickle him, and prod
him with a golden spur.

##### i

O Ukko, the golden king, the silver governor, take a golden club or a
copper hammer from the end of a silver spar, from the head of a copper
nail, and with it beat the wilderness, bang the gloomy wooded wilds,
that into squirrels pine branches turn, into otters—densely wooded
wilds. Good is a beaten wilderness, and gloomy wooded wilds well banged,
so that a dog can run ahead, a whelp can work aright.

##### k

Old Ukko with the rumpled beard, O hollow fir with fir-twig hat, pray
come and beat the wilderness, make its edges shake on a summer night,
the first afternoon. Belabour, Ukko, a young tree, make stumps resound
with thuds, with a fiery sword, with a golden club. Drive out the
creatures to the edge, to the openest abandoned fields, from the end of
every jutting point, from the corner of each wilderness, on my days for
seeking game, at my periods for setting traps.

##### l

Give me, Ukko, of thy 'ewes,' of thine own 'rams,' bring forth thy
'gold,' all thy 'drooping ears.' Bring them without a fear, without
suspicion let them rove; those that are resting in the grove, that are
reposing under boughs, that are sleeping on a knoll, are paddling the
bottom of a brook, send in threes from the forest vales, in fives and
sixes from the glades along the golden cattle-roads, along the silver
paths, where the bridges are laid with silk, bridges with silk,

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

with velvet—swamps, wet spots with homespun cloth, with Silesian
linen—dirty spots, with linen from Germany, with a fringe of homespun
stuff.

##### m

Give, dearest God, to a supplicating man; give him ten animals (F.
hoofs), diverse in aspect and in hue. One skin won't make a coat of fur,
no rug of fur is got from two; <span id="fr_80"></span>[1](#fn_72)
unless some hundreds should be got, some thousands hither should be
brought; a thousand into a coat will go, a hundred into a rug will fit.

Pray don't be angry, God, Earth's Ruler, don't be furious; at least in
my life permit, in my own time let it occur to see them with mine eyes,
to touch them with my hands. For stones I shall not give thee thanks,
for stumps I sha’n’t prostrate myself, for willows certainly sha’n’t
serve, for boughs of fir I coax thee not; I make request for 'hoofs,' I
pray incessantly for 'feet,' I ask for those that go on hoofs, that run
about on nimble feet, not for the best, nor for the worst, for a medium
quality I ask.

Give, dearest God, bestow on a man, on me, give as thou gayest mine
ancestors, to that huge family, enough to eat, enough to drink, presents
enough to the village folk; from the day's toil release a child, <span
id="fr_81"></span>[2](#fn_73) procure him rest at eventide, when the
cattle are coming home, when the woods of pine are turning grey.

##### n

O Tapio's daughter, Annikki \[*v*. Tyytikki\], the tiny little
forest-lass with down-like shirt, with a fine spun shirt, the

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

woman of complexion fair, with shouts awake the forest-king, arouse the
backwoods’ *haltia*, to give me of his precious ones, his animals (F.
hoofs) of every hue; play a tune on a honeyed pipe, pipe on a delicious
pipe into the comely mistress's ear, the gracious mistress of the woods,
so that she speedily shall hear, shall arise from sleep, since she won't
listen in the least, not even rarely will awake, although I beg
incessantly, keep murmuring with a golden tongue.

Lass Annikki that keeps the keys! Eva, the tiny little serving-maid!
advance to the magazine with the delightful mistress's leave; fling open
the magazine of gifts, the lock-less doorway of the loft. Thou art no
lass at all, no lassie of the keys indeed, unless thou open the
magazine, and, having opened it, give forth some greater and some
smaller game, some of every sort of hue. Twist a ruddy thread on thy
ruddy cheek, and draw it across the stream, across the stream of
Pohjola, for the animals to run upon, for the 'money-pelts' to skip
along in front of the man in search of them, before the steps of the man
that walks.

##### o

O forest-daughter, delightful girl, O Tapio's daughter, Tuulikki, chase
the wild creatures out to run from the forest-castle slopes, make them
to scamper, make them scud for my good luck. When the wild creatures
reach the track, hurry them on along the track, place thy two palms as a
fence on either side, lest the wild creatures dash away, the forest-herd
should bounce aside, or on a by-path should diverge. When they look over
it, then raise the fence; when they look down, then lower down the
fence; when the animals don't move, then leave the fence as it is;

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

if the wild creatures dash away, or on a by-path should diverge, lift
them up on the path by the ears, bring them back on the track by the
horns. If a fallen tree oppose their course, shove it aside; if trees
lie across the path, smash them in half; if a fence oppose itself,
prostrate the fence; if a river chance to be in front, a rivulet—across
the path, cast down thy silk to be a bridge, as a foot-bridge—scarlet
cloth, along which the drove can run, for a path for them to go across.
Bring them across the shallow sounds, over the waters draw them on, as a
sail employ a tail, or use a pizzle as a sail.

##### p

O Tapio's daughter, Tuulikki, the famous beauty of the woods, O
Pihlajatar, little lass, short daughter, Tuometar, O kindly mistress,
Hongatar, fair wife of the forest-environs, from a spinny take a switch,
a fir-branch from a clump of firs, chase the wild creatures out to run
before a miserable lad. If in this direction none appear, pray seek them
further off, from Lapland's gloomy wooded wilds, from the utmost border
of the north, from under Kuha-vuori's top, from Kuusivaara's peak, from
near lake Imantra, from the boundary land of the Turja Fell; more
sloping is the country here, more flowing are the waters here; here in a
straight line pathways stretch, here gates fall down.

##### q

O lively woman, Vitsäri, O Tapio's daughter, Tellervo, take a whip of
mountain ash, a cattle-scourge of juniper from the rear of Tapio's hill,
from Tuomi-vaara's further side, and with it drive the timorous, hurry
along the younger ones. Whichever is slow to run, at starting is a

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

lazy one, quicken up with a switch, drive with shouts, with a crack of
the lash, so that the switch shall whiz, the willow-top shall make a
crash; give a swipe across the sides, or across the withers strike, at
the forehead aim no blow, don't thwack upon the skull.

##### r

Old wife of the forest with lovely hair, 'Gold hair-plait' of a hundred
woods! O honeyed maiden of Metsola, old man of the forest with flowing
beard! old wife of Tapio, Nyrkytär! and forest-Tapio himself! O son of
Tapio, Pinneys, don't hold them back, don't hold them fast: Christ
christened thee, thee the Omnipotent baptized in the middle of the
forest-field, to tend the forest animals. Fetch me some forest-ale, that
I may forest-honey drink; in the forest much ale is found, in the forest
is honey sweet, myself have seen it to be true, when as a young man I
was there. Send forth the droves to run, the forest animals to rush,
without suspicion let them come, without precaution—bound along before
the man in search of them, up to the steps of him that begs.

##### s

O Pohja's open-handed \[*v*. blue-mantled\] wife, Laaus, the master of
Pohjola! O Sinisirkku, Pohja's maid, O Pohja's daughter, Pohja's son, O
kindly mistress, Hyypiö, distinguished woman, Varvutar! stir up thine
animals, frighten away thy herd from sleeping in the woods, from
slumbering under boughs of fir, reposing in the leafy grove, from
snoozing on the sward; induce thy droves to run, the forest animals to
bolt, cause the elks to scud along, grand reindeer to hurry up, their
legs to take a sudden spring,

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

their hoofs to move with rapidity to my spots for catching animals, to
these passes where I look for game. In profusion let them come and hurry
with speedy foot, along morasses, over lands, along long streams,
through the forest dense, across the thinly wooded wilds, across the
leafy wooded hills, across the lofty mountains too; then when they
hither have arrived, when they have reached their journey's end, do
thou, Mist-maiden, maid of Fog, the 'Leaf-bud,' 'Ship-borne Yarn' \[*v*.
O Tapio's daughter, Luonnotar\], <span id="fr_82"></span>[1](#fn_74)
with a sieve sift mist, keep scattering fog before the wild creature's
face, when nine paces off, rub fog upon its eyes, let mist descend upon
its pate till I am ready with my bow, have arranged myself to shoot.

##### t

O forest-youth with a golden hat! O forest-mistress, Juonetar \[*v*.
king of the forest, Kuippana\], transport thy 'gold,' induce thy
'silver' to approach to my spots for catching animals, these passes
where I look for game. Send the best of thy flock, of thy herd—the most
superb from the blue backwoods’ interior, from a liver-coloured hole,
from Kuha-vuori's peak, from Paksu-vaara's slopes, from near the rapids
of Imantra, from Kana-saari's deep recess. From a spinny take a switch,
a birch from a forest-dell, send forth the drove to run, cause a
'money-pelt' to break away. Any one too inert to run, make lively with
the switch, correct with the birchen bough; of any one that is quick to
run raise the mouth with a bit, with halters lift its head. Permit the
game to run this way, a 'money-pelt' to rush headlong. More sloping is

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

the country here, a milder climate here is found; here rivers flow, here
waters fall.

##### u

O Hiisi's little boy that rides a good two-year-old, take thy golden
spur from the end of a silver shelf, from a golden chest, from a silver
box, tickle with it the wild creatures' flanks, into their armpits dig
it too; cause the drove to run, the wild animals to caper round towards
the man in search of them, the stately full-grown man, in copper
harness, with golden rings.

#### § 140. FOR SPRAINS, INJURIES OF THE BONE OR SINEWS (VEINS).

##### a

Thyself, aërial God, thou Spirit Lord Jesus, harness thy colt, prepare
thy sleigh, seat thyself at the back and drive in thine ornamented
sleigh through the bones and flesh, through the loosened veins; bring
together bone and flesh, unite the ends of veins, place gold in the
fissure of the bone and silver in between the flesh, flesh where the
bone has been contused, blood where a vein has broken through. Where a
bone is smashed, fasten thereto another bone; where flesh has been
removed, insert more flesh; where a vein has slipt from its place, unite
the vein to its place again; where blood has leaked, there cause fresh
blood to flow; where the skin has broken off, cause skin to grow upon
the place. Bless to their place, in their place adjust the bone to bone,
the flesh to flesh, the joints to corresponding joints, to their former
place, their earlier site, so that the place shall not be felt, so that
the site no longer smarts.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

##### b

Come, maiden, from above the air, the maiden from the sky's mid-point,
in a copper boat, in a copper skiff. Row with honeyed oars, pull hard in
the honeyed punt on either side of the wound from iron, of the injuries
produced by steel. Row a boat composed of veins, cause a boat of bone to
glide through the bones, through the joints, through places where the
flesh has gone; row through the fissures in the bone, along the crevices
in joints; row through the bone to remove the pain, through the flesh to
remove the smarts. Lengthen the veins that are short, shorten those over
long, into their place arrange the veins, make every end of even length,
arrange the large veins mouth to mouth, the small veins end to end, the
threadlike veins in dove-tail form, and the arteries *vis-à-vis*. Then a
slender needle take with a silken thread in the needle's eye, with the
slender needle sew, with the tin needle stitch, knot up the ends of the
veins, with silken ribbons tie them up.

##### c

O beauteous woman of the veins, the beauteous woman Suonetar, the lovely
one that spinneth veins from the golden tuft of a beautiful
spinning-staff on a copper spinning-rock, that weavest a cloth of veins
in a wee corner, in a nook, come hither in my necessity, approach when
summoned here with a skein of veins in the belt, under thine arm a
bundle of skin, to tie up veins, to knot the ends of veins in wounds, in
gashes, in rents, in holes.

##### d

O Tuoni's son with ruddy cheek, twist quickly ’gainst thy left thigh,
’neath thy right hand a scarlet cord with which

<span id="page_246">p. 246</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I'll close the
raw, shall draw together the bleeding cut, shall bind together the
veins, shall tie the ends of veins in knots. If I'm unable properly to
close the bleeding cut, tie up the veins thyself, join together the ends
of veins, that the veins can't move, that the blood can't flow.

#### § 141. WHEN BUTTED BY A RAM OR HE-GOAT.

O mother dear, Saint Catharine, come hither in nimble shoes, in thy
black stockings proudly march, in thy white stockings wander forth, with
red shoe-laces hurry along, with thy blue ribbons hasten here, regard
thy creature close at hand, nigh at hand—what thou hast made. A ram
\[*v*. a goat\] indeed, a wanton one, has already done a shameful deed,
has begun his ugly work, has set to work at boorish deeds.

#### § 142. BREWING ALE.

##### a

O bee, the nimble 'bird,' the king of the meadow flowers, fly thither,
where I bid, whither I bid and I command, along one sea, o’er a second
one, a little slanting o’er a third, to an island in the open main, to a
skerry in the sea. There lies a girl asleep, a 'tinny breast'—fatigued
on the honey-dropping sward, at the edge of a honeyed field; a luscious
grass is at her side, red clover—in her lap. Into the sweet stuff poke
thy wing, into the honey thy tongue's thick-end, bring luscious juice
upon thy wing, honey on thy tongue's string from the splendid head of
grass, from the cup of the golden flower, as ferment for the ale, as
bane for the new-made drink.

<span id="page_247">p. 247</span>

##### b

My little martin, my wee 'bird,' my lovely little 'money-pelt,' go
thither, where I command, whither I bid and I command, to the North's
remotest fields, to the trampled ground of Lapland's bairns, where the
mares fight, the stallions equally compete; with thy paws collect the
yeast, into thy hands let flow the froth from the mouth of the fighting
mare, of the stallion that contends, as ferment for the ale, as yeast
for this small beer.

#### § 143. FOR GOOD LUCK.

Creator, grant! accord, O God, grant me the luck to live, accord that I
shall live in peace, shall ever comfortably dwell on the border of my
field, in the centre of my farm, to give me joy of an afternoon, in the
forenoon to afford delight. Be on thy children's side, be a constant
helper of thy bairns, a continual support by night, a watchful guard by
day, that the sun shall not in anger shine, that the moon shall not in
anger gleam, that the wind shall not in anger blow, that the rain shall
not in anger fall, that bitter cold no frost-bites cause, that the hard
weather shall not harm. Construct an iron fence, a castle of stone erect
around my property, on both sides of my farm from the earth extending to
the sky, reaching from the sky to earth, as my abode, my only one, for
my protection, my support, by help of which I'll do my work, by its aid
o’er waters row, so that no foe shall eat too much, no enemy snatch much
away.

<span id="page_248">p. 248</span>

#### § 144. SQUIRREL-HUNTING.

##### a

Tapio's daughter, Annikki, Tapio's girl with honeyed mouth! stoop down
to 'milk,' prepare to give on this my day for catching game, on my
hunting days. Open wide the storehouse doors, set ajar the garret doors,
throw out my share upon a bough, my portion on a bending tree, by fives
from the dense young scrub, by sixes from the forest knolls, by sevens
from the woodland ridge, by eights from clumps of juniper, in front of
my dogs, my dogs, my men. Induce my dog to bark, let my hound give
tongue; stretch a scarlet thread, spin with a buzzing sound blue thread,
along which an arrow can ascend to a young squirrel's brow, to a
'cone-biter's' nose, to the nostrils of 'blue-wool.'

##### b

O forest-mistress, Mielikki, kind forest-mother that giveth gifts, the
honeyed maiden of Metsola, the golden forest-king! give something to me
to shoot, some larger 'hoofs,' some smaller 'hoofs,' some 'hoofs' of
medium size; cause the hillocks to resound, bring down the squirrels to
the dells, chase the 'money' to the forest's edge, that I can strike
them with a staff, can seize them with my hand and fist. If I can't
strike them with a staff, thyself direct them to a branch, thyself
support my bow, steady my gun thyself, that I can shoot the squirrel on
the branch, the 'forest-cat' upon its swing, with which I shall my
tribute pay, shall carry away my receipt for rent.

<span id="page_249">p. 249</span>

#### § 145. AGAINST NIGHTMARE.

Rahko in iron boots makes a 'stony hill' revolve. O Rahko, put the
incubus under a rafter, ’neath a beam, ’neath an iron roof, ’neath a
tongueless bell. If that is not enough, should it pay no heed at all, I
have a weighing-beam, a steelyard ’neath my back, under my head—a sack,
a sack below, another above, into which put the incubus, collect
together 'Hiisi's dead.'

#### § 146. AGAINST SWELLINGS AND SCAB.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, spin a blue
thread from thy golden \[*v*. blue\] distaff bound with flax; from above
a long belt of cloud, from the sky let fall the thread, with which I'll
smash the scab, with which I'll press the swellings down; I'll lower the
rising lumps, with the finger without a name, <span
id="fr_83"></span>[1](#fn_75) on a human being's skin, on the body of a
mother's son. Let tumours grow on trees, tumours on trees, on the
earth—excrescences, watery blisters upon shoots, boils charged with
blood on sapling firs, not on a human being's skin, on the body of a
mother's son.

##### b

Brown maid \[*v*. smith\] of scabs, bad mother \[*v*. king\] of boils!
snatch from a pig the snout, seize the tush of a foal, with which
thou’lt flog the scab, with which thou’lt squeeze the boils from this
human skin, from the body of a mother's

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

son. Pluck thine evil scabs, to serve as berries \[*v*. strawberries\],
take them to the earth, to serve as berried knolls—to swamps, to a land
devoid of strawberries; in thy mouth dissolve the scab, cook the matter
on thy tongue.

##### c

Red maiden, Pullitar! on thy left knee twist a scarlet cord, with which
I shall bind the roots, while squeezing the scabs, while pressing the
boils.

##### d

To be covered with boils is bad, to live covered with sores—a plague;
old Väinämöinen, reliable, the diviner of all time! raise thy paddle
\[*v*. sword\] from the sea, thy 'shovel'—from the wave, with which thou
It smash the scab, wilt thresh the abscesses away from a poor human
being's skin, from the body of a mother's son.

#### § 147. AGAINST VERY SHARP FROST (*pakkanen*).

##### a

Sharp Frost, the son of Puhuri \[*v*. Pusuri, *v*. Näserva\], winter's
benumbing son! don't freeze my nails, don't demand my toes, don't nip
with frost my head, don't touch my ears. Thou hast enough to freeze,
many to nip with frost, without frost-biting a human skin, the body of a
mother's son.

Begone! freeze snaky fields, freeze swamps, freeze land, the
water-willows nip, attack the knots on aspen-trees, cause roots of birch
to ache, bite the sapling firs; refrigerate hot stones, flat stones that
are burning hot, iron rocks and hills of steel, the wildly-rushing
Vuoksi falls, the frightful rapids

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

of Imatra, the margin of the Northern sea, the declivities of the
boundless sea, the swirling water's orifice, the terrific midstream
broil.

##### b

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, bring me a
soft fur-coat, fetch a hairy coat of wool, with which I'll shelter me,
poor wretch, so that the sharp frost cannot bite. Into my stockings cast
some fire, into my tatters—bits of coal, so that the sharp frost cannot
bite, that the hard weather touch me not. Fetch hither a misty cloud,
bring a rainbow-coloured one, shake a warm covering—a mist on the
swamps, a mist o’er the land; it is pleasant to live in mist, in a
district wrapt in fog.

If still a gangrene should ensue, let a scrap of butter, another of fat,
be laid on the spots sharp frost has nipt, on the place the hard weather
touched.

#### § 145. FOR CATCHING REINDEER.

In the North is the reindeer's origin, from Lapland is the creature
sent; then, rock-like, bent, curved antlers grew on the reindeer's
splendid brow, on the reindeer's powerful head. Crone of the North, with
powerful nails, with powerful nails, with an axe of bone, that maketh
'hoofs,' <span id="fr_84"></span>[1](#fn_76) that bendeth 'paws,' throw
open the iron chest, slip back the bolt upon the game, send forth the
game to run in the path of the lad that hunts, from the North's remotest
fields, from Lapland's level tracts to my places for taking game, to my
traps that should be trod.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

#### § 149. FOR PLEURISY (STITCH).

##### a

Ho! Ukko, God on high, the capable and honest man, that dwells below the
sky, that abides above the clouds, let drop thy pincers from a cloud
into my right hand, the hafts of which are of earthly worms, the
points—of variegated snakes; the sorcerer's 'arrows' with them I'll
lift, I'll draw the 'bloody needles' forth from a wretched human being's
skin, from the body of a woman's (*kapo*) son.

##### b

Smith Ilmarinen, thou thyself the everlasting hammerer, make tiny little
tongs, pincers that are very small, with which I'll lift out 'Lempo's
arrow,' shall extract the 'bloody knife' from a poor human being's skin,
from the body of a mother's son. This man to Mana must not go, his
long-haired one to Tuonela, without being slaughtered by disease,
removed by ordinary death.

##### c

Old crone below the earth (*manner*)! Boy of the field's profoundest
depths! come to watch quite close at hand, to pay attention nigh at
hand, lest Death should eat too much, Disease should reap o’ermuch. Make
great exertions with thy knee, resolve with thy finger-points to lift
the sorcerer's arrow out, to summon back the shafts; with thy back-teeth
seize hold of the sorcerer's arrow-knob, of the end of Piru's shafts.

If no heed at all is paid to that, raise from the earth thy men, thy
heroes from the hard dry land, to help a well-beloved man, to surround a
lonely one.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

d

Blind crone \[*v*. whore\] of Pohjola \[*v*. Väinölä\], Ulappala's
blinded hag! come to lift the arrows out, to disengage the spears, to
wrench the shooting-irons out, to remove the jagged points from a naked
skin, from one without a stitch of clothes.

And if no heed is paid thereto, in the land of the North an old man
lives, with stony nails, with iron teeth; ’tis he that draweth arrows
out, that loosens spears, that extracteth jagged points. Approach, old
man, to take, O 'Stony-nails' to cast, O 'Steely jaws' to snatch, O
'Teeth of iron' to wrench—come lift the sorcerer's arrows out, the
spears of Keito disengage with thy stony nails, with thine iron teeth,
to prevent their stinging with pleurisy, to prevent their racking one
with pain. Snap the arrows in two, into three pieces smash the spear,
into creases squash its point (F. nose).

##### e

An eagle dwells in Turjaland that has serviceable claws, that has five
talons on its toes resembling five reaping-hooks, its mouth with fire
burns, its throat is aglow with flame, at the tip of the wing there are
bright eyes, organs of sight at the feather's end. Come, eagle, from
Turjaland, from Lapland cast thyself, O bird, that strikest blows
incessantly, come and strike this blow as well; with one of thy talons
strike the underside of a stone, raise the other foot and strike at
Keito's spear, at the jagged spike of Aijö's son, at the end of the
arrow's knob; the bloody arrow carry off, the pointed needle snatch from
out of a roaring man, from out of a moaning full-grown man.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

##### f

O Lempo, take thy flying shafts, O Piru, take thine arrows back, O
limping fellow—thy pointed darts; jerk out thine arrows by the shafts,
the sooner the better too, when I have had my say. The bloody needles
convey away, tug out the aggravating stings, which thou madest formerly,
maybe from the fragments of an evil oak, from the morsels of a brittle
tree.

O Keito, launch thy little spears, provide thy shafts with plumes, and,
Piru, cast thy pikes on mighty battle-fields, on the slaughter-plains of
men, down a croaking raven's throat, down the mouth of a cawing crow, to
be by the raven carried off, to be borne to a distance by the crow to
thy family, to thy place of birth, to thy kith and kin, thou wretch, so
that they'll ne’er be heard of more, nor seen again in all thy life.

##### g

Hiisi, remove thy sting! thou devil's son (*pirulainen*)—thy goad, O
Äijö's son—thy pointed darts, Lempo—thy leaf-shaped spears! from a human
being's skin, from the body of a woman's son, before the rising of the
sun, the uprising of the 'morning star.' Stick thy goads in, let thy
projectiles fly, plunge in thy spears, make blunt thy jagged spikes in a
bear's hard bones, in Bruin's roaring throat, in the home where three
Bruins live, in the home of a brace of bears.

If that is not enough, shoot thine arrows forth, launch angrily thy
pointed shafts, thy winged projectiles cast into thy mother's hinder
part, the armpit of thy nurturer, into thine own begetter's heart, the
lungs of her that brought thee forth, not into a human skin, the body of
a woman's (*kapo*) son.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

#### § 150. TO THROW A SPELL OVER A GUN.

Boy, come from Pohjola, child—from the real land of Lapps, force thy
chubby hand, thy thick thumb press, thy fleshy finger introduce down the
copper 'cross-bow's' throat, in front of the gun's big mouth, down the
throat of the iron 'churn,' so that the lead sha’n’t hit a man, the ball
of tin sha’n’t be discharged.

(If that is not enough, if the boy from Pohjola can't deaden the power
of lead, can't block the fiery mouth), O God the father, thou thyself,
thyself, O Jesus, lord of air, that best can deaden the power of lead,
that flingeth 'kernel-fruit,' that knoweth how to throw a ball, to
recite the charm for stopping balls, draw a watery covering, let a
slushy coating grow, from the sky let a mildew fall on the quiver of the
enemy, some water on the touch-hole drop, grease on the iron orifice, so
that the hammer won't strike fire, that the touch-hole will not flash.

If a strange bloodthirsty dog should discharge a leaden ball, should
make a bullet slide, direct it into his stumpy tail, into his
hind-quarters let it roll. May the hide of an elk from Hiisi's land take
possession of his gun, may it twist the touch-hole pan, may it shorten
his lead, may it smash his egg,' so that it shall not cause me hurt, not
penetrate to give me pain, despite the nature of God, the wish of the
heavenly man.

#### § 151. SETTING TRAPS.

##### a

O Ukko, give thine axe, thy silver hatchet, with which I shall cut down
a tree. I'll hew a honeyed aspen-tree from

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

a honeyed knoll, from a golden mound, I'll shove the thick end towards
the sky, on the ground I'll drop the branching head, its thick end
towards the nor’-nor’-west, towards the east its branching head. Then
rain upon my twigs, on these clean sticks, on the whitened twigs, rain
honey from the sky, from the clouds let virgin honey drip; rain honey on
the branching top, then luscious juice upon the bark, into the heart let
the honey flow.

O Ukko, cause fresh snow to fall, sprinkle a little recent snow on the
very slippery ice, on the smooth and slippery heath, that a fellow's
track may be unperceived, that a fellow's breath give out no smell. Yet
if some tracks be visible, let the track be the track of a hare; if a
breath should cause a smell, let the smell be from forest firs.

From a thicket take a switch, from the trunk of three birch-trees, with
which thou’lt ramble through the scrub, wilt cause the bushy groves to
shake. Beat with the switch a lazy one to these places and these knolls,
under the traps of other men, avoiding other people's snares.

##### b

O good old man, splendid old man, the golden forest-king, give me of thy
ewes and rams. Supply for the sake of men, for the sake of men produce
from thy shirt the best, from thy waistcoat the fattest ones, fling thy
'packages of wool,' thy 'little sheaves of flax,' under these snares of
mine; poke in thy 'handful of flax,' and thy 'golden distaff bound with
wool,' firstly, this very night, intermediately the second night,
lastly, at the end of the week, under the silver spar, and to touch the
copper trigger-pin.

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

##### c

O forest-mistress, Simanter, with sheath of tin, with silver belt, that
dwellest in the mountain tracts, that makest a din on the copper hills;
let the tallest of thy serving-maids, the best of them that serve for
hire, open the mountain magazines, with a banging noise the passages.
Let a long file of creatures run, let the mountain cattle' rush over the
traps of other men, or under other people's snares, to snap my twigs, to
let my triggers off. If the cattle run not speedily, won't hurry at a
rapid pace, below their hinder feet may Hiisi's hottest coals be set,
which with their glowing ash will burn, will scratch the herd with
burning sparks.

#### § 152. FOR A GOOD SLEIGHING-ROAD.

O Ukko, let some fresh snow fall, sprinkle some fine fresh fallen snow,
snow for a sleigh to glide along, fresh snow along which a sledge can
dash; hide the berry stalks upon the ground, the stalks of heather cover
up.

#### § 153. FOR CATCHING FOXES.

##### a

King of the forest, Kuippana, brisk man of the woods with tree-moss
beard! O liberal mistress of the woods, the kind gift-giver of the
woods, take a fancy to my salt, approve of these boiled groats, feed a
man with thy 'sweet rye cakes,' and coax him with thy 'groats'; induce
the 'gold' to move, the 'silver' to wander forth ’long a golden lane,
’long a silver path, into the little golden 'cup,' into the silver
'farrier's tongs.' Drive briskly the animals, the forest-creatures

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

hastily, toward my gins that are made of iron, toward my traps that are
formed of steel; and then when they are close, when they have reached
the spot, let my iron give a snap, jerk the points of steel.

##### b

Take a fancy, Forest, to my salt, O Tapio—to my dish of groats, thou
golden forest-king with fir-twig hat, with a tree-moss beard, O
Mimerkki, the forest's wife with sheath of tin, with a silver belt, O
Raunikko \[*v*. Rammikko\] that regulates the 'cash,' Louhi, the
mistress of Pohjola, let rattle thy hand that is filled with 'cash,' let
gleam thine ornamented hand. O son of Tapio, Nyyrikki, spruce fellow
with a tall red cap, with a cloak of blue, with a beard of white, take
thy tall cap of hoofs, sow the smaller 'hoofs,' sow the larger 'hoofs,'
without suspicion let them come, rush in torrents without a halt,
strutting along in socks of black, tripping along on their neat feet to
my spots for catching game, to my traps that must be trod. Choose white
ones for other men, the black ones suit me best; if hereabouts they do
not show, then fetch them from a remoter part, from over nine deep
woods, from a hundred stages off.

##### c

O stalwart maiden, Päistärys \[*v*. Tapio's maiden, Ristikko\], that
strews flax-stalks (*päistär*), strew 'stalks of flax,' scatter thy
'cloaks' about in the blue backwoods, in honeyed Metsola; without
suspicion let them come, without misgiving let them run, without
perceiving the smell of man, without their scenting human scent, to my
spots for catching game, to my traps that should be trod, cross-breasted

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

ones from Pohjola, black 'coats of fur' from Turjaland, to make into
fluttering clothes for lords, to make into garments for men in power.

#### § 154. AGAINST INJURIES FROM SPELLS.

##### a

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the god above the cloud, when needed hither
come, when petitioned hasten here to see these pains, to avert the
calamity, to remove the injury from spells, to eject the plague. Fetch
me a fiery sword, bring a sparkling blade, with which I'll sever the
spell-wrought ills, with which I'll scatter injuries, shall tear out
Hiisi's cankerous sore, shall for ever check the brute; I assign the
torments to the winds, the pains to the wide abandoned fields.

##### b

O Ukko, at the sky's mid-point, at the edge of a thundercloud, come
hither to shelter me, to be my aid, my only aid, to remove this plague,
to counteract the violent one, to undo the fiendish deed, to tear out
Hiisi's cankerous sore, to dislodge the spell-wrought injuries with a
fiery pointed sword, with a sparkling blade, on the point of which
gleamed the moon, on the hilt of which shone the sun.

##### c

O Ukko, at the sky's mid-point, at the furthest end of a ragged cloud,
come hither as my guard, to eject the plague, to remove the hurts; take
from my mouth the 'bit of Death,' from my neck the 'chains of Manala,'
from my shoulders 'Tuoni's reins,' when I am shouting in distress, when
I am yelling out in pain.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

Fetch me a fiery sword, shove quickly a sparkling one in a sheath of
fire into my right hand; with it I'll slash that evil one, with it I'll
claw the toad, the Hiitolainen I shall scourge, shall stop the beastly
creature's noise, so that he shall not raise his snout, no more shall
shake his head so long as he lives, while the Lord's moon shines.

##### d

Arise, O Sea, with thy men, O Landlocked Lake, with thy old men, with
thy crowds, O Dweller in the stream, with thy nation to a man, to remove
these plagues, to undo the spell-sent harm, to grind this Hiisi and this
Juutas crush, to flog the Perkele, to squeeze the De'il (*Piru*), to
dislodge the spell-wrought injuries, to eject the plagues, to eat the
curses of villagers, to lap the incantations up.

##### e

In the north-east an eagle dwells, a famous bird in Turjaland; under its
wing are a hundred men, another hundred above its wing, at the tip of
the tail are a thousand men, on every feather there are ten; all the men
are girt with swords, the heroes with their instruments, all the iron
throng, the people of Väinölä. O eagle, from the northeast come, from
Lapland fling thyself, O bird, to save this head, to preserve this life,
to remove the spell-wrought injuries, to eject the plagues, to eat the
curses of villagers, to lap the incantations up.

#### § 155. FOR TRAPPING SEA-OTTERS.

O Christopher (Ristoppi), the river-chief, the golden river-king, O
Nokiatar \[*v*. Jokiatar\], youthful girl, that

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

watches over the river-herd, pursue the river-herd with shouts, make
them to rush out like a flood from the holes of their stony dens, like a
herd of cattle—from the rocks, through a silver 'door,' through a
'window' of gold <span id="fr_85"></span>[1](#fn_77) to soft pillows, to
beds of wool. In a hundred ditches have otters been caught, in a
thousand streamlets they are found, but in one ditch they must be
caught, and it has a silver 'door.' If hereabouts they do not show, then
fetch them from a remoter part, from the side of Imantra Lake, along a
river of Pohjola, over nine men in search of them, under eight persons
on the watch. If thou a full-grown otter guide, drive one the colour of
the wave through the silver 'door,' through the 'window' of gold, I'll
give thee gold as old as the moon, give silver as bright as the sun.

#### § 156. TO DRIVE AWAY RAIN.

O cease, good God, from raining, blowing, and maintaining a cloudy sky;
O Ukko, god of the sky, thyself; the mighty lord of air, to Russia
\[*v*. Viborg\] conduct the clouds, take the rainbows to Karjala; they
are waiting for water there, an old woman has borne a child, no water
has it seen as yet. A little child is there—a boy, and another child—a
girl, of one night old, of two months old, they all as yet are
unbaptized.

#### § 157. WHEN CHARMING THE SICK.

##### a

Old Väinämöinen, arise! old man, from sleeping cease, to help a
well-beloved son, to be comrade to a famous man in this laborious work,
in the hard task laid on him.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They need me now,
they need me, they require that I divine a deep origin and remove a
great injury, when I start on a war, on a battle with disease.

##### b

Old man, old Väinämöinen! the diviner as old as time, when needed hither
come, when summoned here approach. A wretched man lies groaning here,
one of little strength is in his bed with an unusual disease, with one
unknown by name; the floor is rotting underneath, the roof is mouldering
overhead. From thine out-house take a bathing-switch, from thy belt a
honeyed wing, sweep the fearful (F. holy) sparks away, extinguish the
fearful (F. holy) plagues with thy honeyed bathing-switch, with thy
mellifluous wing; lift up the disease to the sky, to the wind apportion
the pains, for the wind to rock, for bad weather to toss to the distant
limits of the north, to the flat, open land of Lapps, or under deep
waves, on the black mud there, where there is neither moon nor sun, nor
weather that will cause delight.

##### c

Thyself, O Jesus, lord of air, the God that livest in the sky, when
needed hither come, when summoned here approach; here thy son is lying
sick, thine offspring writhes in agony. Some of thy spittle, O Jesus,
spit, some of thy foam, Omnipotent, as ointment for the pains, as a
remedy for sores; make him well at night, restored to health by day,
more perfect than he was before, and better than he was of old.

##### d

Creator! come to repeat a charm, O God, to speak, Almighty! to heal,
make the sick man well at night, make

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

him hale by day; make holy with thy words, assuage with thy formulas
(*lause*), thy words are holy ones, thy formulas are well arranged. From
thy pure mouth speak words of continual help on the injuries of every
kind, so that anguish sha’n’t be felt above, that no pain shall
penetrate the heart, so that it sha’n’t be felt the least, not even a
particle of pain.

##### e

Pure water! water's mistress! water's mistress, water's master! make me
to be healthy now, perfectly well as formerly, since I pray with chosen
words and give to thee as offerings, blood to appease and salt to
reconcile.

#### § 158. CASTRATION.

##### a

Old man of Hiisi, Hiisi's old wife, the fiery-bearded one of hell! just
bring some people from the hill, from the mountain top—some lumps, to
press this rascal down, to check this violent one, so that its foot from
the swamp can't rise, nor its hoof from the hardened earth.

##### b

Blind harlot of Pohjola, Ulappala's wholly blind one! milk here thy
milk, let trickle from thy teats into the nasty wounds from iron, on the
places wholly burnt by fire, lest they begin to suppurate, lest in
eruptions they break out, lest for a long time they should smart, should
for a long while be inflamed.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

#### § 159. PREPARING A BANDAGE.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, the holy handmaid of the sky, pray weave a
little golden belt, pray work with care a silver one; with the silken
girdle bind, with the red one tie the damaged spots. If that should
insufficient prove, let the Maker's silk be a ligature, the cloak of the
Lord be a covering, let the word of God be a bolt, the furs \[*v*.
breath\] of the Lord be a coverlet; may the Creator's mercy grant, may
God's word bring about, that the wound shall not inflame, that it shall
not lead to pain.

##### b

Old woman! come from Pohjola, holding a little basket-cup, in the basket
a copper dish, in the dish a golden plume, to anoint the hurts, to bind
the wounds.

#### § 160. AGAINST BITS OF CHAFF, ETC., IN THE EYE.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, give thy good
finger-tips, thy well-made fingers bring, to become my fingers and to be
transformed into hands of mine, with which I'll snatch the bit of chaff,
shall pluck the 'nettle' out, so that it shall not hurt for long, not
long shall irritate.

##### b

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, the holy handmaid of the sky, take thy
little golden box, just open thy golden chest, take from it a golden
hook, snatch up a honeyed line, with

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the golden hook hook out, with the honeyed line drag out (F. attach a
line to) the bit of chaff in the eye, out from the place where it
entered in.

#### § 161. FOR THE PIGS.

Distinguished woman, Suvetar! Nature's old wife, Etelätär, pray feed my
pigs, give the 'down-turned noses' food when into the woods I send the
swine, the 'down-turned snouts' to abandoned fields, on a shore that
faces the sea, that faces the sandy beach of the sea.

#### § 162. IN WAR-TIME.

##### a

O Ukko, the god known everywhere, father of rulers of the sky, take thy
sons’ side, to thy children be a constant aid; hold a moot in the
clouds, clear councils in a cloudless sky; from the east let a cloud
grow up, from the west send another one, from the north-east a third,
push them together side by side, rain water on the touch-hole pans, or
snow in front of the locks in the important summer of war, in the
miserable year of war, so that the lock shall not strike fire, the
touch-hole shall not send up smoke, that the powder's bang, the report
of the 'evil meal' shall not be heard, nor directed against a woman's
child, a very splendid full-grown man.

##### b

O Ukko, the golden king, the ancient father of the sky, protect me with
fiery furs, put over me a shirt of flame, when I happen to be in the
wars, when I chance to enter the fray. Make me a wall of stone to stand
in front of me,

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

six fathoms every way, with seven-fathom sides, where I, a lad, will
strive against the enemy, so that my head sha’n’t come to harm, the
column of the neck sha’n’t break, that my fine hair sha’n’t fall, my
forelock shall not be destroyed in the din of the flashing iron, on the
point of a frantic blade.

##### c

Creator I save, O Nature, save! save, God above, save men with swords,
crews with their freight, from an eventful state of war, from murderous
waves of men; make haste to give deliverance, to free us from a fix; in
a day a man can lose his head, in an hour—a full-grown man.

##### d

Jesus! take anxious care, from the sky take watchful care of a child
created by thyself, so that the boy shall not depart, a woman's
offspring shall not stray from the track by the Maker made; make me a
shield of stone, an iron enclosure build, behind which I shall fight,
and under which I'll shoot, that death-bolts may not take effect,
sharp-pointed iron harm me not, though of cast copper made, or of
careful silver workmanship, or the point were of burnished gold; smash
into little bits the point, into creases squeeze the tip, into a hook
twist up the spike.

##### e

Reliable old Väinämöinen! the soothsayer as old as time, clip wool from
a stone, from a rock break 'hair,' make from it a shirt -of war, a cover
of six fathoms weave, of over six, of over seven in all, under which
we'll shoot, behind which we shall fight, we'll a fierce people over-

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

throw to the ground, both men and swords, the evil people slanting-wise,
the soldiers on their sides.

##### f

O Väinö's girl, with temples of gold, with copper skirt, with a silver
belt dash water on the touch-hole pan—make sparkle the touch-hole
pan—ta’en from nine water-springs, from the contents of pitchers three,
lest the powder should explode, the 'evil meal' \[*v*. rye\] should
detonate, lest it discharge the lead, let fly the balls of tin ’mong our
good men, into our men's breast-bones; let the flint be on its guard,
let saltpetre keep its word!

#### § 163. PREPARING FOR WAR.

##### a

Ho! Ukko, god on high, the father that rules the sky, bring the swords
of a thousand men, the sabres of a hundred braves, that won't glance off
against a bone, that will not break upon a skull, as I am going on a
war, to a combat hand to hand, to mighty battle-fields, to those
slaughter-plains where the blood reaches up to the leg, the red blood to
the knee.

##### b

Smith! arise from under the wall, from behind a stone, thou hammerer,
thyself Ilmarinen the smith, that art a most skilful hammerer, forge a
new sword for me, to put in my right hand, forge a dozen pikes, an ample
sheaf of spears, that I may start off to the war, to plains where men
are killed by the war-horses’ feet, by the hoofs of a battle-foal, on
bloody beds, on gory sites.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

#### § 164. TO MAKE SNOW-SKATES.

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the father at the sky's midpoint, procure me
straight snow-skates, for the left foot rapid skates, on which I'd
smoothly scud through the great forest tracts, across the swamps, across
firm land, across the moors of the North to the spots where game is
born, to the land where 'money-pelts' are bred.

#### 165. AGAINST INCANTATIONS (*suutelo*).

##### a

Creator, save! O Nature, save. Save, God that dwells above! Creator, thy
creation save! O God—what thou hast made, with words by the Creator
framed, prescribed by the Holy Ghost, from evil-words, from results of
words, from jibberings, from jabberings, from incantations of parish
folk, from spell-wrought ills of the village folk, from the bad designs
of men, from the spells of whores, from the murmurings of a 'bristly
snout,' from a 'long-hair’s' witcheries, from jealous persons of the
land, from the water-sorcerers.

##### b

O Ukko darling, my beloved, my darling father in the sky, hark to my
golden words, when I with chosen words beseech. I am not urging thee to
go a-fishing, to a war, to encounter the swords of men, but I urge thee
now to counteract the bad results of charms, of the spells of whores;
come to free me from the harm, from the bad results of the spells, from
the machinations of the hags, from the plots and scheming of the men, as
my well-wisher would desire, as my ill-wisher would not desire.

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

#### § 166. THE PAINS OF CHILDBIRTH.

##### a

How at such times is one to sing and how lament, when the pains of
labour come, constraint is laid upon a girl, the belly suffers agony,
the womb is in great distress?

Thus at such times is one to speak and thus express oneself: O Ukko,
king of the heavenly realm, the god above the clouds, come hither, come
immediately, they need thee here at once, here helpless infants gasp for
breath, babes as they come to the outer air (F. courtyard); a lass is
seized with the pains of birth, a woman with griping in the wame; come
close at hand to observe if she is under village spells (F. curses),
under murderous designs of men, under old women's secret charms, or
machinations of old hags. If she is under spiteful spells, the murderous
designs of parish folk, release the lass from the binding spells, the
woman from their heavy bands, from the evil words of 'bearded mouths,'
from the evil words of beardless ones. Throw open the 'fleshly chest,'
draw quickly back the lock of bone, send into the world the 'traveller,'
'wee fingers' into the outer air (F. courtyard), to creep about in the
world, to grow in the outer air.

When the time of danger is at hand, the day of distress arrives, in thy
right hand take a golden club and with it break the obstacles, the
'door-posts' smash, put ajar the Creator's locks, break in twain the
bolts at the back, that a big or a little one may go, one of small
strength may walk, come bouncing out to the outer air (F. courtyard),
come skipping out into the world (F. farm), into the world of all
mankind, the country of other travellers.

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

##### b

Ho! Ukko, god on high, thyself the mighty lord of air, take thy golden
axe, thy silver hatchet take, and with it break down obstacles (F.
tree-trunks), cut the 'fleshly threshold' through, break the 'sinewy
gate,' put the locks of bone ajar, tear rents to serve as chimney-holes,
and as windows open holes, that into the world a 'traveller' come, that
one of little strength may pass; let fall a 'flat stone' from the
stove,' a 'backmost flat stone' with a bang, from the 'oven' knock out a
'stone,' break a 'pebble' from the 'wall,' a boy from the lassie's lap,
a child from the woman's hips, or death will come, life's departure will
draw nigh to this painful womb, from the belly's violent throes.

##### c

Ho! Ukko, god on high, the ancient father in the sky, when needed hither
come into this snaky vapour-bath; here a poor wretch is screeching loud,
a wretched woman makes lament, is biting the twigs of the
bathing-switch, is cutting away the leaves, on her knees at the porch's
door, on her hands at the threshold of the bath; come at once, soon
hurry up, still sooner we have need of thee, the earth is cracking under
foot, the sky is splitting up above, while the distressed is crying out,
while the tormented woman yells; a bottle of pure water bring, fetch
some the colour of sleet, fetch a stoupful of luscious juice, a canful
of honey bring, blow into my mouth the half of it, the other half make
into salves, with which I'll salve between the legs, shall anoint the
hinder parts, shall cause the door of flesh to move, shall open up the
gate, shall free the lass from childbirth pains, bring into the world a
traveller, as a senseless one is in the womb, a dolt that knoweth not
the way.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

##### d

Old wife Kave, Nature's daughter! golden Kave, the beautiful, that
formerly allayed great pain, allayed great pain and freed from throes;
since thou freed the moon from a cell (F. halo), freed the sun from a
rock, so free from these throes as well, allay these pains as well, free
a lass from childbirth pains, from the belly's violent throes; with thy
hands bring the babe from the womb, the boy from the lassie's lap,
release it to rejoice the men, into the world of all mankind; if it
should be a boy, let it come with the hubbub of a man, if a girl—more
quietly, if a lassie with less of noise: a boy is in haste to go to war,
a girl is in haste to be betrothed.

##### e

O Porotyttö, the Northern girl, a knapsack take from the hut's far end,
a sack from the bath-house nook; fetch hither some slimy stuff from all
the water's fish, from behind nine seas, nine seas and a half; run into
the sea knee-deep, 'Blue-stocking!' half-way in; then holloa and hulloo
to the perch, the roach, to all the water's fish: 'Give spittle, ruff!
burbot! some slimy stuff, blue sik! bring some, red salmon! send me
some, and with it I'll anoint the legs, I'll stroke her down the sides,
shall relieve the lass of the childbirth pains, the woman—of fulness in
her wame.'

##### f

Old Väinämöinen, thou old man (*ukko*), the diviner as old as time, from
Esthonia bring a scythe, from Hell—a hook for mowing hay; with it I'll
stroke the sides, and pass along the hinder parts, I'll separate the
woman's legs,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> I'll tug the
thighs apart, I'll loosen the 'bench' at the end, break the 'bolt at the
back' in two, I'll open the 'land' in the under parts, burst through the
headrigs of the 'fields,' send forth on the earth a 'traveller,' a human
being to the light of day, to walk upon his feet, to work with his
extremities.

O Hiisi, come from Hiitola, thou humpback,—from the home of gods, with a
golden sleigh, and in the sleigh a golden axe, with which thou'lt break
down 'trunks of trees,' with which thou’lt scatter obstacles, wilt set
ajar the 'Maker's slit,' wilt open up the 'water gate,' wilt make it as
wide as a lake, as ample as Lake Koitere. O Hiisi, whet thine axe,
sharpen the level edge on three whetstones, on five Esthonian stones, on
the head of seven hones, on the end of eight whetstones; pull down a
portion of the 'fence,' the interval between five bars, set the woman's
thighs apart, separate the old woman's legs, as the bit of a war-horse
does, like the traces of a splendid foal.

##### h

O Moon, set free, O Sun, release, Great Bear, continually lead a man
from unfamiliar doors, from unknown gates; guide to the earth a
traveller, a human child to the light of day, from these small nests,
from the cramped abode. If in the womb there is a boy, strive to bring
him forth into the world, if in the lap there is a girl, pray steer the
girl ashore; release the child to see the moon, to rejoice at the sun,
to behold the Great Bear, to regard the stars, a child that has not
noticed them, has not perceived them yet.

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

#### § 167. SETTING UP HOUSE.

From Mary I beg for land, from Peter—an inheritance; dear Mary! give me
land, good Peter!—an inheritance, give me land gratis, in charity—a
piece of land. I will not ask for very much,—for a little I will not go
away—as much of ground as a floor requires, as my backbone can lie upon,
for me to play my games upon, a field for me to dance upon, a yard for
me to run along, the edge of a field to roll upon. Choose every sort of
wild animal on the honeyed sward, on the honeyed knoll, bring to that
piece of ground for me from the woods the good things of the woods, from
the land the best things of the land, to be my joy at eventide, my
delight in the morning hours, bring gold beneath the centre beam,
beneath the lovely roof, and honey to the timbers’ cracks, to the site
of the walls—a luscious juice.

#### § 168. FOR SKIN ERUPTIONS.

My 'little bullfinch,' O Jesus, wash, my 'wee snow-sparrow,'
cleanse—with water by the Maker made, ordained by the Holy Birth—from
water's anger and from earth's, from the secret rancour of a frog; let
the earth receive its 'spice' again, let the water its anger take, may
the earth drink down its 'spice' like milk—its 'spice' to below the
ground, to below the earth, down below nine fields, may the water drink
its anger down, swig it off like wort, down under swamps and moss, down
’neath deep waves.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

#### § 169. FOR A HEALING BATH.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, that hast a pure mother's countenance, that
art the oldest of womankind, the tallest of soft-skirted ones, with
golden bracelets on thine arms, with golden trinkets of thy head, with
golden shoes upon thy feet, come hither, we have need of thee, we are
shouting for thy help; bring thyself here immediately, bareheaded, with
dishevelled hair, without thy girdle, without thy skirt, to restore to
health, to give repose, before the rising of the sun, the dawning of the
god of dawn.

Make the bath-house hot, the stones to throw out steam, with cleanly
bits of wood, with logs by water cast ashore; fetch water beneath thy
dress, bath-switches under cover bring, <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_78) then cause a honeyed steam to rise, cause
a honeyed vapour to ascend through the glowing stones, the burning
flags, lest it burn my bairns, my offspring should destroy; soften the
pleasant bathing-switch, moisten its honeyed spreading head, with the
switches foment the wounds.

To stone-heaps with the wounds from iron! To woodpiles with the wounds
from trees! To stony stoves with the wounds from stones! Make the
sufferer well at night, without pain by day, by virtue of the word of
God, through the mercy always of the Lord.

##### b

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, when needed hither come, in thy hand a
golden cup, in thy wrapper a honeyed wing. Make a honeyed bath-house
hot, make warm the room of

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

deal with coveted logs of wood, which the wind has brought ashore, the
surf has steered ashore, a wave of the sea has cast ashore.

Go to the bath-house secretly, by a side-way to the bathing-house
without being heard by the village-folk, without news reaching the
villagers; anoint the door with ale, the gate with wort, the hinges with
small beer wet, bedaub the handle with fat, that the door sha’n’t creak,
nor the iron hinges speak, nor the gate sing out, nor the handle squeak;
in a spinny break off a bathing-switch, in the copse snap one off, on
the brink of an angry stream, or near three rapids; from the rapids
gather stones, from a sandy heath some junipers; from the side of the
moon take a cup, a ladle from under the arm of the sun, with which
thou’lt water draw, some water from the Vento stream \[*v*. spring\].
Cause steam to rise, make heat ascend to the stones that feel no pain,
to the flags that feel no smart, through the stones of the stove, the
moss-stopping of the bath; take from thy cloak a bathing-switch, from
thy bosom—tender leaves, soften the honeyed bathing-switch, moisten its
hundred tips at the centre of a honeyed stone; sweep away the fearful
\[F. holy\] 'sparks,' <span id="fr_87"></span>[1](#fn_79) remove \[F.
quench\] the fearful \[F. holy\] plagues with thy virgin-honeyed wing,
with thy honeyed bathing-switch, into a little golden cup, into a
copper-sided vat; in the stove put the pains, in the bathhouse moss—the
plagues, in a wool-chest—the angry sores, in a box—the cruel smarts.

##### c

Enter the steam, O God, the hot steam—Father of the air! to restore to
health, to give repose; enter the bathhouse

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

secretly without being heard by a worthless wretch, without news
reaching the villagers, without being known at another farm. Here in the
bath a sick man lies, in the hot bath—a feeble man; throw on the ground
excessive steam, the bad steam send away without his being soiled by
dirt or breathed upon by a chilly breath, without being angrily steamed
by steam or by too much water washed away.

There is nothing for steam to find, for hot steam to choke. <span
id="fr_88"></span>[1](#fn_80) Whatever water I throw on these hot
stones, into honey may it change, may it turn into luscious juice; may a
river of honey flow, a lake of virgin honey plash through the stove of
stone, through the bath-house stopped with moss; may the breath of the
Lord exhale, may the Creator's warm breath dash through the bones and
joints, through the sinews and the flesh, through the warm blood, the
red arteries.

#### § 170. FOR MAKING EDGED TOOLS.

O bee, the active man, the active fellow, the lively bird, on thy wing
fetch luscious juice, bring honey on thy tongue from six flower-tops,
from seven heads of grass, as a fluid to harden iron, as a juice to
temper steel. Then, on thy arrival here, cook the honey on thy tongue,
on thy wing-tip—the luscious juice, as stuff to mellow an iron blade
\[F. tongue\], as a means to soften an iron edge \[F. mouth\], lest the
iron should lacerate, the steel should thoughtlessly destroy; wherever
iron shall penetrate or powerful steel shall gash, may the luscious
juice on the place remain, honey—where the iron has cut, sweet juice—on
the iron's bite.

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

#### § 171. AGAINST DAMAGE FROM FIRE.

##### a

O frosty maiden, the icy girl, when needed, hither come, bring snow for
sores made by Fire, for the injuries by Panu—frost, snow-lumps from the
bed of a lamb, some ice from the pen of a full-grown sheep \[*v*.
kammo\], \[*v*. from a blue sheep's interior\], with these snow-lumps
form a crust, with the ice form a coat of ice (like that) with which the
seas are crusted o’er, the lakes are coated o’er with ice.

##### b

A frosty maiden, an icy girl, sits in a crouching attitude at the mouth
of a frosty spring, in the hollow of an icy well, a golden ladle is in
her hand with which she draws the water up. Come here when needed now,
when beseeched to help, cause thy pool to shake, cause thy spring to
dash down on the places that are burnt, that have long begun to
suppurate; throw some icy water down, bring some the colour of slush.

Water is eldest of the brothers, Fire the youngest of the daughters, may
Water, the eldest, keep awake, may Fire, the youngest, fall asleep!

##### c

O Ismo, of the daughters of the air, into this sore place force thyself,
come like the wind, make speed like a thought, pour thyself out like
water's foam upon thy son's iniquities; some water from thine apron
throw on the fearful scars from fire, on the places that are burnt, so
that they shall not smart for long, shall not for long be found
inflamed.

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

##### d

Rise from the ground, O Iron Cock, O Iron Hen, spring quickly up to eat
the pains produced by Fire, to sip Fire's 'broth' from the places that
are burnt, that have received sore injury, so that no pain be felt
above, no qualm shall penetrate the heart, that the sides of the wound
shall not inflame, nor smart for very long.

##### e

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, like a golden
cuckoo come, like a silver turtle-dove to the burns (F. fires) of one in
agony, to the burnt places of a sufferer; come at once, soon hurry up,
still sooner we have need of thee, in thy hand a golden cup containing
water icy cold in which are copper twigs; dash water on the scabs, on
the places that are burnt. If that is not enough, dig out a fish from a
sandy heath, from a deep pit—a pike, to eat the pains produced by Fire,
to lap Fire's 'broth' from a wretched human skin, from the body of a
woman's (*Kapo*) son.

##### f

Rise, maiden, from the dell, from the moist earth, dear lass! from
inside a frosty spring, from the hollow of an icy well, thy shoes and
laces all over ice, the folds of thy skirt all over rime, thy jacket a
mass of ice, thy clothes entirely hid with snow, in thy bosom a hunk of
ice, under thine arm a lump of ice to gag Fire's mouth, to weigh down
Panu's head.

##### g

Rise from the dell, dear Maid! from the gravel, thou clean-faced one,
'Blue-socks!' from the corner of a swamp,

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Red laces!' from
a dale; from the stream raise frost, from the swamp some cooling stuff
for the places that are burnt, for the fearful scars from fire, in thy
folds wrap up the fire, in thy skirts the flame, in thy clean dress, in
thy white clothes.

##### h

Crone of the North! with crooked jaw, with crooked jaw with scanty
teeth, fetch slush from a slushy place \[*v*. Hymmö\], from Jähmö's
\[*v*. Jämmö's\] chamber—ice; sprinkle some water icy cold, throw some
the colour of slush on the 'burnt out spark,' on this 'burnt soot,' lest
it begin to suppurate, lest it discharge with pus.

##### i

Boy! come from Pohjola, from the cold village, thou full-grown man, from
thy father's place, great man, thou comrade—from Vento's host; when thou
comest bring some frost, both frost and ice, from Hymmo's window—frost,
from Jämmö's closet—ice, some blood of an autumn ewe \[*v*. summer
goat\], some blood of a winter hare; freeze with the frost, ice with the
chilly ice, the injuries brought by Fire, the thorough scorching by Panu
caused.

##### k

Come, Maid of fire! thou well-known Maid of fire, to extinguish Fire, to
repair Panu's work; in thy socks bring frost, on the edge of thy
shoe-latchets—ice, bring frost, bring frost, bring ice, fetch iron hail
to throw on the ugly scars produced by Fire, on Panu's brutal work. If
little ensue therefrom, poke a heifer's hide as a plug with Fire's

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

mouth, over Panu's head as a covering, wipe away the fearful (F. holy)
sparks, sweep away the fearful (*F*. holy) 'waves' from the places that
are burnt, from the havoc wrought by Fire.

##### l

Ho! Ukko, lord on high, the old man of the sky, that hast made fast the
chain, and locked up air's magic words, into this fire fling thyself,
into the flame sink down with water in thy mouth and head, a water-hat
upon thy nape; step along the fiery path, make sparkle the sparkling
path, whisk water icy cold on the fearful scars from fire, cause a wind
to blow, an icy blast to rush to the places that are burnt, that are
thoroughly scorched by fire, so that they shall not suppurate, nor crack
like soot.

##### m

O Vesi-viitta, Mountain's \[*v*. Vaitto's, *v*. Vaitta's\] son, the
lovely offspring of a rock, \[*v*. Suoviitta! the child of Kaleva, <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_81)\] that in a mountain hast slept a year,
lain for a long time in a rock, tether thyself to this glowing ash, into
this Panu cast thyself, make Fire incapable, make Panu impotent; bring
water in a birch-bark dish, fetch some in a two-hooped one from between
two stumps from ’neath a birch's triple root, some chilly water icy cold
for the fearful damage caused by Fire. Fire has wrought mischief here,
Panu committed an evil deed against the will of God, against the honour
of the Blest.

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

#### § 172. TO BEWITCH FIRE.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, the kindly mother, compassionate, in another
direction go, to gloomy Pohjola, to a snowy mountain top, to the hill's
north side where a woodgrouse has its nest, a hen is bringing up her
young; bring snow, bring ice with which thou’lt quench the fire, wilt
make the flame subside, without being wholly burnt by fire, without
being injured by the flame. If that is not enough, put into the flame
(*panu*) thy shirt, into the fire—thy copper belt, fling them into the
fire's control, spread them among the glowing coals; give me thy blue
silk scarf for a bandage round my hand and with it I'll quench the fire,
I'll subdue the flame.

May the raging fire fall asleep, may Mary make it sleep, may darling (F.
golden) water keep awake, may Jesus from above keep watch.

##### b

O Panu, Aurinkoinen's son, the Auringotar's progeny, that under
forge-fires lives, that takes a rest upon the hearth, conceal thyself
among thy coals, among thine ashes disappear, tether thyself to thy
sparks, in thy hot embers hide thyself, to be used by day in a house of
fir, in a stove of stone, to be kept concealed at night in a bin of
coals, in the middle of a 'golden ring.' <span
id="fr_90"></span>[1](#fn_82) May darling (F. golden) Fire with
exhaustion full, may little Flame subside, may Water—the oldest—keep
awake, may Fire—the youngest—fall asleep.

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

##### c

O Panutar, best girl, when needed hither come to quench a fire, to
reduce a flame; give thy skirts a shake, make their borders sway, put
the fire in thy furs, the flame—in thy clothes, throw it into thy rags,
keep it safe in thy ragged clothes, lest it burn one on the cheek, or
hurt one on the side.

##### d

O Nunnus \[*v*. Munnus\] <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_83) of the
daughter of the air, O Höykenys of the Panutars, when summoned hither
come, when implored make haste, when thou comest bring some frost, bring
frost, bring ice, in the air there is frost enough, both frost and ice;
freeze with the frost, ice with the ice, freeze with the frost my finger
tips, ice with the ice my hands, make the fire incapable, silence its
crackling noise, that it shall not tinge my nails, nor scorch my hands.

#### § 173 IN MAKING AN OFFERING.

##### a

O chosen woman, Kunnotar, O golden <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_84)
woman, Kärehetär, come away from melting gold, from smelting silver come
away; in thy bowl I put bits of gold, bits of silver—in thy cup, these
bits of gold are as old as the moon, the bits of silver as old as the
sun, brought by my father from a war, obtained with trouble in the fray,
when I was a child, when I tumbled about as a brat, as tall as father's
knee, as high as mother's spinning-staff.

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

##### b

Clean mistress of Metsola! O forest's golden king, hearken to my golden
words, to my silver utterance. I decoy with gold, with silver I allure;
enter on an exchange of gold, of silver an interchange; more coloured
are thy 'bits of gold' thy 'bits of silver'—of darker hue, my bits of
gold are more glistening, my silver is more glittering and was brought
expressly from a war, with threats from foreign lands, was from Russia
carried off, below Riga was obtained in strife.

##### c

O master of Tapio's farm, O mistress of Tapio's farm, old man of the
forest with hoary beard, the forest's golden king! O forest-mistress,
Mimerkki, the forest's kind gift-giving mother, 'Blue-cloak'? the old
wife of the scrub, 'Red-socks'! the mistress of the swamp, come to make
an exchange of gold, of silver an interchange. My bits of gold are as
old as the moon, my bits of silver as old as the sun, the bits of gold
are Swedish gold, Swedish—the glistening silver bits, in conflict
brought from Tornio, from behind the frontier—in a fight, my father
brought them from the wars, laid hands upon them in the fray; in a purse
they'll get worn away, will blacken in a tinder-bag, if none will change
my gold nor exchange my silver bits.

##### d

O friendly mistress of the woods, O forest's golden king, come to take
my bits of gold, to choose out silver bits. For thy 'gold' take my bits
of gold, for thy 'silver'—my silver bits, for thy 'hoofs' I give bits of
gold, for thy 'paws'—my silver bits, for the benefit of Tapio's farm, to

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

give delight to the Forest Home (*Metsola*). Spread thy lovely linen
handkerchief under my bits of gold to prevent their falling to the
ground, their being sullied in the dirt; these bits of gold are famous
bits that were brought from Germany, obtained from Riga in a fight, in a
battle in Denmark fought.

#### § 174 TO RECOVER STOLEN PROPERTY.

O Kalma, rise and bestir thyself to watch my thief, to look after my
goods, to get my property, to recover what is ta’en away with thy heavy,
frightful hands, with the chains of the Omnipotent.

O Hippa, one of Hiisi's daughters, O Kipinätär, Hiisi's cat, tear his
thighs right well, as sparks of fire torture him, so that he shall not
sleep at night, shall not repose at all by day, without first bringing
back, without his putting in its place what he has ta’en, what he has
robbed, what he has taken of my goods, what he has got, what he has hid.

#### § 175 TO GUARD AGAINST THIEVES.

O Otavatar, maid of night, the steady watcher during night, come here, I
have need of thee, move hither, I summon thee to keep a watch upon my
goods, to look after my property, to observe what has disappeared, to
have returned what was ta’en away.

#### § 176 WHEN ON THE LOOK-OUT.

##### a

Old mother Eine! rise up first, life's ruler (*haltia*) rouse thyself
before a sorcerer rises up, a jealous one jumps up,

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

a presumptuous person moves, or a wizard catches hold, to help a
well-beloved son, to be comrade to a famous man. If thou hast no time
thyself, thyself art disinclined, send hither of thy serving maids, give
thy servants the command; the best send hither, not the worst, the
tallest, not the shortest one, to go about (F. to swing) with me, to
walk with me.

##### b

I, wretched fellow, do not know, not I, an unfortunate son, from whom I
should implore relief, from whom—firm strength, if from the father in
the sky, or from the mother in the earth.

Hulloa! old woman, mother of me, O lovely mother that brought me forth,
long in the earth thou now hast lain, for an age hast murmured in the
sward; my mother! from the earth arise, my parent—from the burial-place
with thy strength, with thy might, to give a little fellow strength;
bring a fur coat from Tuoni's land, Tuoni's fur coat with its thousand
knobs, in which I'll dress myself to guard against these sorcerers. In a
village are many sorcerers, ’longside the road—divining-men, near the
water witches are in scores and envious persons everywhere.

##### c

O Jesus, come as my defence, to be my strength, to be my might, Lord
Jesus do not cast me off, do not abandon me, good God, to the magic
spells of whores, to the 'curses' of filthy sluts, to the cogitations of
old hags, to the malicious thoughts of men, to be cut by every 'branch,'
to be reviled by every 'frog.' Stand before me as a wall, stay behind me
as a fence, lest a sorcerer's arrows take

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

effect, or a wizard's bolts of steel. Bring me a fiery sword, fetch one
the hue of frost, cause the gleaming sword to flash into my right hand
and with it I'll slash the wicked men, crush the foul persons at a blow,
with it I'll flagellate the curs and strike the giants (*koljumi*)
heavily.

##### d

Higher I push myself, to the sky above my head; Creator! come to
exorcise, O God, to speak; now's the Creator's time to exorcise, the
time for God to speak; God, seat thyself, lower thyself, thou merciful,
to be my only aid in overthrowing envious ones, in overcoming my
enemies. Release a man from the injuries, from the injuries, from the
hindrances, from the great village-sorceries, from the malignant cursing
spells, from the mutterings of whores, from the outpour of womankind,
from the witchery of worthless hags, from a 'long-hairs' secret plots,
from the damage of the swarthy man, from the filth of the evil one, from
a relation's spoken 'words,' from the 'utterances' of a relative.

##### e

Old wive Kave! Nature's daughter, Kave the golden and beautiful, come,
bewitch the sorcerers, curse those that 'curse,' upset the envious on
land, the witches in the water crush; weave me a cloth of gold, rattle
me out a silver cloth, make ready a defensive shirt, prepare a copper
cloak under which I'll stay at night, which I can wear by day, by good
God's help, by the true Creator's offices, lest a son should go away,
one borne of a mother should part, lest a mother's offspring go astray,
a woman's progeny disappear.

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

##### f

O maid of mist, the maid of fog, from a stone clip 'wool,' from a rock
break off the 'hair,' make me a shirt of mist, cast for me a copper
cloak under which I can be at night, which I can wear by day, when that
sorcerer is throwing spells, when the 'wolfskin coat' is reviling me,
when the Lapp is singing songs at me.

##### g

Rise, maiden! from the spring, from the pool, 'soft petticoat'! O
'slender fingers,' from the grass, from the withered grass, O 'golden
locks,' to act as my support, to be active in my defence, to overturn
the envious, to crush those wishing ill, to destroy the bad, to conquer
the enemies in the space in front of me, in the shadow at my back, at my
side on either hand, at both my sides. Drive away the young sorcerers,
set down the old divining-men, oppress the old divining-men, tread them
down into mossy swamps and thyself keep dancing over them. In the land
are plenty seers, in the earth's bosom—men of skill, in every dell are
sorcerers, in every place are envious folk, witches at every gate and
soothsayers at every fence.

##### h

Earth's daughter! maiden of dry land, hark to my golden words. Raise thy
men from the earth, from the firm dry land—thy full-grown men, a hundred
from where a stake is set, a thousand from the corner of a stump, a
hundred swordless men, a thousand men with swords, to be my people, to
be my strength, to be a whole nation for me amid these sorcerers, in the
wizards’ neighbourhood.

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

##### i

Earth's old man! from the ground arise, Field's son! from the headlands
of a field, from the side of a coloured church, from the side of a
'hundred planks.'

To catch a squirrel I take thee not, I invite thee not to chase a hare.
I do not wish to hunt a lynx, nor yet to snowshoe after elks, I take
thee as my own defence, to be my help, my only one, to be my refuge, my
support, with whose protection I shall work, with help of whom I'll set
a fence, by aid of whom o’er waters row.

There is a boy in Pohjola, a tall man in Pimentola, whose bristly beard
did gleam like a leafy grove upon a slope, whose hair did sway like a
clump of pines upon a hill; come, boy! from Pohjola, tall man! from
Pimentola to give a puny fellow strength, to give a small man manliness,
so that I shall not be destroyed, shall not be overcome with shame in
the dells of these sorcerers, in the diviners' neighbourhood.

##### k

O 'red hat,' Tuoni's son, with eye askew, with crooked jaw, knock down
the sorcerers, upset the land's jealous men; in the belly shoot the
sorcerers, the devils—in their hinder parts, gouge the eyes of the
jealous man. Whoever peers with jealousy, or pries with eyes askew, drag
a bloody rug, dash down a gory rug from the sky to the earth and tie it
across their eyes.

##### l

Ho! Ukko, the father up above, the observant man of the sky, be on thy
son's side, to thy children a constant help;

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

remove the witches from my side, keep constant watch on the jealous men,
saddle a hundred stallions, provide a thousand men with swords to walk
with me, to run noisily with me, to overthrow the jealous men, to cause
the evil ones to smart, in the space in front of me, in rear of me,
above my head and at my side, and on either flank, so that a son sha’n’t
go away, the son of a mother shall not fall ere [the](errata.htm#2) term
by the Creator fixed, determined by the Holy Birth (*i.e.* the Saviour).

##### m

My Ukko! the father up above, the old father in the sky, knock up an
iron \[*v*. oaken\] fence, set a steel \[*v*. of rowan\] enclosure up,
reaching from earth to near the sky, from the sky as far as the earth to
be a shelter for my folk, for my people—a screen; make the stakes of
steel, of land-snakes make the withes, with adders interlace, tie
lizards on, who'll keep an eye on sorcerers, keep constant watch on
jealous men; leave their tails to flap, their middle part to sway, their
snouts to rise, their solid heads to oscillate, hither to flap with
their tails, thither to hiss with their heads, outwards to buzz with
their mouths, outwards to splutter with their tongues, to give a dig to
listeners, to give a nip to prying men, to crush those wishing ill, to
squeeze to the ground the evil ones, to eat the spells of villagers,
their incantations to lap up, to remove the sickness brought by spells,
to scatter hindrances.

##### n

Ukko! an iron enclosure forge, build an iron fence with iron stakes,
with copper withes; raise high the fence, from earth as far as the sky,
which a sorcerer cannot climb, a

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

wizard cannot pass; make the gates of steel, of forged work—the pairs of
stakes, bind them round and round with snakes, interlace with swarthy
snakes, their heads turned out, their tails turned in, that their
throats may sing in shrieks, their mouths hiss out, that their heads may
scream, so that an 'elf' (*keijolainen*) must make a round, a jealous
man go round about, by the back of the fence, by the outside of the
gate. If sorcerers depress themselves, depress the fence as much, that
no land snake at all can get in underneath the fence, if sorcerers raise
themselves, raise the fence as much, that no bird of air at all over the
fence can fly, if an eagle has flown aloft, still higher raise the
fence, if a viper crawl along low down, bring the fence still lower
down.

##### o

Ho! Ukko, the god on high, from the sky let fall a pipe, in haste drop a
copper horn, let tumble a golden shield, a pipe which I'll put on, a
copper horn in which I'll dress, that a sorcerer's arrows can't stick
in, nor a wizard's steel; bring thy golden axe, thy silver hatchet with
which all the Lempos I shall cut, shall hew the devils in bits, with
their arrows shall slay the sorcerers, the witches with their iron
knives, the wizards with their own steel, with their own swords the evil
men.

##### p

Ho! Ukko, the lord on high that sits there everlastingly, the ruler of
the thunder-clouds, the governor of fleecy clouds, thresh out thy fiery
barn, let sparks fly out from the sparky barn, tear holes in the sky, in
the 'lid of the air' make openings (F. windows), let thy thunders crash,

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

thy claps of thunder crepitate, rumble in dry-weather clouds, clatter in
the bellows of the air, strike fire above the air, from the sky pour
fire to overthrow the jealous men, the witches to destroy, to stare at
sorcerers, to snatch the wizards away; plenty of wizards are on the
roads, of sorcerers in every dell, of witches at every water-side, of
jealous men in every place, moving about near the cattle-shed, walking
along the fence's side.

##### q

From the water, water's mistress! rise, thou 'blue-cap' from the waves,
from the spring, soft-skirted one, from the mud, thou clean of face, to
give strength to a strengthless man, to support an unsupported one.
Raise men from the sea, heroes from landlocked lakes, bowmen from
streams, and swordsmen from the wells. I do not want them against
myself, nor yet against my followers, I'll take them against my enemies,
’gainst the people of the enemy.

##### r

In the mountain are there people, is there help beneath the rock? In the
mountain there are people, there is help beneath the rock; give,
Mountain, of thy might, of thy people, Mountaineer! to help a
well-beloved man, to surround a lonely one, lest he be eaten causelessly
or be slain without disease.

##### s

Old Väinämöinen! come, the diviner as old as time, to speak on my
behalf, at my side to utter 'words'; bring hither a fiery hound, a dog
of iron hue, to eat the spells (F. curses) of villagers, to snap up
village sorcerers.

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

If that is not enough, give me of thine old folk that for an age have
sat, all mouldy have taken breath, in the earth have long reposed, a
long while rested in a grove, to be my people, to be my strength, to be
a whole nation for me; bring me a sword with a fiery edge, give me air's
sword with which I'll strip the spell-brought harm, I'll hew to the
ground the injuries, I'll chase away the corpses of the dead, I'll crush
the black-breasted ones, with which I'll frighten Hiisi's folk and flog
the devils away from my right side, from the shadow on my left, bowling
along like a golden ball or like a silver chip, that a sorcerer's arrows
shall not stick nor a wizard's steel.

##### t

From the earth arise, black \[*v.v.* gold, iron\] cock! spring quick up,
thou iron hen, nimbly to move about with me, to rush noisily with me, to
overthrow the jealous men (then send the sorcerers asleep); peck out an
eye of the jealous one, slit the nose of the sorcerers.

##### u

Men of the sea! arise, ye heroes of landlocked lakes, from the gravel,
ye 'scaly cloaks,' from the pool, ye 'sandy shirts,' that are tall as
pillars of cloud, as high as great forest firs, a hundred men with
swords, a thousand full-grown men of iron, to follow in my company, to
rush noisily with me, to overthrow the jealous men, to overcome the
enemies, so that no foe shall eat too much, no enemy snatch much away.

##### v

Up, swordsmen! from the earth, ye heroes as old as the earth, ye
glaive-men, from the wells, ye bowmen, from the

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

streams; rise, Forest, with thy men, thou Wilderness, with all thy folk,
with thy might, old man of the hill, thou water-Hiisi, with thy tribe
\[*v*. frights\], Mistress of water, with thy folk, Chief of the water,
with thy host, ye maidens, from every dell, from the pools, ye
soft-skirted ones, to help a man without his like, to be comrade of a
famous son, that a sorcerer's arrows shall not stick, nor a diviner's
steel, nor an 'archer’s' instruments, nor a witch's iron knives.

#### § 177. TO STAUNCH BLOOD.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, come here,
come soon, still sooner we have need of thee; blood is flowing to the
ground, the bubbling gore is gushing forth; stick in thy little thumb,
bring thy charming finger near to bar the blood's path, to plug the
flow, lest as a river it should flow, as a lake discharge itself. But if
it pays no heed thereto, does not subside the very least, go for turf
behind the house, for moss from the bathhouse logs, to plug the flow, to
dam the rush. If still it pays no heed thereto, from the sky bring here
five handfuls of flax, six distaffs bound with wool, to plug the fearful
hole, to patch the evil 'gate'; throw thy fine-spun petticoat, thine
apron spread on the rents made by wretched iron, on the rips from a
slender blade, lay on them a healing leaf, put a 'golden' stopper in,
that the blood to the ground sha’n’t flow, that the red blood shall not
spill.

##### b

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, when needed
hither come, when summoned

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

here approach, as we need thee soon, so much the sooner hurry up, a
golden needle in thy hand, in the needle's eye a silken thread with
which thou’lt fasten up the veins, draw together the arteries, with a
slender needle wilt sew them up, wilt stitch them with a golden thread,
so that the red blood shall not fall, that not a single drop shall drip;
from the temples take the silk, undo the ribbon on thy head, tie with
thy silken hands, with thy hair-plaits bind the holes that are torn, the
wounds that are cut. If that is not enough, take from Väinämöinen's belt
the yellow-coloured cloak, if no heed is paid to that, snatch the
Creator's silk, take the Almighty's cloak, with the Creator's hair-plait
tie, with the Maker's wrappers bandage up those rents produced by iron,
the gashes by a 'blue edge' (F. mouth) made; make them whole at night,
without pain by day, at night draw over them a skin, by day let grow a
cuticle more perfect than before, better than formerly.

##### c

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, the holy little serving-maid, fly along an
edge of cloud from the sky to earth, to bind up veins, to stop blood's
mouth; from the water bring a birch-bark slice, slice from an alder tree
a chip, draw the knife from thy sheath, seize thy pocket-axe with which
thou'll cut a chip, wilt shave a shaving off, to place on the wound that
is cut, on the hole that is torn, to close the mouth of the hole, to dam
the passage of the blood, lest the 'milk' to the ground should flow, the
carmine drop upon the field.

##### d

Thou lovely woman, Maariatar, when needed hither come. A calamity has
happened here, iron has gone raging mad.

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Spin a stout
thread on thy stout spinning-staff, sew up the wound produced by iron,
knot the ends of the vein, where the carmine is shaken out, a drop of
blood is trickling down, that to the ground the blood sha’n’t pour, in a
hot stream shall not gush forth. If that is not enough, thy tiny kettle
bring, in which the blood will be seethed, the bubbling gore be heated
up, that a drop of blood sha’n’t drip, sha’n’t sputter on the dirt.

##### e

O charming woman, Helka, come here, there is need of thee, to arrange
the veins, to knot up the ends of veins. From the swamp take moss, fetch
some grassy knolls to block blood's mouth, to dam blood's path; pray
stop with sods of turf, stuff meadow hair-grass in, cover over with
little stones the hole that has been torn, so that the 'milk' sha’n’t
reach the ground, no carmine drop upon the field.

##### f

Lord, fling thy gloves, O Lord, throw down thy mitts as a stopper on the
fearful hole, as a patch on the evil gate, that to the ground the 'milk'
sha’n’t flow, that the carmine shall not fall. May the Maker's lock be a
lock, may the Lord's word (v. bar) be a bar, that the milk to the ground
sha’n’t flow, nor the guiltless blood—upon the dirt, despite the nature
of God, against the intention of the Blest.

##### g

Come, Ukko of the air, when summoned here approach to close blood's
mouth, to stop the flow, that on my beard it shall not spurt, not pour
upon my ragged clothes; stop it up with turf, toss on some lumps from a
knoll, but if it

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

pay no heed thereto, thrust in thy bulky hand, press thy thick thumb,
bring thy fleshy finger near, as a stopper in the fearful hole, as a
patch on the evil gate, that the blood sha’n’t flow, that the veins
sha’n’t throb; lay on a healing leaf, apply a golden \[v. honeyed\]
water-lily leaf.

##### h

Old white-headed Ukko come hither at the nick of time, place thy plough
with its sharp end, turn thy ploughshare with its point to the far end
of Tuonela, to the headland of a holy field, tear up a pile of turf, a
bit of a rush-grown knoll; bring a spigot from Tuonela, a bar from
Kalma's pen to stop blood's mouth, to bar blood's path; stop its mouth
with turf, toss on some pieces from a knoll, draw a rug as a covering
over it, a skin upon it as a sheet, by day draw the covering, at night
cause the skin to grow.

##### i

Thou fiery-throated Laplander, dry-throated Northerner (*Pohjolainen*)
that drank up rivers of fire, sipped streams of sparks, come to sip up
blood, to stop blood's mouth, and the guggling of the gore; pray fetch a
stopper from the Fells, a rivet-nail from Pohjola as a stopper for the
bloody flood; get ready a copper pipe, for pay make a pipe of tin, draw
the blood to lungs, to the heart direct it straight, in the heart is the
place for blood, its cellar is in the lungs, under the liver is its hut,
under the spleen its nest.

##### j

O Homma, the briskest king, when needed hither come. For a long time
back the veins pulsate, the fleshy members are quivering, the blood is
coming like a flood, the gore is

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

wildly spirting out. Come to stop the blood, to bar the rush, to close
blood's mouth, to squeeze its throat; pray fetch a little bit of flesh,
tear it from Lempo's thigh, from the evil spirit's loin to plug this
flood, that the milk to the ground sha’n’t flow nor a man's 'beauty' mix
with dew.

##### k

Thou fiery Hiisi, come from fiery Hell with thy three sons, with thy
daughters two; O Hiisi, fling thy hair, press down thy shaggy glove to
bar blood's path, and if it pay no heed thereto, tear a collop from thy
fat thigh, to plug the fearful hole, to patch the evil gate.

#### § 178. WHEN TRAVELLING BY WATER.

##### a

We row, we are taking our time on \[*v*. to\] the waters of those
sorcerers, in \[*v*. to\] the wizards’ neighbourhood, on billows capped
with foam, on the man-eating open sea, that drowneth full-grown men; if
the oars should be too short, the rowers—of little strength, the
steersmen—little babes, the owners of the ship—mere bairns, give Ahti,
other oars, bring me a better steering-oar, give assistance to the oars,
relief to the steering-oar, that I can row straight on, can traverse the
waters easily, can cruise on the open sea, can hurry through the waves.
If a wave exalt itself, rise extremely high, O Ahti, still the waves, ye
sons of Ahti, still the swell, so that a wooden boat shall speed, the
iron thole shall bang and creak, making the wide waters sparkle, forming
curves in the narrow waters, so that the wind shall sway the boat, the
west wind dash it along without being touched by hand, without
assistance from the oars.

<span id="page_298">p. 298</span>

##### b

O Ahti, give thine oars, O water's master, give thy boat, new oars and
better ones, another stouter steering-oar, with which I'll gently row,
on the open waters cruise in front of a jealous person's house, past the
entrance of the witches’ gate; on the waters witches are numerous, there
are jealous people in every place, Esthonians in groups of five and six,
the Kyröläinens are in tens. Grant that the wooden boat shall speed,
that the wooden boat shall sway, shall glide like bubbles on the lake,
like water-lilies on the waves, that the sun shall not in anger shine,
that the moon shall not in anger gleam, that the wind shall not in anger
blow, that the rain shall not in anger fall.

##### c

Old woman beneath the waves! the woman that lives near foam, rise with
thy hand upon the foam, ascend with thy breast upon the waves to collect
the foam, to take in charge the foam-headed waves in front of a
sailing-boat, in the way of a tarry boat, lest they knock against a
guiltless man, upset a man who is innocent.

##### d

Thou joyous bird <span id="fr_93"></span>[1](#fn_85) of the air, fly
whither I command, to the furthest end of the eternal east, to the home
of the dawn of day, distend thy cheeks with air, blow a delightful
breeze, a favourable gale for me, that I can now go anywhere on these
wide waters, on these broad open seas.

#### § 179. TO FORTIFY WATER.

Rise, maiden, from the spring, from the gravel, slender-fingered one,
rise to fetch water, pray bring energetic water,

<span id="page_299">p. 299</span>

sing forth serviceable water, get by devices helpful water from the
river Jordan, from an eddy in the holy stream, with which was christened
Christ, the Almighty was baptized.

#### § 180. AGAINST AN ENEMY AT SEA.

##### a

Ho! Ukko, god on high, the golden king of the air, cause a raging storm,
raise the tempest's mighty strength, create a wind, launch forth a wave;
don't bring it against myself, but against the hostile boat, ’gainst the
host of the enemy.

##### b

Mist maiden, maid of fog, air maiden Auteretar! with a sieve sift mist,
keep scattering fog, from the sky let fall thick fog, lower a vapour
from the air on the clear surface of the sea, on the wide-open main;
don't bring it against myself, nor yet against my followers, but against
the enemy, ’gainst the forces of the enemy, lest they see to attack,
lest they flee from me.

#### § 181. WHEN USING SALVES.

##### a

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, come hither
from the sky, descend from above the clouds, bring water from far away,
fetch honey in a little stoup from the sky above, from behind the
courtyard of the stars, as ointments for the pains, as embrocations for
the hurts; milk honeyed milk from thy honeyed breasts into a
golden-handled cup, into a copper-sided one;

<span id="page_300">p. 300</span>

thyself anoint the exhausted one, stroke the sufferer with thy beautiful
wee hands, with the finger without a name.

If that is not enough as an ointment for the pains, wash with Jesus’
blood, souse with the gore of the Lord, rub with the Maker's tears,
foment with the 'water of grief,' release a person from accidents,
release from evil days, from oppressive 'bands,' from tight-fastened
'belts of pain.' <span id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_86)

##### b

O Virgin Mary, mother dear, beloved mother, compassionate, come to
anoint the sores, quickly to still the sufferings. Pray bring some
salves from there, from above nine skies, nine salves, eight magic
medicines, take the wing of a finch, a wee snow-sparrow's spotless
plume, a feather from a swallow's tail; with the salves anoint, foment
with the emollients, smear with the grease that Jesus was anointed with,
with which the Omnipotent was healed, when by Pilatus racked, when
tortured by the evil power; anoint above, anoint below, anoint as well
the middle parts; the first time salve and make the body quite well
below, the intermediate time anoint and make the middle free from pain,
the last time salve and free from smarts the parts above; let fall a
salve to flow through bone, through joints, through the hot flesh,
through loosened veins, don't allow the sores to suppurate, to discharge
with pus, to swell up into lumps or into blisters to break out.

##### c

Thou beautiful Mother of Pains, great mistress of the Hill of Pain, old
maker of salves, that meltest sweet stuff, cook reliable salves, the
very best of magic cures, try them

<span id="page_301">p. 301</span>

thyself upon thy tongue, taste the flavour with thy mouth, whether it be
a potent salve, if thy concoction is suitable to be laid upon a hurt, to
be poured upon a wound. If the ointment be a potent one, come here where
there is need of thee, make flutter thy skirts, give the reliable salve
as an ointment for the hurts, as a remedy for wounds.

##### d

Dear Ukko, the Maker up above, the God that dwelleth in the sky, boil
water, some honey boil, concoct a goodly salve in the sky above, above
six 'speckly lids'—cut up a salmon fish, add a bit of salmon trout, a
pat of butter, one of fat, and a rasher of the flesh of swine \[*v*. of
Palvonen\]; concoct a potent salve with which I'll smear the exhausted
one, smear bones till they get fractureless, and joints till they get
fissureless, that they shall feel no pain, that they shall know no ache.

##### e

O Ukko, the golden king, the powerful father of the sky, with thy breast
push clouds, join them together end to end, rain honey from the sky,
rain honey, rain water down, rain down a goodly salve, the best of magic
remedies; from the sky thrust the herding-horns, from the clouds send
the pipes, from which let an ointment pour, on the earth let a magic
medicine grow, to be laid upon a hurt, to be poured over wounds.

##### f

O bee, our bird, our bird, the pleasant bird, just fetch some honey from
Metsola, some luscious stuff from Tapiola, from the honey-dropping
sward, from gracious fields o’ergrown with scrub, bring honey from the
meadow's

<span id="page_302">p. 302</span>

head, from the end of the gracious scrubby field, from the cup of a
golden flower, from seed-vessel of a hundred herbs, cook the honey on
thy tongue, in thy mouth melt the luscious stuff to be laid upon a hurt,
as a healing remedy for sores.

##### g

Thou bird of the air, the bee, fly away to another place, across nine
seas, nine seas and a half, without sitting on a reed, without resting
on a leaf; to an island in the open sea, to an islet in the sea; pray
bring some salves from there, bring goodly salves from nine anointers,
from eight men skilled in healing arts. There is an islet in the sea, on
the islet a honey-lake, delightful honey is therein, a goodly salve is
there that is suitable for veins, is serviceable for the joints.

##### h

Thou bee, thou bumble bee, fly away with fluttering flight across nine
seas, nine seas and a half, to the new house of Tuuri, to the roofless
one of Palvonen; there they make salves, cook honey properly on a single
cooking fire, made with nine sorts of wood, in nine clay pots, in lovely
kettles that would fit a finger point, would hold a thumb; into the
honey thrust thy wing, thy feather—in the melted butter, in the young
maiden's chest, in the old woman's box; thou’lt get enough of honey
there, thy full desire of honeyed sweets for frost bites caused by
bitter cold, for places touched by cruel air.

##### i

Rise from the earth, thou bee, from the knoll, thou honey-wing,' fly
away with fluttering wing above the moon, below the sun, along the
shoulders of Charles's Wain, ’long

<span id="page_303">p. 303</span>

the back of the Seven stars, fly to the Maker's porch, to the chamber of
the Omnipotent. There they make salves, and ointments (F. fats) they
prepare in silver pots, in kettles of gold, here there is honey, water
there, here there are other salves; in the middle the honey seethes, the
melting butter at the sides, the honey at the southern side, the
ointments (F. fats) at the northern end. Into the ointment dip thy claw,
thy feather—in the melted butter, from there bring salves, fetch the
magic remedies, nine salves, eight magic remedies, place them in Jesus’
hands, in Mary's gentle mouth. Try them, Jesus, with thy tongue, Mary,
in thy gentle mouth, whether they are the salves, the Almighty's magic
remedies with which the Maker was besmeared, the Omnipotent was healed,
when by a devil (*pirulainen*) pierced, when tortured by the evil power.

##### j

O bee, the pleasant bird, thou bustling 'blue-wing,' fly away with
fluttering wing to old Väinämöinen's place; snatch a honeyed wing from
old Väinämöinen's belt, and stroke with it a fainting man, heal one that
has come to harm, that the sufferer can sleep, the loud screamer get
repose, can rest without mouldering away, slumber without his being
choked.

##### k

From the south, O swallow, fly, O 'blue-wing' fly with whizzing wings,
bring a feather from the genial land, from the warm land—a downy plume,
with which I'll stroke a helpless man, heal one that has come to harm,
shall sweep away the fearful (F. holy) 'sparks,' shall remove (F.
quench) the fearful (F. holy) plagues.

<span id="page_304">p. 304</span>

#### § 182. FOR A GOOD CROP.

Grant, Jesus, a barley-year, a corn-summer,—O God, that we poor wretched
sons in wretched Bothnia, on the borders of Savolax can take in our
hands a drinking-cup, can put to our mouths a brandy flask, that
servants too shall get some ale, hired servants also taste the brew,
drawers of stone \[*v*. water\]—some wort of malt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_47"></span>[201:1](ms206.htm#fr_52) In the first edition of
the Kalevala R. 21, 259, there is another variant—Iki Liera, son of
Tiera.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[201:2](ms206.htm#fr_53) Probably with allusion
to *tiera*, 'the lump of snow that forms under the feet in walking.'

<span id="fn_49"></span>[202:1](ms206.htm#fr_54) The best man, the
leader of the procession and master of the ceremonies, is here speaking.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[204:1](ms206.htm#fr_56) Wild animals, game.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[205:1](ms206.htm#fr_57) In Lapland the *tyrä*
was a ball about the size of a walnut made from the down of flies glued
together and was used by Lapp witches and sorcerers. In Finnish the word
means a testicle, but is used here as an epithet for the cabbage grub.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[208:1](ms206.htm#fr_58) *i.e.* bears.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[211:1](ms206.htm#fr_60) *i.e.* out in the open
air.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[214:1](ms206.htm#fr_61) Turf smoke made to keep
flies away from the cattle at night.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[217:1](ms206.htm#fr_62) In the index the word
is printed Livetti by Lönnrot.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[222:1](ms206.htm#fr_63) *i.e.* by the sufferer.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[222:2](ms206.htm#fr_64) *v*. O ruddy maiden,
Pullitar.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[226:1](ms206.htm#fr_65) *i.e.* the awful or
terrible tree from having been made by a devil (*piru*), § 212, i. The
Zịrians call it the *sös-pu*, 'the dirty or abominable tree.'

<span id="fn_59"></span>[229:1](ms206.htm#fr_66) The name of a
particular man was probably thought of when this line was recited.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[231:1](ms206.htm#fr_67) A variant of the last
two lines transports the action to recent times:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

E’er I from my gun have wiped the snow,  
Have promptly loaded it with shot.

</div>

<span id="fn_61"></span>[231:2](ms206.htm#fr_68) Holohonka—seems to be a
proper name, though it may be only an epithet.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[232:1](ms206.htm#fr_69) Or runs, which form the
entrance to the trap.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[232:2](ms206.htm#fr_72) Ganander, p. 51,
translates, bird by 'roe deer' and lower down by 'elk.'

<span id="fn_64"></span>[232:3](ms206.htm#fr_71) The sticks and twigs
refer to the trap.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[232:4](ms206.htm#fr_73) Some recite this over
the cattle when driven into the cowhouse for the night on the eve of St.
Michael's day in autumn.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[232:5](ms206.htm#fr_74) The 'holy field' often
means the 'churchyard.'

<span id="fn_67"></span>[233:1](ms206.htm#fr_75) The boy that picks up
the arrows that have been shot.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[233:2](ms206.htm#fr_76) Old man of the Knoll is
an epithet of Tapio and of the bear.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[234:1](ms206.htm#fr_77) *i.e.* wild animals,
birds, game of any kind.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[236:1](ms206.htm#fr_78) In winter the Finnish
hunter dresses in pure white when he goes to the forest after game
(Tervo, p. 3).

<span id="fn_71"></span>[237:1](ms206.htm#fr_79) It should be 'Queen,'
as Kuuritar is a feminine form.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[239:1](ms206.htm#fr_80) 'It is useless' or some
such words must be understood here.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[239:2](ms206.htm#fr_81) The speaker.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[243:1](ms206.htm#fr_82) I have taken this
variant from Kanteletar, ii. 354.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[249:1](ms206.htm#fr_83) The ring-finger.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[251:1](ms206.htm#fr_84) There is play here on
the word *kynsi*, which means both 'nails' and 'hoofs.'

<span id="fn_77"></span>[261:1](ms206.htm#fr_85) 'Window' and 'door'
mean the trap.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[274:1](ms206.htm#fr_86) So as not to be seen by
envious persons or evil-wishers, and rendered ineffectual.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[275:1](ms206.htm#fr_87) *i.e.* the
spell-brought sickness that burns like sparks.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[276:1](ms206.htm#fr_88) See note, [p.
166](ms205.htm#page_166).

<span id="fn_81"></span>[280:1](ms206.htm#fr_89) *v*. the offspring of a
Blue-cloaked One (*F*. *sini-viittainen*).

<span id="fn_82"></span>[281:1](ms206.htm#fr_90) *i.e.* a hearth.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[282:1](ms206.htm#fr_91) According to Ganander
this song was recited by a man about to geld a horse.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[282:2](ms206.htm#fr_92) Gold, here, has a
reference to game. According to Ganander (p. 36) Kärehetär was the
mother of foxes and this song was recited by a trapper.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[298:1](ms206.htm#fr_93) Or nightingale.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[300:1](ms206.htm#fr_94) An epithet for the
pains of labour.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Origins](ms207)

</div>
