[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Classics](../index) 
[Freemasonry](../../mas/index)  [Index](index) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SKETCH

###### FOR

### THE HISTORY

###### OF THE

## DIONYSIAN ARTIFICERS

#### A FRAGMENT

BY

HIPPOLYTO JOSEPH DA COSTA, ESQ.

LONDON

SOLD BY MESSRS. SHERWOOD, NEELY, AND JONES,

PATERNOSTER-ROW.

1820

Price Three Shillings.

Scanned at Intangible Textual Heritage, June 2002, J.B. Hare redactor.

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

THE mysteries of the ancients, and the associations in which their
doctrines were taught, have hardly been considered in modern times, but
with a view to decry and ridicule them.

The systems of ancient mythology have been treated as monstrous
absurdities, debasing the human reason, conducting to idolatry, and
favouring depravity of manners.

However, they deserve attention, if the motives of their inventors,
rather than the profligacy and ignorance of their corruptors be
contemplated.

When men were deprived of the light of revelation, those who formed
systems of morality to guide their fellow creatures, according to the
dictates of improved reason, deserved the thanks of mankind, however
deficient those systems might be, or time may have altered them;
respect, not derision, ought to attend the efforts of those good men;
though their labours might have proved unavailing.

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

In this point of view must be considered an association, traced to the
most remote antiquity, and preserved through numberless viscissitudes,
yet retaining the original marks of its foundation, scope, and tenets.

It appears, that, at a very early period, some contemplative men were
desirous of deducting from the observation of nature, moral rules for
the conduct of mankind. Astronomy was the science selected for this
purpose; architecture was afterwards called in aid of this system; and
its followers formed a society or sect, which will be the object of this
enquiry.

The continuity of this system will be found sometimes broken, a natural
effect of conflicting theories, of the alteration of manners, and of
change of circumstances, but it will make its appearances at different
periods, and the same truth will be seen constantly.

The importance of calculating with precision the seasons of the year, to
regulate agricultural pursuits, navigation, and other necessary
avocations in life, must have made the science of astronomy an object of
great care, in the government of all civilized nations; and the
prediction of eclipses, and other phenomena, must have obtained for the
learned in this science, such respect and veneration from the ignorant
multitude, as to render it extremely useful to legislators, in framing
laws for regulating the moral conduct of their people.

The laws of nature and the moral rules deducted from them were explained
in allegorical histories, which we call fables, and those allegorical
histories were impressed in the memory by symbolical ceremonies
denominated mysteries, and which, though afterwards misunderstood and
misapplied, contain

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

systems of the most profound, the most sublime, and the most useful
theory of philosophy.

Amongst those mysteries are peculiary remarkable the Eleusinian.
Dionysius, Bacchus, Orisis, Adonis, Thamuz, Apollo, &c., were names
adopted in various languages, and in several countries, to designate the
Divinity, who was the object of those ceremonies, and it is generally
admitted that the sun was meant by these several denominations. <span
id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0)

Let us begin with a fact, not disputed, that in these ceremonies, a
death and resurrection was represented, and that the interval between
death and resurrection was sometimes three days, sometimes fifteen days.

Now, by the concurrent testimony of all ancient authors <span
id="fr_1"></span>[2](#fn_1) the deities called Osiris, Adonis, Bacchus,
&c. were names given to, or types, representing the sun, considered in
different situations, and contemplated under various points of
view. <span id="fr_2"></span>[3](#fn_2)

Therefore, these symbolic representations, which described the sun as
dead, that is to say, hidden for three days under the horizon, must have
originated in a climate, where the sun, when in the lower hemisphere,
is, at a certain season of the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

year, concealed for three days from the view of the inhabitants.

Such climate is, in fact, to be found as far north as latitude 66°, and
it is reasonable to conclude, that, from a people living near the polar
circle, the worship of the sun, with such ceremonies, must have
originated; and some have supposed that this people were the
Atlantides. <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3)

The worship of the sun is generally traced to Mitraic rites, and those
invented by the Magi of Persia. But if the sun could be made an object
of veneration, if the preservation of fire could be thought deserving of
religious ceremonies, it is more natural that it should be with a people
living in a frozen clime, to whom the sun is the greatest comfort, whose
absence under the horizon for three days is a deplorable event, and
whose appearance above the horizon a real source of joy.

Not so in Persia, where the sun is never hidden for three days together
under the horizon, and where its piercing rays are so far from being a
source of pleasure, that to be screened from them, to enjoy cool shades,
is one of those comforts, to obtain which all the ingenuity of art is
exerted. The worship, therefore, of the sun, and the keeping sacred
fires, must have been a foreign introduction into Persia.

The conjecture is strengthened by some important facts, which, referring
to astronomical, allusions, place the scene out of Persia, though the
theory is found there.

In the Boun Dehesch (translated by Anquetil Du Perron page 400) we find,
that "the longest day of the summer is equal to the two shortest of the
winter; and that the longest

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

night in the winter is equal to the two shortest nights in summer."

This circumstance can only take place at the latitude of 49° 20', where
the longest day of the year is of sixteen hours ten minutes, and the
shortest of eight hours five minutes.

This latitude is far beyond the limits of Persia, where history places
Zoroaster, to whom the sacred doctrines; of the Persian book Boun
Dehesch are attributed. This proportion, then, of days and nights, as a
general rule could only be true in Scythia, whether at the sources of
the Irtisch, the Oby, the Jenisci, or the Slinger.

We know nothing of the antient history of those Scythians or Massagetes,
but we know that they disputed their antiquity with the Egyptians, <span
id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4) and that the above principle, though
attributed to the Persian Zoroaster, is only applicable to the country
of those Scythians.

But let the origin of the mysteries of the sun begin where it may, they
were celebrated in Greece, in various places, amongst others, at
Appollonia, a city dedicated to Apollo, and situated in latitude 41°
22'. <span id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5) In this latitude the longest day
has fifteen hours, differing three hours from the length of the day when
the sun is on the equinoxial: the reverse is the case with the nights.

This circumstance will account for the preservation of three days in
these mysteries, even when celebrated in Greece, and

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

also for the fifteen days, or representation of the number of fifteen in
some of the Eleusinian rites.

The mysterious numbers were employed to designate such and similar
operations of nature, for it is said that the Pythagorean symbols and
secrets were borrowed from the Orphic or Eleusinian rites; and that they
consisted in the study of the sciences and useful arts, united with
theology and ethics, and were communicated in cyphers and symbols. <span
id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6) Similar intimations, as to the mystic import
of numbers are found in many other authors. <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7)

The letters, representing numbers formed cabalistic names, expressive of
the essential qualities of those things they meant to represent; and
even the Greeks, when they translated foreign names, whose cabalistic
import they knew, so they rendered them by Greek letters, as to preserve
the same interpretation in numbers, which we find exemplified in the
name Nile. <span id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8)

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

But in the number three to which so many mystical and moral allusions
were made, had a reference to the three celestial circles, two of which
the sun touches, passing over the third in its annual course. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9)

The mysteries of Eleusis, the same as those of Dionysius or Bacchus,
were supposed by some to have been introduced into Greece by
Orpheus: <span id="fr_10"></span>[2](#fn_10) they may have come there
from Egypt, but Egypt may have received them at a previous period from
the Persians, and these again from the Scythians; but taking them only
as we find them in Greece, we will give here an outline of their
ceremonies.

The aspirant for these mysteries was not admitted a candidate till he
had arrived at a certain age, and particular persons were appointed to
examine and prepare him for the rites of

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

initiation. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11) Those, whose conduct was
found irregular, or who had been guilty of attrocious crimes, were
rejected, those found worthy of admittance were then instructed by
significant symbols in the principles of society. <span
id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12)

At the ceremony of admission into these mysteries, the candidate was
first shown into a dark room, called the mystical chapel. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13) There certain questions were put to him.
When introduced, the holy book was brought forward, from between two
pillars or stones: <span id="fr_14"></span>[4](#fn_14) he was rewarded
by the vision: <span id="fr_15"></span>[5](#fn_15) a multitude of
extraordinary lights were presented to him, some of which are worthy of
particular remark.

He stood on a sheep skin; the person opposite was called the revealer of
sacred things <span id="fr_16"></span>[6](#fn_16) and he was also
clothed in a sheep skin or with a veil of purple, and on his right
shoulder a mule skin spotted or variegated, representing the rays of the
sun and stars. <span id="fr_17"></span>[7](#fn_17) At a certain distance
stood the

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

torch-bearer, <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18) who represented the
sun; and beside the altar was a third person, who represented the
moon. <span id="fr_19"></span>[2](#fn_19)

Thus we preceive, that over those assemblies presided three persons, in
different employments, and we may remark, that in the government of the
caravans in the eastern countries, three persons also direct them,
though there are five principal officers, besides the three
mathematicians; those three persons are, the commander in chief, who
rules all; the captain of the march, who has the ruling power, as long
as the caravan moves; and the captain of the rest, or refreshment, who
assumes the government, as soon as the caravan stops to refresh. <span
id="fr_20"></span>[3](#fn_20)

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

Some authors have observed the same division of power, in the march of
the Israelites through the wilderness, and consider Moses as the captain
general, Joshua the captain of the march; and perhaps Aaron as the
captain of the rest. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21)

The society of which we are speaking, was ruled by three persons, with
different duties assigned to them, by a custom of the most remote
antiquity.

The mysteries, however, were not communicated at once, but by
gradations, <span id="fr_22"></span>[2](#fn_22) in three different
parts. The business of the initiation, properly speaking was divided
into five sections, as we find in a passage of Theo, who compares
philosophy to those mystic rites. <span id="fr_23"></span>[3](#fn_23)

These ceremonies, thus far, appear to contain the lesser mysteries, or
the first and second stages of the candidate in his

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

progress through the course of his initiations. There was, however, a
third stage, when the candidate, himself, was made symbolically to
approach death, and then return to life. <span
id="fr_24"></span>[1](#fn_24)

In this third stage of the ceremony, the candidate was stretched upon
the couch, <span id="fr_25"></span>[2](#fn_25) to represent his death.

As to the festivities, in which those mysteries were celebrated, we find
that on the 17th of the month Athyr <span id="fr_26"></span>[3](#fn_26)
the images of Osiris were enclosed in a coffin or ark: on the 18th was
the search; <span id="fr_27"></span>[4](#fn_27) and on the 19th was the
finding. <span id="fr_28"></span>[5](#fn_28)

Thug in fables or symbolical histories, relating to these mysteries, we
find Adonis slain and resuscitated; the Syrian women weeping for Thamuz,
&c.

Let us now examine what was meant by this symbolical

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

death and resurrection, or by certain personages, said to have visited
the Hades, and returning up again. <span id="fr_29"></span>[1](#fn_29)

It appears that this type in all its various forms and denominations,

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

indicated the sun passing to the lower hemisphere, and coming again to
the upper. <span id="fr_30"></span>[1](#fn_30)

The Egyptians, who observed this worship of the sun, under the name of
Osiris, represented the sun in the figure of an old man, just before the
winter solstice, and typified him by Serapis, having the constellation
of Leo opposite to him, the Serpent or Hydra under him, the Wolf on the
east of the Lion, and the Dog on the west. This is the state of the
southern hemisphere at midnight about that period of the year.

The same Egyptians represented the sun by the boy Harpocrates, at the
vernal equinox; and then was the festivity of the death, burial, and
resurrection of Osiris; that is to say, the sun in the lower hemisphere;
just coming up, and rising above in the upper hemisphere.

In this upper situation the sun was called Horus, Mithras, &c. and
hailed as *sol invictus*. We will now point out some other symbols to
express the same phenomena, though different from those types we are
treating of at present.

In the Mithraical astronomical monuments, where the figure of a man is
represented conquering and killing a bull, there are two figures by
their sides with torches; one pointing downwards, the other, upwards.

These monuments, where the mysteries in question were depicted, the man
killing and conquering the bull, represent the sun, passing to the upper
hemisphere, through the sign of Taurus, which in that remote period
(four thousand six hundred years before our era) was the equinoxal sign.
The two

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

torch-bearers, the one pointing his torch downwards, the other upwards,
represent the sun passing down to the lower hemisphere, and coming up
again. <span id="fr_31"></span>[1](#fn_31)

At the remote time before alluded to, the sun entered the sign Taurus,
at the summer equinox, and the year was begun at this period among the
Egyptian astronomers. <span id="fr_32"></span>[2](#fn_32) Afterwards, in
consequence of the precession of the equinoxes, the summer equinox took
place in the sign of Aries; hence part of the Egyptians transferred
their worship from the bull or calf to the ram; <span
id="fr_33"></span>[3](#fn_33) while others continued to worship the
bull. <span id="fr_34"></span>[4](#fn_34)

We may explain this in the language of our modern astronomers by saying,
that some of the learned Egyptians continued to reckon by the moveable
zodiac, while others reckoned the year by the fixed zodiac; and this
circumstance produced a division of sects in the people, as it was a
division of opinion, amongst the learned.

Likewise, by the same precession of the equinoxes, the sun

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

passed from Aries to Pisces in the vernal equinox, about three hundred
and thirty eight years before our era; yet the beginning of the year
continued to be reckoned from Aries. If the Egyptian astronomy and
Egyptian religion had then existed with the same vigour, both would have
perhaps suffered a similar alteration; but the Egyptian systems were at
that period nearly annihilated. We may observe, however, that the
Christians, at the beginning of our era, marked their tombs; with
fishes, as an emblem of Christianity, to distinguish their sepulchers
from those of the heathens, by a symbol unknown to them.

Returning from this short digression to our immediate purpose, we have
to observe, that if those ceremonies and symbols were meant to represent
the sun, and the laws of its motions, these very phenomena of nature
were studied with a moral view, as being themselves types or arguments
to a more sublime or metaphysical philosophy; and the moral rules
therefrom deducted, were impressed on the memory by those lively images
and representations.

The emerging of the sun into the lower hemisphere, and its returning,
was contemplated either as a proof or as a symbol of the immortality of
the soul; one of the most important, as well as the most sublime tenets
of the Platonic Philosophy. <span id="fr_35"></span>[1](#fn_35)

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

The doctrines of the spirituality and immortality of the soul, explained
by those symbols, were very little understood, even by the initiated;
thus we find some of them <span id="fr_36"></span>[1](#fn_36) took those
types to signify merely the present body, by their descriptions of the
infernal abodes; whereas, the true meaning of these mysteries inculcated
the doctrine of a future state of the soul, and future rewards and
punishments; and that such were the doctrines of those philosophers is
shown by many and indisputable authorities. <span
id="fr_37"></span>[2](#fn_37)

The union of the soul with the body was considered as the death of the
soul; its; separation as the resurrection of the soul; <span
id="fr_38"></span>[3](#fn_38) and such ceremonies and types were
intended to impress the doctrine of the immersion of the soul into
matter as is well attested. <span id="fr_39"></span>[4](#fn_39)

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

By the emblem of the sun descending into the lower hemisphere was also
represented the soul of the man, who through ignorance and
uncultivation, was in a state compared to sleep, or almost dead; which
mystery was intended to stimulate man to the learning of sciences. <span
id="fr_40"></span>[1](#fn_40)

The Egyptians also considered matter as a species of mud or mire, in
which the soul was immerged; <span id="fr_41"></span>[2](#fn_41) and in
an ancient author we find a recapitulation of these theories in the same
sense. <span id="fr_42"></span>[3](#fn_42)

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

The Persians, who followed the tenets of Zerdoust, called by the Greeks
Zoroaster, having received the same doctrines upon the mystical
contemplation of the sun, made also the same metaphysical application to
the soul, of the passage of the sun through the signs; of the
zodiac. <span id="fr_43"></span>[1](#fn_43)

The sun, moreover, was considered as the symbol of the active principle;
whereas the moon and earth were symbols of the passive. <span
id="fr_44"></span>[2](#fn_44)

The sun itself, considering its beneficial influence in the physical
world, was chosen as; the symbol of the Deity, though afterwards taken
by the vulgar as a Deity. <span id="fr_45"></span>[3](#fn_45)

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

It must be here particularly observed, that the different names, which
the Egyptians (from whom the Greeks learnt them) gave to God, instead of
meaning several gods were only expressions of the different productive
effects of the only one God. <span id="fr_46"></span>[1](#fn_46) Not
very different from

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

what the Jews derive from the great name Tetragramaton. <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47)

The fables, allegories, and types of the ancients, being of three
classes, <span id="fr_48"></span>[2](#fn_48) import some times various
meanings; therefore, some of the ceremonies to which sublime import is
attached, are also applied to typify less dignified operations, in the
natural system. Thus, for instance, the fable of Proserpine, which
alludes to the immersion of the soul into the body, was also employed to
symbolize the operation of the seed in the ground. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[3](#fn_49)

But the general doctrine of Plato of the descent of the soul into the
darkness; of the body, the perils of the passions, the torments of
vices, appears to be perfectly described by Virgil; <span
id="fr_50"></span>[4](#fn_50) though this Poet was of the Epicurean
sect, the most fashionable in his days.

The lesser mysteries represented, as we have seen, the descent of the
soul into the body, and the pains therein suffered. The greater
mysteries were intended to typify the splendid visions, or the happy
state of the soul, both here and hereafter, when purified from the
defilements of material nature. These doctrines are also inculcated, by
the fables of the fortunate islands, the Elysian fields, &c. The
different purifications in these rites were symbols of the gradation of
virtues, necessary to the re-ascent of the soul. Inward purity, of which
external

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

purifications were symbols, can only be obtained by the exercise of
these virtues. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51)

To the allusion of these virtues must be understood what Socrates
says, <span id="fr_52"></span>[2](#fn_52) that it is the business of the
philosophers to study to die and to be themselves death; and as at the
same time he reprobates suicide, such death cannot mean any other but
philosophical death, or the exercise of what he calls the cathartic
virtues.

If such was the meaning and import of the Eleusinian and Dionysian
rites, symbols, and ceremonies, it must be allowed that a society or
sect, which was employed in the contemplation of such sublime truths,
cannot be looked upon as trifling or profligate.

The very Christian Fathers, who so strongly attacked the Pagan religion,
confessed the utility of these symbols; <span
id="fr_53"></span>[3](#fn_53) and that the circumstances previous to
initiation into those mysteries,

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

tended to exclude impious notions, and prepare the mind to hear the
truth. <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54)

Those mysteries were concealed from the vulgar; because it would be a
ridiculous prostitution of such sublime theories to disclose them to the
multitude incapable of understanding them, when even many of the
initiates, for want of study and application, did not comprehend the
whole meaning of the symbols.

The multitude were told only in the abstract, the doctrine of a future
state of rewards and punishments, and were made acquainted with the
calendar, the result of astronomical observations; the knowledge of
which was connected with their festivities and agricultural pursuits.
They were likewise taught other practical parts of science calculated
for general use.

The secrecy of these mysteries was the first cause of obloquy against
them; next came, beyond doubt, the depravity of their followers, and the
perversion of those assemblies into convivial meetings first, and then
into the most debauched associations.

Secrecy, also, was enjoined by the laws, it was death to reveal any
thing belonging to the Eleusinian mysteries; to disclose imprudently any
thing about them, was supposed even indecorous; of this we find a very
conspicuous; instance in Plutarch. <span id="fr_55"></span>[2](#fn_55)

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

Out of respect for this custom the scholars were, in general, only
instructed in the *exoteric* doctrines. <span
id="fr_56"></span>[1](#fn_56) The *acroamatic* doctrines were taught
only to the few select, by private communication and *viva voce*.

Rut when the ignorance of the very teachers of those mysteries caused
their forms only to be attended to, the essence was lost, the shadow
only remained; and, then, even those forms and ceremonies were
frequented by persons, ignorant of their import, and wicked enough to
turn them to their private interests, as a machine employed in deceiving
the people, and to occasions of debauchery and depravity. We shall give
an example of this,

The mysteries of Eleusis, or the Sun, were united or analogous to those
of Dionysius or Bacchus; because, according to the Orphic theology, the
intellect of every planet was denominated Bacchus: so when the sun was
considered as the spiritual intelligence, who moved or caused this
planet to move, in its annual circle, he was denominated Trietericus
Bacchus. <span id="fr_57"></span>[2](#fn_57)

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

The ceremonies, therefore, of Bacchus, were attended with rejoicings, as
the triumph of the spirit over matter; but this circumstance, so
intimately connected with the sublime notions of the Eleusinian
mysteries, was completely turned into a mere banqueting, and processions
of drunken people, who of the ceremonies knew nothing else, than to
carry branches of trees in their hands. <span
id="fr_58"></span>[1](#fn_58)

More, still: a depraved priest introduced those Bacchanalian mysteries
into Rome, for the very worst of purposes, which alarming the Senate,
the most severe punishment was inflicted on him and his followers. <span
id="fr_59"></span>[2](#fn_59)

In consequence of those abuses, it was, that Socrates refused to be
initiated, <span id="fr_60"></span>[3](#fn_60) and the same did
Diogenes, alledging that Patæcion, a notorious robber, had obtained
initiation: <span id="fr_61"></span>[4](#fn_61) Epaminondas, also, and
Agesilaus never desired it. <span id="fr_62"></span>[5](#fn_62)

But if those who were desirous of being licentious clothed themselves
with those mysteries, this has nothing to do with the original tenets of
the institution. For the purity of its votaries was carried, according
to the primitive mysteries, to the most delicate and scrupulous
point. <span id="fr_63"></span>[6](#fn_63)

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

After such respectable authorities, as we have referred to, we must
reject, as impudent calumnies, the assertion of Tertullian, who says,
that the natural parts of a man were enclosed in the ark carried about
in the processions of those mysteries: Theodoret and Arnobius say, they
were the parts of a woman: such assertors had no means of ascertaining
what was not known to any one, out of the precincts of those most
recondite mysteries. <span id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64)

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

We should rather guess, that in the ark, carried in the procession, and
said to enclose the body of Osiris, spheres were deposited, representing
our solar system. <span id="fr_65"></span>[1](#fn_65)

In regard to these accusations, found in some of the ecclesiastical
writers, we must also observe, that many of them, led by a mistaken zeal
for the Christian religion, disfigured in a most reprehensible degree,
the ancient historical monuments: taking, for instance, the manner in
which the history of Egypt as written by Manethon, was transmitted to us
by those ecclesiastical writers: <span id="fr_66"></span>[2](#fn_66)
others; of such writers, in fact, knew nothing of the Egyptian
mysteries. <span id="fr_67"></span>[3](#fn_67)

The conclusion, therefore, is, that the motives of those institutions
were good and pure, as tending to the study of science, and practice of
morality, though the same institutions

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

afterwards degenerated; <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68) and their
degeneration was followed by the ruin of the state, as predicted by
Trimegistus himself,

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

who in this prediction proved how great a philosopher and politician he
was. <span id="fr_69"></span>[1](#fn_69)

Having thus established what was the meaning and import of the
Eleusinian or Dionysian mysteries amongst the ancient Greeks, who
transmitted to us the knowledge of them; and having shown that the
ceremonies were not intended in their origin as a worship of the sun,
considered as a Deity, we shall proceed to examine how those mysteries
were communicated to other nations by the Greeks.

About fifty years <span id="fr_70"></span>[2](#fn_70) before the
building of the Temple of Solomon in Jerusalem, a colony of Grecians,
chiefly Ionians, complaining of the narrow limits of their country, in
an increased population, emigrated; and having been settled in Asia
Minor, gave to that country the name of Ionia. <span
id="fr_71"></span>[3](#fn_71)

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

No doubt that people carried with them their manners, sciences, and
religion; and the mysteries of Eleusis <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72) among the rest. Accordingly we find that
one of their cities, Byblos, was famed for the worship of Apollo, as
Apollonia had been with their ancestors. <span
id="fr_73"></span>[2](#fn_73)

These Ionians, participating in the improved state of civilization in
which their mother country, Greece, then was, cultivated the sciences,
and useful arts; but made themselves most conspicuous in architecture,
and invented or improved the order called by their own name Ionian.

These Ionians formed a society, whose purpose was to employ themselves
in erecting buildings. The general assembly of the society, was first
held at Theos; but afterwards, in consequence of some civil commotions,
passed to Lebedos. <span id="fr_74"></span>[3](#fn_74)

This sect or society was now called the Dionysian Artificers, as Bacchus
was supposed to be the inventor of building theatres; and they performed
the Dionysian festivities. <span id="fr_75"></span>[4](#fn_75) They
afterwards extended themselves to Syria, Persia, and India. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[5](#fn_76)

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

From this period, the Science of Astronomy which had given rise to the
symbols of the Dionysian rites, became connected with types taken from
the art of building. <span id="fr_77"></span>[1](#fn_77)

These Ionian societies divided themselves into different sections, or
minor assemblies. <span id="fr_78"></span>[2](#fn_78) Some of those
small or dependent associations; had also their distinguishing
names. <span id="fr_79"></span>[3](#fn_79)

But they extended their moral views, in conjunction with the art of
building, to many useful purposes, and to the practice of acts of
benevolence. <span id="fr_80"></span>[4](#fn_80)

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

We find recorded, that these societies, and their utility, were many
years afterwards inquired into, by Cambyses, king of Persia, who
approved of them, and gave to them great marks of favour. <span
id="fr_81"></span>[1](#fn_81)

It is essential to observe, that these societies; had significant words
to distinguish their members; <span id="fr_82"></span>[2](#fn_82) and
for the same purpose they used emblems taken from the art of
building. <span id="fr_83"></span>[3](#fn_83)

Let us now notice the passage of the Dionysian Artificers to Judea.
Solomon obtained from Hiram, king of Tyre, men skilful in the art of
building, when the Temple was erected at Jerusalem. <span
id="fr_84"></span>[4](#fn_84) Amongst the foreigners, who came on this
occasion, we find men from Gabel, called Giblim; <span
id="fr_85"></span>[5](#fn_85) that is to say, the Ionians settled in
Asia Minor, for Gabbel, or Byblos, was

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

that city where stood the temple of Apollo, where the Eleusinian rites
or Dionysian mysteries were celebrated, as we have already stated. <span
id="fr_86"></span>[1](#fn_86)

We could, in addition to this argument produce some authority; for
Josephus says that the Grecian style of architecture was used at the
temple of Jerusalem. <span id="fr_87"></span>[2](#fn_87)

After this we cannot be surprised to find that the ceremonies of
Eleusis, or Thamuz, should be introduced into Judea, particularly, as
Solomon himself, after having entered into the scientific allusions, in
the construction of the temple, was not free from the accusation of the
gross superstition of idolatry. <span id="fr_88"></span>[3](#fn_88)

So we find some years afterwards the prophet Ezekiel complaining that
the Israelitish women were weeping for Thamuz

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

at a certain period of the year, at the very gates of the temple. <span
id="fr_89"></span>[1](#fn_89)

But it is natural to suppose that the Dionysian Artificers would not
have attempted to introduce those rites amongst the religious Jews, as a
mere matter of idolatry, for the worship of the sun. The ideas of the
Israelites, concerning the unity of God, would have revolted at any
thing, inducing a belief of the polytheism of the Gentiles.

The symbol, therefore, in these mysteries, must have been explained to
the Jews, to mean only the sun, in the true and original sense of those
mysteries; that is to say, as an emblem of God's goodness to man; and
the apparent motions of that luminary, first as the guide for fixing the
seasons; next as types or remembrances of the immortality of the soul:
for this dogma does not appear either clear in the books of the Jews
before that period, or universally admitted amongst them at a much later
date. <span id="fr_90"></span>[2](#fn_90)

To avoid, therefore, any allusion to idolatry in these ceremonies and
symbols, another personage or another name must have been substituted
for Adonis or Osiris; and as a symbolical death and resurrection was
essential, in the allegory of the

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

system, the history of the death of another individual must have been
substituted . . . . . .

However, in framing this new symbolical history, such circumstances were
to be related, connected with the death of that personage, as to typify
and account for the whole of the Eleusinian mysteries, or the passage of
the sun from the upper to the lower hemisphere, and its return up
again. <span id="fr_91"></span>[1](#fn_91)

In the formation of this new system, or rather new allegory to the same
system, though the name of the hero was changed, the circumstances must
have been preserved, as far as consistent with new names . . . . . . . .

The whole fabric of the temple would favor an allusion of this sort.

The foundation stone was laid on the second day of the second
month; <span id="fr_92"></span>[2](#fn_92) which corresponds upon an
average to the 20th of April; reckoning the sacred year, upon the fixed
zodiac.

Now if you rectify your globe to the latitude of Jerusalem (31.° 30') at
that period of the year, you will have the sun in Aries, or the sun
represented by a ram or sheep, or a man in a sheep's skin; as the
hierophant was represented, in the mysteries of Eleusis. <span
id="fr_93"></span>[3](#fn_93)

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

Therefore, the very period of the year in which the foundation stone of
the temple was laid, would afford an opportunity of establishing upon it
a new allegorical system, to explain the ancient mystery.

If we suppose the globe to represent the world in the position above
described, the aspirant being in the west facing the hierophant, who in
the east represents; the rising sun, the candidate will find himself
between the two tropics, represented by the two columns <span
id="fr_94"></span>[1](#fn_94) which were placed on the west entrance of
that temple . . . . . .

The better to understand the facility with which the ancient system
could be adapted to the circumstances of the temple of Jerusalem, we
must consider its typic emblems, according to the notions of the Jews,
and some of the Christian fathers.

The temples built in honor of the several gods, were so shaped, as to
have allusion to the supposed attributes of such gods. <span
id="fr_95"></span>[2](#fn_95) But the universe was supposed by the
Platonists to be the true temple of the true and only God. <span
id="fr_96"></span>[3](#fn_96) The temple, therefore, dedicated to the
true God, was to be a type of the universe.

Thus we find that the temple of Jerusalem was situated

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

east and west, and with dimensions and types all adapted to represent
the universal system of nature. <span id="fr_97"></span>[1](#fn_97)

If the temple of Solomon was a type of the universe, to

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

symbolize that Jehovah was no local God, but the only God, Lord of the
universe; tradition also tells us that the place of assembly of the
Dionysian Artificers was allegorically described

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

by its dimensions, as a symbol of the universe, in length, in breadth,
in height, and in depth.

The ancients represented the course of the stars, by the winding of a
snake; but if this snake was so placed as to have the tail in her mouth,
it then represented eternity.

Now if we consider the beginning of the civil year amongst the Hebrews,
the month Tisri, which was in the winter equinox; <span
id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) the sun, proceeding from thence,
approaches the south, and touches the tropic of Capricorn; then
retrocedes towards the north, crossing the equinoxal, and touching the
tropic of Cancer; from whence retroceding again to the south, arrives at
the equinoxial, finishing the year.

These points, in an extended map of the two hemispheres seem separate;
but the emblem of the snake biting its tail, would represent the end of
the year, meeting the beginning. <span id="fr_99"></span>[2](#fn_99)

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

Mr. Hutchinson has proved, that the globes, on the top of the two
columns, at the portico of the temple, were orreries, or

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

mechanical representations of the motions of the heavenly bodies. <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100)

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

I think, that after those circumstances, which afforded so many
facilities for the introduction of the system of the Dionysian
Artificers in Judea, the continuance of the same, in subsequent periods,
cannot be of difficult explanation.

We find it stated, in the Book of the Maccabees, <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101) that a society existed in those days in
Judea, called the Assideans or Cassideans, whose business it was to take
care of the repairs of the temple.

From these Cassideans proceeded the sect or society of the Essenians,
which, according to Philo and Josephus, were the same as the Assideans;
and probably, because they admitted no women in their assemblies, Pliny
says <span id="fr_102"></span>[2](#fn_102) that they were propagated
without wives.

Josephus <span id="fr_103"></span>[3](#fn_103) mentions the first of the
Essenians, in the time

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

of Aristobulus, and Antigonus the son of Hircanus; but Suidas <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104) and others were of opinion that they
were a branch of the Rechabites, who subsisted before the captivity.

Josephus, probably ignorant of the secret tenets of the Essenians, also
accuses them of worshipping the sun, or saying prayers before the sun
rising, as if to incite him to rise. But this very accusation, again,
identifies them with the sect of the Dionysian Artificers, who, as
appears by the reasons above stated, were supposed to adore the sun.

Josephus relates many other particulars, by which, in a striking manner,
he brings them to what we have related of the other societies which
preceded them. <span id="fr_105"></span>[2](#fn_105) It also points out
the conformity of their ideas with those of the Platonists and
Dionysians, on the nature of the soul. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[3](#fn_106) In short, they used

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

symbols, allegories, and parables, after the manner of the
ancients. <span id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)

The practices of those Essenians are represented by Philo <span
id="fr_108"></span>[2](#fn_108) as the most pacific, and full of social
virtues; and those amongst them who were most enthusiastic for their
tenets, had their goods in common, as the Christians had in the first
ages of Christianity. <span id="fr_109"></span>[3](#fn_109)

The Essenians had not their ceremonies and mysteries, recorded in
history; but thus far we know, that they transmitted to posterity the
doctrines which they received from their ancestors; <span
id="fr_110"></span>[4](#fn_110) they had also distinguishing
signs; <span id="fr_111"></span>[5](#fn_111) and the festival
banquets; <span id="fr_112"></span>[6](#fn_112) though it does not
appear that they followed the profession of builders or architects
exclusively.

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

Out of Judea we find also societies distinguished by the same characters
as the Essenians, and with the same tenets of Plato; for, the
Pythagoreans also employed the symbols from the art of building. <span
id="fr_113"></span>[1](#fn_113)

The Dionysian Artificers existed also in Syria, Persia, and India; <span
id="fr_114"></span>[2](#fn_114) and the Eleusinian mysteries were
preserved in Europe, even at Rome, until the eighth century of the
Christian era. <span id="fr_115"></span>[3](#fn_115)

After this epoch, Europe was visited by the most barbarous nations who,
persecuting every scientific research, scattered a general darkness, in
which all the labours of the ancients, in favor of mankind, were nearly
lost, in the general ignorance of their times.

Those very societies and sects, had also been in former periods much
abused, and the ceremonies converted, as we have seen, for the worst of
purposes: this was another powerful cause for their decline and ruin.

Christianity was then in Europe, the only bond of morality, by which
power could, in some measure, be controuled, or restrained.

When the sciences began to revive, a general fanaticism prevailed, and a
spirit of persecution appeared, which caused the ancient doctrines of
philosophers, and the old systems of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

morality to be regarded only as offsprings of atheism, and practices of
idolatry.

Under these circumstances, the Eleusinians, the Dionysian Artificers,
Assideans or Essenians, sunk into such oblivion, that no mention is made
of them in history.

In the tenth century, during the wars of the crusades, some societies
were instituted in Palestine, and Europe, which adopted some regulations
resembling those of the ancient fraternities. But is was in England, and
chiefly in Scotland, where the remains of the old system, identified
with that of the Dionysian Artificers, were discovered in modern times.

Cætera desunt.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[5:1](#fr_0) The number of authorities to prove
this are collected in Kirker, vol. I p. 288.

Ogygia me Bacchum canit,  
Osiris Egyptus putat,  
Arabiæ gens Adoneum.  
                  Ausonius in Myobarbum

Epig. 29.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[5:2](#fr_1) Meursius has collected all the
authorities and fragments found in ancient authors upon the Eleusinian
ceremonies.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[5:3](#fr_2) Plutarchus, De Iside et Osiride.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[6:1](#fr_3) Recherches sur les Atlantides.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[7:1](#fr_4) Herodotus.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[7:2](#fr_5) Martiniere Dicc. Geogr. art.
Appollonia.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[8:1](#fr_6) Jamablicus. part. I cap. 32.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[8:2](#fr_7) Plutarchus (in vitæ Numæ) says, that
"to offer an odd number to the celestial gods, and an even one to the
terrestrial, is proper. The sense of which precept is hidden from the
vulgar."

The same Plutarchus (in vitæ Lycurgi) explaining the number of the
Spartan Senators, who were 28, says, "something perhaps there is in
being a perfect number formed of seven, multiplied by four, and withal
the first number after six that is equal to all its parts."

Another proof of the mystic import of numbers is found in Plutarchus (in
vitæ Fabii.) "The perfection of the number three consists in being the
first of odd numbers, the first of plurals, and containing in itself the
first differences, and the first elements of all numbers."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[8:3](#fr_8) The fertility caused by the
inundations of the Nile over the adjacent country caused this river to
be considered as a mystic representation of the sun, parent of <span
id="page_9">p. 9</span> all fecundity of the earth; and therefore a name
was given to it containing the number 365, or days in the solar year.
The Greeks thus preserved the name.

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="247">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ν {Greek <em>N</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>50</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ε {Greek <em>E</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>5</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ι {Greek <em>I</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>10</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Λ {Greek <em>L</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>30</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Ο {Greek <em>O</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>70</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Σ {Greek <em>S</em>}</p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><u></u>
<p>200</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="63%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
<td width="37%" data-valign="TOP"><p>365</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<span id="fn_9"></span>[9:1](#fr_9) Potter's Grec. Antiq.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[9:2](#fr_10) Dionysius Siculus, Lib. VI. says,
that the Athenians invented the Eleusinian mysteries; but in the first
book of his Library he says they were brought from Egypt by Erecteus.

Theodoret Lib. Grec. Affect, says, that it was Orpheus who invented
those mysteries, imitating, however, the Egyptian festivities of Isis.

Arnobius and Lactantius describe those mysteries, as also does Clemens.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[10:1](#fr_11) Hesichius in γδραυ {Greek
*gdrau*}

"They were exhorted to direct their passions. Porphir. ap. Sob. Ecclog.
Phis. p. 142.

To merit promotion by improving their minds. Arrian in Epictet. lib. 3
cap. 21.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[10:2](#fr_12) Clemens, Strom. Lib. I. p. 325.
Lib. VIII. p. 854.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[10:3](#fr_13) μυςχος σηχος {Greek
*mu<u>s</u>xo<u>s</u> shxo<u>s</u>*}

<span id="fn_14"></span>[10:4](#fr_14) πετρωμα {Greek *petrwma*}

<span id="fn_15"></span>[10:5](#fr_15) αντοψια {Greek *antopsia*}

<span id="fn_16"></span>[10:6](#fr_16) ιεροφαντες {Greek
*ierofante<u>s</u>*}

<span id="fn_17"></span>[10:7](#fr_17) Mairobius Saturnalia. Lib. I. c.
8. I will copy here an English translation of this passage, which I have
read some where.

"He who desires in pomp of sacred dress,  
The Sun's resplendent body to express, <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>  
Should first a veil assume of purple bright.  
Like fair white beams combined with fiery light;  
On his right shoulder next, a mule's broad hide,  
Widely diversified with spotted pride,  
Should hang an image of the pole divine,  
And doedal stars whose orbs eternal shine;  
A golden splendid zone then, oe'r his vest  
He next should throw, and bind it round his breast,  
In mighty token how with golden light,  
The rising sun from earth's last bounds, and night  
Sudden emerges and with matchless force,  
Darts through old Ocean's billows in his course,  
A boundless splendour hence enshrined in dew,  
Plays on his whirlpools, glorious to the view,  
While his circumfluent waters spread abroad,  
Full in the presence of the radiant god;  
But Ocean's circle, like a zone of light,  
The sun's wide bosom girds and charms the wand'ring sight.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[11:1](#fr_18) δαδουχοσ {Greek *dadouxos*}

<span id="fn_19"></span>[11:2](#fr_19) Atheneus, Lib. V. cap. 7.

Apuleius. Lib. II. Metamorph.

<span id="fn_20"></span>[11:3](#fr_20) Fragments, added to Calmet's
Dict.

Dissertation on the Caravans, taken from Col. Campbell's Travels in
India.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[12:1](#fr_21) Ib.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[12:2](#fr_22) "The *perfective* part precedes
initiation, and initiation precedes *inspection*."

Proculs. in Theol. Plat. lib. IV. p. 220.

<span id="fn_23"></span>[12:3](#fr_23) Again philosophy may be called
the initiation into the sacred ceremonies, and the tradition of genuine
mysteries; for there are five parts of initiation. The first is previous
purgation; for neither are the mysteries communicated to all, who are
willing to receive them; but there are certain characters, who are
prevented by the voice of the crier; such as those who possess impure
hands, and an inarticulate voice; since it is necessary that such as are
not expelled from the mysteries should first be refined by certain
purgations; but after purgation, the tradition of the sacred rights
succeeds. The third part is denominated inspection. And the fourth,
which is the end, fixing of the crowns: so that the initiated may, by
these means, be enabled to communicate to others the sacred rites, in
which he has been instructed; whether after this he become the
torch-bearer, or an interpreter of the mysteries, or sustain some other
part of the sacerdotal office. But the fifth, which is produced from all
these, is friendship with divinity, and the enjoyment of that felicity,
which arises from intimate converse with the gods.

Theo of Smyrna, in Mathemat. p. 18.

<span id="fn_24"></span>[13:1](#fr_24) "I approached the confines of
death, and treading on the threshold of Proserpine, and being carried
through all the elements, I came back again to my pristine situation. In
the depths of midnight I saw the sun glittering with a splendid light,
together with the infernal and supernatural gods, and approaching nearer
to those divinities, I paid the tribute of devout adoration."

Apuleius Metamorph. lib. III.

<span id="fn_25"></span>[13:2](#fr_25) παςος {Greek
*pa<u>s</u>o<u>s</u>*}

<span id="fn_26"></span>[13:3](#fr_26) This month Athyr, according to
the Julian year answers to November, or the winter solstice; but with
the Jews, the month of Thamuz, when the solemnities of Adonis were
celebrated in Judea, was in June, or summer solstice. The reason appears
to be, that the Jews taking this month from the vague year of the
Egyptians (and not from the fixed year) settled Thamuz in the summer
solstice.

Selden. De diis Syriis.

Kirker, vol. I. p. 291.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[13:4](#fr_27) ζητησις {Greek *zhthsi<u>s</u>*}
Plutarchus.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[13:5](#fr_28) ευρεσις {Greek *euresi<u>s</u>*}
Plutarchus.

<span id="fn_29"></span>[14:1](#fr_29) We must here observe that the
fables were intended to convey more than one meaning; in proof of which
we copy the following passage:

"Of fables some are theological, others animastical (or relating to the
soul) others material, and lastly others mixed of all these. Fables are
theological, which employ nothing corporeal, but speculate the very
essence of the gods: such as the fable, which asserts, that Saturn
devoured his children: for it insinuates nothing more than the nature of
an intellectual god, since every intellect returns to itself. But we
speculate fables physically when we speak concerning the energies of the
gods about the world; as, when considering Saturn the same as time, and
calling the parts of time the children of the universe, we assert that
the children are devoured by their parent. But we employ fables in an
animastic mode, when we contemplate the energies of the soul; because,
the intellection of our souls, though by a discoursive energy, they run
into other things, yet abiding their parents. Lastly, fables are
material, such as the Egyptians ignorantly employ, considering and
calling corporeal natures divinities; such as Isis, Earth, Osiris,
Humidity, Typhon, Heat; or again, denominating Saturn water, Adonis
fruits, and Bacchus, wine. And, indeed, to assert that these are
dedicated to the gods, in the same manner as herbs, stones, and animals,
is the part of wise men; but to call them gods is alone the province of
fools and madmen; unless we speak in the same manner, as when from
established custom we call the orb of the sun and its rays the sun
itself. But we may perceive the mixt kind of fables, as well in many
other particulars, as when they relate, that discord, at the banquet of
the gods through a golden apple, and that a dispute about it arising
amongst the goddesses, they were sent by Jupiter to take the judgment of
Paris, who, charmed with the beauty of Venus, gave her the apple in
preference to the rest. For in this fable, the banquet denotes the
supermundane powers of the gods, and on this account, a subsisting
conjunction with each other: but the golden apple denotes the world,
which on account of its composition from contrary natures, is not
improperly said to be thrown by discord or strife. But again, since
different gifts are imparted to the world by different gods, they appear
to contest with each other for the apple. And a soul living according to
sense, (for this is Paris) and not perceiving other powers in the
universe, asserts that the apple is alone the beauty of Venus. Of these
species of fables, such as are theological belong to philosophers, the
physical and animastical to poets. But they were mixt with iniatiatory
rites, and the intention of all mystic ceremonies is to conjoin us with
the world and the gods."

Salust, the Platonic Philosopher.

<span id="fn_30"></span>[15:1](#fr_30) Orpheus, Hymn. Sol and Adon.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[16:1](#fr_31) Kirker, Vol. I. p. 217. Vide
Hide, Hist. vet. Persar. 113.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[16:2](#fr_32) "The Egyptians began to reckon
their months from the time when the sun enters, now, in the beginning of
the sign Aries."

Rabb. A. Seba.

<span id="fn_33"></span>[16:3](#fr_33) Why has he (Aratus) taken the
commencement of the year from Cancer, when the Egyptians date the
beginning from Aries?"

Theon. p. 69.

Herodotus (L. 2. cap. 24) says, that the statue of Jupiter Ammon had the
head of a ram, Eusebius (Præparat. Evang. L. 3. cap. 12.) tells us, that
the idol Ammon had a ram's head with the horns of a goat.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[16:4](#fr_34) Strabo (L. 17.) informs us, that
in his time, the Egyptians nowhere sacrificed sheep but in the Niotic
Nome.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[17:1](#fr_35) "Also Pindar, speaking of the
Eleusinian mysteries, deducts this inference: "Blessed is he, who having
seen the common things under the earth, also knows what is the end of
life, for he knows the empire of Jupiter."

Clemens Strom. Lib. III. p. 518.

"Since in Phædo he venerates with a becoming silence, the assertion
delivered in the Arcane Discourses; that men are placed in the body, as
in a certain prison, secured by a guard, and testifies, according to the
mystic ceremonies, the different allotments of pure and impure souls in
Hades; their habits, and the triple path <span id="page_18">p. 18</span>
arising from their essences, and thus, according to paternal and sacred
institutions, all which are full of symbolical theory, and of the
poetical descriptions concerning the ascent and descent of souls, of
Dionysial signs, the punishment of the Titans, the trivia and wanderings
in Hades, and every thing of the same kind."

Proclus, in Comm. of Plauto's Politics, p. 723.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[18:1](#fr_36) Macrobius.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[18:2](#fr_37) "We live their death, and we die
their life."

Macrobius himself.

<span id="fn_38"></span>[18:3](#fr_38) "The ancient Theologists also
testify, that the soul is in the body, as it were in a sepulchre, to
suffer punishment."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. III. p. 518.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[18:4](#fr_39) "When the soul has descended into
generation she participates of evil, and profoundly rushes into the
region of dissimilitude, to be entirely merged in nothing more than into
dark mire."

Again,

"The soul therefore dies through vice, as much as it is possible for the
soul to die, and the death of the soul is, while merged or baptized, as
it were, in the <span id="page_19">p. 19</span> present body, to descend
into matter, and be filled with its impurity; and after departing from
this body, to lie absorbed in its filth, till it returns to a superior
condition, and elevates its eye from the overwhelming mire. For to he
plunged in matter is to descend into the Hades, and there fall asleep."

Plotinus, in Enead. I. Lib. VIII. p. 80.

"O wretched man that I am! who shall deliver me from the body of this
death?"

Rom. VII. v. 24.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[19:1](#fr_40) He who is not able, by the
exercise of his reason to define the idea of the good, separating it
from all other objects, and piercing, as in a battle, through every kind
of argument; endeavouring to confute, not according to opinion, but
according to essence, and proceeding through all these dialetical
energies, with an unshaken reason: he who cannot accomplish this, would
you not say that he neither knows the good itself, nor any thing which
is properly denominated good? And would you not assert that such a one,
when he apprehends any certain image of reality, apprehends it rather
through the medium of opinion than of science; that in the present life
he is sunk in sleep, and conversant with delusions of dreams, and that
before he is roused to a vigilant state, he will descend to Hades, and
be overwhelmed with sleep perfectly profound?"

Plato, De Rep. Lib. VII.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[19:2](#fr_41) The Egyptians called matter
(which they symbolically denominated water) the dregs or sediment of the
first life, matter being, as it were, a certain mire or mud.

Simplicius, in Arist. Phis. p. 50.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[19:3](#fr_42) Lastly, that I may comprehend the
opinion of the ancient theologists on the state of the soul after death,
in a few words, they considered, as we have elsewhere asserted, things
divine as the only realities, and that all others were only the images
<span id="page_20">p. 20</span> or shadows of truth. Hence they asserted
that prudent men, who earnestly employed themselves in divine concerns,
were above all others in a vigilant state. But that imprudent men, who
pursued objects of a different nature, being laid asleep, as it were,
were only engaged in the delusions of a dream; and that if they happened
to die in this sleep, before they were roused, they would be afflicted
with similar and still sharper visions in a future state. And that he
who in this life pursued realities, would, after death, enjoy the
highest truth; so he who was conversant with fallacies, would hereafter
be tormented with fallacies and delusions in the extreme: as the one
would be delighted with true objects of enjoyment, so the other would be
tormented with delusive semblances of reality."

Ficinus, De Immortalitate Anim.

Lib. XVIII. p. 411.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[20:1](#fr_43) Plato mentions, that this
Zoroaster twelve days after his death, when already placed on the pile,
came again to life, which perhaps represented, if not something more
abstruse, the resurrection of those who are received in heaven, going
through the twelve signs of the Zodiac; and he says, likewise, that they
hold the soul to descend through the same signs when the generation
takes place. This is to be taken in no other way, than the twelve
labours of Hercules, by which, when done, the soul is liberated from all
the pains of this world.

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 711.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[20:2](#fr_44) Apuleius.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[20:3](#fr_45) Mocopulus, in Hesoid, Ptol. See
Cudworth, Book. I. chap. 4.

"This God, whether he ought to be called that which is above mind and
<span id="page_21">p. 21</span> understanding, or the idea of all
things, or the one, (since unity seems to be the oldest of all things)
or else, as Plato was wont to call him, the God, I say this uniform
cause of all things, which is the origin of all beauty and perfection,
unity and power, produced from himself a certain intelligible sun, every
way like himself, of which the sensible sun is but an image."

Julian's Orat. in praise of the Sun.

"We see the unity (of God) as the sun from a distance obscurely, if you
go nearer, more obscure still; and, lastly, it prevents seeing any thing
else. Truly it is an incomprehensible light, inaccessible; and
profoundly it is compared to the sun, to which the more you look the
more blind you become."

Damascius, Platonicus, De Unitate.

The remains of the sectarians of Zoroaster, called now in Persia,
Guebres, and who lead a miserable life, and more persecuted by the
Mahomedans than the Jews are in Europe by the Christians, still perform
their devotions, and say their prayers towards the sun or fire; but
assert, that they do not adore them, only conceive them symbols of the
Deity.

Vide Stanley, De Vet. Persar.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[21:1](#fr_46) "The first God, before the being
and only, is the father of the first God, who he generated, preserving
his solitary unity, and this is above the understanding, and that
prototype which is said his own father his son, one father, and truly
good God . . . . This is the beginning, God of gods, unity from one,
above essence, the principle of essence, essence comes from him, for
this reason is called father of essence: this is the being, the
principle of intelligence; these are principles the most ancient of all
. . . . . . This intelligence acting or operating, which is the truth of
the Lord, and the science, in as much as it proceeds in generating,
bringing to light the occult power of the concealed reasons, is called
in the Egyptian language Ammon; but in as much as it acts without
fallacy, and likewise artificially with truth, is called *Phta*; the
Greeks call it Vulcan, considering the acting or operating; in as much
as he is the operator of all good, is called Osiris, who in consequence
of his superiority has many other denominations, in consequence of the
many powers and different actions, which he exercises."

Jamblicus, De Myster. Egypt.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[22:1](#fr_47) The Hebrews call it שם חםפורש
{Hebrew *ShM HMPWRSh*} Shem Hamphoresh.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[22:2](#fr_48) See note page 14.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[22:3](#fr_49) Porphyr. cited by Eusebius, De
Præp. Lib. III. cap. 2.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[22:4](#fr_50) Eneid. Lib. VI.

<span id="fn_51"></span>[23:1](#fr_51) "In the sacred rites, popular
purifications are in the first place brought forth, and after these
those as are more Arcane. But in the third place, collections of various
things into one are received; after which follows inspection. The
ethical and political virtues, therefore, are analogous to the apparent
(or popular) purifications. But such of the cathartic virtues as banish
all external Impressions correspond to the more occult purifications.
The theoretical energies about intelligibles are analogous to the
collections; but the contraction of these energies into an indivisible
nature, corresponds to initiation. And the simple self-inspection of
simple forms, is analogous to epoptic vision."

Olimpiodorus, in Plato's Phæd.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[23:2](#fr_52) Vide note page 18.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[23:3](#fr_53) "The interpretation of the
symbolic kind is useful in many respects; for it leads to theology, to
piety, and to show the ingenuity of the mind, the conciseness of
expression, and serves to demonstrate science."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 673.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[24:1](#fr_54) "For before the delivery of these
mysteries, some expiations ought to take place, that those, who were to
be initiated, should leave impious opinions, and be converted to the
true tradition."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. VII. p. 848.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[24:2](#fr_55) "Alexander gained from him
(Aristotle) not only moral and political knowledge, but was also
instructed in those more secret and profound branches of science, <span
id="page_25">p. 25</span> which they call *epoptic* and *acroamatic*;
and which they did not communicate to every common scholar. For when
Alexander was in Asia, and received information that Aristotle had
published some books, in which those points were discussed, he wrote to
him a letter, in behalf of Philosophy, in which be blamed the course he
had taken. The following is a copy of it."

"Alexander to Aristotle, prosperity.--You did wrong in publishing the
acroamatic parts of science. In what shall we differ from others, if the
sublimer knowledge, which we gained from you, be made common to all the
world? For my part, I had rather excel the bulk of mankind in the
superior parts of learning, than in the extent of power and dominion.
Farewell."

Plutarch, in vit. Alex.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[25:1](#fr_56) Aulus Gellius. Lib. XX. cap. 5.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[25:2](#fr_57) "He is called Dionysius, because
he is carried with a circular motion through the immensely extended
heavens."

Orphic vers. apud.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[26:1](#fr_58) "Indeed there are, as the saying
is, many, who go into the mysteries: a multitude certainly of branch
bearers (Thyrsirii) but very few Bacchians."

Socrates, in Plato; apud. Clemens Strom. Lib. I. p. 372.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[26:2](#fr_59) Livii. Lib. XXXIX. cap. 8 and 18.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[26:3](#fr_60) Lucian, in Demonat. tom. 2. p.
308.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[26:4](#fr_61) Plutarch. De aud. Poet. tom. 2.
p. 21.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[26:5](#fr_62) Diogen. Lært. Lib. VI. § 39.

<span id="fn_63"></span>[26:6](#fr_63) "A woman asked, how many days
ought to pass, after she had congress with her husband, before she could
attend the mysteries of Ceres. The answer was, with your husband
immediately, with a strange man never."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. IV. p. 619.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[27:1](#fr_64) As a proof of the sublime ideas
of God, entertained by the Egyptian sages, in contradiction to these
gross accusations., we copy the following passages, from the very
Mercurius Trimegistus, as related by Pimandrus.

"The Artificer fabricated the whole universe with his word, not with his
hands. He however has it always present in his mind, acting all, one
only God, constituting every thing with his will; this is his body, not
tangible, not visible, nor similar to any other: for he is not fire, not
waiter, not air, not even spirit; but from him depend every thing good;
however, such he is, as every thing belongs to him."

Again,

"But that you should not want the principal name of God, nor you should
be ignorant of what is clear, and seems concealed from many; for, if it
never appears, it is nowhere. Whatever appears only to your sight is
created; what is concealed is all eternal; nor is it a reason why it
should appear, as it never ends; he puts every thing before our eyes,
but he remains concealed; because he enjoys an all eternal life: clearly
he brings every thing to light, but he delights in the *adytum*; one,
and uncreated, incomprehensible to our imagination (phantasia); but as
every thing is enlightened by him, he shines in all and through all
things; and yet appears chiefly to those, to whom he is pleased to
communicate his name."

Again,

"There is nothing in nature that is not him; he is all that exists; he
is even what is not; and what is, he brought into light. And as nothing
can be made without a maker, so you must think that unless God is always
acting, it is impossible for any thing to exist in heaven, air, earth,
sea, in all the world, in any particle of the world, in what is as well
as in what is not. This is with the best name, God; this, again, is the
most powerful of all things; this, conspicuous in mind; this, present
with eyes; this, incorporeal; this, as it were, multi-corporeal, for
nothing is in the bodies that is not in him; because, he alone exists in
all; he has all names; because be is the only father; so it has no name
because he is the father of all."

Apud Kirker, Vol. II. p. 504.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[28:1](#fr_65) Synesius, speaking of the
Egyptian hierophant; observes thus; "they have χωμαστη\`ρια {Greek
*xwmasth\`ria*}, which are arks, concealing, they say, the spheres."

See Plutar. De Iside and Orsiride.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[28:2](#fr_66) Julius Africanus, a Christian
Priest, by birth a Jew, made a short compendium of the history of
Manethon, that the author himself might be dispensed with: this was
about the year 230 of the Christian era. Finding that the Egyptian
Chronology represented the world some thousands of years older than the
chronology of the Bible, he so disfigured the dates of Manethon as to
make him agree with the Bible.

Moreover, this work of Africanus is also lost, and we have only extracts
of it, preserved in the work of a monk, generally known by the name of
Syncellus, who confesses that he mutilated and altered Africanus. Now
this individual not even had the original Bible, but only the Greek
translation, which avowedly has the chronology vitiated; and yet
Manethon's data were to be disfigured and interpolated, to make it
square with the incorrect Greek translation of the Bible.

<span id="fn_67"></span>[28:3](#fr_67) "Celsus seems to me, here, to do
just as if a man, travelling into Egypt, where the wise men of the
Egyptians, according to their country learning, philosophize much, about
those things that are accounted by them divine, whilst the ideots, in
the mean time, hearing only certain fables, which they know not the
meaning of, are very much pleased therewith: Celsus, I say, does as if
such sojourner in Egypt, <span id="page_29">p. 29</span> who had
conversed only with those ideots, and not been at all instructed by any
of the priests, in their arcane and recondite mysteries, should boast
that he knew all that belonged to the Egyptian theology."

Origines, contra Celsum, Lib. I. p. 11.

"When amongst the Egyptians there is a king chosen out of the military
order, be is forthwith brought to the priests, and by them instructed in
that arcane theology which conceals mysterious truths under obscure
fables and allegories."

Plutarch. De Iside, p. 354.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[29:1](#fr_68) We will content ourselves, here
with the authority of Kircher, one of the most learned antiquarians in
Egyptian matters.

"Therefore, Hermes, that great author of the hieroglyphic doctrine,
elucidating many things, chiefly about God, and his perfections, also of
the creation of the world, and its preservation, of the administration
of the same world and its parts, both by himself, and through his
angels, as he heard of the Patriarchs about the government of the world,
endeavoured seriously to penetrate these things: hence sprang a new
philosophy in which as he treated of more sublime things than the
ignorant could understand, he veiled under a new art, afterwards called
hieroglyphic, which was hidden from rude understandings, not in wooden
monuments, but in mystic figures, engraved in hard stones, for an
eternal memorial with posterity; as a sublime science of things
deserving eternal veneration, and worthy of being recommended to all;
and in imitation of the great eternal Artificer, in the administration
of the world, he so constituted his system, that it was communicated
only to the select hieromists, priests, stolists, and hierogramatists,
men of great genius, wise for the government of the state, according to
the rules of administration, prescribed in the obelisks, and men who had
shown ability and aptitude, and were moreover restricted, by oath, to
keep it secret. By these means the priests, being looked upon by all
with admiration, in consequence of their science in those new things,
expressed in the symbols, were honoured by the multitude almost as half
gods. But to increase this veneration they told the people many things
about the apparitions of the gods, their answers, and how they were to
be worshipped to sooth them and make them propitious: to this we must
add the great profit they had by their machines and mechanical
inventions and their skill in mathematics; and their making statues that
moved their eyes and head, to express approbation or disapprobation: and
that the miserable multitude was deceived and beguiled, paying always to
obtain a favor from the gods, or to avert their anger. Hence it came,
that in the course of time, that religion conceived by Trimegistus in a
sincere sense, was by degrees degenerated into open and declared
idolatry."

Kircher, vol. IV. p. 82.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[30:1](#fr_69) "O Egypt, Egypt, of thy religion
only the fables remain, and those incredible to thy posterity."

Trimegistus, in Asclepio.

<span id="fn_70"></span>[30:2](#fr_70) The emigration of the Ionians to
Asia Minor is mentioned by Herodotus, and others, but the epoch is fixed
by various authors differently:

|                              |      |
|------------------------------|------|
| By Playfair in the year B. C | 1044 |
| Gillies                      | 1055 |
| Barthelemy. Anacharsis       | 1076 |

 

<span id="fn_71"></span>[30:3](#fr_71) "It is said, that the chief of
the Ionian colony was Androclus, a legitimate son of Codrus, the king of
Athens; so it is related, that the Ionians established their royalty;
and those descending from that race, even now, are called kings, and
enjoy their boners, that is to say, a place where they attend the
spectacles and the public games, wearing the royal purple, and a staff
instead of the sceptre, and the Eleusinian rites."

Strabo, Lib. XIV. p. 907.

This emigration is also mentioned by Herodotus, Lib. I. cap. 142, and
148; Aelianus, Lib. VIII. Pausanias, in Achaicis; Plutarchus, in Homero,
Veleius Paterculus, in Chronico. Clemens, Lib. I. Strom.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[31:1](#fr_72) Vide Strabo, above.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[31:2](#fr_73) "Byblos was capital of Cinera,
and there was a temple of Apollo, situated on an elevated spot, not far
from the sea. Afterwards is the river called Adonis."

Strabo, Lib. XVI. p. 1074.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[31:3](#fr_74) "Lebedos, was the seat and
assembly of the Dionysian Artificers, who inhabit from Ionia to the
Hellespont; there they had annually their solemn meetings and
festivities in honor of Bacchus. Their first seat was Theo.

Strabo, Lib. XIV. p. 921.

The Latin translator of Strabo renders the Dionysian Artificers (
Διονυσιος τεχνε {Greek *Dionusio<u>s</u> texne*}) *scenicos artificers*;
because Bacchus or Dionysus was supposed to be the inventor of theatres
and *scena*, derived from the Heb. שכז {Hebrew *Sh<u>K</u>Z*}, to
inhabit.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[31:4](#fr_75) Polydor. Virg. de Rer. Invent, I.
3. c. 13.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[31:5](#fr_76) Strabo, p. 471.

<span id="fn_77"></span>[32:1](#fr_77) From the application of
instruments of architectuure to morality, the Platonic and Pythagorean
philosophers took not only types but words to explain our moral ideas.

For instance, a *right* man (rectus); *obligation*, from ligament
(ligare) and from the same law (lex a ligare); to *square* our actions
(quadrare) *Justum aequum*, &c. *Rude* mind, *polished* mind; from
*rude* stone, and *polished* stone, &c.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[32:2](#fr_78) The meetings or assemblies of the
Dionysian Artificers went by various names, ( ας συνοιχια {Greek
*a<u>s</u> sunoixia*}) *contubernium*, which was the place of their
meeting. The society was called sometimes συναγωγη {Greek *sunagwgh*}
(*collegium*); ἄρεσις {Greek *á?resi<u>s</u>*}; (*secta*); συνοδος
{Greek *sunodo<u>s</u>*} (*congregatio*) χοινος {Greek *xoino<u>s</u>*};
(*communitas*).

Aulus Gellius, Lib. cap. II.

<span id="fn_79"></span>[32:3](#fr_79) See Chiseul, Antiquitates
Asiaticæ, p. 95.

<span id="fn_80"></span>[32:4](#fr_80) "This example imitated those
Ionians who emigrated from Europe to the maritime countries of Caria
(Asia Minor) and also the Dorians, their neighbours, building temples at
a common expense. The Ionians built the temple of Diana at Ephesus, the
Dorians that of Apollo at Triopii, where at a certain period they
repaired with their wives and children, and there performed sacred
rites, and had a market, likewise games, races, wrestlings,
music-parties of different kinds, and made common offerings to the gods.
When they had performed the spectacles and the business of the market,
or fair, and fulfilled towards each other the duties of fellow
creatures, if there was any litigation between the cities, they sat as
judges to settle the dispute: moreover, in these assemblies they debated
as to the war with the barbarians, and the means of keeping a mutual
concord amongst the nations."

Dionis. Halicarn. Lib. III p. 229. edit. 1691.

<span id="fn_81"></span>[33:1](#fr_81) "After this, the inhabitants of
Ionia thought proper to apply to Cambyses, and having represented to him
what was their business, the king ordered them into his presence, and
asked who they were, and how they came to live in his dominions; and
having examined and ascertained from whence they proceeded, he admired
them, and chose rather that they should be erected into a society by
himself, than to allow that he received such as coming from another
country; for he thought it was not decorous to receive favours from
others, who sojourned in his country, as if he would receive those
services as pay for their habitations; and, therefore, to show this,
dismissed them with presents, as marks of his munificence."

Libanius in Orat. XI. Antiochus. Vol. II. p. 343.

<span id="fn_82"></span>[33:2](#fr_82) Robertson's Greece, p. 127.

<span id="fn_83"></span>[33:3](#fr_83) Eusebius de Prep. Evang. L. III.
c. 12. p. 117.

<span id="fn_84"></span>[33:4](#fr_84) I Kings, chap. v.

<span id="fn_85"></span>[33:5](#fr_85) The English translation of the
Bible in I Kings c. v. v. 18 where the original Hebrew says Gibblim (
גבלים {Hebrew *GBLYM*}) or Gibblites, which means inhabitants of Gebbel,
renders it, by the appellative, stone squares. The proof that this
reading is not correct, is not only because of the different opinions of
all other translations, which understand by this Gibblim the inhabitants
of Gebbel; but that the same English <span id="page_34">p. 34</span>
translation, in another part of the Bible, renders the same word by the
ancients of *Gebbal*. (Ezek. ch. xxvii. v. 9.)

Now that Gabbel was the same as Byblos is clear; because the Septuagint
version always translates this Gebbel for Byblos, and though there were
several cities of this name, yet this one seems to be that which is
between Tripoli and Berite; and still called Gebail.

In fact, Lucian, in his Treatise De Dea Syria, says expressly, that
Gabala was Byblos, famous for the worship of Adonis.

<span id="fn_86"></span>[34:1](#fr_86) For we find in Ezekiel these
words "And I saw the women sitting weeping for Thamuz," that is to say,
Adonis. Such, however, was what was done by the inhabitants of those
cities, in testimony of which, they sent letters to women who were at
Byblos, when Adonis was found, and afterwards scaled and thrown into the
sea, they say they were spontaneously carried to Byblos; and, when
arrived there, women ceased to weep for Adonis."

Procopius in Isaiah c. xviii.

<span id="fn_87"></span>[34:2](#fr_87) Josephus Antiquit. Lib. VIII. c.
5.

<span id="fn_88"></span>[34:3](#fr_88) I Kings chap. xi. v. 5, and 6.

<span id="fn_89"></span>[35:1](#fr_89) Ezek. c. viii. v. 14. Thamuz
signifies the name of a month, and likewise the name of an idol or
divinity, which even in the opinion of St. Jerome is the same as Adonis.
Plutarch says that the Egyptians called Osiris Ammuz, and from thence
was corruptly derived the name of Jupiter Ammon. Robertson (Thesaurus
Linguæ Sanctæ) says that the word Ammuz (read Ammoum) used by Herodotus
and Plutarch, were corruptions from the Hebrew Thamuz (Hebrew תםוז
{Hebrew *TMWZ*}). I would rather say that the word was originally
Egyptian, and made Hebrew by the addition of the formative ת {Hebrew
*T*}); and the more so, as Ammuz in the Egyptian language signifies (by
the explanation of Manetho in Plutarch) something abstruse or concealed;
which has an evident allusion to the concealment or symbolical death of
Osiris or Adonis.

<span id="fn_90"></span>[35:2](#fr_90) Mark. chap. xii. v. 18.

<span id="fn_91"></span>[36:1](#fr_91) Thus in the numbers, 3, 5, 7, 12,
15 must have been preserved as essential. In the ceremonies, the symbol
of death and resurrection; the crossing of the equinoxial twice, &c. In
the time, the season of the year, when the sun arrives at the two
tropics, the rising, the southing, the setting, &c.

<span id="fn_92"></span>[36:2](#fr_92) Chron. chap. iii. v. 2.

<span id="fn_93"></span>[36:3](#fr_93) See note page 10.

<span id="fn_94"></span>[37:1](#fr_94) πετρωμα {Greek *petrwma*}

<span id="fn_95"></span>[37:2](#fr_95) Vitruvius Lib. IV. c. 5.

<span id="fn_96"></span>[37:3](#fr_96) "Justly, therefore, Plato knowing
the world to be the temple of God, showed a place in the city where the
symbols should answer."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 691.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[38:1](#fr_97) We shall here first quote the
authority of the Jews on this point.

"Now let us consider what may be subindicated by the cherubim and
flaming sword turning every way. What if this ought to be thought the
circumvolution of the whole heavens?"

"But of the flaming sword turning every way, it may thus be understood
to signify the perpetual motion of these (Cherubim) and of the whole
heavens. But what if it be taken otherwise? So that the two cherubim
signify both hemispheres."

Philo Judeus, p. 111, & 112.

"The tunic of the high priest since it was of linen, represents the
earth; but the blue, the pole of heaven; the lightenings were indicated
by the pomegranates; the thunders by the sound of the bells, &c. . . ."

". . . . But the two sardonixes, with which the pontifical garment is
clasped, denotes the sun and the moon, but if any one wish to refer the
twelve stones to the twelve months, or to the same number of stars
(constellations) in the circle, which the Greeks called the zodiac, he
will not wander from the true meaning."

Josephus, Antiq. Lib. III.

Now for the Christian Fathers:

"It would be too long to follow the prophetical and legal (statements)
which have been expressed by enigmas: almost the whole of the divine
Scripture offer up these sort of oracles.

"He who reasons properly will find sufficient for the purpose, we shall
give a few examples. So for instance what the ancients told of the
temple, the seven enclosures, which also refer to other things in the
history of the Hebrews, and what was inside by the apparatus of divers
Symbols, referring to appearances, signify in their composition what
refers, to heaven and earth. They signify, then, what to the nature of
the elements imports the revelation of God. For the purple comes from
the water, the linen ( Βυσοσ {Greek *Busos*}) from the earth, the blue
(hyacinthus) from the colour of the sky, as it is dark; the scarlet, the
fire. In the middle, however, of the Temple was the veil, beyond which
only the priests could go; there was the censer, symbol of the earth,
which is this world, and from which exaltations takes place. But that
place, which afterwards inside of the veil, where only the high priest
had permission to enter, and that on certain days; the external court
which was open to all Hebrews, they say was the medium between heaven
and earth. Others say it was the symbol of the world, which is perceived
by our intellectual senses. But the opening which separated the
infidelity of the people, <span id="page_39">p. 39</span> was extended
before five columns, and separated those who were in the court."

Clemens, Strom. L. V. p. 665.

This Christian Father explains these columns, by the following passage
of Plato:

"Plato says we must contemplate these columns, and diligently see that
no profane person dares to go there. Those are profane who believe that
nothing exists, but what they can touch with their hands, but the
actions and generations, and all those things, which we cannot see, in
things which exist, are without number. Such are those who attend to
nothing else beyond the five senses."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. "Now for the candlestick, which was placed on
the south of the censer. By this was exemplified the motion of the seven
planets, which have their motions in the south. For on each side of the
candlestick were branches, and in them lamps; because, the sun also, as
a lamp, is placed in the middle of the other errant (stars), and those
which are above it, and those which are below it, by a certain divine
harmony receive light from him."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 666.

"Those things, however, told of the sacred ark, signify the world as
perceived by the intellectual senses, which are occult and shut to the
vulgar. Besides those golden images, each having six wings, they either
signify the two bears, as some will have it; or, what seems more
convenient, the two hemispheres. Indeed the name of cherubim signifies
an extensive knowledge. But both have two wings, and thus signify the
sensible world, and the time carried on by the circle of the zodiac."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 667.

"But the 360 bells, pending from the long robe (of the priest) are the
times of the year; for it is said, this is the year of the Lord,
preaching and sounding the great arrival of the Saviour."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 668.

"The two brilliant emerald stones, which are on the shoulder-piece,
signify the sun and the moon, which are the helpers of nature. For is
was supposed the shoulder to be the beginning of the hand. But those
other twelve stones, which are disposed in four rows, describe to us the
circle of the zodiac, and agreeing to the four seasons of the year."

Clemens, Strom. Lib. V. p. 691.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[40:1](#fr_98) The first civil month of the
Jews, called Tisri, ( תישרי {Hebrew *TYShRY*}) was from the Egyptain
Misri, changing only the formative ט {Hebrew *<u>T</u>*} into ת {Hebrew
*T*}. And the word was derived from יםר {Hebrew *YMR*} (*rectum esse*),
as then the sun was in the equinoxial: and the Rabbins, to this day,
call the equinoxial םישרי {Hebrew *MYShRY*}. The Greeks spelling badly
the name called this Egyptian month ημυςορυ {Greek *hmu<u>s</u>oru*}.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[40:2](#fr_99) The number 12, which is that of
the months of the year, and alluded to in so many types of the Temple,
must have afforded also facilities to establish the system of the
Dionysian Artificers; and therefore we shall give some idea of the
heathen philosophy attached to this number, in the following extracts
from Suidas:

"The great Demiurgos, or architect of the universe, employed twelve
thousand years, in the work he has produced, and divided in twelve times
the twelve houses of the sun."

Suidas, Art. Tyrrhenia.

"In the first thousand, he made the heaven and earth. In the second
thousand, the firmament (expansion) which he called coelum. In the third
thousand, he made the sea, and the water that runs on the earth. In the
fourth, he made two <span id="page_41">p. 41</span> great torches of
nature. In the fifth, he made the quadrupeds, animals that live on the
earth and in the waters. In the sixth, he made the man."

"The first six thousand years having preceded the formation of the human
race, it seems it will not exist but during six thousand years, which
are the others to complete the period of twelve thousand, at the end of
which the world will finish."

Suidas Ib.

Now if you take each sign of the zodiac for 24,000 years, you will
explain the above mystery. When the sun comes out of Aries, or the
spring sign, the world is said to be born; here the period of life
begins. When the sun is in Cancer, or the summer, is the pleasure and
delights of life. When in Libra, life has declined: after that all is
winter of death; and from this arise the fables about the four ages of
the world.

The books of the Persian Mythology explain to us the same meaning.

"Time is 12,000 years, it is said in the law, that the celestial people
were three thousand years to exist, and then the enemy (Satan or
Arhiman) was not in the world, which makes six thousand years . . . ."

"The thousand of good appeared in the Lamb, the Bull, the Taurus, the
Cancer, the Lion, and the Sheep, which make six thousand years. After
the thousand of God, comes the Scale (Libra), Arhiman came into the
world (that is to say the winter)."

Boun Dehesh; translation du Perron, p. 420.

"Orsmud, speaking in the law, says, 'I made the productions of the world
in 365 days:' it is for this reason that the six *gahs gahambars*
(months) are included in the year."

ib. p. 400.

Astronomically speaking, there is no period or cycle of 12,000 years.
But Dupuis has solved the mystery, by saying, that the periods of the
ancient Indians and Chaldeans, answered to the series 1, 2, 3, 4, or 4,
3, 2, 1.

Thus the duration of the four ages of the world, according to the Ezour
Vedan, were

|         |       |       |
|---------|-------|-------|
| 1st age | 4,000 | years |
| 2nd     | 3,000 |       |
| 3rd     | 2,000 |       |
| 4th     | 1,000 |       |

 

Memoirs de l'Academie des Inscript. tom. 31. p. 254.

The Baga Vedan counts thus, <span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="370">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="47%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1st age</p></td>
<td width="30%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4,800</p></td>
<td width="22%" data-valign="TOP"><p>years</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="47%" data-valign="TOP"><p>2nd</p></td>
<td width="30%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3,600</p></td>
<td width="22%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="47%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3rd</p></td>
<td width="30%" data-valign="TOP"><p>2,400</p></td>
<td width="22%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="47%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4th</p></td>
<td width="30%" data-valign="TOP"><u></u>
<p>1,200</p></td>
<td width="22%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="47%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Total</p></td>
<td width="30%" data-valign="TOP"><p>12,000</p></td>
<td width="22%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

The Indians figured this system by a cow with four legs; or the number
twelve, taken successively four times.

Another Indian period establishes the duration of the world thus,

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="406">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
<col style="width: 33%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1st age</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1,728,000</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p>years</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>2nd</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1,296,000</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3rd</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p>864,000</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4th</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><u></u>
<p>432,000</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="50%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Total</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4,320,000</p></td>
<td width="25%" data-valign="TOP"><p> </p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

Now the smallest of these numbers (432,000) elevated to 2, 3, and 4,
will give a sum total of 4,320,000.

The Indians say that the year of the gods is composed of 360 years of
those of men; if you divide 4,320,000 for 360 you will have 12.

In the Chaldean period, as given by Berosus, we find the same numbers of
432,000, and to compose it, he follows the arithmetic order, thus:

<table data-cellspacing="0" data-border="0" data-cellpadding="9" width="345">
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 50%" />
<col style="width: 50%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>1st degree</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>12,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>2nd</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>24,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>3rd</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>36,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>4th</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>48,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>5th</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>60,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>6th</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>72,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>7th</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>84,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>8th</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><u></u>
<p>96,000</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="odd">
<td width="52%" data-valign="TOP"><p>Total</p></td>
<td width="48%" data-valign="TOP"><p>432,000</p></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

 

<span id="fn_100"></span>[42:1](#fr_100) The columns or pillars were
denominated יכיז {Hebrew *Y<u>K</u>YZ*} and בעז {Hebrew *B!Z*} the first
signifies establish, from כיז {Hebrew *<u>K</u>YZ*} to establish or make
firm; the second signifies in strength, from the proposition ב {Hebrew
*B*} in, and the root עוז {Hebrew *!WZ*} strength.

<span id="fn_101"></span>[43:1](#fr_101) "Now the Assideans were the
first amongst the children of Israel that sought peace of them."

Maccab. vii. v. 13.

I should translate this passage differently, thus:

"And those, who amongst the sons of Israel were called Assideans, were
the first of this assembly, and they wished to ask them peace."

According to this interpretation, by far more expressive of the text, it
is seen, that the Assideans were a respectable body, for they were the
first of that assembly.

In I Maccab. ii. v. 42, it is said, "Then came there unto him a company
of Assideans, who were mighty men of Israel, even all such as were
voluntarily devoted unto the law."

The very word Assidean or Cassidean is supposed to be derived from the
Hebrew *Cassidim*, which in Psalm 78. v. 2. is taken in the sense of men
pious, holy, full of piety and mercy.

<span id="fn_102"></span>[43:2](#fr_102) "So for thousands of centuries,
incredible to be said, this people is eternal, without any body being
born amongst them."

Pliny, Lib. V. cap. 17.

<span id="fn_103"></span>[43:3](#fr_103) Josephus, Lib. 13. cap. 19.

<span id="fn_104"></span>[44:1](#fr_104) in προγονοι {Greek *progonoi*}.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[44:2](#fr_105) "Before they admit any one who
desire it, into their sect, they put him to one year's probation, and
inure him to the practice of their most uneasy exercises. After this
term they admit him into the common refectory, and the place where they
bathe; but not into the interior of the house, till after another trial
of two years; then they are allowed to make a kind of profession,
wherein they engage by horrible oaths, to observe the laws of piety,
justice, and modesty; fidelity to God and their Prince; never to
discover the secrets of their sect to strangers, and to preserve the
books of their masters, and the names of angels with great care."

Josephus, loco citato.

<span id="fn_106"></span>[44:3](#fr_106) "They hold the soul to be
immortal, and believe that souls descend from the highest air into the
bodies animated by them, whither they are drawn by some natural
attraction, which they cannot resist; and after death, they swiftly
return to the place, from whence they came, as if freed from a long and
melancholy captivity. In respect to the state of the soul after death,
they have almost the same sentiments as the heathen, who place the souls
of good men in the Elysian fields, and those of the wicked in Tartarus."

Josephus, loco citato.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[45:1](#fr_107) Philo, Lib. V. cap. 17.

<span id="fn_108"></span>[45:2](#fr_108) Some employ themselves in
husbandry, others in trade and manufactures of such things only as are
useful in time of peace, their designs being beneficial only to
themselves and other men . . . . ."

"You do not find an artificer among them, who would make an arrow, a
dart, or sword, or helmet, or cuirass, or shield, or any sort of arms,
machines, or warlike instruments."

Philo, loco citato.

<span id="fn_109"></span>[45:3](#fr_109) "Their instructions run
principally on holiness, equity, justice, economy, policy, the
distinction between real good and real evil; of what is indifferent,
what we ought to pursue or to avoid. The three fundamental maxims of
their morality are, the love of God, of virtue, and of our neighbour."

Philo, loco citato.

<span id="fn_110"></span>[45:4](#fr_110) "the Essenians transmitted the
doctrines they had received from their ancestors."

Philo. De vita contemplativa

Apud opera, p. 691

<span id="fn_111"></span>[45:5](#fr_111) "They had distinguishing
signs."

Ib.

<span id="fn_112"></span>[45:6](#fr_112) "I shall say something of their
congregations and how often they celebrated their banquets, &c."

Ib. p. 692.

<span id="fn_113"></span>[46:1](#fr_113) Vide Iamblicus, de Vita
Pythagoræ, cap. 17. and Basnage, History of the Jews, B. II. cap. 13.

<span id="fn_114"></span>[46:2](#fr_114) Strabo, p. 471.

<span id="fn_115"></span>[46:3](#fr_115) Psellus, quoted by Clinch,
Antologia Hibernica, for January, 1794.
