[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb00) 
[Next](wb02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# PREFACE.

So many letters are daily received asking questions about the Woman's
Bible,--as to the extent of the revision, and the standpoint from which
it will be conducted--that it seems best, though every detail is not as
yet matured, to state the plan, as concisely as possible, upon which
those who have been in consultation during the summer, propose to do the
work.

I. The object is to revise only those texts and chapters directly
referring to women, and those also in which women are made prominent by
exclusion. As all such passages combined form but one-tenth of the
Scriptures, the undertaking will not be so laborious as, at the first
thought, one would imagine. These texts, with the commentaries, can
easily be compressed into a duodecimo volume of about four hundred
pages.

II\. The commentaries will be of a threefold character, the writers in
the different branches being selected according to their special
aptitude for the work:

1\. Two or three Greek and Hebrew scholars will devote themselves to the
translation and the meaning of particular words and texts in the
original.

2\. Others will devote themselves to Biblical history, old manuscripts,
to the new version, and to the latest theories as to the occult meaning
of certain texts and parables.

3\. For the commentaries on the plain English version a committee of
some thirty members has been formed. These are women of earnestness and
liberal ideas, quick to see the real purport of the Bible as regards
their sex. Among them the various books of the Old and New Testament
will be distributed for comment.

III\. There will be two or more editors to bring the work of the various
committees into one consistent whole.

{p. 6}

IV\. The completed work will be submitted to an advisory committee
assembled at some central point, as London, New York, or Chicago, to sit
in final judgment on "The Woman's Bible."

As to the manner of doing the practical work:

Those who have been engaged this summer have adopted the following plan,
which may be suggestive to new members of the committee. Each person
purchased two Bibles, ran through them from Genesis to Revelations,
marking all the texts that concerned women. The passages were cut out,
and pasted in a blank book, and the commentaries then written
underneath.

Those not having time to read all the books can confine their labors to
the particular ones they propose to review.

It is thought best to publish the different parts as soon as prepared so
that the Committee may have all in print in a compact form before the
final revision.

E. C. S.

AUGUST 1ST, 1895.

{p. 7}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: INTRODUCTION.](wb02)
