[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb03) 
[Next](wb05) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*Genesis ii, 21-25.*

21 And the Lord God caused a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, and he slept;
and be took one of his ribs, and closed up the flesh thereof.

22 And the rib which the Lord God had taken from man, made he a woman,
and brought her unto the man.

23 And Adam said, This is now bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh:
she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of man.

24 Therefore shall a man leave his father and his mother, and shall
cleave unto his wife; and they shall be one flesh.

25\. And they were both naked, the man and his wife, and were not
ashamed.

AS the account of the creation in the first chapter is in harmony with
science, common sense, and the experience of mankind in natural laws,
the inquiry naturally arises, why should there be two contradictory
accounts in the same book, of the same event? It is fair to infer that
the second version, which is found in some form in the different
religions of all nations, is a mere allegory, symbolizing some
mysterious conception of a highly imaginative editor.

The first account dignifies woman as an important factor in the
creation, equal in power and glory with man. The second makes her a mere
afterthought. The world in good running order without her. The only
reason for her advent being the solitude of man.

There is something sublime in bringing order out of chaos; light out of
darkness; giving each planet its place in the solar system; oceans and
lands their limits; wholly inconsistent with a petty surgical operation,
to find material for the mother of the race. It is on this allegory that
all the enemies of women rest their battering rams, to prove her
inferiority. Accepting the view that man was prior in the creation, some
Scriptural writers say that as the woman was of the man, therefore, her
position should be one of subjection. Grant it, then as the historical
fact is reversed in our day, and the man is now of the woman, shall his
place be one of subjection?

{p. 21}

The equal position declared in the first account must prove more
satisfactory to both sexes; created alike in the image of God--The
Heavenly Mother and Father.

Thus, the Old Testament, "in the beginning," proclaims the simultaneous
creation of man and woman, the eternity and equality of sex; and the New
Testament echoes back through the centuries the individual sovereignty
of woman growing out of this natural fact. Paul, in speaking of equality
as the very soul and essence of Christianity, said, "There is neither
Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor
female; for ye are all one in Christ Jesus." With this recognition of
the feminine element in the Godhead in the Old Testament, and this
declaration of the equality of the sexes in the New, we may well wonder
at the contemptible status woman occupies in the Christian Church of
to-day.

All the commentators and publicists writing on woman's position, go
through an immense amount of fine-spun metaphysical speculations, to
prove her subordination in harmony with the Creator's original design.

It is evident that some wily writer, seeing the perfect equality of man
and woman in the first chapter, felt it important for the dignity and
dominion of man to effect woman's subordination in some way. To do this
a spirit of evil must be introduced, which at once proved itself
stronger than the spirit of good, and man's supremacy was based on the
downfall of all that had just been pronounced very good. This spirit of
evil evidently existed before the supposed fall of man, hence woman was
not the origin of sin as so often asserted.

E. C. S.

In v. 23 Adam proclaims the eternal oneness of the happy pair, "This is
now bone of my bone and flesh of my flesh;" no hint of her
subordination. How could men, admitting these words to be divine
revelation, ever have preached the subjection of woman!

Next comes the naming of the mother of the race. "She

{p. 22}

shall be called Woman," in the ancient form of the word Womb-man. She
was man and more than man because of her maternity.

The assertion of the supremacy of the woman in the marriage relation is
contained in v. 24: "Therefore shall a man leave his father and his
mother and cleave unto his wife." Nothing is said of the headship of
man, but he is commanded to make her the head of the household, the
home, a rule followed for centuries under the Matriarchate.

L. D. B.

{p. 23}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: GENESIS CHAPTER III.](wb05)
