[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb35) 
[Next](wb37) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER II.

*Deuteronomy vii*.

1 When the Lord thy God shall bring thee into the land whither thou
goest to possess it and hath cast out many nations before thee.

2 Thou shalt smite them, *and* utterly destroy them; thou shalt make no
covenant with them, nor shew mercy unto them:

3 Neither shalt thou make marriages with them; thy daughter thou shalt
not give unto his son, nor his daughter shalt thou take unto thy son.

4 For they will turn away thy son from following me.

5 But thus shall ye deal with them; ye shall destroy their altars, and
break down their images, and cut down their groves, and burn their
graven images with fire.

6 For thou *art* a holy people.

7 The Lord did not set his love upon you, not choose you, because ye
were more in number than any people; for ye *were* the fewest of all
people:

8 But because the Lord loved you, and because he would keep the oath
which he had sworn unto your fathers, hath the Lord brought you out with
a mighty hand, and redeemed you out of the house of bondmen, from the
hand of Pharaoh king of Egypt.

WITH the seven nations that God cast out, the children of Israel were
commanded to make no covenants, nor matrimonial alliances lest they
should fall into idolatry. As men are more given to wandering in strange
countries than women these injunctions are intended specially for them.
Adam Clarke says, the heart being naturally inclined to evil, the
idolatrous wife would more readily draw aside the believing husband,
than the believing husband the idolatrous wife. That being the case,
could not the believing wife with her subtle influence have brought over
the idolatrous husband? Why should she not have the power to convert to
one religion as well as another, especially as there was no choice
between them. There could not have been anything worse than the Jewish
religion illustrated in their daily walk and conversation, as described
in their books, and if the human heart naturally inclined to evil, as
many converts might have been made to the faith of Moses as to any
other.

With this consideration it is plain that if the Jews had offered women
any superior privileges, above any other tribe, they could have readily
converted the women to their way of thinking. {p. 129} The Jewish God
seems as vacillating and tempest-tossed between loving and hating his
subjects as the most undisciplined son of Adam. The supreme ideal of
these people was pitiful to the last degree and the appeals to them were
all on the lowest plane of human ambition. The chief promise to the
well-doer was that his descendants should be as numerous as the sands of
the sea.

In chapter ix when rebellion at Horeb is described, Aaron only is
refered to, and in chapter x when his death is mentioned, nothing is
said of Miriam. In the whole recapitulation she is forgotten, though
altogether the grandest character of the three, though cast out of the
camp and stricken with leprosy, in vengeance, she harbors no resentment,
but comforts and cheers the women with songs and dances, all through
their dreary march of forty years.

*Deuteronomy x*.

18 He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth
the stranger, in giving him food and raiment.

19 Love ye therefore the stranger: for ye were strangers in the land of
Egypt.

The sacred fabulist has failed to give us any choice examples in which
the Jews executed just judgments for widows or fatherless girls; on the
contrary in all their dealings with women of all ranks, classes and ages
they were merciless and unjust.

As to the stranger, their chief occupation was war and wholesale
slaughter, not only of the men on the battlefield, but of innocent women
and children, destroying their cities and making their lands desolate. A
humane person reading these books for the first time without any glamour
of divine inspiration, would shudder at their cruelty and blush at their
obscenity.

Those who can make these foul facts illustrate beautiful symbols must
have genius of a high order.

*Deuteronomy xii*.

18 But thou must eat them before the Lord thy God in the place which the
Lord thy God shall choose, thou, and thy son, and thy daughter, and thy
manservant, and thy maidservant, and the Levite that *is* within thy
gates: and thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God in all that them
puttest thine hands unto.

19 Take heed to thyself that thou forsake not the Levite as long as thou
livest upon the earth.

If women have been faithful to any class of the human family

{p. 130}

it has been to the Levite. The chief occupation of their lives next to
bearing children has been to sustain the priesthood and the churches.

With continual begging, fairs and donation parties, they have helped to
plant religious temples on every hill-top and valley, and in the streets
of all our cities, so that the doleful church bell is forever ringing in
our ears. The Levites have not been an unqualified blessing, ever
fanning the flames of religious persecution they have been the chief
actors in subjugating mankind.

E. C. S.

{p. 131}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: DEUTERNOMY CHAPTER III.](wb37)
