[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb48) 
[Next](wb50) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF RUTH.

*Ruth i*.

1 Now it carne to pass in the days when the judges ruled, that there was
a famine in the land. And a certain man of Bethlehem-judah went to
sojourn in the country of Moab, he, and his wife, and his two sons.

2 And the name of the man was Elimelech, and the name of his wife Naomi,
and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion. And they came into the
country of Moab, and continued there.

3 And Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died; and she was left, and her two
sons.

4 And they took them wives of the women of Moab; the name of the one was
Orpah, and the name of the other Ruth: and they dwelt there about ten
years.

5 And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them; and the woman was left
of her two sons and her husband.

6 Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from
the country of Moab; for she had heard in the country of Moab how that
the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread.

7 Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was, and her two
daughters in law with her.

8 And Naomi said unto her daughters in law, Go, return each to her
mother's house;

The Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with
me.

10 And they said unto her, Surely we will return with thee unto thy
people.

14 And they lifted up their voice, and wept: and Orpah kissed her mother
in law; but Ruth clave to her.

15 And he said, Behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people,
and unto her gods: return thou after thy sister in law.

16 And Ruth said, Entreat me not to leave thee: for whither thou goest,
I will go; and where thou lodgest, I will lodge: thy people shall be my
people, and thy God my God:

19 So they two went until they came to Beth-lehem. And it came to pass,
when they were come to Beth-lehem, that all the city was moved about
them, and they said, Is this Naomi?

20 And she said unto them, Call me not Naomi, call me Mara: for the
Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me.

21 I went out full, and the Lord hath brought me home again empty: why
then call ye me Naomi, seeing the Lord hath testified against me, and
the Almighty hath afflicted me.

22 So Naomi returned, and Ruth the Moabitess, her daughter in law, with
her.

COMMENTATORS differ as to the exact period when this book was written
and as to the judge who ruled Israel at that time.

It must have been, however, in the beginning of the days when the judges
ruled, as Boaz, who married Ruth, was the son of Rahab, who protected
the spies in Joshua's reign. Some say that it was in the reign of
Deborah. Tradition says that the "Messiah was descended from two Gentile
maidens, Rahab and Ruth, and that Ruth was the

{p. 38}

daughter of Eglon, King of Moab; but this is denied, as Boaz, whom Ruth
married, judged Israel two hundred years after Eglon's death. However
widely the authorities differ as to Ruth's genealogical tree, they all
agree that she was a remarkably sincere, refined, discreet maiden, a
loving daughter and an honored wife.

Elimelech, the husband of Naomi, is severely criticised by Biblical
writers for leaving his people and his country when in distress and
seeking his fortune among the heathen Moabites, thus leading his sons
into the temptation of taking strange wives. They say that the speedy
deaths of the father and the sons were a proof of God's disapprobation.
Naomi manifested such remarkable goodness and wisdom as a widow, that
one wonders that she did not use her influence to keep her husband in
his native land to share the trials of his neighbors.

The tender friendship between Ruth and Naomi, so unusual with a
mother-in-law, has been celebrated in poetry, in prose and in art the
world round. The scene between Naomi and her daughters in parting was
most affectionate. As soon as Naomi decided to return to her own
country, her daughters assisted her in making the necessary
preparations. Ruth secretly made her own, having decided to go with
Naomi to the land of Judea.

When the appointed day arrived, mounted on three gray jackasses, they
departed. A few miles out Naomi proposed to rest by the roadside and to
say farewell, and, after thanking them for all the love and kindness
they had shown her, advised them to go no farther, but return to their
home in that land of plenty. She told them frankly that she had no home
luxuries to offer, life with her would for them be poverty and privation
in a strange land, and she was not willing that they should sacrifice
all the pleasures of their young lives for her. Sad and lonely with the
loss of their husbands, parting with Naomi seemed to intensify their
grief. United in a common sorrow, the three women stood gazing in
silence into each other's faces, until Naomi, with her usual
self-control and common sense, again pointed out to them all the
hardships involved in the change which they proposed.

Her words made a deep impression on Orpah. She hesitated,

{p. 39}

and at last decided to abide by Naomi's advice; but not so with Ruth.
Naomi had a peculiar magnetic attraction for her, a charm stronger than
kindred, country or ease. Her expressions of steadfast friendship in
making her decision were so tender and sincere that they have become
household words. She said: "Entreat me not to leave thee; for whither
thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge; thy people
shall be my people, and thy God my God; where thou diest will I die, and
there will I be buried. The Lord do so to me, and more also, if aught
but death part thee and me." (These words are on a bronze tablet on the
stone over the grave of Robert Louis Stevenson at Samoa.)

Having bade farewell to Orpah, they journeyed together and made a home
for themselves in Bethlehem. Naomi owned a small house, lot and spring
of water on the outskirts of the town. After a few days of rest, Ruth
said to Naomi, I must not sit here with folded hands, nor spend my time
in visiting neighbors, nor in search of amusement, but I must go forth
to work, to provide food and clothes, and leave thee to rest. As it was
the season for the wheat and barley harvests, Ruth heard that laborers
were needed in the fields. It was evident that Ruth believed in the
dignity of labor and of self-support. She thought, no doubt, that every
one with a sound mind in a sound body and two hands should earn her own
livelihood. She threw her whole soul into her work and proved a blessing
to her mother. So Naomi consented that she might go and glean in the
fields with other maidens engaged in that work.

When Naomi was settled in Bethlehem she remembered that she had a rich
kinsman, Boaz, whose name means strength, a man of great wealth as well
as wisdom. Ruth was employed in the field of Boaz; and in due time he
took note of the fair maiden from Moab. In harvest time he needed many
extra hands, and he came often among the reapers to see how the work
went forward. He heard such good accounts of Ruth's industry, dignity
and discretion that he ordered his men to make her work as easy as
possible, to leave plenty for her to glean and to carry home in the
evening. This she often sold on the way, and bought something which
Naomi needed.

Naomi and Ruth enjoyed their evenings together. Naomi did

{p. 40}

not spend the day in idleness either. She had her spinning-wheel and
loom to make their garments; she worked also in her garden, raising
vegetables, herbs and chickens; and they talked over their day's labor
as they enjoyed their simple supper of herb tea, bread and watercresses.
Their menu was oft times more tempting, thanks to Ruth's generous
purchases on her way home. Being busy, practical women, their talk
during the evening was chiefly on "ways and means;" they seldom rose to
the higher themes of pedagogics and psychology, subjects so familiar in
the clubs of American women.

E. C. S.

*Ruth ii*.

1 And Naomi had a kinsman of her husband's, a mighty man of wealth, of
the family of Elimelech; and his name was Boaz.

2 And Ruth the Moabitess said unto Naomi, Let me now go to the field,
and glean cars of corn after him in whose sight I shall find grace. And
she said unto her, Go, my daughter.

4 And, behold, Boaz came from Bethlehem . . .

7 And she said, I pray you, let me glean and gather after the reapers
among the sheaves: so she came.

8 Then said Boaz unto Ruth, Hearest thou not, my daughter? Go not to
glean in another field, neither go from hence, but abide here fast by my
maidens: . . . . It hath fully been shewed me, all that thou hast done
unto thy mother-in-law since the death of thine husband; and how thou
hast left thy father and thy mother.

19 And her mother-in-law said unto her, Where hast thou gleaned to-day?
and where wroughtest thou? blessed be he that did take knowledge of thee
. . . . And Ruth said, the man's name is Boaz . . . . And Naomi said
unto her, The man is near of kin unto us, one of our next kinsmen.

It was a custom among the Israelites, in order to preserve their own
line, that the nearest kinsman should marry the young widow on whom
their hopes depended. So when Naomi remembered that Boaz was her
kinsman, and that as age made marriage with her undesirable, Ruth would
be the proper person to fill her place. With great tact on their part
Naomi's wishes were accomplished.

Boaz was the son of Salmon and Rahab, and according to the Chaldee was
not only a mighty man in wealth but also in wisdom, a most rare and
excellent conjunction. Boaz was of the family of Elimelech, of which
Ruth, by marriage, was a part also. Moreover, as she had adopted the
country of Naomi and was a proselyte to her faith, her marriage with
Boaz was in accordance with Jewish custom. Naomi was told by the spirit
of prophecy, says the Chaldee, that from

{p. 41}

her line should descend six of the most righteous men of the age,
namely, David, Daniel, his three compeers and the King Messiah.

Commentators say that Boaz was probably himself one of the elders, or
the aldermen, of the city, and that he went up to the gates as one
having authority, and not as a common person. They say that Ruth was
neither rich nor beautiful, but a poor stranger, "whose hard work in the
fields" had withered her "lilies and roses." But Boaz had heard her
virtue and dignity extolled by all who knew her. The Chaldee says,
"house and riches are the inheritance from fathers; but a prudent wife
is more valuable than rubies and is a special gift from heaven." Boaz
prized Ruth for her virtues, for her great moral qualities of head and
heart. He did not say like Samson, when his parents objected to his
choice, "her face pleaseth me."

In narrating the story of Ruth and Naomi to children they invariably ask
questions of interest, to which the sacred fabulist gives no answer.
They always ask if Ruth and Naomi had no pets when living alone, before
Obed made his appearance. If the modern historian may be allowed to
wander occasionally outside of the received text, it may be said
undoubtedly that they had pets, as there is nothing said of cats and
dogs and parrots, but frequent mention of doves, kids and lambs, we may
infer that in these gentle innocents they found their pets. No doubt
Providence softened their solitude by providing them with something on
which to expend their mother love.

*Ruth iv*.

1 Then went Boaz up to the gate, and sat him down there; and, behold,
the kinsman of whom Boaz spoke came by; unto whom he said, He, such a
one! turn aside, sit down here. And he turned aside, and sat down.

2 And he took ten men of the elders of the city, and said, Sit ye down
here.

3 And he said unto the kinsman, Naomi, that is come again out of the
country of Moab, selleth a parcel of land, which was our brother
Elimelech's:

4 And I thought to advertise thee, saying, Buy it before the
inhabitants, and before the elders of my people. If thou wilt redeem it,
redeem it; but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may
know; for there is none to redeem it beside thee; and I am after thee.
And he said, I will redeem it.

5 Then said Boaz, What day thou buyest the field of the hand of Naomi,
thou must buy it also of Ruth the wife of the dead, to raise up the name
of the dead upon his inheritance.

6 And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself, lest I mar mine
own inheritance; redeem thou my right to thyself; for I cannot.

Boaz was one of the district judges, and he held his court in the

{p. 42}

town hall over the gates of Bethlehem. The kinsman who was summoned to
appear there and to settle the case readily agreed to the proposal of
Boaz to fill his place, as he was already married. He was willing to
take the land; but as the widow and the land went together, according to
the Jewish law of inheritance, Boaz was in a position to fill the legal
requirements; and as he loved Ruth, he was happy to do so. Ruth was
summoned to appear before the grave and reverend seigniors; the civil
pledges were made and the legal documents duly signed. The reporter is
silent as to the religious observances and the marriage festivities.
They were not as vigilant and as satisfying as are the skilled reporters
of our day, who have the imagination to weave a connected story and to
give to us all the hidden facts which we desire to know. Our reporters
would have told us how, when and where Ruth was married, what kind of a
house Boaz had, how Ruth was dressed, etc., etc., whereas we are left in
doubt on all of these points.

The historian does vouchsafe to give to us further information on the
general feeling of the people. They all joined in the prayer of the
elders that the Lord would "make the woman that is come into thine house
like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel;"
they prayed for Boaz that he might be more famous and powerful; they
prayed for the wife that she might be a blessing in the house, and the
husband in the public business of the town; that all of their children
might be faithful in the church, and their descendants be as numerous as
the sands of the sea.

In due time one prayer was answered, and Ruth bore a son. Naomi loved
the child and shared in its care. But Ruth said: "The, love of Naomi is
more to me than that of seven sons could be." Naomi was a part of Ruth's
household to the day of her death and shared all of her luxuries and her
happiness.

The child's name was Obed, the father of Jesse, the father of David. The
name Obed signifies one who serves. The motto of the Prince of Wales is
(*ich dien*) "I serve." It is to be hoped that Obed was more profoundly
interested in the problems of industrial economics than the Prince seems
to be, and that he spent a more useful and practical life. If the
Bethlehem newspapers had been as

{p. 43}

enterprising as our journals they would have given us some pictorial
representations of Obed on Naomi's lap, or at the baptismal font, or in
the arms of Boaz, who, like Napoleon, stood contemplating in silence his
firstborn.

Some fastidious readers object to the general tenor of Ruth's courtship.
But as her manners conformed to the customs of the times, and as she
followed Naomi's instructions implicitly, it is fair to assume that
Ruth's conduct was irreproachable.

E. C. S.

{p. 44}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: BOOKS OF SAMUEL.](wb50)
