[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb60) 
[Next](wb62) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF MATTHEW.

## CHAPTER I.

*Matthew i.*

16 And Jacob begat Joseph the husband of Mary, of whom was born Jesus,
who is called Christ.

17 So all the generations from Abraham to David are fourteen
generations; and from David until the carrying away into Babylon are
fourteen generations; and from the carrying away into Babylon unto
Christ are fourteen generations.

SAINT MATTHEW is supposed to be distinguished from the other Apostles by
the frequency of his references to the Old Testament. He records more
particulars of Jesus than the others do, far more of his birth, his
sayings and his miracles.

There has been much difference of opinion among writers of both sacred
and profane history as to the paternity of Jesus, and whether he was a
real or an ideal character. If, as the Scriptures claim, he descended
from heaven, begotten by the Holy Ghost, the incarnation of God himself,
then there was nothing remarkable in his career, nor miraculous in the
seeming wonders which he performed, being the soul and the centre of all
the forces of the universe of matter and of mind. If he was an ideal
character, like the gifted hero of some novel or tragedy, his great
deeds and his wise sayings the result of the imagination of some skilful
artist, then we may admire the sketch as a beautiful picture. But if
Jesus was a man who was born, lived and died as do other men, a worthy
example for imitation, he is deserving of our love and reverence, and by
showing us the possibilities of human nature he is a constant
inspiration, our hope and salvation; for the path, however rough, in
which one man has walked, others may follow. As a God with infinite
power he could have been no example to us; but with human limitations we
may emulate his virtues and walk in his footsteps.

Some writers think that his mother was a wise, great and beautiful

{p. 117}

Jewish maiden, and his father a learned rabbi, who devoted much time and
thought to his son's education. At a period when learning was confined
to the few, it was a matter of surprise that as a mere boy he could read
and write, and discuss the vital questions of the hour with doctors in
the sacred temples. His great physical beauty, the wisdom of his replies
to the puzzling questions of the Pharisees and the Sadducces, his
sympathy with the poor and the needy, his ambition for all that is best
in human development, and his indifference to worldly aggrandizement,
altogether made him a marked man in his day and generation. For these
reasons he was hated, reviled, persecuted, like the long line of martyrs
who followed his teachings. He commands far more love and reverence as a
true man with only human possibilities, than as a God, superior to all
human frailties and temptations.

What were years of persecution, the solitude on the mountain, the
agonies on the cross, with the power of a God to sustain him? But
unaided and alone to triumph over all human weakness, trials and
temptation, was victory not only for Jesus but for every human being
made in his image.

*Matthew ii.*

1 Now when Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea in the days of Herod the
king, behold, there came wise men from the east to Jerusalem,

2 Saying, Where is he that is born King of the Jews? for we have seen
his star in the cast, and are come to worship him.

3 When Herod the king had heard these things, he was troubled, and all
Jerusalem with him.

4 And when he had gathered all the chief priests together, he demanded
of them where Christ should be born.

5 And they said unto him, In Bethlehem of Judea:

8 And he sent them to Bethlehem, and said, Go and search diligently for
the young child; and when ye have found him, bring me word.

9 And they departed; and lo, the star, which they saw in the east, went
before them, till it came and stood over where the young child was.

11 And when they were come into the house, they saw the young child with
Mary his mother, and fell down, and worshiped him: and when they had
opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts; gold, and
frankincense, and myrrh.

12 And being warned of God in a dream that they should not return to
Herod, they departed into their own country another way.

13 And the angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream, saying,
Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and flee into Egypt; for
Herod will seek to destroy him.

14 And he arose, and departed into Egypt;

19 But when Herod was dead, behold, an angel of the Lord appeareth in a
dream to Joseph

20 Saying, Arise, and take the young child and his mother, and go into
the land of Israel.

These sages were supposed to be men of great learning belonging

{p. 118}

to a sect called Magians, who came from Arabia. There was a general
feeling that the king of the Jews was yet to be born, and that they were
soon to see the long expected and promised Messiah. Herod was greatly
troubled by the tidings that a child had been born under remarkable
circumstances. The star spoken of was supposed to be a luminous meteor
the wise men had seen in their own country before they set out on their
journey for Bethlehem, and which now guided them to the house where the
young child was. Notwithstanding the common surroundings, the wise men
recognizing something more than human in the child, fell down and
worshiped him and presented unto him the most precious gifts which their
country yielded. Some have supposed that the frankincense and the myrrh
were intended as an acknowledgment of his deity, as the gold was of his
royalty.

To defeat the subtle malice of Herod, who was determined to take the
child's life, Joseph was warned in a dream to flee into Egypt with the
child and his mother. The wise men did not return to Herod as commanded,
but went at once to their own country.

*Matthew ix.*

18 Behold, there came a certain ruler, saying, My daughter is even now
dead; but come and lay thy hand upon her, and she shall live.

19 And Jesus arose and followed him.

2 And behold, a woman, which was diseased twelve years, came behind him,
and touched the hem of his garment:

21 For she said within herself, If I may but touch his garment, I shall
be whole.

22 But Jesus turned him about, and when he saw her, he said, Daughter,
be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole. And the woman was
made whole from that hour.

23 And when Jesus came into the ruler's house, \* \* \*

24 He said, Give place: for the maid is not dead, but sleepeth. And they
laughed him to scorn,

25 But when the people were put forth, he went in, and took her by the
hand, and the maid arose.

*Matthew xiv.*

3 For Herod had laid hold on John, and put him in prison for Herodias'
sake, his brother Philip's wife.

4 For John said unto him, It is not lawful for thee to have her.

5 And when he would have put him to death, he feared the multitude,
because they counted him as a prophet.

6 But when Herod's birthday was kept, the daughter of Herodias danced
before them, and pleased Herod.

7 Whereupon he promised to give her whatsoever she would ask.

8 And she being before instructed of her met, Give me here John
Baptist's head in a charger.

9 And the king was sorry: nevertheless for the oath's sake he commanded
it to be given her,

10 And he sent, and beheaded John in the prison.

11 And his head was brought in a charger, and given to the damsel: and
she brought it to her mother.

12 And his disciples came, and took up the body, and buried it, and went
and told Jesus.

{p. 119}

Josephus says that Herodias was niece both to her former husband,
Philip, and to Herod, with whom she at this time lived. Herod had
divorced his own wife in order to take her; and her husband Philip was
still living, as well as the daughter Salome, whom he had by her. No
connection could be more contrary to the law of God than this. John,
therefore, being a prophet and no courtier, plainly reproved Herod, and
declared that it was not lawful for him to retain Herodias. This greatly
offended Herod and Herodias, and they cast John into prison, Herodias
waited her opportunity to wreak her malice on him, counting John's
reproof an insult to her character as well as an interference with her
ambition.

At length when Herod celebrated his birthday, entertaining his nobles
with great magnificence, the daughter of Herodias danced before them
all, with such exquisite grace as to delight the company, whereupon
Herod promised her whatever she desired, though equal in value to half
his kingdom. Salome consulted her mother, who urged her to demand the
head of John the Baptist. By the influence of Herodias, Herod, contrary
to his own conscience, was induced to put John to death, for he feared
him as a righteous man.

It must have been a great trial to the daughter, who might have asked so
many beautiful gifts and rare indulgences, to yield all to her wicked
mother's revenge. But these deeds were speedily avenged. It is said that
Salome had her head cut off by the ice breaking as she passed over it.
Herod was shortly after engaged in a disastrous war on account of
Herodias, and was expelled from his territories; and both died in exile,
hated by everybody and hating one another.

L. C. S.

In regard to the charge against Herodias, which is current among
theological scandal-mongers, there is not a moderately intelligent jury
of Christendom (if composed half of men and half of women) which, after
examining all the available evidence, would not render a verdict in her
favor of "Not Guilty." The statement that She "paid the price of her own
daughter's debasement and disgrace for the head of John the Baptist," is
an assertion born wholly of the ecclesiastical,

{p. 120}

distorted imagination. Not even a hint, much less an iota of proof, to
warrant such an assertion, is found anywhere in history--sacred or
profane. While some anonymous writer of the early Christian centuries
did put in circulation the charge that John the Baptist was put to death
at the instigation of Herodias (without implicating her daughter's
character, however), Josephus, on the contrary, explicitly declares that
his death was wholly a political matter, with which the names of
Herodias and her daughter are not even connected by rumor. Says
Josephus: "When others came in crowds about him (John the Baptist), for
they were greatly moved by hearing his words, Herod, who feared lest the
great influence John had over the people might put it into his power and
inclination to raise a rebellion (for they seemed ready to do anything
he should advise), thought it best, by putting him to death, to prevent
any mischief he might cause. . . . Accordingly he was sent a prisoner,
*out of Herod's suspicious temper*, to Macherus, the castle I before
mentioned, and was there put to death."

Now, the jury must remember that Josephus was born in Jerusalem about 38
A. D., that he was an educated man and in a position to know the facts
in this case, owing both to his prominent position among the Jews and to
his study of contemporaneous history. But that, on the other hand, the
anonymous writers who bring Herodias' name into the transaction, are not
traceable further back than the fourth century of our era, and that even
they do not bring any charge against her character as a mother.

E. B. D.

*Matthew xv.*

21 Then Jesus departed into the coasts of Tyre and Sidon.

22 And, behold, a woman of Canaan cried unto him, saying, Have mercy on
me, O Lord, thou son of David; my daughter is grievously vexed with a
devil.

23 But he answered her not a word. And his disciples besought him to
send her away.

24 But he answered and said, I am not sent but unto the lost sheep of
the house of .Israel.

25 Then came she and worshiped him, saying, Lord, help me.

26 But he said, It is not meet to take the children's food, and to cast
it to dogs.

27 And she said, Truth, Lord: yet the dogs eat of the crumbs which fall
from their master's table.

23 Then Jesus answered and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith:
be it unto thee even as thou wilt. And her daughter was made whole from
that very hour.

Peter had a house in Capernaum; and his wife's mother lived

{p. 121}

with them; and Jesus lodged with them when in that city. It is hoped
that his presence brought out the best traits of the mother-in-law, so
as to make her agreeable to Peter. As soon as Jesus rebuked the fever,
she was able without delay to rise and to wait on Jesus and his
disciples. These displays of the power of Christ in performing miracles,
according to the text, are varied, in almost every conceivable way of
beneficence; but he wrought no miracles of vengeance, even the
destruction of the swine was doubtless intended in mercy and conducive
to much good--so say the commentators. He not only healed the sick and
cast out devils, but he made the blind to see and the dumb to speak.

The woman of Canaan proved herself quite equal in argument with Jesus;
and though by her persistency she tired the patience of the disciples,
she made her points with Jesus with remarkable clearness. His patience
with women was a sore trial to the disciples, who were always disposed
to nip their appeals in the bud. It was very ungracious in Jesus to
speak of the Jews as dogs, saying, "It is not meet to take the
children's food, and to cast it to dogs." Her reply, "Yet the dogs eat
of the crumbs which fall from the master's table," was bright and
appropriate. Jesus appreciated her tact and her perseverance, and
granted her request; and her daughter, the text says, was healed.

We might doubt the truth of all these miracles did We not see so many
wonderful things in our own day which we would have pronounced
impossible years ago. The fact of human power developing in so many
remarkable ways proves that Jesus's gift of performing miracles is
attainable by those who, like him, live pure lives, and whose blood
flows in the higher arches of the brain. If one man, at any period of
the world's history, performed miracles, others equally gifted may do
the same.

*Matthew xx.*

20 Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children with her sons,
worshiping him, and desiring a certain thing of him.

21 And he said unto her, What wilt thou? She saith unto him, Grant that
these my two sons may sit, the one on thy right hand, and the other on
the left, in thy kingdom.

Zebedee, the father of James and of John, was dead; and he was

{p. 122}

not so constant a follower of Christ as his wife; so she is mentioned as
the mother of Zebedee's children, which saying has passed into a
conundrum, "Who was the mother of Zebedee's children?" Scott in his
commentaries gives her name as Salome. Whatever her name, she had great
ambition for her sons, and asked that they might have the chief places
of honor and authority in his kingdom. Her son James was the first of
the Apostles who suffered martyrdom. John survived all the rest and is
not supposed to have died a violent death.

A mother's ambition to lift her sons over her own head in education and
position, planning extraordinary responsibilities for ordinary men, has
proved a misfortune in many cases. Many a young man who would be a
success as a carpenter would be a failure as the governor of a State.
Mothers are quite apt to overestimate the genius of their children and
push them into niches which they cannot fill.

*Matthew xxii.*

23 The same day came to him the Sadducees, which say that there is no
resurrection and asked him,

24 Saying, Master, Moses said, If a man die, having no children, his
brother shall marry his wife, and raise up seed unto his brother.

25 Now there were with us seven brethren: and the first, when he had
married a wife, deceased, and, having no issue, left his wife unto his
brother:

26 Likewise the second also, and the third, unto the seventh.

27 And last of all the woman died also.

28 Therefore in the resurrection, whose wife shall she be of the seven?
for they all had her.

29 Jesus answered and said unto them, Ye do err, not knowing the
Scriptures, nor the power of God.

30 For in the resurrection they neither marry, nor are given in
marriage, but are as the angels of God in heaven.

Jesus reminded the Sadducees that marriage was intended only for the
present world, to replenish the earth and to repair the ravages which
death continually makes among its inhabitants; but as in the future
state there was to be no death, so no marriage. There the body even
would be made spiritual; and all the employments and the pleasures pure
and angelic. The marriage relation seems to have been a tangled problem
in all ages. Scientists tell us that both the masculine and feminine
elements were united in one person in the beginning, and will probably
be reunited again for eternity.

E. C. S.

{p. 123}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: MATTHEW CHAPTER II.](wb62)
