[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb64) 
[Next](wb66) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE BOOK OF JOHN.

*John ii.*

And the third day there was a marriage in Cana of Galilee; and the
mother of Jesus was there:

2 And both Jesus was called, and his disciples, to the marriage.

3 And when they wanted wine, the mother of Jesus saith unto him, They
have no wine.

4 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, what have I to do with thee? mine hour is
not yet come.

5 His mother saith unto the servants, Whatsoever he saith unto you, do
it.

7 Jesus saith unto them, Fill the waterpots with water. And they filled
them up to the brim.

8 And he saith unto them, Draw out now and bear unto the governor of the
feast. And they bare it.

9 When the ruler of the feast had tasted the water that was made wine,
he called the bridegroom.

10 And saith unto him, Every man at the beginning doth set forth good
wine; and when men have well drunk, then that which is worse: but thou
hast kept the good wine until now.

JOHN was distinguished among the Apostles for his many virtues, and was
specially honored as the bosom friend of Jesus.

He is supposed to have lived in the neighborhood of Judea until the time
approached for the predicted destruction of Jerusalem; then he went to
Asia and resided some years in Ephesus, was banished to the Island of
Patmos by the Emperor Domitian, and returned to Asia after the death of
that Emperor. He lived to be a hundred years of age, and died a natural
death, being the only Apostle who escaped martyrdom. John alone records
the resurrection of Lazarus, and many things not mentioned in the other
Gospels.

Probably Mary was related to one of the parties to the marriage, for she
appears to have given directions as one of the family. As Joseph is not
mentioned either on this occasion or afterwards, we may suppose that he
died before Jesus entered into his public ministry. There was no
disrespect intended in the word "woman" with which Jesus addressed his
mother, as the greatest princesses were accosted even by their servants
in the same manner among the ancients. Jesus merely intended to suggest
that no one could command

{p. 139}

when he should perform miracles, as they would in any ordinary event
subject to human discretion.

The Jews always kept a great number of water-pots filled with water in
their houses for the ceremonial washing prescribed by law. Commentators
differ as to how much these pots contained, but it is estimated that the
six contained a hogshead. The ruler of the feast was generally a Levite
or a priest; and he expressed his surprise that they should have kept
the best wine until the last.

*John iv.*

5\. Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar.

6 Now Jacob's well was there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his
journey, sat thus on the well: and it was about the sixth hour.

7 There cometh a woman of Samaria to draw water: Jesus saith unto her,
Give me to drink.

9 (For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)

9 Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a
Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have
no dealings with the Samaritans.

10 Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God,
and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water.

27 And upon this came his disciples, and marvelled that he talked with
the woman. yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with
her?

As the Samaritans were not generally disposed to receive the Jews into
their houses, Jesus did not try to enter, but sat down by Jacob's well,
and sent his disciples into the town to buy some necessary provisions.
The prejudices against each other were so inveterate that they never
asked for a favor, hence the woman was surprised when Jesus spoke to
her. They might buy of each other, but never borrow nor receive a favor
or gift, nor manifest friendship in any way.

But Christ, despising all such prejudices that had no foundation either
in equity or in the law of God, asked drink of the Samaritan woman. He
did not notice the woman's narrow prejudices, but directed her attention
to matters of greater importance. He told her though she should refuse
him the small favor for which he asked because he was a Jew, yet he was
ready to confer far greater benefits on her, though a Samaritan. The
living water to which Jesus referred, the woman did not understand.

{p. 140}

16 Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither.

17 The woman answered and said, I have no husband. Jesus said unto her,
Thou hast well said, I have no husband:

18 For thou hast had five husbands: and he whom thou now hast is not thy
husband: in that saidst thou truly.

19 The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet.

28 The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and
saith to the men.

29 Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not
this the Christ?

39 And many of the Samaritans of that city believed on him for the
saying of the woman, which testified, He told me all that ever I did.

40 So when the Samaritans were come unto him, they besought him that he
would tarry with them: and he abode there two days.

41 And many more believed because of his own word.

The woman could not understand Jesus' words because she had no
conviction of sin nor desire for a purer, better life; and as soon as
possible she changed the subject of the conversation from her private
life to the subjects of controversy between the Jews and the Samaritans.

*John viii.*

2 And early in the morning he came again into the temple, and all the
people came unto him: and he sat down, and taught them.

3 And the Scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in
adultery; and when they had set her in the midst,

4 They say unto him, Master, this woman was taken in adultery,

5 Now Moses in the law commanded us, that such should be stoned: but
what sayest thou?

6 This they said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him. But
Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as though
he heard them not.

7 So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto
them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
her.

8 And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.

9 And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went
out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last: and Jesus
was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst.

10 He said unto her, Woman, where are those thine accusers? hath no man
condemned thee?

11 She said, No man, Lord. And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn
thee: go, and sin no more.

The Scribes and the Pharisees concocted a plan to draw Jesus into a
snare. They concluded from many of his doctrines that he deemed himself
authorized to alter or to abrogate the commands of Moses; therefore they
desired his opinion as to the fitting punishment for an adulteress. If
he had ordered them to execute her, they would doubtless have accused
him to the Romans of assuming a judicial authority, independent of their
government; had he directed them to set her at liberty, they would have
represented him to the people as an enemy to the law, and a patron of
the most infamous characters; and had he referred them to the Roman
authority,

{p. 141}

they would have accused him to the multitude as a betrayer of their
liberties.

*John ix.*

And as Jesus passed by, he saw a man which was blind from his birth.

2 And his disciples asked him, saying, Master, who did sin, this man, or
his parents, that he was born blind?

3 Jesus answered, Neither hath this man sinned, nor his parents: but
that the works of God should be made manifest in him.

A prevalent idea of the Jews was that, in accord with the ten
commandments, the sins of the parents were visited upon the children.
This is recognized as absolute law to-day; but it by no means follows
that all afflictions are the result of sin. The blindness may have
resulted from a combination of circumstances beyond the control of the
parents. The statement does not disprove the law of transmission, but
simply shows that defects are not always the result of sin.

*John xi.*

Now a certain man was sick, named Lazarus, of Bethany, the town of Mary
and her sister Martha.

3 Therefore his sisters sent unto him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom
thou lovest is sick.

5 Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus.

6 When he had heard therefore that he was sick, he abode two days still
in the same place where he was.

17 When Jesus came, he found that he bad lain in the grave four days
already.

20 Martha, as soon as she heard that Jesus was coming, went and met him:
but Mary sat still in the house.

;21 Then said Martha unto Jesus, Lord, if then hadst been here, my
brother had not died.

22 But I know, that even now, whatsoever thou wilt ask of God, God will
give it thee.

23 Jesus saith unto her, Thy brother shall rise again.

24 Martha saith unto him, 1 know that he shall rise again in the
resurrection at the last day.

25 Jesus said unto her, I am the resurrection and the life:

28 And she went her way, and called Mary her sister, saying, The Master
is come, and calleth for thee.

29 As soon as she heard that, she arose quickly, and came unto him.

32 When Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his
feet, saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not
died.

35 Jesus wept.

36 Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him!

41 Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.

43 And Jesus cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come forth.

44 And he that was dead came forth.

It appears that Jesus was a frequent visitor at the home of Mary, Martha
and Lazarus, and felt a strong friendship for them. They lived in
Bethany, two miles from Jerusalem. Many Jews carne out from the city to
express their sympathy. Martha did not fully understand

{p. 142}

Jesus; she considered him as a prophet who wrought miracles by faith and
prayer in the same manner as the ancient prophets.

The grief of Mary, the tears of the Jews, and his own warm friendship
for the sisters, affected Jesus himself to tears and groans. In
appealing to Divine power, Jesus wished to show the unbelieving Jews
that his miracles were performed by influence from above and not by the
spirit of evil, to which source they attributed his wonderful works.
Many who were said to witness this miracle did not believe.

After this Jesus again rested at the home of Mary, where she washed his
feet and wiped them with the hair of her head, and then anointed him
with costly spices from an alabaster box. He then went tip to Jerusalem
to attend the passover.

*John xx.*

The first day of the week cometh Mary Magdalene early, when it was yet
dark, unto the sepulchre, and seeth the stone taken away from the
sepulchre.

2 Then she runneth, and cometh to Simon Peter, and to the other
disciple, whom Jesus loved, and saith unto them, They have taken away
the Lord out of the sepulchre, and we know not where they have laid him.

3 Peter therefore went forth, and that other disciple, and came to the
sepulchre.

4 So they ran both together: and the other disciple did outrun Peter,
and came first to the sepulchre.

5 And he stooping down and looking in, saw the linen clothes lying; yet
went he not in.

6 Then cometh Simon Peter following him, and went into the sepulchre,
and seeth the linen clothes lie.

7 And the napkin, that was about his head, not lying with the linen
clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself.

8 Then went in also that other disciple, which came first to the
sepulchre, and he saw, and believed.

9 For as yet they knew not the Scripture, that he must rise again from
the dead.

10 Then the disciples went away again unto their own home.

11 But Mary stood without at the sepulchre weeping: and as she wept, she
stooped down, and looked into the sepulchre.

12 And seeth two angels in white sitting, the one at the head, and the
other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.

13 And they say unto her, Woman, Why weepest thou? She saith unto them,
Because they have taken away my Lord, and I know not where they have
laid him.

14 And when she had thus said, she turned herself back, and saw Jesus
standing, and knew not that it was Jesus.

15 Jesus saith unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom seekest thou?
She, supposing him to be the gardener, saith unto him, Sir, if thou hast
borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him
away.

16 Jesus saith unto her, Mary. She turned herself, and saith unto him,
Rabboni, which is to say, Master.

17 Jesus saith unto her, Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my
Father: but go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my
Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God.

18 Mary Magdalene came and told the disciples that she had seen the
Lord, and that he had spoken these things unto her.

Mary appears to have arrived at the sepulchre before any of the

{p. 143}

other women, and conversed with Jesus. Though the disciples, in visiting
the tomb, saw nothing but cast-off clothes, yet Mary sees and talks with
angels and with Jesus. As usual, the woman is always most ready to
believe miracles and fables, however extravagant and though beyond all
human comprehension. Several women purposed to be at the tomb at sunrise
to embalm the body.

The men who visited the tomb saw no visions; but all the women saw Jesus
and the angels, though the men, who went to the tomb twice, saw nothing.
Mary arrived at the tomb before light, and waited for the other women;
but seeing some one approaching, she supposed he was the person employed
by Joseph to take care of the garden, so asked him what had been done to
him. Though speaking to a supposed stranger, she did not mention any
name. Jesus then called her by name; and his voice and his address made
him known to her. Filled with joy and with amazement, she called him
"Rabboni," which signifies, "teacher." Jesus said unto her, "Touch me
not."

This finishes the consideration of the four Gospels--the direct recorded
words of Jesus upon the question of purity; and all further references
should harmonize, in spirit, with his teachings, and should be so
interpreted, without regard to contrary assertions by learned but unwise
commentators.

E. C. S.

Is it not astonishing that so little is in the New Testament concerning
the mother of Christ? My own opinion is that she was an excellent woman,
and the wife of Joseph, and that Joseph was the actual father of Christ.
I think there can be no reasonable doubt that such was the opinion of
the authors of the original Gospels. Upon any other hypothesis it is
impossible to account for their having given the genealogy of Joseph to
prove that Christ was of the blood of David. The idea that he was the
Son of God, or in any way miraculously produced, was an afterthought,
and is hardly entitled now to serious consideration. The Gospels were
written so long after the death of Christ that very little was known of
him, and

{p. 144}

substantially nothing of his parents. How is it that not one word is
said about the death of Mary, not one word about the death of Joseph?
How did it happen that Christ did not visit his mother after his
resurrection? The first time he speaks to his mother is when he was
twelve years old. His mother having told him that she and his father had
been seeking him, he replied: "How is it that ye sought me? Wist ye not
that I must be about my father's business?" The second time was at the
marriage feast in Cana, when he said to her: "Woman, what have I to do
with thee?" And the third time was at the cross, when "Jesus, seeing his
mother standing by the disciple whom he loved, said to her: 'Woman,
behold thy son;' and to the disciple: 'Behold thy mother.'" And this is
all.

The best thing about the Catholic Church is the deification of Mary; and
yet this is denounced by Protestantism as idolatry. There is something
in the human heart that prompts man to tell his faults more freely to
the mother than to the father. The cruelty of Jehovah is softened by the
mercy of Mary.

Is it not strange that none of the disciples of Christ said any thing
about their parents--that we know absolutely nothing of them? Is there
any evidence that they showed any particular respect even for the mother
of Christ? Mary Magdalene is, in many respects, the tenderest and most
loving character in the New Testament {*sic*}. According to the account,
her love for Christ knew no abatement, no change-true even in the
hopeless shadow of the cross. Neither did it die with his death. She
waited at the sepulchre; she hastened in the early morning to his tomb;
and yet the only comfort Christ gave to this true and loving soul lies
in these strangely cold and heartless words: "Touch me not."

ANON.

{p. 145}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: THE BOOK OF ACTS.](wb66)
