[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Bible](../../bib/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wb74) 
[Next](wb76) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# "THE WOMAN'S BIBLE" REPUDIATED.

At the twenty-eighth annual convention of the National-American Woman
Suffrage Association, held in Washington, D. C., in January, 1896, the
following, was reported by the Committee on Resolutions:

"That this Association is non-sectarian, being composed of persons of
all shades of religious opinion, and that it has no official connection
with the so-called 'Woman's Bible,' or any theological publication."

Charlotte Perkins Stetson moved to amend by striking out everything
after the word "opinion."

Anna R. Simmons moved, as an amendment to the amendment, to omit the
words "the so-called Woman's Bible, or."

This was followed by a long and animated discussion, in which the
following persons participated:

Frances A. Williamson, Helen Morris Lewis, Annie L. Diggs, Carrie
Chapman Catt, Rachel Foster Avery, Henry B. Blackwell, Laura M. Johns,
Elizabeth U. Yates, Katie R. Addison, Alice Stone Blackwell and Rev.
Anna Howard Shaw, speaking for the resolution; and Charlotte Perkins
Stetson, Mary Bentley Thomas, J. B. Merwin, Clara B. Colby, Harriette A.
Keyser, Lavina A. Hatch, Lillie Devereux Blake, Caroline Hallowell
Miller, Victoria Conkling Whitney, Althea B. Stryker, and Cornelia H.
Cary speaking against it.

The President, Susan B. Anthony, left the chair and spoke with much
earnestness against the adoption of the resolution as follows:

"The one distinct feature of our Association has been the right of
individual opinion for every member. We have been beset at

{p. 216}

every step with the cry that somebody was injuring the cause by the
expression of some sentiments that differed with those held by the
majority of mankind. The religious persecution of the ages has been done
under what was claimed to be the command of God. I distrust those people
who know so well what God wants them to do to their fellows, because it
always coincides with their own desires. All the way along the history
of our movement there has been this same contest on account of religious
theories. Forty years ago one of our noblest men said to me: 'You would
better never hold another convention than let Ernestine L. Rose stand on
your platform,' because that talented and eloquent Polish woman, who
ever stood for justice and freedom, did not believe in the plenary
inspiration of the Bible. Did we banish Mrs. Rose? No, indeed! Every new
generation of converts threshes over the same old straw. Twenty-five
years ago a prominent woman, who stood on our platform for the first
time, wanted us to pass a resolution that we were not free lovers; and I
was not more shocked than I am to-day at this attempt. The question is
whether you will sit in judgment on one who has questioned the Divine
inspiration of certain passages in the Bible derogatory to women. If she
had written approvingly of these passages, you would not have brought in
this resolution because you thought the cause might be injured among the
liberals in religion. In other words, if she had written your views, you
would not have considered a resolution necessary. To pass this one is to
set back the hands on the dial of reform. It is the reviving of the old
time censorship, which I hoped we had outgrown.

"What you should do is to say to outsiders that a Christian has neither
more nor less rights in our Association than an atheist. When our
platform becomes too narrow for people of all creeds and of no creeds, I
myself shall not stand upon it. Many things have been said and done by
our orthodox friends that I have felt to be extremely harmful to our
cause; but I should no more consent to a resolution denouncing them than
I shall consent to this. Who is to draw the line? Who can tell now
whether Mrs. Stanton's commentaries may not prove a great help to
woman's emancipation

{p. 217}

from old superstitions that have barred her way? Lucretia Mott at first
thought Mrs. Stanton had injured the cause of all woman's other rights
by insisting upon the demand for suffrage, but she had sense enough not
to bring in a resolution against it. In 1860, when Mrs. Stanton made a
speech before the New York Legislature in favor of a bill making
drunkenness a cause for divorce, there was a general cry among the
friends that she had killed the woman's cause. I shall be pained beyond
expression if the delegates here are so narrow and illiberal as to adopt
this resolution. You would better not begin resolving against individual
action or you will find no limit. This year it is Mrs. Stanton; next
year it may be me or one of yourselves who will be the victim.

"Are you going to cater to the whims and prejudices of people who have
no intelligent knowledge of what they condemn? If we do not inspire in
woman a broad and catholic spirit, they will fail, when enfranchised, to
constitute that power for better government which we have always claimed
for them. You would better educate ten women into the practice of
liberal principles than to organize ten thousand on a platform of
intolerance and bigotry. I pray you, vote for religious liberty, without
censorship or inquisition. This resolution, adopted, will be a vote of
censure upon a woman who is without a peer in intellectual and
statesmanlike ability; one who has stood for half a century the
acknowledged leader of progressive thought and demand in regard to all
matters pertaining to the absolute freedom of women."

The Resolution was then adopted by a vote of 53 to 41.

"The Truth shall make you free."--*John viii*., 32-

THE END.

{p. 218}

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Advertisements from original, Vol. 2](wb76)
