[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Women](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](fow27)  [Next](fow29) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# CHAPTER XXVI

### DAUGHTERS

"My son is my son till he hath got him a wife,  
But my daughter's my daughter all the days of her life."

THE proper bringing up, and putting out in life, of daughters have
always been a moot point in proverbial philosophy, but it would seem
that most countries are agreed in regarding marriage as the best thing
for their happiness, although this is not always an easy matter, for, as
it is said in Germany, "Daughters are easy to rear, but difficult to
marry;" which is much to the same purport as the Spanish adage, "When a
good offer comes for a daughter, don't wait till her father returns from
market," for fear the opportunity should slip by; another German saying
reminding us that "Daughters and dead fish are no keeping wares." There
are numerous versions of this piece of proverbial philosophy, a
well-known adage recommending parents thus: "Marry your son when you
will, your daughter when you can."

It is not every parent, it may be remembered, who is in the position to
make conditions similar to the following, told in a West African
folktale:--

A certain man had a most beautiful daughter, who was beset by many
suitors. But as soon as they were told that the sole condition on which
they could obtain her was to bale out a brook with a ground nut shell
they always walked away in disappointment. However, at last one took
heart of grace and began the task. He obtained the young lady, for the
father said, "He who undertakes what he says, will do it."

Apropos of the value of grown-up daughters, an amusing story is told by
Mr. Baring Gould in illustration of a curious baptismal superstition
which still lingers on in Yorkshire, where it is said the first child
baptised in a new font is sure to die--a reminiscence of the sacrifice
which was used for the consecration of every dwelling and temple in
heathen times.

"When I was incumbent of Dalton," he writes, "a new church was built. A
blacksmith in the village had seven daughters, after which a son was
born, and he came to me a few days after the consecration of the new
church to ask me to baptise his boy in the old temporary church and
font.

"'Why, Joseph,' said I, 'if you only wait till Thursday, the boy can be
baptised in the new font on the opening of the new church.'

"'Thank you, sir,' replied the blacksmith with a wriggle, 'but, you see,
it's a lad, and we shu'd be sorry if he were to die; ha' if t'had been a
lass instead, why then, you were welcome, for twouldn't ha' mattered a
ha'penny. Lasses are ower money, and lads ower few wi' us.'"

But the blacksmith's reference to his seven daughters reminds us that
for very many years past extraordinary powers have been generally
supposed to reside in the "seventh daughter," strange instances of which
have from time to time been recorded in the literature of the past. Thus
the Scotch fortune-teller commonly boasted that she was the seventh
daughter of a seventh daughter, and by this means she contrived to
ingratiate herself among the lower orders.

A correspondent of Notes and Queries, writing some years ago, records
how "In Saltash Street, Plymouth, my friend copied on December 10, 1852,
the following notice on a board, indicating the profession and claims of
the inhabitant: 'A Shepherd, the third seventh daughter--doctress.' As
in the case of the "seventh son," such a child is born a physician,
possessing an intuitive knowledge of the art of healing all manners of
disorders, and even occasionally the faculty of performing wonderful
cures by only the touch of the finger. Some years ago a herbalist in the
West of England declared that she was "in the habit of healing scores of
people that medical men had given up," her credentials being that she
was the seventh daughter of the seventh daughter of the seventh
daughter.

And to this day, in some places, there exists a strong prejudice against
baptising a boy before a girl, an amusing instance of which is given by
the late Cuthbert Bede in Notes and Queries as having occurred in a
Worcestershire parish.

On the occasion in question there were three baptisms, two boys and a
girl, and when the first child was about to be christened the woman who
carried the little girl elbowed her way up to the parson, in order that
the child in her arms might be the first to be baptized. By way of
apology, she said to one of the sponsors, "It's a girl, so it must be
christened first."

On the following day an opportunity was taken to ascertain her motive,
and this was her explanation: 'You see, sir, the parson bain't a married
man, and consequentially is disfamiliar with children, or he'd a-never
put the little girl to be christened after the boys. And although it
sadly fluster'd me, sir, to put myself afore my betters in the way which
I was fosed to do, yet, sir, it was the doing of a kindness to them two
little boys in me a-setting of my little daughter afore 'em."

"Why?"

"Well, sir, if them little boys had been christened afore the little
girl, they'd have her soft chin and she'd have had their hairy
beards--the poor little incident! But, thank goodness, I've kept her
from that misfortune."

On the other hand, strange to say, in Scotland, and in some parts of the
North of England, just the reverse practice is observed, the Scotch
reason being that to christen a girl before a boy would be to make the
former of a masculine nature, while the latter would grow up effeminate.
A correspondent of Notes and Queries, writing from Darlington in 1867,
says, "While standing at the font, and preparing to baptise two
children, the nurse attending on one of the parties abruptly demanded of
the other nurse if the child she presented was a boy. When questioned on
the subject, she replied that 'she wondered at my not knowing that a boy
was always christened before a girl.'"

An amusing equivocal rhyme long current in Durham tells how--

"John Lively, Vicar of Kelloe,  
Had seven daughters and never a fellow."

which, it has been suggested, "may either mean that the parson of the
sixteenth century had no son, or that he had no equal in learning."
Another version of the proverb reads "six daughters"--seven, it is said,
being often merely a conventional number. But, whatever the object of
this folk-rhyme may be, the parson mentions no son in his will, in which
he leaves to his daughter Elisabeth his best gold ring with a death's
head in it, and seventeen yards of white cloth for curtains of a bed,
and to his daughter Mary his silver seal of arms, his gimald ring, and
black gold ring.

Grown-up daughters at home would occasionally seem to have been regarded
the opposite of a blessing to their father, for "Three daughters and a
mother," runs the German proverb, "are four devils for the father;" but,
it is added, "Would you know your daughter, see her in company," for
then she will cultivate every charm to make herself as attractive as
possible. At home the picture is quite the reverse, for, runs the
popular German adage, "A house full of daughters is like a cellar full
of sour beer;" and there is our own proverb, "Marriageable, foolish
wenches are troublesome troops to keep."

A Cheshire maxim, too, speaks in the same strain:--

"I'll tent thee, quoth Wood,  
If I can't rule my daughter, I'll rule my good."

This idea, it may be added, is conveyed in various ways, which, it must
be acknowledged, are far from being favourable to the children, for, as
a Northamptonshire couplet says:--

As tall as your knee they are pretty to see;  
As tall as your head they wish you were dead."

Hence daughters are certain cares, but uncertain comforts; and,
according to an Oriental proverbial maxim--

"A daughter after two sons brings prosperity,  
And a son after two daughters beggary."

And we may compare the Lincolnshire couplet--

"Lasses is cumbersome,  
Lads is lumbersome."

Folk-maxims of this kind might be easily multiplied, a popular Welsh
adage reminding us that "the worst store is a maid unbestowed," but when
it is remembered in the words of our old proverb that "Every Jack must
have his Jill," there is hope for every daughter of Eve, for she may be
the object of a passion similar to that described by Charles Dance:--

"By the margins of fair Zurich's waters  
Dwelt a youth, whose fond heart, night and day,  
For the fairest of fair Zurich's daughters,  
In a dream of love melted way."

 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXVII: My Lady's Walk](fow29)
