[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww05)  [Next](aww07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### III Of the "Oráculo Manual"

Having thus proved *à priori* that the ideal book of maxims was destined
to be the *Oráculo Manual* of Balthasar Gracian, let us proceed to prove
our proof, as schoolboys do with their sums. That it is the best book of
maxims is a foregone conclusion, because there is none other.
Schopenhauer, who translated the book, observes that there is nothing
like it in German, and there is certainly none approaching it in
English, and if France or Italy can produce its superior, it is strange
that its fame has remained so confined to its native country.

Not that there are not books teaching the art of self-advancement in
almost all languages. The success of Dr. Smiles's volume on Self-Help is
a

<span id="page_xxxvi">p. xxxvi</span>

sufficient instance of this. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11)
Curiously enough, Dr. Smiles's book has had its greatest success in
Italy, where it has given rise to quite a *letteratura selfelpista*, as
the Italians themselves call it. Or rather not curiously, for if you
wish to find the most unromantic set of ideals nowadays you must go
search among the Romance nations.

Gracian does not, however, compete with Dr. Smiles. He does not deal
with *Brodweisheit*; he assumes that the vulgar question of bread and
butter has been settled in favour of his reader. He may be worldly, but
he is thinking of the great world. He writes for men with a position and
how to make the most of it. Nor is the aim he puts before such persons
an entirely selfish one. "The sole advantage of power is that you can do
more good" is the only rational defence of ambition, and Gracian employs
it (Max. cclxxxvi).

Indeed the tone of the book is exceptionally high. It is impossible to
accuse a man of any meanness who is the author of such maxims as—

"One cannot praise a man too much who speaks well of them who speak ill
of him" (clxii).

<span id="page_xxxvii">p. xxxvii</span>

"Friends are a second existence" (cxi).

"When to change the conversation? When they talk scandal" (ccl).

"In great crises there is no better companion than a bold heart"
(clxvii).

"The secret of long life: lead a good life" (xc).

"Be able to boast that if gallantry, generosity, and fidelity were lost
in the world men would be able to find them again in your own breast"
(clxv).

"A man of honour should never forget what he is because he sees what
others are" (cclxxx).

And there are whole sections dealing with such topics as Rectitude
(xxix), Sympathy with great Minds (xliv), a genial Disposition (lxxix),
and the like.

Not that he is without the more subtle devices of the worldly wise. One
could not wish to have anything more cynical or stinging than the
following:—

"Find out each man's thumbscrew" (xxvi).

"A shrewd man knows that others when they seek him do not seek *him*,
but their advantage in him and by him" (cclii).

"The truth, but not the whole truth" (clxxxi).

<span id="page_xxxviii">p. xxxviii</span>

"Keep to yourself the final touches of your art" (ccxii).

"Do not take payment in politeness" (cxci).

"Have a touch of the trader" (ccxxxii).

"Think with the few and speak with the many" (xliii).

"Never have a companion who casts you in the shade" (clii).

"Never become paradoxical in order to avoid the trite" (cxliii). <span
id="fr_12"></span>[1](#fn_12)

"Do not show your wounded finger" (cxlv).

The characteristic of the book is this combination or rather contrast of
high tone and shrewdness. Gracian is both wisely worldly and worldly
wise. After all, there does not seem to be any inherent impossibility in
the combination. There does not seem any radical necessity why a good
man should be a fool. One always has a certain grudge against Thackeray
for making his Colonel Newcome so silly at times, though perhaps the
irony, the pathos, the tragedy of the book required it. As a matter of
fact the holiest of men have been some of the shrewdest, for their
friends at least, if not for themselves.

The explanation of the combination in

<span id="page_xxxix">p. xxxix</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Gracian is simple
enough. He was a Jesuit, and the Jesuits have just that combination of
high tone and worldly wisdom as their *raison d’être*. And in the case
of the *Oráculo* the mixture was easily effected by Gracian or his
friend Lastanosa. For Gracian had written at least two series of works
in which this contrast was represented by separate books. Two of these
describing the qualities of the Hero and the Prudent Man (*El Heroe* and
*El Discreto*) were published and are represented in the
*Oráculo*. <span id="fr_13"></span>[1](#fn_13) Two others dealing with
the Gallant and the Cautious Man (*El Galante* and *El Varon Atento*)
are referred to by Lastanosa in the preface to *El Discreto*, and are
also doubtless represented in the book before us. One may guess that the
section on Highmindedness (cxxviii) or on Nobility of Feeling (cxxxi)
comes from *El Galante*, while "Better mad with the rest of the world
than wise alone" (cxxxiii) smacks of *El Varon Atento*. At times we get
the two tones curiously intermingled: "Choose an heroic ideal" (lxxv)
seems at first sight a noble sentiment, but Gracian goes on to qualify
it by adding, "but rather to emulate than to imitate."

The modernness of the tone is the thing

<span id="page_xl">p. xl</span>

that will strike most readers apart from these contrasts. Here and there
one may be struck by an archaic note. "Never compete" would scarcely be
the advice of a worldly teacher nowadays. But on the whole there is a
tone of modern good society about the maxims which one would scarcely
find in contemporary English works like Peacham's, or even in
contemporary French authors like Charron. The reason is that modern
society is permeated by influences which Gracian himself represented.
The higher education of Europe for the last two and a half centuries has
been in the hands of Jesuits or in schools formed on the *Ratio
Studiorum*. And Society in the stricter sense traces from the Hôtel
Rambouillet, where one-half the influence was Spanish. Gracian thus
directly represents the tone of the two Societies which have set the
tone of our society of to-day, and it is no wonder therefore if he is
modern.

Even in his style there is something of a modern epigrammatic ring. At
times there is the euphuistic quaintness, *e.g.* "One must pass through
the circumference of time before arriving at the centre of opportunity."
But as a rule the terseness and point of the maxim approximate to the
modern epigram. "El

<span id="page_xli">p. xli</span>

escusarse antes de ocasion es culparse "might be both the source and the
model of *Qui s’excuse s’accuse*. The terseness is indeed excessive and
carried to Tacitean extremes. "A poco saber camino real," "Ultima
felicidad el filosofar," "Harto presto, si bien." Gracian jerks out four
or five words where a popular preacher would preach a sermon. Yet I
cannot agree with the writers who call him obscure. He is one of the
writers that make you think before you grasp his meaning, but the
meaning is there, and put plainly enough, only tersely and very often
indirectly, after the manner of proverbs. There is indeed no doubt that
he and his predecessors were influenced by the form of the Spanish
proverb in drawing up aphorisms and maxims. I say predecessors, for
aphorismic literature at any rate was no novelty in Spain. Among the
long list of books on aphorisms possessed by the late Sir William
Stirling-Maxwell, and still at Keir, there are fully a dozen Spanish
ones who precede Gracian(Hernando Diaz, Lopez de Corelas, and Melchior
de Santa Cruz are the most important, though the latter is more full of
anecdotage). Among them is a book of *Aforismos* by Antonio Perez, whose
*Relaciones* has been the chief means of blackening Philip II.'s

<span id="page_xlii">p. xlii</span>

character. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14) The former are
undoubtedly of the same style as Gracian, and probably influenced him,
though, as they are aphorisms and not maxims, I have not been able to
quote parallels in the Notes. Thus "Una obra vale millares de graçias"
(Perez, *Afor.* i. 198) has the same proverbial ring. It is curious to
see Lytton's "The pen is mightier than the sword" anticipated by Perez'
"La pluma corta mas que espadas afiladas" (*ibid.* 199), or Voltaire's
"Speech was given us to conceal our thoughts" in Perez' "Las palabras,
vestido de los conçeptos" (ii. 130). This last example has all Gracian's
terseness, while Perez' "Amigos deste Siglo, rostros humanos, coraçones
de fieras" <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15) (ii. 71) has both
terseness and cynicism. Certainly the only other work in Spanish or any
other literature preceding Gracian on anything like the same lines is
this book of *Aforismos* by Antonio Perez.

It is somewhat of a question, to my mind, how far Gracian was the author
of the final form of the maxims as we have them in the *Oráculo*. Those
taken from *El Heroe* and

<span id="page_xliii">p. xliii</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *El Discreto*
differ from their originals with great advantage. They are terser, more
to the point and less euphuistic. Now the Address to the Reader has all
these qualities, and we may assume was written by its signatory, Don
Vincencio de Lastanosa. It is just possible that we owe to him the
extreme terseness and point of the majority of the maxims of the
*Oráculo Manual*. It must not, however, be assumed that they are all as
pointed and epigrammatic as those I have quoted. Gracian seems advisedly
to have imbedded his jewels in a duller setting. At times he vies with
the leaders of the great sect of the Platitudinarians, and he can be as
banal as he is brilliant. Even as it is, his very brilliancy wearies,
and after fifty maxims or so one longs for a more fruity wisdom, a more
digressive discussion of life like those learned, wise, and witty essays
of Mr. Stevenson, which may some day take higher rank as literature than
even his novels.

Perhaps, after all, the weariness to which I refer may be due to the
cautious tone of the book. To succeed one must be prudent; <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16) that is the great moral of the book, and
if so, does it seem worth while to succeed? If life is to be

<span id="page_xliv">p. xliv</span>

denuded of the aleatory element, is it worth living? Well, Gracian meets
you when in that temper too. It is indeed remarkable how frequently he
refers to luck; how you are to trust your luck, weigh your luck, follow
your luck, know your unlucky days, and so forth. Is all this a
confession that after all life is too complex a game for any rules to be
of much use? Granted, but there is one thing certain about life, and
that is put by Goethe in the lines which I, following
Schopenhauer, <span id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17) have placed at the
head of my translation. One must be either hammer or anvil in this
world, and too great an excess of idealism only means that the unideal
people shall rule the world. To guard against both extremes we have the
paradoxical advice I have heard attributed to Mr. Ruskin, "Fit yourself
for the best society, and then—never enter it."

Whether any ideal person will learn to rule the world by studying
Gracian's or any one else's maxims is somewhat more doubtful, for
reasons I have given above in discussing proverbs. The man who can act
on maxims can act without them, and so does not need them. And there is
the same amount of contradiction

<span id="page_xlv">p. xlv</span>

in maxims as in proverbs. Thus, to quote an example from the book before
us, from Max. cxxxii it would seem best to keep back an intended gift:
"long expected is highest prized"; whereas from Max. ccxxxvi we learn
that "the promptness of the gift obliges the more strongly." Which maxim
are we to act upon? That depends on circumstances, and the judgment that
can decide on the circumstances can do without the maxims. I cannot
therefore promise success in the world to whomsoever may read this book;
otherwise I should perhaps not have published it.

But whether Gracian's maxims are true or useful scarcely affects their
value. To the student of literature as such, the flimsiest sentiment or
the merest paradox aptly put is worth the sublimest truth ill expressed.
And there can be little doubt that Gracian puts his points well and
vigorously. I cannot hope to have reproduced adequately all the vigour
and force of his style, the subtlety of his distinctions, or the
shrewdness of his mother-wit. But enough, I hope, has emerged during the
process of translation to convince the reader that Gracian's *Oráculo
Manual* has much wisdom in small compass and well put.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[xxxvi:1](aww06.htm#fr_11) One of our public
men, I have been told, is known among his friends by the sobriquet of
"Self-help by smiles."

<span id="fn_12"></span>[xxxviii:1](aww06.htm#fr_12) Mr. Oscar Wilde's
attention may be respectfully called to this maxim.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[xxxix:1](aww06.htm#fr_13) See *supra*, [p.
xxi](aww04.htm#page_xxi). and notes.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[xlii:1](aww06.htm#fr_14) On Perez see Mr.
Froude's paper in his *Spanish Story of the Armada*. Perez was over in
England and was of the Sidney set.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[xlii:2](aww06.htm#fr_15) "Friends nowadays,
human faces, hearts of brutes."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[xliii:1](aww06.htm#fr_16) The second title of
the book is *Arte de Prudencia*, which I have adopted as the main title
of my version.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[xliv:1](aww06.htm#fr_17) Gracian was his
favourite author; "Mein Gracian" he called him on one occasion
(*Memorabilien*, p. 505).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Bibliographical Appendix](aww07)
