[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww11)  [Next](aww13) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

c *A Man without Illusions, a wise Christian, a philosophic Courtier*.

Be all these, not merely seem to be them, still less affect to be them.
Philosophy is nowadays discredited, but yet it was always the chiefest
concern of the wise. The art of thinking has lost all its former repute.
Seneca introduced it at Rome: it went to court for some time, but now it
is considered out of place there. And yet the discovery of deceit was
always thought the true nourishment of a thoughtful mind, the true
delight of a virtuous soul.

<span id="page_58">p. 58</span>

ci *One half of the World laughs at the other, and Fools are they all*.

Everything is good or everything is bad according to the votes they
gain. What one pursues another persecutes. He is an in-sufferable ass
that would regulate everything according to his ideas. Excellences do
not depend on a single man's pleasure. So many men, so many tastes, all
different. There is no defect which is not affected by some, nor need we
lose heart if things please not some, for others will appreciate them.
Nor need their applause turn our head, for there will surely be others
to condemn. The real test of praise is the approbation of famous men and
of experts in the matter. You should aim to be independent of any one
vote, of any one fashion, of any one century.

cii *Be able to stomach big slices of Luck*.

In the body of wisdom not the least important organ is a big stomach,
for great capacity implies great parts. Big bits of luck do not
embarrass one who can digest still bigger ones. What is a surfeit for
one may be hunger for another. Many are troubled as it were with weak
digestion, owing to their small capacity

<span id="page_59">p. 59</span>

being neither born nor trained for great employment. Their actions turn
sour, and the humours that arise from their undeserved honours turn
their head and they incur great risks in high place: they do not find
their proper place, for luck finds no proper place in them. A man of
talent therefore should show that he has more room for even greater
enterprises, and above all avoid showing signs of a little heart.

viii *Let each keep up his Dignity*.

Let each deed of a man in its degree, though he be not a king, be worthy
of a prince, and let his action be princely within due limits. Sublime
in action, lofty in thought, in all things like a king, at least in
merit if not in might. For true kingship lies in spotless rectitude, and
he need not envy greatness who can serve as a model of it. Especially
should those near the throne aim at true superiority, and prefer to
share the true qualities of royalty rather than take parts in its mere
ceremonies, yet without affecting its imperfections but sharing in its
true dignity.

civ *Try your hand at Office*.

It requires varied qualities, and to know which is needed taxes
attention and calls for masterly

<span id="page_60">p. 60</span>

discernment. Some demand courage, others tact. Those that merely require
rectitude are the easiest, the most difficult those requiring
cleverness. For the former all that is necessary is character; for the
latter all one's attention and zeal may not suffice. ’Tis a troublesome
business to rule men, still more fools or blockheads: double sense is
needed with those who have none. It is intolerable when an office
engrosses a man with fixed hours and a settled routine. Those are better
that leave a man free to follow his own devices, combining variety with
importance, for the change refreshes the mind. The most in repute are
those that have least or most distant dependence on others; the worst is
that which worries us both here and hereafter.

cv *Don't be a Bore*.

The man of one business or of one topic is apt to be heavy. Brevity
flatters and does better business; it gains by courtesy what it loses by
curtness. Good things, when short, are twice as good. The quintessence
of the matter is more effective than a whole farrago of details. It is a
well-known truth that talkative folk rarely have much sense whether in
dealing with the matter itself or its formal

<span id="page_61">p. 61</span>

treatment. There are that serve more for stumbling-stones than
centrepieces, useless lumber in every one's way. The wise avoid being
bores, especially to the great, who are fully occupied: it is worse to
disturb one of them than all the rest. Well said is soon said.

cvi *Do not parade your Position*.

To outshine in dignity is more offensive than in personal attractions.
To pose as a personage is to be hated: envy is surely enough. The more
you seek esteem the less you obtain it, for it depends on the opinion of
others. You cannot take it, but must earn and receive it from others.
Great positions require an amount of authority sufficient to make them
efficient: without it they cannot be adequately filled. Preserve
therefore enough dignity to carry on the duties of the office. Do not
enforce respect, but try and create it. Those who insist on the dignity
of their office, show they have not deserved it, and that it is too much
for them. If you wish to be valued, be valued for your talents, not for
anything adventitious. Even kings prefer to be honoured for their
personal qualifications rather than for their station.

<span id="page_62">p. 62</span>

cvii *Show no Self-satisfactio*n.

You must neither be discontented with yourself—and that were
poor-spirited—nor self-satisfied—and that is folly. Self-satisfaction
arises mostly from ignorance: it would be a happy ignorance not without
its advantages if it did not injure our credit. Because a man cannot
achieve the superlative perfections of others, he contents himself with
any mediocre talent of his own. Distrust is wise, and even useful,
either to evade mishaps or to afford consolation when they come, for a
misfortune cannot surprise a man who has already feared it. Even Homer
nods at times, and Alexander fell from his lofty state and out of his
illusions. Things depend on many circumstances: what constitutes triumph
in one set may cause a defeat in another. In the midst of all
incorrigible folly remains the same with empty self-satisfaction,
blossoming, flowering, and running all to seed.

cviii *The Path to Greatness is along with Others*.

Intercourse works well: manners and taste are shared: good sense and
even talent grow insensibly. Let the sanguine man then make a comrade of
the lymphatic, and so with the other

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

temperaments, so that without any forcing the golden mean is obtained.
It is a great art to agree with others. The alternation of contraries
beautifies and sustains the world: if it can cause harmony in the
physical world, still more can it do so in the moral. Adopt this policy
in the choice of friends and defendants; by joining extremes the more
effective middle way is found.

cix *Be not Censorious*.

There are men of gloomy character who regard everything as faulty, not
from any evil motive but because it is their nature to. They condemn
all: these for what they have done, those for what they will do. This
indicates a nature worse than cruel, vile Indeed. They accuse with such
exaggeration that they make out of motes beams wherewith to force out
the eyes. They are always taskmasters who could turn a paradise into a
prison; if passion intervenes they drive matters to the extreme. A noble
nature, on the contrary, always knows how to find an excuse for
failings, if not in the intention, at least from oversight.

cx *Do not wait till you are a Sinking Sun*.

’Tis a maxim of the wise to leave things

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

before things leave them. One should be able to snatch a triumph at the
end, just as the sun even at its brightest often retires behind a cloud
so as not to be seen sinking, and to leave in doubt whether he has sunk
or no. Wisely withdraw from the chance of mishaps, lest you have to do
so from the reality Do not wait till they turn you the cold shoulder and
carry you to the grave, alive in feeling but dead in esteem. Wise
trainers put racers to grass before they arouse derision by falling on
the course. A beauty should break her mirror early, lest she do so later
with open eyes.

cxi *Have Friends*.

’Tis a second existence. Every friend is good and wise for his friend:
among them all everything turns to good. Every one is as others wish
him; that they may wish him well, he must win their hearts and so their
tongues. There is no magic like a good turn, and the way to gain
friendly feelings is to do friendly acts. The most and best of us depend
on others; we have to live either among friends or among enemies. Seek
some one every day to be a well-wisher if not a friend; by and by after
trial some of these will become intimate.

<span id="page_65">p. 65</span>

cxii *Gain Good-will*.

For thus the first and highest cause foresees and furthers the greatest
objects. By gaining their good-will you gain men's good opinion. Some
trust so much to merit that they neglect grace, but wise men know that
Service Road without a lift from favour is a long way indeed. Good-will
facilitates and supplies everything: is supposes gifts or even supplies
them, as courage, zeal, knowledge, or even discretion; whereas defects
it will not see because it does not search for them. It arises from some
common interest, either material, as disposition, nationality,
relationship, fatherland, office; or formal, which is of a higher kind
of communion, in capacity, obligation, reputation, or merit. The whole
difficulty is to gain good-will; to keep it is easy. It has, however, to
be sought for, and, when found, to be utilised.

cxiii *In Prosperity prepare for Adversity*.

It is both wiser and easier to collect winter stores in summer. In
prosperity favours are cheap and friends are many. ’Tis well therefore
to keep them for more unlucky days, for adversity costs dear and has no
helpers. Retain a store of friendly and obliged persons; the

<span id="page_66">p. 66</span>

day may come when their price will go up. Low minds never have friends;
in luck they will not recognise them: in misfortune they will not be
recognised by them.

cxiv *Never Compete*.

Every competition damages the credit: our rivals seize occasion to
obscure us so as to out-shine us. Few wage honourable war. Rivalry
discloses faults which courtesy would hide. Many have lived in good
repute while they had no rivals. The heat of conflict gives life, or
even new life, to dead scandals, and digs up long-buried skeletons.
Competition begins with belittling, and seeks aid wherever it can, not
only where it ought. And when the weapons of abuse do not effect their
purpose, as often or mostly happens, our opponents use them for revenge,
and use them at least for beating away the dust of oblivion from
anything to our discredit. Men of good-will are always at peace; men of
good repute and dignity are men of good-will.

cxv *Get used to the Failings of your Familiars*,

as you do to ugly faces. It is indispensable if they depend on us, or we
on them. There

<span id="page_67">p. 67</span>

are wretched characters with whom one cannot live, nor yet without them.
Therefore clever folk get used to them, as to ugly faces, so that they
are not obliged to do so suddenly under the pressure of necessity. At
first they arouse disgust, but gradually they lose this influence, and
reflection provides for disgust or puts up with it.

cxvi *Only act with Honourable Men*.

You can trust them and they you. Their honour is the best surety of
their behaviour even in misunderstandings, for they always act having
regard to what they are. Hence ’tis better to have a dispute with
honourable people than to have a victory over dishonourable ones. You
cannot treat with the ruined, for they have no hostages for rectitude.
With them there is no true friendship, and their agreements are not
binding, however stringent they may appear, because they have no feeling
of honour. Never have to do with such men, for if honour does not
restrain a man, virtue will not, since honour is the throne of
rectitude.

cxvii *Never talk of Yourself*.

You must either praise yourself, which is vain, or blame yourself, which
is little-minded:

<span id="page_68">p. 68</span>

it ill beseems him that speaks, and ill pleases him that hears. And if
you should avoid this in ordinary conversation, how much more in
official matters, and above all, in public speaking, where every
appearance of unwisdom really is unwise. The same want of tact lies in
speaking of a man in his presence, owing to the danger of going to one
of two extremes: flattery or censure.

cxviii *Acquire the Reputation of Courtesy*;

for it is enough to make you liked. Politeness is the main ingredient of
culture,—a kind of witchery that wins the regard of all as surely as
discourtesy gains their disfavour and opposition; if this latter springs
from pride, it is abominable; if from bad breeding, it is despicable.
Better too much courtesy than too little, provided it be not the same
for all, which degenerates into injustice. Between opponents it is
especially due as a proof of valour. It costs little and helps much:
every one is honoured who gives honour. Politeness and honour have this
advantage, that they remain with him who displays them to others.

<span id="page_69">p. 69</span>

cxix *Avoid becoming Disliked*.

There is no occasion to seek dislike: it comes without seeking quickly
enough. There are many who hate of their own accord without knowing the
why or the how. Their ill-will outruns our readiness to please. Their
ill-nature is more prone to do others harm than their cupidity is eager
to gain advantage for themselves. Some manage to be on bad terms with
all, because they always either produce or experience vexation of
spirit. Once hate has taken root it is, like bad repute, difficult to
eradicate. Wise men are feared, the malevolent are abhorred, the
arrogant are regarded with disdain, buffoons with contempt, eccentrics
with neglect. Therefore pay respect that you may be respected, and know
that to be esteemed you must show esteem.

cxx *Live Practically*.

Even knowledge has to be in the fashion, and where it is not it is wise
to affect ignorance. Thought and taste change with the times. Do not be
old-fashioned in your ways of thinking, and let your taste be in the
modern style. In everything the taste of the many carries the votes; for
the time being

<span id="page_70">p. 70</span>

one must follow it in the hope of leading it to higher things. In the
adornment of the body as of the mind adapt yourself to the present, even
though the past appear better. But this rule does not apply to kindness,
for goodness is for all time. It is neglected nowadays and seems out of
date. Truth-speaking, keeping your word, and so too good people, seem to
come from the good old times: yet they are liked for all that, but in
such a way that even when they all exist they are not in the fashion and
are not imitated. What a misfortune for our age that it regards virtue
as a stranger and vice as a matter of course! If you are wise, live as
you can, if you cannot live as you would. Think more highly of what fate
has given you than of what it has denied.

cxxi *Do not make a Business of what is no Business*.

As some make gossip out of everything, so others business. They always
talk big, take everything in earnest, and turn it into a dispute or a
secret. Troublesome things must not be taken too seriously if they can
be avoided. It is preposterous to take to heart that which you should
throw over your shoulders. Much that would be something has become
nothing by

<span id="page_71">p. 71</span>

being left alone, and what was nothing has become of consequence by
being made much of. At the outset things can be easily settled, but not
afterwards. Often the remedy causes the disease. ’Tis by no means the
least of life's rules: to let things alone.

cxxii *Distinction in Speech and Action*.

By this you gain a position in many places and carry esteem beforehand.
It shows itself in everything, in talk, in look, even in gait. It is a
great victory to conquer men's hearts: it does not arise from any
foolish presumption or pompous talk, but in a becoming tone of authority
born of superior talent combined with true merit.

cxxiii *Avoid Affectatio*n.

The more merit, the less affectation, which gives a vulgar flavour to
all. It is wearisome to others and troublesome to the one affected, for
he becomes a martyr to care and tortures himself with attention. The
most eminent merits lose most by it, for they appear proud and
artificial instead of being the product of nature, and the natural is
always more pleasing than the artificial. One always feels sure that

<span id="page_72">p. 72</span>

the man who affects a virtue has it not. The more pains you take with a
thing, the more should you conceal them, so that it may appear to arise
spontaneously from your own natural character. Do not, however, in
avoiding affectation fall into it by affecting to be unaffected. The
sage never seems to know his own merits, for only by not noticing them
can you call others' attention to them. He is twice great who has all
the perfections in the opinion of all except of himself; he attains
applause by two opposite paths.

cxxiv *Get Yourself missed*.

Few reach such favour with the many; if with the wise ’tis the height of
happiness. When one has finished one's work, coldness is the general
rule. But there are ways of earning this reward of goodwill. The sure
way is to excel in your office and talents: add to this agreeable manner
and you reach the point where you become necessary to your office, not
your office to you. Some do honour to their post, with others ’tis the
other way. It is no great gain if a poor successor makes the predecessor
seem good, for this does not imply that the one is missed, but that the
other is wished away.

<span id="page_73">p. 73</span>

cxxv *Do not be a Black List*.

It is a sign of having a tarnished name to concern oneself with the
ill-fame of others. Some wish to hide their own stains with those of
others, or at least wash them away: or they seek consolation
therein—’tis the consolation of fools. They must have bad breath who
form the sewers of scandal for the whole town. The more one grubs about
in such matters, the more one befouls oneself. There are few without
stain somewhere or other, but it is of little known people that the
failings are little known. Be careful then to avoid being a registrar of
faults. That is to be an abominable thing, a man that lives without a
heart.

cxxvi *Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in not hiding it when
committed*.

You should keep your desires sealed up, still more your defects. All go
wrong sometimes, but the wise try to hide the errors, but fools boast of
them. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is done; if
a man does not live chastely, he must live cautiously. The errors of
great men are like the eclipses of the greater lights. Even in
friendship it is rare to expose one's failings

<span id="page_74">p. 74</span>

to one's friend. Nay, one should conceal them from oneself if one can.
But here one can help with that other great rule of life: learn to
forget.

cxxvii *Grace in Everything*.

’Tis the life of talents, the breath of speech, the soul of action, and
the ornament of ornament. Perfections are the adornment of our nature,
but this is the adornment of perfection itself. It shows itself even in
the thoughts. ’Tis most a gift of nature and owes least to education; it
even triumphs over training. It is more than ease, approaches the free
and easy, gets over embarrassment, and adds the finishing touch to
perfection. Without it beauty is lifeless, graciousness ungraceful: it
surpasses valour, discretion, prudence, even majesty it-self. ’Tis a
short way to dispatch and an easy escape from embarrassment.

cxxviii *Highmindedness*.

One of the principal qualifications for a gentleman, for it spurs on to
all kinds of nobility. It improves the taste, ennobles the heart,
elevates the mind, refines the feelings, and intensifies dignity. It
raises him in whom

<span id="page_75">p. 75</span>

it is found, and at times remedies the bad turns of Fortune, which only
raises by striking. It can find full scope in the will when it cannot be
exercised in act. Magnanimity, generosity, and all heroic qualities
recognise in it their source.

cxxix *Never complain*.

To complain always brings discredit. Better be a model of self-reliance
opposed to the passion of others than an object of their compassion. For
it opens the way for the hearer to what we are complaining of, and to
disclose one insult forms an excuse for another. By complaining of past
offences we give occasion for future ones, and in seeking aid or counsel
we only obtain indifference or contempt. It is much more politic to
praise one man's favours, so that others may feel obliged to follow
suit. To recount the favours we owe the absent is to demand similar ones
from the present, and thus we sell our credit with the one to the other.
The shrewd will therefore never publish to the world his failures or his
defects, but only those marks of consideration which serve to keep
friendship alive and enmity silent.

<span id="page_76">p. 76</span>

cxxx *Do and be seen Doing*.

Things do not pass for what they are but for what they seem. To be of
use and to know how to show yourself of use, is to be twice as useful.
What is not seen is as if it was not. Even the Right does not receive
proper consideration if it does not seem right. The observant are far
fewer in number than those who are deceived by appearances. Deceit rules
the roast, and things are judged by their jackets, and many things are
other than they seem. A good exterior is the best recommendation of the
inner perfection.

cxxxi *Nobility of Feeling*.

There is a certain distinction of the soul, a highmindedness prompting
to gallant acts, that gives an air of grace to the whole character. It
is not found often, for it presupposes great magnanimity. Its chief
characteristic is to speak well of an enemy, and to act even better
to-wards him. It shines brightest when a chance comes of revenge: not
alone does it let the occasion pass, but it improves it by using a
complete victory in order to display unexpected generosity. ’Tis a fine
stroke of policy, nay, the very acme of statecraft. It makes no pretence

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

to victory, for it pretends to nothing, and while obtaining its deserts
it conceals its merits.

cxxxii *Revise your Judgments*.

To appeal to an inner Court of Revision makes things safe. Especially
when the course of action is not clear, you gain time either to confirm
or improve your decision. It affords new grounds for strengthening or
corroborating your judgment. And if it is a matter of giving, the gift
is the more valued from its being evidently well considered than for
being promptly bestowed: long expected is highest prized. And if you
have to deny, you gain time to decide how and when to mature the No that
it may be made palatable. Besides, after the first heat of desire is
passed the repulse of refusal is felt less keenly in cold blood. But
especially when men press for a reply is it best to defer it, for as
often as not that is only a feint to disarm attention.

cxxxiii *Better Mad with the rest of the World than Wise alone*.

So say politicians. If all are so, one is no worse off than the rest,
whereas solitary wisdom passes for folly. So important is it to sail
with

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

the stream. The greatest wisdom often consists in ignorance, or the
pretence of it. One has to live with others, and others are mostly
ignorant. "To live entirely alone one must be very like a god or quite
like a wild beast," but I would turn the aphorism by saying: Better be
wise with the many than a fool all alone. There be some too who seek to
be original by seeking chimeras.

cxxxiv *Double your Resources*.

You thereby double your life. One must not depend on one thing or trust
to only one resource, however pre-eminent. Everything should be kept
double, especially the causes of success, of favour, or of esteem. The
moon's mutability transcends everything and gives a limit to all
existence, especially of things dependent on human will, the most
brittle of all things. To guard against this inconstancy should be the
sage's care, and for this the chief rule of life is to keep a double
store of good and useful qualities. Thus as Nature gives us in duplicate
the most important of our limbs and those most exposed to risk, so Art
should deal with the qualities on which we depend for success.

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

cxxxv *Do not nourish the Spirit of Contradiction*.

It only proves you foolish or peevish, and prudence should guard against
this strenuously. To find difficulties in everything may prove you
clever, but such wrangling writes you down a fool. Such folk make a
mimic war out of the most pleasant conversation, and in this way act as
enemies towards their associates rather than towards those with whom
they do not consort. Grit grates most in delicacies, and so does
contradiction in amusement. They are both foolish and cruel who yoke
together the wild beast and the tame.

cxxxvi *Post Yourself in the Centre of Things*.

So you feel the pulse of affairs. Many lose their way either in the
ramifications of useless discussion or in the brushwood of wearisome
verbosity without ever realising the real matter at issue. They go over
a single point a hundred times, wearying themselves and others, and yet
never touch the all-important centre of affairs. This comes from a
confusion of mind from which they cannot extricate themselves. They
waste time and patience on matters they should leave alone, and cannot
spare them afterwards for what they have left alone.

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

cxxxvii *The Sage should be Self-sufficing*.

He that was all in all to himself carried all with him when he carried
himself. If a universal friend can represent to us Rome and the rest of
the world, let a man be his own universal friend, and then he is in a
position to live alone. Whom could such a man want if there is no
clearer intellect or finer taste than his own? He would then depend on
himself alone, which is the highest happiness and like the Supreme
Being. He that can live alone resembles the brute beast in nothing, the
sage in much and God in everything.

cxxxviii *The Art of letting Things alone*.

The more so the wilder the waves of public or of private life. There are
hurricanes in human affairs, tempests of passion, when it is wise to
retire to a harbour and ride at anchor. Remedies often make diseases
worse: in such cases one has to leave them to their natural course and
the moral suasion of time. It takes a wise doctor to know when not to
prescribe, and at times the greater skill consists in not applying
remedies. The proper way to still the storms of the vulgar is to hold
your hand and let them calm down of themselves. To

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

give way now is to conquer by and by. A fountain gets muddy with but
little stirring up, and does not get clear by our meddling with it but
by our leaving it alone. The best remedy for disturbances is to let them
run their course, for so they quiet down.

cxxxix *Recognise unlucky Days*.

They exist: nothing goes well on them; even though the game may be
changed the ill-luck remains. Two tries should be enough to tell if one
is in luck to-day or not. Everything is in process of change, even the
mind, and no one is always wise: chance has something to say, even how
to write a good letter. All perfection turns on the time; even beauty
has its hours. Even wisdom fails at times by doing too much or too
little. To turn out well a thing must be done on its own day. This is
why with some everything turns out ill, with others all goes well, even
with less trouble. They find everything ready, their wit prompt, their
presiding genius favourable, their lucky star in the ascendant. At such
times one must seize the occasion and not throw away the slightest
chance. But a shrewd person will not decide on the day's

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

luck by a single piece of good or bad fortune, for the one may be only a
lucky chance and the other only a slight annoyance.

cxl *Find the Good in a Thing at once*.

’Tis the advantage of good taste. The bee goes to the honey for her
comb, the serpent to the gall for its venom. So with taste: some seek
the good, others the ill. There is nothing that has no good in it,
especially in books, as giving food for thought. But many have such a
scent that amid a thousand excellences they fix upon a single defect,
and single it out for blame as if they were scavengers of men's minds
and hearts. So they draw up a balance sheet of defects which does more
credit to their bad taste than to their intelligence. They lead a sad
life, nourishing themselves on bitters and battening on garbage. They
have the luckier taste who midst a thousand defects seize upon a single
beauty they may have hit upon by chance.

cxli *Do not listen to Yourself*.

It is no use pleasing yourself if you do not please others, and as a
rule general contempt is the punishment for self-satisfaction. The

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

attention you pay to yourself you probably owe to others. To speak and
at the same time listen to yourself cannot turn out well. If to talk to
oneself when alone is folly, it must be doubly unwise to listen to
oneself in the presence of others. It is a weakness of the great to talk
with a recurrent "as I was saying" and "eh?" which bewilders their
hearers. At every sentence they look for applause or flattery, taxing
the patience of the wise. So too the pompous speak with an echo, and as
their talk can only totter on with the aid of stilts, at every word they
need the support of a stupid "bravo!"

cxlii *Never from Obstinacy take the Wrong Side because your Opponent
has anticipated you in taking the Right One*.

You begin the fight already beaten and must soon take to flight in
disgrace. With bad weapons one can never win. It was astute in the
opponent to seize the better side first: it would be folly to come
lagging after with the worst. Such obstinacy is more dangerous in
actions than in words, for action encounters more risk than talk. ’Tis
the common failing of the obstinate that they lose the true by
contradicting it, and the useful by

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

quarrelling with it. The sage never places himself on the side of
passion, but espouses the cause of right, either discovering it first or
improving it later. If the enemy is a fool, he will in such a case turn
round to follow the opposite and worse way. Thus the only way to drive
him from the better course is to take it yourself, for his folly will
cause him to desert it, and his obstinacy be punished for so doing.

cxliii *Never become Paradoxical in order to avoid the Trite*.

Both extremes damage our reputation. Every undertaking which differs
from the reasonable approaches foolishness. The paradox is a cheat: it
wins applause at first by its novelty and piquancy, but afterwards it
becomes discredited when the deceit is fore-seen and its emptiness
becomes apparent. It is a species of jugglery, and in matters political
would be the ruin of states. Those who cannot or dare not reach great
deeds on the direct road of excellence go round by way of Paradox,
admired by fools but making wise men true prophets. It argues an
unbalanced judgment, and if it is not

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

altogether based on the false, it is certainly founded on the uncertain,
and risks the weightier matters of life.

cxliv *Begin with Another's to end with your Own*.

’Tis a politic means to your end. Even in heavenly matters Christian
teachers lay stress on this holy cunning. It is a weighty piece of
dissimulation, for the foreseen advantages serve as a lure to influence
the other's will. His affair seems to be in train when it is really only
leading the way for another's. One should never advance unless under
cover, especially where the ground is dangerous. Likewise with persons
who always say No at first, it is useful to ward off this blow, because
the difficulty of conceding much more does not occur to them when your
version is presented to them. This advice belongs to the rule about
second thoughts \[xiii\], which covers the most subtle manœuvres of
life.

cxlv *Do not show your wounded Finger*,

for everything will knock up against it; nor complain about it, for
malice always aims where weakness can be injured. It is no use to be
vexed: being the butt of the talk will only vex

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

you the more. Ill-will searches for wounds to irritate, aims darts to
try the temper, and tries a thousand ways to sting to the quick. The
wise never own to being hit, or disclose any evil, whether personal or
hereditary. For even Fate sometimes likes to wound us where we are most
tender. It always mortifies wounded flesh. Never therefore disclose the
source of mortification or of joy, if you wish the one to cease, the
other to endure.

cxlvi *Look into the Interior of Things*.

Things are generally other than they seem, and ignorance that never
looks beneath the rind becomes disabused when you show the kernel. Lies
always come first, dragging fools along by their irreparable vulgarity.
Truth always lags last, limping along on the arm of Time. The wise
therefore reserve for it the other half of that power which the common
mother has wisely given in duplicate. Deceit is very superficial, and
the superficial therefore easily fall into it. Prudence lives retired
within its recesses, visited only by sages and wise men.

cxlvii *Do not be Inaccessible*.

None is so perfect that he does not need

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

at times the advice of others. He is an in-corrigible ass who will never
listen to any one. Even the most surpassing intellect should find a
place for friendly counsel. Sovereignty itself must learn to lean. There
are some that are incorrigible simply because they are
[inaccessible](errata.htm#7): they fall to ruin because none dares to
extricate them. The highest should have the door open for friendship; it
may prove the gate of help. A friend must be free to advise, and even to
upbraid, without feeling embarrassed. Our satisfaction in him and our
trust in his steadfast faith give him that power. One need not pay
respect or give credit to every one, but in the innermost of his
precaution man has a true mirror of a confidant to whom he owes the
correction of his errors, and has to thank for it.

cxlviii *Have the Art of Conversation*.

That is where the real personality shows itself. No act in life requires
more attention, though it be the commonest thing in life. You must
either lose or gain by it. If it needs care to write a letter which is
but a deliberate and written conversation, how much more the ordinary
kind in which there

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

is occasion for a prompt display of intelligence? Experts feel the pulse
of the soul in the tongue, wherefore the sage said, "Speak, that I may
know thee." Some hold that the art of conversation is to be without
art—that it should be neat, not gaudy, like the garments. This holds
good for talk between friends. But when held with persons to whom one
would show respect, it should be more dignified to answer to the dignity
of the person addressed. To be appropriate it should adapt itself to the
mind and tone of the interlocutor. And do not be a critic of words, or
you will be taken for a pedant; nor a taxgatherer of ideas, or men will
avoid you, or at least sell their thoughts dear. in conversation
discretion is more important than eloquence.

cxlix *Know how to put off Ills on Others*.

To have a shield against ill-will is a great piece of skill in a ruler.
It is not the resort of incapacity, as ill-wishers imagine, but is due
to the higher policy of having some one to receive the censure of the
disaffected and the punishment of universal detestation. Everything
cannot turn out well, nor can every one be satisfied: it is well
therefore, even at the

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

cost of our pride, to have such a scapegoat, such a target for unlucky
undertakings.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 150-199](aww13)
