[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aww14)  [Next](aww16) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002A9JOQK/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Art of Worldly Wisdom*, by Balthasar Gracian, tr. by Joseph Jacobs,
\[1892\], at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

ccl *When to change the Conversation*.

When they talk scandal. With some all goes contrariwise: their No is
Yes, and their Yes No. If they speak ill of a thing it is the highest
praise. For what they want for them-selves they depreciate to others. To
praise a thing is not always to speak well of it, for some, to avoid
praising what's good, praise what's bad, and nothing is good for him for
whom nothing is bad.

ccli *Use human Means as if there were no divine ones, and divine as if
there were no human ones*.

A masterly rule: it needs no comment.

cclii *Neither belong entirely to Yourself nor entirely to Others*.

Both are mean forms of tyranny. To desire to be all for oneself is the
same as desiring to

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

have all for oneself. Such persons will not yield a jot or lose a tittle
of their comfort. They are rarely beholden, lean on their own luck, and
their crutch generally breaks. It is convenient at times to belong to
others, that others may belong to us. And he that holds public office is
no more nor less than a public slave, or let a man give up both berth
and burthen, as the old woman said to Hadrian. On the other hand, others
are all for others, which is folly, that always flies to extremes, in
this case in a most unfortunate manner. No day, no hour, is their own,
but they have so much too much of others that they may be called the
slaves of all. This applies even to knowledge, where a man may know
everything for others and nothing for himself. A shrewd man knows that
others when they seek him do not seek *him*, but their advantage in him
and by him.

ccliii *Do not Explain overmuch*.

Most men do not esteem what they understand, and venerate what they do
not see. To be valued things should cost dear: what is not understood
becomes overrated. You have to appear wiser and more prudent than he

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

requires with whom you deal, if you desire to give him a high opinion of
you: yet in this there should be moderation and no excess. And though
with sensible people common sense holds its own, with most men a little
elaboration is necessary. Give them no time for blame: occupy them with
understanding your drift. Many praise a thing without being able to tell
why, if asked. The reason is that they venerate the unknown as a
mystery, and praise it because they hear it praised.

ccliv *Never despise an Evil, however small*,

for they never come alone: they are linked together like pieces of good
fortune. Fortune and misfortune generally go to find their fellows.
Hence all avoid the unlucky and associate with the fortunate. Even the
doves with all their innocence resort to the whitest walls. Everything
fails with the unfortunate—himself, his words, and his luck. Do not wake
Misfortune when she sleeps. One slip is a little thing: yet some fatal
loss may follow it till you do not know where it will end. For just as
no happiness is perfect, so no ill-luck is complete. Patience serves
with what comes from above; prudence with that from below.

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

cclv *Do Good a little at a time, but often*.

One should never give beyond the possibility of return. Who gives much
does not give but sells. Nor drain gratitude to the dregs, for when the
recipient sees all return is impossible he breaks off correspondence.
With many persons it is not necessary to do more than overburden them
with favours to lose them altogether: they cannot repay you, and so they
retire, preferring rather to be enemies than perpetual debtors. The idol
never wishes to see before him the sculptor who shaped him, nor does the
benefited wish to see his benefactor always before his eyes. There is a
great subtlety in giving what costs little yet is much desired, so that
it is esteemed the more.

cclvi *Go armed against Discourtesy*,

and against perfidy, presumption, and all other kinds of folly. There is
much of it in the world, and prudence lies in avoiding a meeting with
it. Arm yourself each day before the mirror of attention with the
weapons of defence. Thus you will beat down the attacks of folly. Be
prepared for the occasion, and do not expose your reputation

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

to vulgar contingencies. Armed with prudence, a man cannot be disarmed
by impertinence. The road of human intercourse is difficult, for it is
full of ruts which may jolt our credit. Best to take a byway, taking
Ulysses as a model of shrewdness. Feigned misunderstanding is of great
value in such matters. Aided by politeness it helps us over all, and is
often the only way out of difficulties.

cclvii *Never let Matters come to a Rupture*,

for our reputation always comes injured out of the encounter. Every one
may be of importance as an enemy if not as a friend. Few can do us good,
almost any can do us harm. In Jove's bosom itself even his eagle never
nestles securely from the day he has quarrelled with a beetle. Hidden
foes use the paw of the declared enemy to stir up the fire, and
meanwhile they lie in ambush for such an occasion. Friends provoked
become the bitterest of enemies. They cover their own failings with the
faults of others. Every one speaks as things seem to him, and things
seem as he wishes them to appear. All blame us at the beginning for want
of foresight, at the end for lack of patience, at all times for

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

imprudence. If, however, a breach is inevitable, let it be rather
excused as a slackening of friendship than by an outburst of wrath: here
is a good application of the saying about a good retreat.

cclviii *Find out some one to share your Troubles*.

You will never be all alone, even in dangers, nor bear all the burden of
hate. Some think by their high position to carry off the whole glory of
success, and have to bear the whole humiliation of defeat. In this way
they have none to excuse them, none to share the blame. Neither fate nor
the mob are so bold against two. Hence the wise physician, if he has
failed to cure, looks out for some one who, under the name of a
consultation, may help him carry out, the corpse. Share weight and woe,
for misfortune falls with double force on him that stands alone.

cclix *Anticipate Injuries and turn them into Favours*.

It is wiser to avoid than to revenge them. It is an uncommon piece of
shrewdness to change a rival into a confidant, or transform into guards
of honour those who were aiming

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

attacks at us. It helps much to know how to oblige, for he leaves no
time for injuries that fills it up with gratitude. That is true *savoir
faire* to turn anxieties into pleasures. Try and make a confidential
relation out of ill-will itself.

cclx *We belong to none and none to us, entirely*.

Neither relationship nor friendship nor the most intimate connection is
sufficient to effect this. To give one's whole confidence is quite
different from giving one's regard. The closest intimacy has its
exceptions, without which the laws of friendship would be broken. The
friend always keeps one secret to himself, and even the son always hides
something from his father. Some things are kept from one that are
revealed to another and *vice versâ*. In this way one reveals all and
conceals all, by making a distinction among the persons with whom we are
connected.

cclxi *Do not follow up a Folly*.

Many make an obligation out of a blunder, and because they have entered
the wrong path think it proves their strength of character to go on in
it. Within they regret their error, while

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

outwardly they excuse it. At the beginning of their mistake they were
regarded as inattentive, in the end as fools. Neither an unconsidered
promise nor a mistaken resolution are really binding. Yet some continue
in their folly and prefer to be constant fools.

cclxii *Be able to Forget*.

It is more a matter of luck than of skill. The things we remember best
are those better for-gotten. Memory is not only unruly, leaving us in
the lurch when most needed, but stupid as well, putting its nose into
places where it is not wanted. In painful things it is active, but
neglectful in recalling the pleasurable. Very often the only remedy for
the ill is to forget it, and all we forget is the remedy. Nevertheless
one should cultivate good habits of memory, for it is capable of making
existence a Paradise or an Inferno. The happy are an exception who enjoy
innocently their simple happiness.

cclxiii *Many things of Taste one should not possess oneself*.

One enjoys them better if another's than if one's own. The owner has the
good of them the first day, for all the rest of the time they

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

are for others. You take a double enjoyment in other men's property,
being without fear of spoiling it and with the pleasure of novelty.
Everything tastes better for having been without it: even water from
another's well tastes like nectar. Possession not alone hinders
enjoyment: it increases annoyance whether you lend or keep. You gain
nothing except keeping things for or from others, and by this means gain
more enemies than friends.

cclxiv *Have no careless Days*.

Fate loves to play tricks, and will heap up chances to catch us
unawares. Our intelligence, prudence, and courage, even our beauty, must
always be ready for trial. For their day of careless trust will be that
of their discredit. Care always fails just when it was most wanted. It
is thoughtlessness that trips us up into destruction. Accordingly it is
a piece of military strategy to put perfection to its trial when
unprepared. The days of parade are known and are allowed to pass by, but
the day is chosen when least expected so as to put valour to the
severest test.

cclxv *Set those under you difficult Task*,

Many have proved themselves able at once

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

when they had to deal with a difficulty, just as fear of drowning makes
a swimmer of a man, In this way many have discovered their own courage,
knowledge, or tact, which but for the opportunity would have been for
ever buried beneath their want of enterprise. Dangers are the occasions
to create a name for oneself; and if a noble mind sees honour at stake,
he will do the work of thousands. Queen Isabella the Catholic knew well
this rule of life, as well as all the others, and to a shrewd favour of
this kind from her the Great Captain won his fame, and many others
earned an undying name. By this great art she made great men.

cclxvi *Do not become Bad from sheer Goodness*.

That is, by never getting into a temper. Such men without feeling are
scarcely to be considered men. It does not always arise from laziness,
but from sheer inability. To feel strongly on occasion is something
personal: birds soon mock at the mawkin. It is a sign of good taste to
combine bitter and sweet. All sweets is diet for children and fools. It
is very bad to sink into such insensibility out of very goodness.

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

cclxvii *Silken Words, sugared Manners*.

Arrows pierce the body, insults the soul. Sweet pastry perfumes the
breath. It is a great art in life to know how to sell wind. Most things
are paid for in words, and by them you can remove impossibilities. Thus
we deal in air, and a royal breath can produce courage and power. Always
have your mouth full of sugar to sweeten your words, so that even your
ill-wishers enjoy them. To please one must be peaceful.

cclxviii *The Wise do at once what the Fool does at last*.

Both do the same thing; the only difference lies in the time they do it:
the one at the right time, the other at the wrong. Who starts out with
his mind topsyturvy will so continue till the end. He catches by the
foot what he ought to knock on the head, he turns right into left, and
in all his acts is but a child. There is only one way to get him in the
right way, and that is to force him to do what he might have done of his
own accord. The wise man, on the other hand, sees at once what must be
done sooner or later, so he does it willingly and gains honour thereby,

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

cclxix *Make use of the Novelty of your Position*;

for men are valued while they are new. Novelty pleases all because it is
uncommon, taste is refreshed, and a brand new mediocrity is thought more
of than accustomed excellence. Ability wears away by use and becomes
old. However, know that the glory of novelty is short-lived: after four
days respect is gone. Accordingly, learn to utilise the first fruits of
appreciation, and seize during the rapid passage of applause all that
can be put to use. For once the heat of novelty over, the passion cools
and the appreciation of novelty is exchanged for satiety at the
customary: believe that all has its season, which soon passes.

 

cclxx *Do not condemn alone that which pleases all*.

There must be something good in a thing that pleases so many; even if it
cannot be explained it is certainly enjoyed. Singularity is always
hated, and, when in the wrong, laughed at. You simply destroy respect
for your taste rather than do harm to the object of your blame, and are
left alone, you and your bad taste. If you cannot find the good in a
thing, hide your incapacity and do not damn it straightway. As a general
rule bad

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

taste springs from want of knowledge. What all say, is so, or will be
so.

cclxxi *In every Occupation if you know little stick to the safest*.

If you are not respected as subtle, you will be regarded as sure. On the
other hand, a man well trained can plunge in and act as he pleases. To
know little and yet seek danger is nothing else than to seek ruin. In
such a case take stand on the right hand, for what is done cannot be
undone. Let little knowledge keep to the king's highway, and in every
case, knowing or unknowing, security is shrewder than singularity.

cclxxii *Sell Things by the Tariff of Courtesy*.

You oblige people most that way. The bid of an interested buyer will
never equal the return gift of an honourable recipient of a favour.
Courtesy does not really make presents, but really lays men under
obligation, and generosity is the great obligation. To a right-minded
man nothing costs more dear that what is given him: you sell it him
twice and for two prices: one for the value, one for the politeness. At
the same time it is true that with vulgar souls generosity is gibberish,

<span id="page_164">p. 164</span>

for they do not understand the language of good breeding.

cclxxiii *Comprehend their Dispositions with whom you deal*,

so as to know their intentions. Cause known, effect known, beforehand in
the disposition and after in the motive. The melancholy man always
foresees misfortunes, the backbiter scandals; having no conception of
the good, evil offers itself to them. A man moved by passion always
speaks of things differently from what they are; it is his passion
speaks, not his reason. Thus each speaks as his feeling or his humour
prompts him, and all far from the truth. Learn how to decipher faces and
spell out the soul in the features. If a man laughs always, set him down
as foolish; if never, as false. Beware of the gossip: he is either a
babbler or a spy. Expect little good from the misshapen: they generally
take revenge on Nature, and do little honour to her, as she has done
little to them. Beauty and folly generally go hand in hand.

cclxxiv *Be Attractive*.

<span id="page_165">p. 165</span>

magnet of your pleasant qualities more to obtain goodwill than good
deeds, but apply it to all. Merit is not enough unless supported by
grace, which is the sole thing that gives general acceptance, and the
most practical means of rule over others. To be in vogue is a matter of
luck, yet it can be encouraged by skill, for art can best take root on a
soil favoured by nature. There goodwill grows and develops into
universal favour.

cclxxv *Join in the Game as far as Decency permits*.

Do not always pose and be a bore: this is a maxim for gallant bearing.
You may yield a touch of dignity to gain the general good-will: you may
now and then go where most go, yet not beyond the bounds of decorum. He
who makes a fool of himself in public will not be regarded as discreet
in private life. One may lose more on a day of pleasure than has been
gained during a whole life of labour. Still you must not always keep
away: to be singular is to condemn all others. Still less act the
prude—leave that to its appropriate sex: even religious prudery is
ridiculous. Nothing so becomes a man as to be a man: a woman may

<span id="page_166">p. 166</span>

affect a manly bearing as an excellence, but not *vice versâ*.

cclxxvi *Know how to renew your Character*,

with the help both of Nature and of Art, Every seven years the
disposition changes, they say. Let it be a change for the better and for
the nobler in your taste. After the first seven comes reason, with each
succeeding lustre let a new excellence be added. Observe this change so
as to aid it, and hope also for betterment in others. Hence it arises
that many change their behaviour when they change their position or
their occupation. At times the change is not noticed till it reaches the
height of maturity. At twenty Man is a Peacock, at thirty a Lion, at
forty a Camel, at fifty a Serpent, at sixty a Dog, at seventy an Ape, at
eighty nothing at all.

cclxxvii *Display yourself*.

’Tis the illumination of talents: for each there comes an appropriate
moment; use it, for not every day comes a triumph. There are some
dashing men who make much show with a little, a whole exhibition with
much. If ability to display them is joined to versatile gifts, they are
regarded as miraculous. There

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

are whole nations given to display: the Spanish people take the highest
rank in this. Light was the first thing to cause Creation to shine
forth. Display fills up much, supplies much, and gives a second
existence to things, especially when combined with real excellence.
Heaven that grants perfection, provides also the means of display; for
one without the other were abortive. Skill is however needed for
display. Even excellence depends on circumstances and is not always
opportune. Ostentation is out of place when it is out of time. More than
any other quality it should be free of any affectation. This is its rock
of offence, for it then borders on vanity and so on contempt: it must be
moderate to avoid being vulgar, and any excess is despised by the wise.
At times it consists in a sort of mute eloquence, a careless display of
excellence, for a wise concealment is often the most effective boast,
since the very withdrawal from view piques curiosity to the highest.
’Tis a fine subtlety too not to display one's excellence all at one
time, but to grant stolen glances at it, more and more as time goes on.
Each exploit should be the pledge of a greater, and applause at the
first should only die away in expectation of its sequel.

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

cclxxviii *Avoid Notoriety in all Things*.

Even excellences become defects if they become notorious. Notoriety
arises from singularity, which is always blamed: he that is singular is
left severely alone. Even beauty is discredited by coxcombry, which
offends by the very notice it attracts. Still more does this apply to
discreditable singularities. Yet among the wicked there are some that
seek to be known for seeking novelties in vice so as to attain to the
fame of infamy. Even in matters of the intellect want of moderation may
degenerate into loquacity.

cclxxix *Do not contradict the Contradicter*.

You have to distinguish whether the contra-diction comes from cunning or
from vulgarity. It is not always obstinacy, but may be artfulness.
Notice this: for in the first case one may get into difficulties, in the
other into danger. Caution is never more needed than against spies.
There is no such countercheck to the picklock of the mind as to leave
the key of caution in the lock.

cclxxx *Be Trustworthy*.

Honourable dealing is at an end: trusts are

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

denied: few keep their word: the greater the service, the poorer the
reward: that is the way with all the world nowadays. There are whole
nations inclined to false dealing: with some treachery has always to be
feared, with others breach of promise, with others deceit. Yet this bad
behaviour of others should rather be a warning to us than an example.
The fear is that the sight of such unworthy behaviour should override
our integrity. But a man of honour should never forget what he is
because he sees what others are.

cclxxxi *Find Favour with Men of Sense*.

The tepid Yes of a remarkable man is worth more than all the applause of
the vulgar: you cannot make a meal off the smoke of chaff. The wise
speak with understanding and their praise gives permanent satisfaction.
The sage Antigonus reduced the theatre of his fame to Zeus alone, and
Plato called Aristotle his whole school. Some strive to fill their
stomach albeit only with the breath of the mob. Even monarchs have need
of authors, and fear their pens more than ugly women the painter's
pencil.

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

cclxxxii *Make use of Absence to make yourself more esteemed or valued*.

If the accustomed presence diminishes fame, absence augments it. One
that is regarded as a lion in his absence may be laughed at when present
as the ridiculous result of the parturition of the mountains. Talents
get soiled by use, for it is easier to see the exterior rind than the
kernel of greatness it encloses. Imagination reaches farther than sight,
and disillusion, which ordinarily comes through the ears, also goes out
through the ears. He keeps his fame that keeps himself in the centre of
public opinion. Even the Phoenix uses its retirement for new adornment
and turns absence into desire.

cclxxxiii *Have the Gift of Discovery*.

It is a proof of the highest genius, yet when was genius without a touch
of madness? If discovery be a gift of genius, choice of means is a mark
of sound sense. Discovery comes by special grace and very seldom. For
many can follow up a thing when found, but to find it first is the gift
of the few, and those the first in excellence and in age. Novelty
flatters, and if successful gives the possessor double

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

credit. In matters of judgment novelties are dangerous because leading
to paradox, in matters of genius they deserve all praise. Yet both
equally deserve applause if successful.

cclxxxiv *Do not be Importunate*,

and so you will not be slighted. Respect yourself if you would have
others respect you. Be sooner sparing than lavish with your presence.
You will thus become desired and so well received. Never come unasked
and only go when sent for. If you undertake a thing of your own accord
you get all the blame if it fails, none of the thanks If it succeeds.
The importunate is always the butt of blame; and because he thrusts
himself in without shame he is thrust out with it.

cclxxxv *Never die of another's Ill-luck*.

Notice those who stick in the mud, and observe how they call others to
their aid so as to console themselves with a companion in misfortune.
They seek some one to help them to bear misfortune, and often those who
turned the cold shoulder on them in prosperity give them now a helping
hand. There is great

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

caution needed in helping the drowning without danger to oneself.

cclxxxvi *Do not become responsible for all or for every one*,

otherwise you become a slave and the slave of all. Some are born more
fortunate than others: they are born to do good as others to receive it.
Freedom is more precious than any gifts for which you may be tempted to
give it up. Lay less stress on making many dependent on you than on
keeping yourself independent of any. The sole advantage of power is that
you can do more good. Above all do not regard responsibility as a
favour, for generally it is another's plan to make one dependent on him.

cclxxxvii *Never act in a Passion*.

If you do, all is lost. You cannot act for yourself if you are not
yourself, and passion always drives out reason. In such cases inter-pose
a prudent go-between who can only be prudent if he keeps cool. That is
why lookers-on see most of the game, because they keep cool. As soon as
you notice that you are losing your temper beat a wise retreat. For no
sooner is

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

the blood up than it is spilt, and in a few moments occasion may be
given for many days' repentance for oneself and complaints of the other
party.

cclxxxviii *Live for the Moment*.

Our acts and thoughts and all must be determined by circumstances. Will
when you may, for time and tide wait for no man. Do not live by certain
fixed rules, except those that relate to the cardinal virtues. Nor let
your will subscribe fixed conditions, for you may have to drink the
water to-morrow which you cast away to-day. There be some so absurdly
paradoxical that they expect all the circumstances of an action should
bend to their eccentric whims and not *vice versâ*. The wise man knows
that the very polestar of prudence lies in steering by the wind.

cclxxxix *Nothing depreciates a Man more than to show he is a Man like
other Men*.

The day he is seen to be very human he ceases to be thought divine.
Frivolity is the exact opposite of reputation. And as the re-served are
held to be more than men, so the frivolous are held to be less. No
failing causes

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

such failure of respect. For frivolity is the exact opposite of solid
seriousness. A man of levity cannot be a man of weight even when he is
old, and age should oblige him to be prudent. Although this blemish is
so common it is none the less despised.

ccxc *’Tis a piece of good Fortune to combine Men's Love and Respect*.

Generally one dare not be liked if one would be respected. Love is more
sensitive than hate. Love and honour do not go well together. So that
one should aim neither to be much feared nor much loved. Love introduces
confidence, and the further this advances, the more respect recedes.
Prefer to be loved with respect rather than with passion, for that is a
love suitable for many.

ccxci *Know how to Test*.

The care of the wise must guard against the snare of the wicked. Great
judgment is needed to test that of another. It is more important to know
the characteristics and properties of persons than those of vegetables
and minerals. It is indeed one of the shrewdest things in life. You can
tell metals by

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

their ring and men by their voice. Words are proof of integrity, deeds
still more. Here one requires extraordinary care, deep observation,
subtle discernment, and judicious decision.

ccxcii *Let your personal Qualities surpass those of your Office*,

Let it not be the other way about. How-ever high the post, the person
should be higher. An extensive capacity expands and dilates more and
more as his office becomes higher. On the other hand, the narrow-minded
will easily lose heart and come to grief with diminished
responsibilities and reputation. The great Augustus thought more of
being a great man than a great prince. Here a lofty mind finds fit
place, and well-grounded confidence finds its opportunity.

ccxciii *Maturity*.

It is shown in the costume, still more in the customs. Material weight
is the sign of a precious metal; moral, of a precious man. Maturity
gives finish to his capacity and arouses respect. A composed bearing in
a man forms a *façade* to his soul. It does not

<span id="page_176">p. 176</span>

consist in the insensibility of fools, as frivolity would have it, but
in a calm tone of authority. With men of this kind sentences are
orations and acts are deeds. Maturity finishes a man off, for each is so
far a complete man according as he possesses maturity. On ceasing to be
a child a man begins to gain seriousness and authority.

ccxciv *Be moderate in your Views*.

Every one holds views according to his interest, and imagines he has
abundant grounds for them. For with most men judgment has to give way to
inclination. It may occur that two may meet with exactly opposite views
and yet each thinks to have reason on his side, yet reason is always
true to itself and never has two faces. In such a difficulty a prudent
man will go to work with care, for his decision of his opponent's view
may cast doubt on his own. Place yourself in such a case in the other
man's place and then investigate the reasons for his opinion. You will
not then condemn him or justify yourself in such a confusing way.

ccxcv *Do not affect what you have not effected*.

Many claim exploits without the slightest claim. 'With the greatest
coolness they make

<span id="page_177">p. 177</span>

a mystery of all. Chameleons of applause they afford others a surfeit of
laughter. Vanity is always objectionable, here it is despicable. These
ants of honour go crawling about filching scraps of exploits. The
greater your exploits the less you need affect them: content yourself
with doing, leave the talking to others. Give away your deeds but do not
sell them. And do not hire venal pens to write down praises in the mud,
to the derision of the knowing ones. Aspire rather to be a hero than
merely to appear one.

ccxcvi *Noble Qualities*.

Noble qualities make noblemen: a single one of them is worth more than a
multitude of mediocre ones. There was once a man who made all his
belongings, even his household utensils, as great as possible. How much
more ought a great man see that the qualities of his soul are as great
as possible. In God all is eternal and infinite, so in a hero everything
should be great and majestic, so that all his deeds, nay, all his words,
should he pervaded by a transcendent majesty.

<span id="page_178">p. 178</span>

ccxcvii *Always act as if your Acts were seen*.

He must see all round who sees that men see him or will see him. He
knows that walls have ears and that ill deeds rebound back. Even when
alone he acts as if the eyes of the whole world were upon him. For as he
knows that sooner or later all will be known, so he considers those to
be present as witnesses who must afterwards hear of the deed. He that
wished the whole world might always see him did not mind that his
neighbours could see him over their walls.

ccxcviii *Three Things go to a Prodigy*.

They are the choicest gifts of Heaven's prodigality—a fertile genius, a
profound intellect, a pleasant and refined taste. To think well is good,
to think right is better: ’tis the understanding of the good. It will
not do for the judgment to reside in the backbone: it would be of more
trouble than use. To think aright is the fruit of a reasonable nature.
At twenty the will rules; at thirty the intellect; at forty the
judgment. There are minds that shine in the dark like the eyes of the
lynx, and are most clear where there is most darkness. Others are more
adapted for the occasion: they always hit on that which suits the
emergency:

<span id="page_179">p. 179</span>

such a quality produces much and good; a sort of fecund felicity. In the
meantime good taste seasons the whole of life.

ccxcix *Leave off Hungry*.

One ought to remove even the bowl of nectar from the lips. Demand is the
measure of value. Even with regard to bodily thirst it is a mark of good
taste to slake but not to quench it. Little and good is twice good. The
second time comes a great falling off. Surfeit of pleasure was ever
dangerous and brings down the ill-will of the Highest Powers. The only
way to please is to revive the appetite by the hunger that is left. If
you must excite desire, better do it by the impatience of want than by
the repletion of enjoyment. Happiness earned gives double joy.

ccc *In one word, be a Saint*.

So is all said at once. Virtue is the link of all perfections, the
centre of all the felicities. She it is that makes a man prudent,
discreet, sagacious, cautious, wise, courageous, thoughtful,
trustworthy, happy, honoured, truthful, and a universal Hero. Three
HHH's make a man happy—Health, Holiness, and a Headpiece.

<span id="page_180">p. 180</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Virtue is the sun
of the microcosm, and has for hemisphere a good conscience. She is so
beautiful that she finds favour with both God and man. Nothing is
lovable but virtue, nothing detestable but vice. Virtue alone is
serious, all else is but jest. A man's capacity and greatness are to be
measured by his virtue and not by his fortune. She alone is
all-sufficient. She makes men lovable in life, memorable after death.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Notes](aww16)
