<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb09)  [Next](ldjb11) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_140">p. 140</span>

### CHAPTER VII.

### MAN.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"God created man in His own image. Male and female
(*in one*) created He them."</span>

</div>

<span class="smallcaps">Man</span> in his cosmic aspect is a being very
superior to that which is commonly looked upon as a "man," and which is
described in books on anthropology, anatomy, &c. Such external sciences
deal only with the grossly material body of external terrestrial man,
while the essential body of macrocosmic and microcosmic man is beyond
the reach of external observation. In the study of man as a cosmic being
there are three subjects to be considered, although the three are only
three aspects of one. These three subjects are God, Nature, and Man, and
neither one of them can be understood in its inner essence without an
understanding of the other two. External science, "natural philosophy,"
and theology seek to separate them. They regard man as a being
separated, distinct, and independent of nature, and nature as something
independent of man; while of God they know nothing, and regard the
divine power, which is the cause of all life, as if it were something
external to nature and man, and beyond their reach. For this reason the
"man" of modern science has become an unnatural being, without any
conceivable object for his existence, and nature is to him an organism
evolved by accidence and subject to no other than mechanically acting
law. The divine, spiritual, creative, and hidden powers in man and in
nature are entirely removed from the field of perception of the
"rationalist."

Man, as a whole, may be conceived of as a planetary

<span id="page_141">p. 141</span>

spirit, a self-conscious, luminous sphere of unimaginable extent; as, in
fact, at present the mental sphere of man has no defined limits; it
reaches as far as his thoughts can go. He was created for the purpose of
being the image of God. The glory of God was residing in him, and he was
penetrated by the light of divine love.

In man is contained everything, God, and the Christ, and the angels, the
celestial and terrestrial kingdoms, and the powers of hell. Outside of
him is nothing of which he can conceive; he can know nothing except that
which exists in his mind. No god or devil, no spirit or any power
whatever, can act within man unless it enters into his constitution.
Only that which exists in him has existence for him.

Without a realisation of this fact the mysteries of religion will remain
incomprehensible. It may be interesting and amusing to speculate about
all the different gods and celestial hosts that go to make up the
Pantheons of the various nations, but such a study does not constitute
real knowledge. Only when man's spiritual perceptions are unfolded and
he attains divine knowledge of self, then will he know the Christ and
all the celestial powers whose aggregate goes to make up the kingdom of
God existing within himself.

"The Spirit of God resides from eternity to eternity only in heaven—that
is to say, in His own essence, in the power of the majesty. When it
became inbreathed into the image of man, then was heaven in man; for God
willed to reveal Himself in man, as in an image created after His own
likeness, and to manifest the great wonders of His eternal wisdom."
(*Stiefel*, i. 36.)

"Simultaneously with the introduction of His divine image, Adam received
also the living word of God (spiritual intelligence) to furnish food for
his soul." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 3, 24.)

"God created Adam to (enjoy) eternal life in Paradise in a state of
paradisiacal perfection. Divine love illumined

<span id="page_142">p. 142</span>

his interior, as the sun is illuminating the world." (*Stiefel*, i. 36.)

"In Paradise there is perfect life without disturbance, and a perpetual
day, and the paradisiacal man is clear like transparent glass, and he is
fully penetrated by the light of the divine sun." <span
id="fr_39"></span>[1](#fn_39) (*Signature*, xi. 5 1.)

 

His body likewise appeared luminous, because its terrestrial substance
was absorbed in the celestial essence. It radiated a pure, divine
light. <span id="fr_40"></span>[2](#fn_40)

"The inner holy corporeity of the pure element penetrated through the
four elements and kept the *Limus* of earth—that is to say, the external
*sulphuric* (terrestrial) body within itself as in a state of
absorption. Nevertheless, that body was actually present, but in such a
way as darkness dwells in light, so that the darkness cannot manifest
itself on account of the light." (*Mysterium*, xvi. 6.)

"All the qualities of the inner and holy body, together with the
external ones, were in primordial man attuned in one harmony. Neither of
them lived in its own state of desire; but they had their desire in the
soul wherein the divine light was manifest. This, the divine light
radiated through all the qualities, and produced in them an equal,
harmonious temperature." (*Mysterium*, xvi. 5.)

"The inner man kept the external one imprisoned within itself and
penetrated it in a manner comparable to iron, which glows if it is
penetrated by fire, so that it seems as if it were itself fire. But when
the fire becomes extinct, then does the black, dark iron become
manifest." (*Mysterium*, xvi. 7.)

<span id="page_143">p. 143</span>

"The pure element penetrated through the external roan and overpowered
the four elements; moreover, the power of the heat and the cold was in
the flesh. But as the light of God was shining therein, they were in
equal harmony, so that neither one of them became manifest before the
other. Thus God the Father is called a wrathful, jealous God and a
consuming fire, and He is all that in regard to His qualities; but of
these qualities nothing becomes manifest in His light." (*Stiefel*, xi.
75.)

"Primordial man in Paradise, being fixed therein, was in a state such as
time is before God and God in time. As time is a spectacle before God,
likewise the external life of man was a spectacle before the inner and
holy man, who was the true image of God." (*Mysterium*, xvi. 8.)

In the same sense the Bhagavad Gita says that the true self, the God,
*Atma*, or " Christ," is not a participator, but merely a spectator in
that which concerns the external illusion.

"The inner body was a dwelling-place of the Godhead, an image of divine
substantiality. In that body the soul had her meekness, and her fire was
rendered mild thereby, for she received there the love and meekness of
God." (*Tilk*., i. 233.)

 

Owing to this resemblance to God, Adam's will and thoughts were as one.
His mind was pure and uncomplicated, childlike, unsophisticated, and
devoted to God; he did not need to speculate about the unknown, because
he had the power to perceive that which he wanted to know. He enjoyed
the perception of divine and terrestrial things. <span
id="fr_41"></span>[1](#fn_41)

"The mind of Adam was innocent like that of a child, playing with the
wonders of its Father. There was in him no self-knowledge of evil will,
no avarice, pride,

<span id="page_144">p. 144</span>

envy, anger, but a pure enjoyment of love." (*Threefold Life*, xi. 23.)

"When Adam was created in Paradise, there his life was burning like a
flame of pure oil. Therefore his perception was celestial, and his
intelligence was surpassing and comprehending things beyond nature."
(*Signature*, vii. 2.)

"The inner man stood in heaven; his essences were the Paradise; his body
was indestructible. He knew the language of God and the angels, and the
language of nature, as may be seen by Adam giving names to all
creatures, to each according to its own essence and quality." (*Forty
Questions*, iv. 7.)

"Adam, after having been created by God, was in Paradise in a state of
joy and glorification, beautiful and filled with knowledge. God then
brought before him, as the lord of the world, all the animals, so that
he might behold them, and give a name to each according to its special
essence and power. And Adam knew that he was within every creature, and
he gave to each its appropriate name. God can see into the hearts of all
things, and the same could be done by Adam." <span
id="fr_42"></span>[1](#fn_42) (*Three* [*Principles*](errata.htm#0), x.
17.)

 

In this state of godlike being he had power over all things; for all
things existed in him and he in all, and there was nothing that could
have done him any external injury. To express it in other words, all
things existed subjectively in his mind, as they now do in ours, but his
mind was his " body," and where the centre of his consciousness was,
there was his "form." <span id="fr_43"></span>[2](#fn_43)

<span id="page_145">p. 145</span>

"As God is a Lord over all, so man in the power of God was to be a lord
over this world." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 4, 7.)

"The soul in the power of God penetrates through all things, and is
powerful over all, as God Himself; for she lives in the power of His
heart." (*Three Principles*, xxii. 17.)

"As gold is incorruptible in the fire, so man was subject to nothing,
only to the One God dwelling in him, and manifested in him by the power
of His holy being."

(*Mysterium*, xvi. 12.) "Everything was subject to Adam; his rule
extended into heaven and over the earth, and in all elements and stars.
This was because divine power was manifested in him." <span
id="fr_44"></span>[1](#fn_44) (*Mysterium*, xvi. 2.)

"The will-spirit of man penetrated through all creatures, and was
injured by none, because none could grasp it. No creature can apprehend
the power and light of the sun in its own will, but must remain passive
to become penetrated by it; thus it was then the case with the
will-spirit of man." (*Grace*, vii. 2.)

"Before his fall, man could rule over the sun and the stars. Everything
was in his power. <span id="fr_45"></span>[2](#fn_45) Fire, air, water,
and earth could not tame him; no fire burned him, no water drowned, no
air suffocated him; all that lived stood in awe of him." (*Threefold
Life*, xi. 23.)

"No heat, no cold, no sickness, nor accident, nor any fear could touch
or terrify him. His body could pass through earth and rocks without
breaking anything in them; for a man who could be overpowered by the
terrestrial nature, or who could be broken to pieces, would not be
eternal." <span id="fr_46"></span>[3](#fn_46) (*Menschwerdung*, i. 2,
13.)

<span id="page_146">p. 146</span>

Likewise that nature which surrounded him, and which is called Eden, was
illuminated by the celestial light, and it was thereby exalted to
paradisiacal magnificence.

"Adam was in Paradise, that is to say, in the temperature. Thereby he
was placed in a certain locality, namely, in that where the holy world
was blooming out through the earth and bearing the fruits of Paradise."
(*Grace*, v. 34.)

"'Eden' means the locality, but 'Paradise' is the out-flowing or the
life of God in divine harmony." (*Letters*, xxxi. 28.)

"In Paradise the substance of the divine world penetrated the substance
belonging to time, comparable to the power of the sun penetrating a
fruit growing on a tree, and endowing it with such qualities as render
it lovely to the sight and good to the taste." (*Mysterium*, xvii. 5.)

"Thus the holy divine world was predominant through all the three
principles of the human quality, and there was an equal accord, and no
enmity or opposite will was manifest betwixt the principles." <span
id="fr_47"></span>[1](#fn_47) (*Mysterium*, xvii. 20.)

 

There were in Paradise all the products which we meet in the terrestrial
world, but they were there in a state of ethereality and of supernatural
beauty. This paradisiacal beauty was, however, not manifested in all
parts of the world.

"In Paradise there are growths, the same as in this world, but not in
(terrestrial) tangibility. There *Heaven* is in the place of the earth,
the *Light of God* instead of the sun, and the *Eternal Father* in the
place of the power of the stars." (*Three Principles*, ix. 20.)

"The Paradise is not anything corporeal or tangible in a terrestrial
sense, but its corporeity and tangibility is like that of the angels. It
is there a clear,

<span id="page_147">p. 147</span>

visible, substance, as if it were material, and it is actually
"material;" but it is formed only out of the power, without any addition
of terrestrial matter, and it is, therefore, perfectly transparent."
(*Three Principles*, ix. 18.)

"The tangible world, or nature, before the time of the wrath of God, was
thin, ethereal, lovely, and clear, so that the sourcive spirits could
look through everything and penetrate it. There were therein neither
terrestrial rocks nor earth, and there was no created light needed, such
as it is now; but the light was generated in all things in the midst of
each thing, and everything was in the light." (*Aurora*, xviii. 29.)

"The whole world would have been all Paradise if it had not been
corrupted by Lucifer. But as God knew that Adam was going to fall, it
bloomed out in only one place, wherein man might find a suitable
dwelling-place, and be fortified therein." (*Mysterium*, xvii. 7.)

"God saw and knew that man was going to fall, and therefore the Paradise
did not bloom and bear fruits in the whole of the world by means of the
earth, although it was manifest everywhere, but only in the Garden of
Eden, wherein Adam was tempted, did it become revealed in its full
magnificence." <span id="fr_48"></span>[1](#fn_48) (*Letters*, xxxix.
28.)

 

For all that, man, although having been endowed with great splendour by
the Creator, did not yet enjoy true similarity with God. <span
id="fr_49"></span>[2](#fn_49)

"In Adam was manifest the kingdom of grace, the divine life, because he
lived in the temperature (harmony) of the qualities, but he did not know
that God was

<span id="page_148">p. 148</span>

revealed in him. Likewise his self-will did not know that which is good,
because it had as yet experienced no evil. How could there be any joy
where no sorrow is known?" (*Grace*, ix. 15.)

"The soul was in her own essence from eternity, but as a created thing
she was formed to represent the image of God at the time of the creation
of the body. Nevertheless she is *per se* not yet the true image, but
only an essential fire for its production." (*Tilk*., i. 81.)

"The soul of man, which has been breathed into him by God, is from the
Eternal Father; but with that she has not yet attained the birth of the
Son, wherein is the end of nature, and from which no created being
issues." (*Three Principles*, ix. 13.)

 

Man can attain real similarity to God and perfect beatitude only by
decisively willing to put his will into the Son, as the Heart or Light
of the Father.

"God has the eternal and unchangeable will to generate His Heart and his
Son, and thus the soul should put her immutable will into the heart of
God. Then would she be in heaven and Paradise, and enjoy the
inexpressible happiness of God the Father, which He enjoys in the Son,
and she would hear the inexpressible words in the heart of God." <span
id="fr_50"></span>[1](#fn_50) (*Three Principles*, x. 14.)

"Adam was conceived in the love of God and born into this world. He was
in possession of a divine substantiality, and his soul was of the will,
the first principle, the quality of the Father. This will should be
directed, together with the imagination, into the heart of the Father,
that is to say, into the *Word* and the Spirit of love and purity. Then
would man's soul retain the substance

<span id="page_149">p. 149</span>

of God in the Word of Life." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 10, 2.)

"The living soul, from the eternal will of the Father, was breathed into
man, and this will has no other purpose than to give birth to His only
Son. <span id="fr_51"></span>[1](#fn_51) Of this will God the Father
infused into man, and this is the eternal soul of man. The soul ought to
put her regenerated will into the eternal will of the Father, in the
heart of God. Then will she receive the power of the heart of God and
also His holy eternal light, wherein arises the Paradise and the
celestial kingdom and eternal joy." (*Three Principles*, xxvi. 16.)

"If the soul sinks her will into the meekness, *i.e.*, the obedience of
God, she becomes a fountain of the heart of God, and receives divine
power, and all her essences become angelic and joyful. Then her harsh
essences will also be useful to her, and appear to her more mild and
useful, than if they had already originally been entirely sweet and
mild." (*Three Principles*, xiii. 31.)

 

It was within his power to decide, and he was free to do so, because
there was in him not only the principle of light, but also the
fire-principle,—not only perception, but will.

"The light and the power of the light is a desire, and wants to come in
possession of the noble image made after God's likeness, because it has
been created for the world of light. Likewise the dark world or the
craving wrath desires the same, for man has all the worlds within
himself, and there is a great battle taking place in man. That principle
with which he identifies himself with in his desire and his will, will
rule in him." (*Tilk*., i. 381.)

"As the soul is essential and her very substance is a

<span id="page_150">p. 150</span>

desire, it is clear that she is in two kinds of *Fiat*. The first is her
own soul-property; the other belongs to the second principle, issuing
from the will of God in the soul. The soul desiring for God for the
purpose of forming herself in His image and likeness, this desire of God
acts as a *Fiat* in her own centre; for the desire of God wants to
possess the soul. On the other hand, she herself desires to possess the
centre in the power of the fire, wherein the life of the soul
originates." (*Eye*, vii.)

"The will of the soul is free, and she can either sink into nothing
within herself and conceive of herself as the nothing, when she will
sprout like a branch out of the tree of divine life, and eat of the love
of God; or she may in her own self-will rise up in the fire and desire
to become a separate tree." <span id="fr_52"></span>[1](#fn_52) (*Forty
Questions*, ii. 2.)

 

There existed in man also the third principle, wherein resides sensual
desire. He was not endowed with this principle for the purpose of
surrendering himself to it, but that he might introduce it into the
light of God, and glorify Him by means of that light. <span
id="fr_53"></span>[2](#fn_53)

"Man was a mixed individuality, and destined to be an image according to
the inner, and also according to the outer world; but as the symbol of
God, he was to rule with the inner consciousness over the external one."
(*Menschwerdung*, i. 3, 13.)

"When man remains in harmonious order, so as not to let one world into
the other, he is then the likeness of God; but the image or the *mirror*
of the world

<span id="page_151">p. 151</span>

of light he should surely introduce into the external world." (*Six
Theosophical Points*, vi. 12.)

"The constellation (the astral influences) of the macrocosm should not
be permitted to rule over man; but he has his own constellation (the
spirit, the idea) within himself, which is capable of becoming attuned
to the harmony of the rise and evolution of the divine world within."
(*Letters*, i. 8.)

"All of man's desire should have been placed into the light; then would
the light have shone within his essence and desire, and filled
everything as with one will." (*Tilk*., i. 542.)

"The soul of Adam could have ruled powerfully over the external
principle if she had entered again with her will into the heart of God,
into the word of the Lord." <span id="fr_54"></span>[1](#fn_54) (*Forty
Questions*, iv. 2.)

 

Thus it was intended that, by means of the instrumentality of man, the
paradisiacal splendour should be continually spread out and increased
over terrestrial nature, and that all the hidden treasures of nature
should be uncovered.

"The external world is also of God and belonging to God, and man has
been created therein, so that he may bring again the external into the
internal one; the end into the beginning." (*Letters*, xi. 18.)

"Adam was also created in the external quality, so that he may manifest
in forms and execute in works that which had been perceived in eternal
wisdom." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 4.)

"Man has been created in Paradise, for it was out-blooming through the
earth, and from the earth of Paradise was Adam's body created, because
he was a lord of the earth, and it was his destiny to unfold the

<span id="page_152">p. 152</span>

wonders of the earth. If it had not been for that purpose, God might
have endowed him with an angelic body; but in that case the
substantiated being with its wonderful qualities would not have been
unfolded." <span id="fr_55"></span>[1](#fn_55) (*Menschwerdung*, ii.
12.)

 

But while in Adam all the three principles were originally in unity and
harmony, there was attracting him outwardly in a powerful manner, not
only the heart of God, but also the devil and the kingdom of the
terrestrial world. <span id="fr_56"></span>[2](#fn_56)

"Man stood in three principles, and they were in equal concordance in
him, but not outside of him; for the dark world had a desire different
from that of the world of light, and likewise the external world had a
desire differing from that of the dark world and from the world of
light. Thus the image of God was betwixt three principles, which all of
them in their desire were conducive to that image. Each of them wanted
to become manifest in Adam—to have him within its own regiment or as a
ruler, and to manifest its wonders through him." (*Mysterium*, xvii.
34.)

"Everything attracted Adam and wanted to take possession of him. The
heart of God wanted to have him in Paradise and to reside in him, for it
said, 'He is my image and likeness.' The kingdom of wrath wanted him,
for it said, 'He is mine; for he has issued out of my fountain, out of
the eternal mind of the darkness. I will be in him, and he shall live in
my power; I will manifest through him strong and great power.' Finally,
the kingdom of the world likewise said, 'He is mine, for he bears my
image; he lives in me and I in

<span id="page_153">p. 153</span>

him; he must be obedient to me, for I have all nay members (organs) in
him and he has his members in me, and I am greater than he. He shall be
my steward, and manifest my power and wonders.'" <span
id="fr_57"></span>[1](#fn_57) (*Three Principles*, xi. 33.)

 

Adam, making a perverted use of the freedom granted to him, allowed his
lower qualities to be awakened to an evil desire—that is to say, to a
desire for the terrestrial world, which is divided within itself.

"In primitive man before the fall, the qualities for differentiation and
self-enjoyment were in equal will-power, and their desire was introduced
into the unity of God. This the devil begrudged to them, and he deluded
the seven qualities of life by awakening within them a perverted desire,
persuading them that it were good, and that they would become wise, if
the qualities, each according to its own kind, would enter into their
own accord, <span id="fr_58"></span>[2](#fn_58) and that in this way the
spirit would taste and recognise that which was good and evil." (*Tabulæ
Principiæ*, 68.)

"The soul of Adam fell in love with the creation of the formed word in
its differentiation, and not being conscious of the power of
distinguishing, she entered into lust, into differentiation." (*Grace*,
vi. 33.)

"The soul wanted to know how it would be if the temperature were to
become separated—that is to say, divided, as heat and cold, moisture and
dryness, hardness and softness, acridity and sweetness, bitterness and
that which is sour; she wanted to taste these and the other

<span id="page_154">p. 154</span>

qualities all in their separateness, although it had been prohibited to
Adam by God." <span id="fr_59"></span>[1](#fn_59) (*Grace*, iii. 34.)

 

Owing to this perverted desire, there grew in him the tree of
temptation, wherein the terrestrial qualities, as such, became
manifest. <span id="fr_60"></span>[2](#fn_60)

"Adam's spirit was lusting after terrestrial fruit, such as was of the
nature of the corrupted earth, and therefore nature formed for him a
tree that was like the corrupted earth; for Adam was the heart in
nature, and therefore his spiritual soul aided in the formation of that
tree, of which he desired to eat." (*Aurora*, xvii. 20.)

"The tree of temptation grew by the power of the hunger after
self-knowledge of good and evil. It should not be said that it was any
other kind of a product than the rest of such trees; only there was
manifest in it the terrestrial desire for conscious evil and good; while
the other trees and plants were penetrated by the holy, paradisiacal
*Mercury*, so that in them the qualities were in equal accordance, and
heat and cold were not separately manifested in them." (*Stiefel*, ii.
80.)

"In the tree of self-knowledge of good and evil there were the qualities
in the curse, such as is the case at present—that is to say, each of
them was manifest in itself, and seeking to preponderate. They had gone
out of their harmony, and thus all the three principles, each
separately, were manifest in that tree. Therefore

<span id="page_155">p. 155</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Moses (wisdom)
calls it the tree of knowledge of good and evil." (*Mysterium*, xvii.
15.)

 

The forthcoming of the tree of temptation is not to be wondered at,
because Adam was endowed with great powers, and an earthly form as a
protection to him against the powers of hell. <span
id="fr_61"></span>[1](#fn_61)

"Reason (man's reasoning) says, 'Why did God permit Adam to draw the
tree of temptation out of the earth by means of his imagination?' Christ
said, 'If you have faith as big as a mustard-seed, and you say to the
mountain: throw thyself into the sea; it shall be done as you say.' The
soul-spirit (spiritual soul) was produced out of the divine omnipotence,
out of the centre of eternal nature, wherefrom all beings have been
created. Why should it then not be powerful? It was a fire-spark out of
God's power, but after it had been gathered into a created being
(individualised as an organism) it gave way to its own selfish desire,
and broke away from the whole, and thus it caused corruption unto
itself. The soul-power, before vanity entered, was so strong as not to
be subject to anything, and would be so now, even this very day, if the
understanding had not been taken away." (*Mysterium*, xvii. 41.)

 

"Divine prevision recognised that the devil was going to winnow mankind,
and to introduce them into evil desire; and therefore God put before
them the tree of life, and of the knowledge of good and evil, by means
of which the breaking up (the death) of the external body was
inaugurated. He did this lest man should long after the centre of the
dark world." <span id="fr_62"></span>[2](#fn_62) (*Mysterium*, xvii.
38.)

<span id="page_156">p. 156</span>

Formerly Adam belonged to the celestial world and to eternity; but now,
the image of God having begun to pale in him, he sank into the
terrestrial state, and thereby into impotency and sleep.

"A reasonable person will easily perceive that there could be no sleep
in Adam as long as he was in the image of God, for at that time he was
such an image as we shall be in the resurrection of the dead. We shall
then not need the elements, neither the sun nor the moon, and also
require no sleep; but our eyes will be open to see always and eternally
the glory of God." (*Three Principles*, xii. 17.)

"The image of God does not sleep. In it there is no time. With sleep,
time became manifest in man. He fell asleep in the angelic world, and
awoke relatively to the external world." <span
id="fr_63"></span>[1](#fn_63) (*Mysterium*, xix. 4.)

"After Adam had been overcome, the *tincture*, wherein the beautiful
virgin had previously dwelt, became terrestrial, faint, and feeble. The
powerful source of the *tincture*, wherefrom the virgin had her power,
without being subjected to sleep, left Adam and went into its own
principle." (*Three Principles*, iii. 8.)

Thus Adam became a victim of Magic, and now his magnificence was gone.
Sleep signifies death and surrender. The terrestrial realm had conquered
him and ruled over him." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 5.)

"After the lust of the spirit of this world had conquered in Adam, he
fell asleep. Then his celestial body became flesh and blood, and his
strong power became rigid bones. Then the celestial virgin went into the

<span id="page_157">p. 157</span>

celestial ether, into the principle of power." <span
id="fr_64"></span>[1](#fn_64) (*Three Principles*, xiii. 2.)

 

This impotency was to be a means of salvation for Adam, and moreover
there was given to him the terrestrial woman in the place of the
celestial virgin, who had passed away from him. <span
id="fr_65"></span>[2](#fn_65) This was done to save him from arriving at
a still greater depth of degradation. <span
id="fr_66"></span>[3](#fn_66)

"When Adam left God and entered into selfishness, God permitted it to
happen that a deep sleep fell upon Adam. If it had not been for that
circumstance, he would in his selfishness even have become a devil by
the power of the fire." <span id="fr_67"></span>[4](#fn_67) (*Stiefel*,
ii. 363.)

"When the devil saw that lust resided in Adam, he acted still more
powerfully upon the *Sal-nitre* in Adam, and infected it still stronger.
Then it was time that the Creator should build him a wife, who
afterwards indeed caused the sin to be acted out, and who ate of the
evil fruit. Otherwise, if Adam had eaten of the tree before the woman
was made out of him, he would have fared still worse." (*Aurora*, xvii.
21.)

Therefore woman (spirituality) is, and will always be, the saviour of
man.

 

The woman was extracted from all the powers of Adam. Relatively to her
substance, she was formed out

<span id="page_158">p. 158</span>

of a "rib," which at that time had not yet degenerated into stiff
bone. <span id="fr_68"></span>[1](#fn_68)

"Eve has been extracted from Adam, not as a mere spirit, but entirely
substantial. It should be said that Adam received a cleft, and that the
woman is bearing Adam's spirit, flesh and bone." (*Three Principles*,
xiii. 14.)

"Reasoning says, 'If Eve has been made out of a rib of Adam, she must be
very inferior to man.' This is, however, not so, but the *Fiat*, in its
aspect as sharp attraction (the first quality), took her from all
essences and qualities of each power of Adam." <span
id="fr_69"></span>[2](#fn_69) (*Three Principles*, xiii. 18.)

"Adam's body had not yet received hard bones and osseous substance. This
took place only when Eve tasted the apple and gave to Adam to eat
thereof." "It is true that the infection and the terrestrial death were
already in him as a tendency and deadly disease, but the 'bones' and
'ribs' were nevertheless still power and strength, and thus Eve was
created out of that power or strength which (later on) was to become
*rib*." <span id="fr_70"></span>[3](#fn_70) (*Three Principles*, xiii.
13.)

 

Eve was not misshaped. She lived with Adam in

<span id="page_159">p. 159</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Paradise; but the
pure likeness of God was then in neither of them.

"Eve was not misshapen, but very lovely; nevertheless she too bore the
signs (of corruption), and could not be anything more than a wife of
Adam. Both were still in Paradise, and if they had not eaten from the
tree, but turned to God by changing their imagination, they would have
remained in Paradise." (*Three Principles*, xiii. 36.)

"Adam and Eve had still a paradisiacal consciousness, but it was mixed
with terrestrial desire. They were naked, and had animal organs for
procreation; but they did not know this, neither were they ashamed of
them, for the spirit of the great world had not yet obtained rule over
them before they had eaten of the terrestrial fruit." (*Menschwerdung*,
i. 6, 15.)

"No one can truly say that Eve, before coming in contact with Adam, had
been a pure and chaste virgin, because, as soon as Adam awoke from his
sleep, he saw her by his side. He soon imagined into her (fell in love
with her). He took her unto himself and said, 'This is flesh of my flesh
and bone of my bone. She will be called *woman*, because she has been
taken from man.' Eve likewise began to put her imagination into Adam,
and each one ignited the desire of the other. Where, then, is the pure
chastity and virginity? Is this not animal? Has not the external image
become an animal?" <span id="fr_71"></span>[1](#fn_71) (*Forty
Questions*, xxxvi. 6.)

 

God had ordered mankind not to eat from the fruits of the tree of
temptation; but the devil thought of inducing them to disobey the
command, and they were, moreover,

<span id="page_160">p. 160</span>

incited to do so by the spirit of the world, and by their own perverted
desire.

"The holy-speaking Word of God, after the Trinity of the unfathomable
Godhead, gave to the fiery intelligence of the soul the command, 'Eat
not of the tree of knowledge of good and evil; or, if you do that, you
will die in the image of God on the same day.' That is to say, 'the
fiery soul will lose her light, and thereby mortality, the quality of
the dark world, from the centre of the first three principles, will
creep forth and manifest itself in the tree, and swallow up the Kingdom
of God therein.'" (*Grace*, vi. 17.)

"When Adam and Eve were in Paradise as man and woman, being still in
possession of a celestial essence, although the latter was mixed (with
materiality), the devil would not suffer this to be so, for his envy was
great. Then, after Adam had been brought to fall and deprived of his
angelic form, and seeing that Eve was his wife, the devil thought that
they might generate children in Paradise and remain therein. He then
made up his mind to seduce them to eat of the forbidden fruit, so that
they might become earthly thereby." (*Menschwerdung*, i. 7.)

"Adam was urged on by the power of the tree, which was also within
himself, so that one lust infected another. He was also urged by the
spirit of the great world, so that his strength became overpowered."
(*Three Principles*, xi. 40.)

 

For the purpose of seducing mankind, the devil availed himself
especially of the services of the serpent, which, being a living symbol
of the tree of temptation, caused them to imagine that, by eating the
forbidden fruit, they would become godlike. <span
id="fr_72"></span>[1](#fn_72)

"The devil introduced his poisonous imagination into

<span id="page_161">p. 161</span>

the human quality. Therefrom resulted in man the ardent desire to eat of
evil and good, and to live in the self-will; that is to say, his will
left the harmony of unity and went into the multiplicity of the
qualities. The devil, by means of the serpent, represented to him that
he would become like God, and that his eyes would open; which then
actually took place in the fall, so that they could now recognise,
taste, see, and feel evil and good." <span id="fr_73"></span>[1](#fn_73)
(*Mysterium*, xvii. 37.)

"The devil mixed lies and truth together, and said to the first human
beings that they would be like God. His meaning was that they would be
so, according to the first principle of wrath; but about the Paradise he
said nothing." (*Three Principles*, xvii. 96.)

"The substance of the snake, its celestial aspect, was a great power, as
there was likewise a great celestial power in the devil, for he was a
*prince* of God. Thus he introduced his cunning and lies into a strong
state of will, for the purpose of making illusions therewith as his own
god." (*Mysterium*, xx. 16.)

"The imagination of the devil poisoned the substance of the serpent, so
that the latter, in consequence of the division of its powers that
formerly were in paradisiacal unity, formed itself into a serpent. Thus
he used the snake as his instrument." <span
id="fr_74"></span>[2](#fn_74) (*Letters*, xxxix. 21.)

"The snake was a living symbol of the tree of temptation. The tree of
temptation was in mute power, and the serpent was in a living power, and
the serpent attached itself to that tree, being of its own
nature." <span id="fr_75"></span>[3](#fn_75) (*Mysterium*, xx. 20.)

 

After Adam had introduced his perverted desire into

<span id="page_162">p. 162</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Eve, the latter
was the first to be seduced to fall away from God. <span
id="fr_76"></span>[1](#fn_76)

"The lust originated in Adam, but thereupon this perverted desire began
to be excited in the woman." (*Stiefel*, ii. 375.)

"Eve was lusting after the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, but there was the prohibition before her, and she was afraid of
God, and did not want to act against the prohibition. Then the devil
entered into the substance and cunning of the snake, and turned this
power and craftiness around, so that Eve could see and know that the
serpent was very artful and cunning. She clung to the forbidden tree,
and it did her no harm; but she looked at the serpent and fell in love
with his cunning and cleverness, also with his agility and artfulness,
and she lusted to eat of the tree. The serpent advised her to do so by
the sound and voice of the devil, and pretended that he derived his
cunning and artfulness from the tree." (*Mysterium*, xx. 22.)

"The devil told her that the fruit would do her no harm, but that the
eyes of her understanding would be opened, and she would be like God.
She thought it would be a good thing to be a goddess, and she consented;
and in consenting she fell from the divine harmony, from the peace in
God, and from divine faith, and entered with her desire into the serpent
and into the cunning, the desire, and vanity of the devil." <span
id="fr_77"></span>[2](#fn_77) (*Mysterium*, xx. 25.)

 

While the devil was desirous directly for the fire-life,

<span id="page_163">p. 163</span>

man at first was only desirous after the terrestrial things, but thereby
his lust of pride began to arise.

"The devil went with his imagination into the fiery foundation, but Adam
into the watery quality." (*Signature*, vii. 4.)

"Unlike Lucifer, Adam did not actually desire to awaken the first
principle; his desire was rather to taste good and evil—that is to say,
the vanity of the earth." (*Mysterium*, xviii. 31.)

"In the external part of the soul originated the terrestrial lust to eat
of the manifold qualities; but in the interior fiery part of it
originated lust for pride, to know evil and good, and to be like
God." <span id="fr_78"></span>[1](#fn_78) (*Mysterium*, xviii. 30.)

Thus the first act of the great drama ended, and a god became a man. In
the second act He rises again upward toward His former divine state, no
more innocent and ignorant of evil, but taught by experience, knowing
and wise, a conqueror over "matter," and a true Lord over all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_39"></span>[142:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_39) The term "Paradise"
means a state of purity and innocence and happiness, but not necessarily
knowledge. Man had to learn to know evil so as to be able to realise
good.

<span id="fn_40"></span>[142:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_40) His thoughts and will
were pure, and therefore his spirit (the union of will and thought)
manifested itself in producing a pure and luminous form, not burdened
with the gross material elements which form at present the bodies of
human beings. Then, as now, his body was the product of his own
thoughts.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[143:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_41) Logical proof is only
useful as long as we are blind in regard to the nature of a thing After
that thing has become a part of ourselves and we perceive it, no more
proof of its existence will be required.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[144:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_42) Adam was in harmony
with creation and as one with all nature. Therefore he could experience
the feelings of all beings in nature within himself, and express them
accordingly.

<span id="fn_43"></span>[144:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_43) Even now man is still
there where his consciousness exists; but as his physical body is too
gross to follow the movements of his thoughts, the body becomes
unconscious whenever his consciousness concentrates itself at another
place.

<span id="fn_44"></span>[145:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_44) This was the divine
Man, out of whom the world was created, while the natural man is a
product of the world.

<span id="fn_45"></span>[145:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_45) Because everything was
within his own will, within himself.

<span id="fn_46"></span>[145:3](ldjb10.htm#fr_46) This celestial Adam
has not died, but still exists in all of us; but on account of our state
of degeneration, caused by the attraction of the lower principles, we
have forgotten our own divine nature.

<span id="fn_47"></span>[146:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_47) It was Adam's own
state of feeling and thinking that created an Eden for him, and thus
each human being creates his or her own Paradise.

<span id="fn_48"></span>[147:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_48) This Paradise
(*Deva-loca* or *Devachan*) is described in Eastern books as an
"illusion;" but it is no more an illusion to its inhabitants than the
dream called "terrestrial existence" is an illusion to us. On the
contrary, it is far more permanent and beautiful than this terrestrial
world.

<span id="fn_49"></span>[147:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_49) He could not enjoy
similarity with God, because he did not possess divine self-knowledge.
To attain this knowledge of self he had to eat from the tree of the
self-knowledge of good and evil, and then return to his original divine
state.

<span id="fn_50"></span>[148:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_50) This the soul can
surely not do by seeking for the Son or the Heart of God in anything
outside of her own sphere, and with which she is in no way related.
Therefore the meaning of the words, "Thou shalt worship only one God,"
is "Thou shalt have faith in no other God except the one who is seeking
to reveal Himself within your own conscience, and not worship any
strange idols, such as exist in the imagination of men."

<span id="fn_51"></span>[149:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_51) God being a unity, has
no other will or object in view than to give birth to His Son, *i.e.*,
to manifest His outspoken Word as wisdom in man.

<span id="fn_52"></span>[150:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_52) The spiritual will of
man is free; not so the will of semi-animal man, for freedom depends on
the extent of knowledge. When man's knowledge becomes divine, then will
his will be free—wholly free.

<span id="fn_53"></span>[150:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_53) Man requires the
material (animal) element in him to endow him with strength to rise
above it by the power of God. Man may be regarded as a god crucified
within an animal. The god furnishes him with wisdom, the animal with
strength. We are to overcome the animal in us by the power of divine
wisdom. He who has nothing to overcome can gain no victory. We cannot
rise above a thing as long as we have not attained its highest level.

<span id="fn_54"></span>[151:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_54) It would be foolish to
worry about what Adam ought or ought not to have done. The meaning is,
that we who have "Adam" in us should enter now with our will into the
will of God.

<span id="fn_55"></span>[152:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_55) If primordial man had
never fallen from his purely spiritual state and "refused to create," he
would never have learned to know the wonders of creation, the unfoldment
of the third principle. The external world, as we know it, was created
by Adam's fall.

<span id="fn_56"></span>[152:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_56) The "devil" means
spiritual will perverted. If it is perverted in a personal being, then
will there be a personal devil.

<span id="fn_57"></span>[153:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_57) God (Christ), nature,
and the devil (Antichrist—*i.e.*, Christ perverted) are seeking to
attain self-consciousness in man. Man's consciousness is, therefore,
continually changing, and in reality not his own. Only when the
principle of either good or evil has become self-conscious in man, and
he has become identified with it, will he know his true impersonal self.
Only then will he be a free and responsible agent.

<span id="fn_58"></span>[153:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_58) It was his desire that
the lower qualities should become conscious in himself, each according
to its own nature.

<span id="fn_59"></span>[154:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_59) This is the difference
between life in the terrestrial and life in the celestial states of
nature, that the former is differentiated into forms, each of which
loves to live in the consciousness of its own illusive self—*i.e.*, in a
state of isolation and separatedness, and enjoying its own qualities;
while in the celestial state the individual powers intermingle, each
living, so to say, in the consciousness and enjoying itself in the life
of the other. while all strive towards unity and rest in it, like a
tree, whose many branches and leaves receive their life all from one
common trunk.

<span id="fn_60"></span>[154:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_60) This "tree of
temptation" is still growing in every human being, as is represented in
the allegorical "Adam." The lower qualities in man still strive for
outward manifestation, and can be overcome in no other way than by his
rising above them into the higher ones.

<span id="fn_61"></span>[155:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_61) It is self-evident
that man can attain knowledge of a thing only by giving attention to it.
In doing so, he directs his consciousness to it. Man's consciousness
became centred within the lower principles constituting the sensual
world, and thereby it lost its seat and centre of gravity in the
Supreme. If it had not been for this attraction which the material world
exercised upon man, he might have sunk still lower, and approached
absolute evil, the kingdom of Lucifer.

<span id="fn_62"></span>[155:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_62) "Adam would have
fallen into the unfathomable abyss of hell, if, <span id="page_156">p.
156</span> besides the celestial state, which in consequence of his sin
became perverted into a hellish one, there had not been still another,
namely, the terrestrial region " (*Hamberger*).

<span id="fn_63"></span>[156:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_63) God (divine
self-consciousness) never sleeps; it is only nature in man that causes
him to sleep and wake alternatively. No man is fully awake and
self-conscious as long as he has not found his own god.

<span id="fn_64"></span>[157:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_64) The "history of Adam"
is nothing else but the history of mankind as a whole. Its truth may be
recognised by every one capable of self-examination.

<span id="fn_65"></span>[157:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_65) Adam having lost the
power to recognise the true woman, the eternal virgin within himself, it
was necessary that he should have an external objective substitute to
whom he might be attracted, so as to stimulate his power to love; which
would have entirely died out without such an object, or would have
degraded him still lower by turning into desire for still lower beings
in the scale of evolution.

<span id="fn_66"></span>[157:3](ldjb10.htm#fr_66) From such a
degradation may have resulted the tribe of the monkeys descended from
aboriginal man. (See *Secret Doctrine*, by H. P. Blavatsky.)

<span id="fn_67"></span>[157:4](ldjb10.htm#fr_67) The "*Sal-nitre*"
means the fiery material element in man, wherein reside his sensual
attractions; in other words, his *Kama-rupa*.

<span id="fn_68"></span>[158:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_68) The woman is made out
of the more refined and spiritual essences of man; for this reason woman
even to-day is more refined and intuitional than man; while the
organisation of the body and also the mind of the male is on the whole
more gross and material; and he reasons where woman perceives. There
were not all the female elements removed from man in the creation of the
woman. If man had no such elements in him he would be a brute. Neither
could any woman be visible and tangible and man's associate if she had
none of the male and grossly material elements of Adam in her
organisation.

<span id="fn_69"></span>[158:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_69) It was a part of the
higher and more celestial elements which left "Adam" at the time of the
creation of "Eve."

<span id="fn_70"></span>[158:3](ldjb10.htm#fr_70) It may be well to
remember that at the time of Jacob Boehme it was considered a crime to
disbelieve even in the literal and external interpretation of the Bible
allegories, and that his explanations would have been incomprehensible
and unacceptable if his expressions had not been such as to correspond
with those of the Bible.

<span id="fn_71"></span>[159:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_71) Woman in all
departments of life is a saviour of man. Even the most degraded woman
may be a saviour for still more degraded man, by keeping alive in him a
feeling for an ideal—a low ideal, it is true, but one that keeps him
from sinking into still lower depths, and which may become more refined.
The mission of woman to save man ceases only when man has found the
celestial virgin within himself.

<span id="fn_72"></span>[160:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_72) The "serpent" is the
*astral light*, in whose folds and temptations the will of man is
entangled.

<span id="fn_73"></span>[161:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_73) Evil desires always
enter the heart of man silently and worm-like, until the soul becomes
entangled therein as in the folds of a serpent.

<span id="fn_74"></span>[161:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_74) The serpent is not
himself the devil, but the devil is the evil will that causes the
serpent to move.

<span id="fn_75"></span>[161:3](ldjb10.htm#fr_75) There is no mortal man
to whose tree of life the serpent of desire is not attached during his
terrestrial existence.

<span id="fn_76"></span>[162:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_76) If woman represents
the will and man the intellectual power of mankind as a whole, it
naturally follows that the will was seduced by the desire before the
intellect followed in its track. If the intellect had become seduced
first, it would have become separated from the "woman," and man would
have become a clever fool, an intellectual maniac, an unspiritual but
cunning scientist, without any soul or faith—a "materialist."

<span id="fn_77"></span>[162:2](ldjb10.htm#fr_77) Actual "sin" begins
only where there is a knowledge of evil. A mere evil desire does not
constitute "sin" as long as the desire has not the consent of the
intellect.

<span id="fn_78"></span>[163:1](ldjb10.htm#fr_78) The more man seeks for
the object of his existence in external and sensual things, the more
will he depart from his spiritual faith or point of gravitation from his
own divine centre or God. He becomes experienced in external and
superficial things, and loses sight of that which is real and divine.
His external knowledge, which after all is only imaginary, as it deals
only with passing illusions, awakens his pride and self-conceit; he
begins to assert his personality against immortality; he becomes cruel,
and selfish, and passionate; and unless he be redeemed by the awakening
of spirituality within himself, he will end in awakening in him the
"fiery foundation," the principle of evil, the "devil." Instead of the
Christ, Lucifer will be revealed in him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter VIII. Nature, or the Third Principle](ldjb11)

</div>
