<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb00)  [Next](ldjb02.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_iv">p. iv</span>

"My writings are only for those who are willing to receive the truth in
a simple and childlike state of mind, for it is they who are to possess
the kingdom of God. I have written only for those that seek; to the
cunning and worldly-wise I have nothing to say." (*Threefold Life*, xv.
65.)

"Neither money nor worldly possessions, neither science nor authority,
will bring to you the sweet rest of paradise, at which you can arrive
only by the noble knowledge of self. In that you may clothe your soul;
it is the pearl which is not eaten by moths, and which no thief takes
away. Seek it, and you will find a noble treasure." (*Three Principles*,
ix. 1.)

"I write for no other purpose than that man may learn how to know
himself." (*Three Principles*, iv. 64.)

<span id="page_v">p. v</span>

### PREFACE.

<span class="smallcaps">The</span> following is an attempt to present an
epitome of the principal doctrines of Jacob Boehme in a certain
systematic order, so as to afford a general view of them and to serve as
an introduction to the study of Boehme's works. I have herein followed
the plan laid down in Dr. J. Hamberger's excellent but now very rare
book. The headings of the paragraphs are for the purpose of summarising
the quotations that follow. These quotations have in many instances been
condensed, and in some cases I have attempted to render them in a more
modern and comprehensible phraseology than that of the original text,
the latter being very often obscure and untranslatable. This I did
because it seemed to me of far more importance that the public, for whom
this book is written, should obtain a comprehensive view of the
doctrines of Boehme than that merely the learned philologist should find
his curiosity gratified by getting the exact form in which Boehme
clothed his thoughts. In adding some remarks of my own, my object was
not such a presumptuous one as to amend, comment upon, explain, or make
clearer the writings of Boehme; for it is self-evident that in order to
be able to criticise, amend, or explain the contents of a divinely
inspired book, the critic or explainer would have to be divinely
inspired

<span id="page_vi">p. vi</span>

himself. I have no such arrogant claims to advance; but I wanted to call
the attention of the reader to certain points that may aid in their
understanding.

I have carefully compared the doctrines of Boehme with those of the
Eastern sages, as laid down in the "Secret Doctrine" and in the
religious literature of the East, and I find the most remarkable harmony
between them in their esoteric meaning; in fact, the religion of Buddha,
Krishna, and that of the Christ seem to me to be one and identical. The
greatest obstacle to the understanding of the mysteries of the religion
of the living Christ is the very narrow view which we have become
accustomed to take of them, according to the merely external and
superficial interpretation of the Old and New Testaments, such as is
given by the modern churches and by fashionable clericalism, which
regards these doctrines from a merely historical or emotional point of
view.

A study of Boehme's writings, by means of entering into the spirit in
which they were written, is sure to expand the mind and to elevate the
heart of the reader, giving him a greater and more sublime conception of
God, Nature, and Man, than any other book of which I know.

I am under many obligations to Mrs. E. B. Penny, of Cullompton, for her
assistance in this difficult work, and also to Mr. G. W. Medway for
valuable suggestions.

The extracts are taken from the 1682 Amsterdam (German) edition of
Boehme's Complete Works.

F. H.

<span class="smallcaps">Vienna</span>, *September* 1890.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Contents](ldjb02.md)

</div>
