<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Esoteric](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](ldjb18)  [Next](ldjb20) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Life and Doctrines of Jacob Boehme*, by Franz Hartmann, \[1891\],
at Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

### APPENDIX.

##### <span class="smallcaps">Apparitions</span>

"<span class="smallcaps">The</span> soul originates from three
principles; she lives therefore in a threefold anguish, and is held by
three ties. The first tie links her to eternity and reaches within the
abyss of hell (the fiery will); the second is the kingdom of heaven; the
third is the region of the stars with the elements. The third kingdom is
not eternal, but has a certain period of existence; nevertheless it is
this kingdom that causes the man to grow up, endowing him with manners
and will, and desires relating to good and to evil. It gives him beauty,
riches and honours, and makes him a terrestrial god. It is with him unto
the end of his time, and then it departs and as it aided him to obtain
life, so it aids him in death, and cuts him loose from the astral soul.

"First the four elements break away from the one element, and thus the
activity in the third principle ceases; and this is the most terrible
thing, that the four elements are broken up within themselves. Then the
*tincture* with the shadow (of what was man) enters into the other, and
with this the shadow remains in the root of the element from which the
four elements were born, and from which they issued. This breaking up
alone is the suffering and the pain; it is the destruction of the
sensitive house of the soul.

"But if the essences of the soul in the first principle have been so
much attached to the ways of this world that they have desired only for
the lust of the latter, for temporal honour, power, and pomp; the will,
the soul, *i.e.*, the essences out of the first principle, still retain
the astral essences as their most precious treasure, and desire to dwell
therein; but as

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

these essences are now deprived of their mother, the four elements, they
become gradually consumed in the essences of the first principle.

"Then will the soul in her astral garment, floating within the doors of
the depth, experience great uneasiness owing to her earthly state, and
by the power that belongs to her astral constitution she may reappear in
the shape of her former corporeal body, asking for this or for that,
such as has been her desire before she passed away, and seeking to
obtain rest; and she may also go about haunting places and trying to
manifest her presence at night, according to her sidereal spirit, making
noises of various kinds.

"That with which she has clothed herself during life, this will be her
garment. If it is luxury, lust, ambition, riches, malevolence, anger,
lies, or the illusions of the world, then will the strong power of the
essences out of the first principle hold on to these things by means of
the sidereal spirit, and render it active according to the astral
quality. The sidereal spirit restlessly clings to that for which it
desires; as is said by Christ, 'Where your treasure is, there is your
heart.' Therefore it often happens that the ghosts of dead persons are
seen going about in great unrest. That with which the soul has clothed
herself here in the body (in her will and thought), that constitutes her
anguish, and according to her anguish will be her shape and form in the
astral state, until this state and anguish is consumed. Her eternal
dwelling-place is the deep abyss without end or number, and the works
which she performed here are embodied in the forms in her tincture, and
follow her.

"There is no light neither from this world nor from God, but the
ignition of her own fire is her light, it being the terrible flash of
her wrath and inimical. The kind of the anguish of such souls differs
according to the quality of that with which the soul has burdened
herself. For such a soul there is no help; she cannot enter into the
light of God; and even if St. Peter had left a thousand keys upon the
earth, neither of them would unlock the door, for she has severed the
bond that connected her with Divinity." (See *Three Principles*, xix.
and foll.)

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Asceticism</span>.

It is written that it is very difficult for a rich man to enter into the
kingdom of heaven. This does not refer to the possession of wealth, but
to one's vain and avaricious life; for while man grows fat, God is
forgotten. None ought to imagine that he is blessed because he is poor.
If he is an unbeliever and godless, he is then in the kingdom of the
devil, in spite of his poverty. Neither ought the rich man throw away
his money or give it to the spendthrift, thinking thereby to gain
eternal bliss. The kingdom of God is in truth, justice, and love towards
the needy. It condemns none who properly uses that which he has. You
must not lay down your sceptre and go into a corner and lament. This is
only hypocrisy. You can be of service to the law of justice and to the
kingdom of God better if you keep your sceptre and protect the oppressed
and weak, and work for right and justice; not according to your avarice,
but in the love and fear of God." (*Principles*, xxv. 74.)

### <span class="smallcaps">Astral Spirit</span>.

"All that we think and do and desire in our external being is the work
of the spirit of this world acting within our constitution; for the body
is nothing but the instrument of that spirit wherewith it works, and,
like all other instruments that are born of the spirit of this world, it
will ultimately break and be decomposed. Therefore no man shall despise
or condemn another man if the latter has not the same qualifications as
he; for the natural heaven (the constellation) builds up each man
according to the nature of the ruling influences. It gives to every
person his or her ways and manners and shape, and also his desires and
instincts, and this cannot be taken away from the external man as long
as the external heaven does not break up his animal constitution. But if
the external man does *not* do that which the spirit of the external
world desires in him, but is forced to depart from that which is false
and illusive; then such a power does not come from the external heaven,
but from the new-born man within, he being from eternity, and battling
with the earthly man; and often he gains a victory over the latter."
(*Three Principles*, xxv. 6.)

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

### <span class="smallcaps">Atonement</span>.

"If you wish to follow the path (of light), you must use great earnest.
It must not be mere talk or pretence, while the heart is far away; for
in this way you will attain nothing. You must gather together your whole
mind, with all your senses and reason, into one single will, if you wish
to become reformed, and to come out of your abominations. You must put
your sense into God, into His charity, with full confidence and
assurance, and then you will attain it. And if the devil in you says,
'It cannot be; you are too great a sinner;' let not this terrify you;
for he is a liar and the father of doubt.

"There are not more than two kingdoms moving within you. One is the
kingdom of God, wherein is Christ, desiring you; the other is the
kingdom of hell, wherein is the devil, and he desires you also. Then
will the poor soul have to battle, for she is in the middle. Christ
offers to her the new robe, and the devil the cloth of sins; and
whenever you have a good thought or desire for God, and wish to enter
into the true atonement (becoming one with the Divine), that thought is
most certainly not from yourself, but from the love of God, and the
noble virgin is calling to you to come, and not to desist in your
efforts. But if on this way you are met by your great sins, that seek to
detain you like mountains, so that you can find no peace in your heart;
then is this most surely the work of the devil, who causes you to think
that God is not willing to listen to you. Let not in such moments
anything detain or terrify you; for the devil is your enemy. It is
written that if your sins were as red as blood, if you truly repent,
they will become as white as snow." (*Principles*, xxiv. 34.)

"Thus the precious jewel is sown; but remember well, it does not
immediately grow into a tree. Often will the devil brush over it and
seek to uproot the mustard-seed; the soul will often have to weather
heavy storms, and be covered with the shadows of her sins. But if you
constantly battle against the powers of evil, then will the tree grow
and blossom, and you will obtain the fruit." (Comp. *Three Principles*,
xxiv. 37.)

<span id="page_325">p. 325</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">The Cross</span>.

The cross with the image of a dying person nailed thereon is the symbol
of regeneration and initiation. It reminds the true follower of Christ
that he must pass through the mystic death and become regenerated in the
spirit before he can enter into the glory of eternal life. The cross
represents terrestrial life, and the crown of thorns the sufferings of
the soul within the elementary body, but also the victory of the spirit
over the elements of darkness. The body is naked, to indicate that the
candidate for immortality must divest himself of all desires for
terrestrial things. The figure is nailed to the cross, which symbolises
the death and surrender of the self-will, and that it should not attempt
to accomplish anything by its own power, but merely serve as an
instrument wherein the Divine will is executed. Above the head are
inscribed the letters:

I. N. R. J.

whose most important meaning is:

<span class="smallcaps">In Nobis Regnat Jesus</span>.  
(Within ourselves reigns Jesus.)

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the
signification of this inscription can be practically known only to those
who have actually died relatively to the world of desires, and risen
above the temptation for personal existence; or, to express it in other
words, those who have become alive in Christ, and in whom thus the
kingdom of Jesus (the holy love-will issuing from the heart of God) has
been established.

To the cynic, sophist, and fool this symbol will be incomprehensible,
and in the hands of the bigot and hypocrite it is a token of his
disgrace, and a testimonial of his own godlessness and
self-condemnation.

"The external world or the external life is not a valley of suffering
for those who enjoy it, but only for those who know of a higher life.
The animal enjoys animal life; the intellect the intellectual realm; but
he who has entered into regeneration recognises his terrestrial
existence as a burden and prison. With this recognition he takes upon
himself the Cross of Christ." (*Epistles*, ii. 34.)

<span id="page_326">p. 326</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Death</span>.

"The holy and heavenly man, hidden in the monstrous (external) man, is
as much in heaven as God, and heaven is in him, and the heart or light
of God is begotten and born in him. Thus is God in him and he in God.
God is nearer to him than his bestial body.

"The animal body is not his own native country, wherein he is at home;
the true man, regenerated and new-born in Christ, is not in this world,
but in the paradise of God; and although he is in the body, nevertheless
he is in God. And although the animal body dies, nevertheless nothing
happens to the new man, but he comes forth out of the contrary will and
torment-house into his native country. There needs to be no removing to
any distance or place, whither he may have to go, that it might be
better with him, for God is everywhere revealed in him." (*The
Epistles*, xxv. 13.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Doubt</span>.

"The nothing wherein the devil resides. Doubt is the negation of that
faith which is God. It is the outcome of selfishness and of that
blindness which causes man not to recognise the possession of what he
already has." (See *Threefold Life*, xiv. 41.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">God</span>.

"God is eternal unity, the unmeasurable one good, having nothing before
or after it that could possibly endow it with something or move it. It
is without any inclinations or qualities, without any beginning in time,
within itself only one. It is purity itself, without any contact;
requiring neither place nor locality for its dwelling, being at once
outside of and within the world. Into its depth no thought can
penetrate, neither can its greatness be expressed in numbers, for it is
infinity itself. All that can be counted or measured is natural or
figurative, but the unity of God cannot be defined. It is everything,
and has been recognised as good,

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

and is called 'good,' because it is eternal mildness and beneficence
within the sensitivity of nature and creature, the sweetest love. For
the unity in its aspect as good issues out of itself, introducing itself
into willing and moving. There the unity lives and penetrates the
willing or moving, and the willing and moving experiences the mildness
of the unity. This is the foundation of love in the unity, of which
Moses says, 'The Lord our God is an holy God, and there is no other
besides Him.'" (*Theos*. quest. i. 1.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Humility</span>.

"God is the centre of man, but he resides only within himself, unless
the spirit of man becomes one spirit with him; in which case he will
become manifest in human nature, in soul, mind and desire, whereby he
becomes perceptible to the inner senses of man. The will sends the
senses into God, and God impresses the senses and becomes one being with
them. Then the senses carry the power of God to the will, and the will
receives them joyfully but tremblingly; for it recognises itself as
being unworthy knowing that it comes from an unsteady dwelling. Thus it
receives that power by sinking down before God and out of its triumph
arises a sweet humility. This is the true essence of God, and this
conceived essence within the will is the celestial body, and is called
the true and just faith, which the will has received in the power of
God. It sinks within the mind and resides in the fire of the soul."
(*Menschw*. x. 8.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Jesus Christ</span>.

"In the fifth quality the glory and majesty of God becomes manifest as
the light of love. It is written that God resides in a light into which
none can enter. This means that no created being has ever been born out
of the central fire of love, for it is the most holy fire, and even God
Himself in His Trinity. Out of this holy fire has emanated the JAH, a
ray of the sensitive unity. This is the dear name of <span
class="smallcaps">Jesus</span>, redeeming the poor soul from the
wrath-fire, and in taking up human nature, giving itself up to the
central fire of God in the soul, in the wrath of God within the soul;

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

kindling her again with the love-fire, and uniting her with God."
(*Theos*. quest. iii. 25.)

"<span class="smallcaps">Christ</span> is he that is regenerated of
human quality; the mother of regeneration, the anointed one." (See
*Stief*, 19.) <span id="fr_238"></span>[1](#fn_238)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Man, Terrestrial and Celestial</span>.

"The virgin says: I have something against you. I have raised you up
from among the thorns. When you were a wild animal, I have configured in
you my own image. But the wild animal is among the thorns: this I will
not take unto my bosom. You are still living within your wild animal.
When the world takes that animal, because it belongs to it, then will I
take you. Thus each one will take its own belongings. Why do you
therefore love so much that wild animal which causes to you nothing but
sorrow? You cannot take it with you. It does not belong to you, but to
the world. Let the world use it as it may, but remain you with me. It
will be only a little while; then will your animal break, and you will
be rid of it, and remain with me. How will you then rejoice, if you
think of that animal, which afflicted you day and night, and of which
you are then free. As a flower grows up out of the earth, so do you rise
up out of your wild animal. You say, 'I am your animal; you are born in
me.' Listen, my animal! I am greater than you. When you was to become, I
was your constructor. My essences are out of the root of eternity; but
you are of this world. You will break; but I remain eternally in my
power. Therefore I am far nobler than you. You live in the wrath; but I
will put my fearful wrath into the light, into eternal joy. My works are
in power, while yours remain as shadows. When I am once rid of you, I
will then never accept you again as my animal; but (I take) my new body
which I am regenerating within the deepest root of the holy element."
(*Principles*, xxi. 69.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Nature</span>.

"Lift up your mind in the spirit, and see that the whole of

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

nature, with all the powers therein, with its depth, width, and height,
heaven and earth, and all that is therein and above the heavens, is the
body of God, and the powers of the stars are the arteries in the natural
body of God in this world." (*Aurora*, ii. 16.)

"Nature is not God, no more than the body of a man is man. Nature is the
echo and image of eternal nature, made manifest by the power of the
Word." (*Tabulæ Principiæ*, li.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Path</span>.

"Neither in the sky, nor upon the earth, or among the stars or the
elements, can we find any way by which we may enter into rest. We behold
merely the entrance into life, and next to that its end, when our body
will be borne back to the earth and all our works, labour, and sciences,
and glory will be inherited by another, who also troubles himself for a
while with such things, and then follows us (into death). This continues
from the beginning of the world unto its end. During our misery we can
never know where our spirit remains while the body breaks and becomes a
corpse, unless we are new-born out of this world; so that although we
live in this world in our body, nevertheless we dwell in our soul and
spirit in another eternal, perfect, and new life. Therein a new man will
be found in our spirit and soul, and therein shall and will he live
eternally. Only in this new form will we learn to know what we are and
where our true home is." (*Principles*, xxii. 5.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Planets</span>.

The seven planets refer not only to certain visible stars, but to the
seven qualities of eternal nature, namely—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. ♄ *Saturn*—Astringency; darkness.

2\. ♃*Jupiter*—The active desire within the astringency.

3\. ♂ *Mars*—The fiery strength.

4\. ☉ *Sun*—The light of nature.

5\. ♀ *Venus*—The beginning of substantiality.

6\. ☿ *Mercury*—Life; sound; the *verbum fiat*.

7\. ☾ *Luna*—Moon; corporeity.

</div>

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

"If the first three qualities have their superiority in the dark
principle, then will the other qualities be dormant in their centres;
and all the seven are then evil, as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *Saturn*—Avarice.

2\. *Jupiter*—Cunning.

3\. *Mars*—Anger.

4\. *Sun*—Pride.

5\. *Venus*—Lewdness.

6\. *Mercury*—Envy.

7\. *Luna*—The flesh.

</div>

"If the three first qualities have their superiority in the principle of
light and are born out of the dark centre, then will they have in them
the nature of light. They will then all the seven be good, as follows:—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

1\. *Saturn*—Charity.

2\. *Jupiter*—Wisdom.

3\. *Mars*—Meekness.

4\. *Sol*—Humility.

5\. *Venus*—Chastity.

6\. *Mercury*—Beneficence.

7\. *Luna*—The substantiality of the body of Christ."

</div>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Principle</span>.

"A principle (beginning) is nothing else but a new birth, a new life.
There is only one principle in which is eternal life, namely, the
eternal divinity, and this would not become manifest if God had not
created within himself creatures, such as men and angels, who know the
indissoluble band, and how the birth of eternal light in God takes
place." (*Principles*, v. 6.)

"God had no other material out of which to create anything, except his
own essence. But God is a spirit, intangible, and having neither
beginning nor end. His depth and greatness is everything. A spirit does
nothing except that it rises, and stirs, and moves, and gives birth to
its own self. In its birth there are especially three forms—bitterness,
astringency, and heat; but in these three forms there is neither a
first, nor a second, nor a third; but they are all three only one, and

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

each one gives birth to the other and to the third." (*Principles*, l.
3.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Sex</span>.

"The male is the head, and has in him the upper regiment with the
tincture of the fire, and in his tincture he has the soul that desires
for *Venus* as its corporeal matrix. The soul longs to have spirit and
body, and this has the matrix of woman. But the lower regiment is the
female one, and her regiment stands in the *Moon;* for the *Sun* gives
the heart, and *Venus* the *tincture*, not of a fiery, but of a watery
kind. The spirit furnishes the air, and its tincture is not in the heat.

"The female desires the male, and the *Moon* longs for the *Sun;* for
she is of a material nature, and desires a celestial heart. Thus the
female *matrix* desires for the heart of man and for his *tincture* the
soul; for the soul is eternal good. Thus exists sexual desire among all
creatures, and they wish to mingle with each other. The body does not
understand this, neither is it understood by the air-spirit; but the two
*tinctures*, the male and the female ones, know it well." (*Threefold
Life*, ix. 106.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Sophia</span>.

"The fiery soul, pure as clear gold, and tested in the fire of God, is
the husband of the noble *Sophia*, for she is the *tincture* of the
light. If the tincture of the fire is perfectly pure, then will Sophia
be united with it, and thus *Adam* receives again the most noble bride
that was taken away from him during his sleep, and will take her into
his arms. This is neither a man nor a woman, but a branch on the
*pearl-tree* standing in God's paradise. But how the bride receives her
groom in his clear and bright fire-quality, and how she gives him the
kiss of love, this will be understood only by him who has been at the
marriage of the Lamb. To all others it will be a mystery." (*Mysterium
Magnum*, xxv. 14.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Substantiality</span>.

"If you boast of being a Christian, why do you then not believe Christ's
words when he said, 'I am with you even to

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

the end of the world;' and furthermore, that he will give us his body
for food and his blood to drink? You say, 'Christ has gone to heaven;
how then could he be in this world?' Perhaps you agree that he is
present with us in his Holy Spirit. But what would become of the
new-born man in you if he were fed only by spirit, this being merely
food for the soul? Each life eats of its own mother. The soul is spirit,
and eats spiritual food; the new-born man eats of the pure element, and
the external man of the outcome of the four elements.

"What will it benefit the (ethereal) body if the soul eats of the pure
divinity? for you know that the soul and the body are not one and the
same thing. The soul is spirit, and needs spiritual food. Or do you
think that you can feed the new man with earthly food? If so, you are
then still far from the kingdom of God." (*Principles*, xxiii. 6.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Sulphur, Salt, and Mercury</span>.

"The word *Sul* means and is the soul of a thing; for in the word
*Sulphur* it is the oil or the light, which is born from the syllable
*Phur*. It is the beauty or goodness of a thing; its love or best
beloved. In a creature it is the intelligence and sense, and it is the
spirit born from the syllable *Phur*. The word or syllable *Phur* is
*Prima Materia*, entering into the third principle within itself, the
Macrocosm wherefrom the elemental (terrestrial) kingdom or essence is
born; but in the first principle it is the essence of the innermost
generation, wherefrom God the Father from eternity gives birth to his
Son. In man it is also the light born from the sidereal spirit within
the other centre in the Microcosm, but in the *Spiraculum* it is a
soul-spirit in the inner centre. It is the light of God, which alone
possesses that soul which is in the love of God, for it is kindled and
breathed upon by the Holy Spirit." (*Three Principles*, ii. 7.)

"*Sal* is *Prima Materia*, astringency. In the strong astringency arises
the bitterness; for in the powerful attraction arises the uneasiness of
the spirit. For instance, if a person becomes angry, his spirit attracts
that which causes him to become embittered and trembling; and if he does
not

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

resist and put it down, then the fire of wrath becomes kindled in him,
so as to make him burn in malice. Then in his mind and soul this becomes
substantial and a being." (*Three Principles*, i. 9.)

"*Mercury*, an astringent bitter fire—sulphur—water; the most terrible
of all states; but you must not imagine it to be a *Materia* or a
tangible thing; it is spirit and the source of the first beginning of
nature." (*Three Principles*, i. 10.)

"It comprehends all the four qualities wherein arises the life; but it
has its beginning not in the centre, like Phur, but according to the
fire-flash within the terror of the dark quality." (*Threefold Life*,
ii. 42.)

##### <span class="smallcaps">Word</span>.

"The whole power of the Father speaks out of all the qualities the <span
class="smallcaps">Word</span>, *i.e.*, the Son of God. The same word, or
the same sound, spoken by the Father issues out of the *Salniter*, or
the powers of the Father, and out of the Father's *Mercurius* or sound.
Thus the Father speaks the word out of himself, and the same sound is
the glory of all his powers; and after it is spoken out, it is no longer
contained within the powers of the Father, but sounds and rings in the
whole of the Father in all powers. This power outspoken by the Father
has such a strength that the sound of the word immediately and rapidly
penetrates through the whole depth of the Father, and this strength is
the Holy Spirit; for the outspoken word remains as a glory or majestic
command before the king; but the sound, issuing through the word,
executes the command of the Father which he has spoken out through the
word, and in this is the birth of the Holy Trinity. The same takes place
in an angel or man. The power in the whole of his body has all the
qualities as in God the Father." (*Auror*. vi. 2.)

"In the spirit of the word is to be understood the whole of Divinity,
with all its powers and effects, and with its whole essence; its
uprising, penetrating, and changing; the whole action and the whole
generation." (*Auror*. xix. 72.)

"Thus every creature has its own centre for its out-speaking, or the
sound of the formed word within itself, both the eternal and temporal
beings; the unreasoning ones as well as

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

man; for the first *Ens* has been spoken out of the sound of God, by
wisdom, out of her centre into the fire and light, and has been formed
into the *fiat*, and entered into 'compaction.' The *Ens* is out of the
eternal, but the *compaction* is out of the temporal; and therefore in
everything there is something eternal hidden in time." (*Mysterium
Magnum*, xxii. 2.)

"In that quality in which each word in the human voice in the act of
outspeaking forms and manifests itself, either in the love of God, as in
the holy *Ens*, or in the wrath of God; in the same quality will it be
taken up again therein after it has been spoken out. The false word
becomes infected by the devil, and sealed up for (future) detriment, and
is received within the *Mysterium* of the wrath, as in the quality of
the dark world. Each thing returns with its *Ens* to that wherefrom it
has originated." (*Mysterium Magnum*, xxii. 6.)

The word is near to thee, even within thy heart and lips, and God
himself is the word which is in thy heart and lips." (*Three
Principles*, iv. 10.)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_238"></span>[328:1](ldjb19.htm#fr_238) Jesus represents the
Logos and Christ the Karana sharira in Eastern terminology.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Index](ldjb20)

</div>
