[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4342) 
[Next](sbe4344) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1">9:5:1</span></span>

### FIFTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:1">9:5:1:1</span></span>1. Now,
then, as to the taking of milk as fast-food: the initiated should take
milk for his fast-food. Once upon a time the nectar of immortality
departed from the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:2">9:5:1:2</span></span>2. They
said, 'Let us seek for it here by toil and penance!' They sought for it
by toil and penance. Having become initiated, they were living on
fast-milk, for penance it is when, after becoming initiated, one lives
on fast-milk. They heard the sound of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:3">9:5:1:3</span></span>3. They
said, 'It is indeed coming nearer: let us practise penance still
further!' They resorted to three teats: they saw it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:4">9:5:1:4</span></span>4. They
said, 'It is indeed coming nearer: let us practise penance still
further!' They resorted to two teats: they saw it still nearer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:5">9:5:1:5</span></span>5. They
said, 'It is indeed coming nearer: let us practise penance still
further!' They resorted to one teat: it came nigh unto them, but they
could not lay hold of it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:6">9:5:1:6</span></span>6. They
said, 'It has indeed come nigh unto us, but we cannot lay hold of it:
let us undergo the whole (practice of) penance!' On the day of
preparation they underwent entire abstention from food; for the whole
(practice of) penance it is when one abstains from food: let him
therefore eat nothing on the day of preparation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:7">9:5:1:7</span></span>7. On the
morrow, having laid hold of it and pressed it (the Soma), they offered
(of it) in the fire,

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

and thereby bestowed immortality upon Agni. And he, Agni (the
fire-altar), indeed, is the body of all the gods; and hence, when they
bestowed immortality on Agni (the fire-altar), they bestowed immortality
on their own selves, and thereby the gods became immortal.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:8">9:5:1:8</span></span>8. Now
that same nectar of immortality is Soma. And even to this day the
Sacrificer seeks for it by toil and penance; having become initiated he
lives on fast-milk; for penance it is when, after being initiated, one
lives on fast-milk; he hears the sound of it, saying, 'On such and such
a day the buying (will take place <span
id="fr_455"></span>[1](#fn_448))!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:9">9:5:1:9</span></span>9. He
resorts to three teats (of the cow): he sees it. He resorts to two
teats: he sees it nearer by. He resorts to one teat: it comes nigh to
him, but he cannot lay hold of it. He undergoes entire abstinence from
food; for the whole (practice of) penance it is when one abstains from
food: let him therefore eat nothing on the day of preparation.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:10">9:5:1:10</span></span>10.
And, on the morrow, having laid hold of it, and pressed it, he offers
(of it) in the fire, and thereby bestows immortality on Agni. He then
drinks (of it), and thereby bestows immortality on his own self, and
becomes immortal; for this, assuredly, is immortality to man when he
attains the whole (perfect) life: and so, in truth, he attains the whole
life by this self of his.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:11">9:5:1:11</span></span>11.
When he has offered in the fire, he drinks (Soma); for that (fire-altar)
is his divine body, and this (Sacrificer's own body) is his human one;
and

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

the gods were first, and then men: therefore he drinks (Soma), after
offering in the fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:12">9:5:1:12</span></span>12.
Now, then, the discussion of the Samish*t*aya*g*us (oblations): The gods
and the Asuras, both of them sprung from Pra*g*âpati, entered upon their
father Pra*g*âpati's inheritance, to wit, speech--truth and untruth,
both truth and untruth: they, both of them, spake the truth, and they
both spake untruth; and, indeed, speaking alike, they were alike.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:13">9:5:1:13</span></span>13. The
gods relinquished untruth, and held fast to truth, and the Asuras
relinquished truth, and held fast to untruth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:14">9:5:1:14</span></span>14. The
truth which was in the Asuras beheld this, and said, 'Verily, the gods
have relinquished untruth, and held fast to truth: well, then, I will go
thither!' Thus it went over to the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:15">9:5:1:15</span></span>15. And
the untruth which was in the gods beheld this, and said, 'Verily, the
Asuras have relinquished truth, and held fast to untruth: well, then, I
will go thither!' Thus it went over to the Asuras.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:16">9:5:1:16</span></span>16. The
gods spake nothing but truth, and the Asuras nothing but untruth. And
the gods, speaking the truth diligently, were very contemptible, and
very poor: whence he who speaks the truth diligently, becomes indeed
very contemptible, and very poor; but in the end he assuredly prospers,
for the gods indeed prospered.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:17">9:5:1:17</span></span>17. And
the Asuras, speaking untruth diligently, throve even as salt soil <span
id="fr_456"></span>[1](#fn_449), and were very prosperous: whence he who
speaks untruth diligently, thrives indeed, even as salt soil, and
becomes very prosperous;

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

but in the end he assuredly comes to naught, for the Asuras indeed came
to naught.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:18">9:5:1:18</span></span>18. Now
that same truth, indeed, is this threefold lore <span
id="fr_457"></span>[1](#fn_450). The gods said, 'Now that we have made
up the sacrifice, let us spread out <span
id="fr_458"></span>[2](#fn_451) this truth!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:19">9:5:1:19</span></span>19.
They prepared the Initiation-offering. But the Asuras became aware of
it, and said, 'Having made up the sacrifice, the gods are now spreading
out that truth: come, let us fetch hither what was ours!' The
Samish*t*aya*g*us of that (offering) was not yet performed, when they
arrived: whence people offer no Samish*t*aya*g*us <span
id="fr_459"></span>[3](#fn_452) for that sacrifice. The gods, espying
the Asuras, snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something
else <span id="fr_460"></span>[4](#fn_453). They (the Asuras) went away
again, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:20">9:5:1:20</span></span>20.
When they had gone away, they (the gods) prepared the Opening-offering.
But the Asuras

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

became aware of this also. The *S*amyos (formula) of that (offering) had
been pronounced, when they arrived; whence that sacrifice ends with the
*S*amyos <span id="fr_461"></span>[1](#fn_454). The gods, espying the
Asuras, snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something else. They
went away again, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:21">9:5:1:21</span></span>21.
When they had gone away, they (the gods), having bought and driven about
the king (Soma), prepared the guest-offering for him. But the Asuras
became aware of this also. The I*d*â of that (offering) had been
invoked, when they arrived; whence that sacrifice ends with the
I*d*â <span id="fr_462"></span>[2](#fn_455). The gods, espying the
Asuras, snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something else. They
went away again, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:22">9:5:1:22</span></span>22.
When they had gone away, they (the gods) spread out (performed) the
Upasads <span id="fr_463"></span>[3](#fn_456). When they had recited
three kindling-verses, and no more, they made offering to the deities,
but laid out <span id="fr_464"></span>[4](#fn_457) no fore-offerings and
no after-offerings on either side of the sacrifice, for they were in too
great haste at that time; whence at the Upasads, when he has recited
three kindling-verses, and no more, he

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

makes offering to the deities, but lays out no fore-offerings and no
after-offerings on either side of the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:23">9:5:1:23</span></span>23. On
the day of preparation they slaughtered the Agnîshomîya victim. But the
Asuras became aware of this also. The Samish*t*aya*g*us oblations of
this (offering) had not yet been offered, when they arrived; whence
people offer no Samish*t*aya*g*us for this animal(-offering). The gods,
espying the Asuras, snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something
else. They went away again, thinking, 'It is something else they are
doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:24">9:5:1:24</span></span>24. On
the next morning after they had gone away, they (the gods) spread out
(performed) the morning-service (of the Soma-sacrifice). But the Asuras
became aware of this also. As much as the morning-service had been
performed of it, when they arrived. The gods, espying the Asuras,
snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something else. They went
away, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:25">9:5:1:25</span></span>25.
When they had gone, they (the gods) spread out the midday-service. But
the Asuras became aware of this also. As much as the midday-service had
been performed of it, when they arrived. The gods, espying the Asuras,
snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something else. They went
away, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:26">9:5:1:26</span></span>26.
When they had gone, (the gods) went on with the animal-offering of the
Soma-sacrifice <span id="fr_465"></span>[1](#fn_458).

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> But the Asuras
became aware of this also. As much of this animal-offering as is done
(at the evening-service) had been done, when they arrived. The gods,
espying them, snatched up the sacrifice, and began doing something else.
They went away, thinking, 'It is something else they are doing.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:27">9:5:1:27</span></span>27.
When they had gone away, they (the gods) spread the evening-service and
completed it; and by completing it they obtained that whole truth. Then
the Asuras went down <span id="fr_466"></span>[1](#fn_459). Then the
gods prevailed, and the Asuras came to naught. And, indeed, he who knows
this, himself prevails, and his spiteful enemy comes to naught.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:28">9:5:1:28</span></span>28. The
gods said, 'Those sacrifices of ours which are half-completed, and
leaving behind which we went off <span
id="fr_467"></span>[2](#fn_460),--think ye upon this, how we may
complete them!' They said, 'Meditate ye!' whereby, indeed, they meant to
say, 'Seek ye how we may complete these sacrifices!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:29">9:5:1:29</span></span>29.
Whilst meditating, they saw these Samish*t*aya*g*us (oblations), and
offered them, and thereby completed those sacrifices; and inasmuch as
thereby they completed (sa*m*sthâpaya) them, they are
'sa*m*sthitaya*g*us'; and inasmuch as thereby they sacrificed completely
(sa*m*-ya*g* <span id="fr_468"></span>[3](#fn_461)), they are
'samish*t*aya*g*us.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:30">9:5:1:30</span></span>30. Now
there are nine such (incomplete) sacrifices,

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

and there are nine samish*t*aya*g*us-oblations <span
id="fr_469"></span>[1](#fn_462); and by offering these, he completes
those sacrifices. He offers both kinds, those of the Soma-sacrifice, and
those of the Agni(-*k*ayana),--first those of the Soma-sacrifice, and
afterwards those of the fire-altar: the significance of this has been
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:31">9:5:1:31</span></span>31. Two
he offers of the fire-altar,--two-footed is the Sacrificer, and Agni is
the Sacrificer: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure, with so
much he thus completes the sacrifice. \[He offers them, with, Vâ*g*. S.
XVIII, 56, 57\], 'Sacrifice hath been offered, up by the Bh*ri*gus . .
.;'--'May Agni who hath received sacrifice and oblation speed our
offered meat!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:32">9:5:1:32</span></span>32.
These two amount to eleven,--the Trish*t*ubh consists of eleven
syllables, and the Trish*t*ubh means strength: it is strength he thus
imparts to the Sacrificer.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:33">9:5:1:33</span></span>33.
And, again, as to why there are eleven,--the Trish*t*ubh consists of
eleven syllables, and Indra is of trish*t*ubh nature, Indra is the self
(soul) of the sacrifice, Indra is the deity <span
id="fr_470"></span>[2](#fn_463): he thus finally establishes the
sacrifice in him who is the self, the deity of the sacrifice.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:34">9:5:1:34</span></span>34.
Having performed the Samish*t*aya*g*us-oblations, they betake themselves
to the expiatory bath (avabh*ri*tha <span
id="fr_471"></span>[3](#fn_464)). Having come out from the bath,

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

and performed the Udayanîya (concluding oblation) <span
id="fr_472"></span>[1](#fn_465), he, after the animal cake of the
offering of the barren cow <span id="fr_473"></span>[2](#fn_466),
prepares oblations for the goddesses.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:35">9:5:1:35</span></span>35. For
now Pra*g*âpati, having gained his end, thought himself quite perfect.
Establishing himself in the quarters he went on ordering (or creating)
and disposing everything here; and inasmuch as he went on ordering and
disposing, he is the Orderer. And in like manner does the Sacrificer,
establishing himself in the quarters, order and dispose everything here.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:36">9:5:1:36</span></span>36.
And, again, as to why he prepares these oblations. This Agni (the
fire-altar) is the quarters (regions), and these he lays down beforehand
(in the shape of) the bunch of Darbha grass <span
id="fr_474"></span>[3](#fn_467) and the clod-bricks <span
id="fr_475"></span>[4](#fn_468); the Prâ*n*abh*ri*ts <span
id="fr_476"></span>[5](#fn_469) in the first layer, the whole of the
second, the whole of the third, and the whole of the fourth
(layers <span id="fr_477"></span>[6](#fn_470)); and of the fifth

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

layer the Asapatnâs, Nâkasads and Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs <span
id="fr_478"></span>[1](#fn_471),--these kept going out upwards <span
id="fr_479"></span>[2](#fn_472) (from Pra*g*âpati, the altar).
Pra*g*âpati was afraid of them, thinking, 'Whilst moving away, these
will go beyond this universe.' Having become the Orderer, he went round
them and established himself in them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:37">9:5:1:37</span></span>37. Now
the same as that Orderer is yonder sun; and that which was the farthest
gone of the regions is that in which that (sun) shines firmly
established.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:38">9:5:1:38</span></span>38. And
the same as that Orderer is this cake to the Orderer on twelve
potsherds. On twelve potsherds (it is),--the year is (of) twelve months,
Pra*g*âpati is the year, and Pra*g*âpati is the Orderer. And that one
which was the farthest gone of the regions is the same as these previous
oblations,--a pap to Anumati, a pap to Râkâ, a pap to Sinîvalî, and a
pap to Kuhû <span id="fr_480"></span>[3](#fn_473): when he prepares
these oblations, he thereby establishes him (Pra*g*âpati) in that which
was the farthest gone of the regions. That (cake) he offers whole, for
the completeness of that (Pra*g*âpati).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:39">9:5:1:39</span></span>39.
These are goddesses, for they are the regions,

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

the regions are the metres, and the metres are deities; and that Ka is
Pra*g*âpati; and inasmuch as they are goddesses (devî) and Ka, they are
'devikâ*h* <span id="fr_481"></span>[1](#fn_474).' There are five of
them, for there are five regions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:40">9:5:1:40</span></span>40. As
to this they say, 'He should not offer these oblations, lest he should
do what is excessive.' Let him nevertheless offer them; for these
oblations are offered for (the fulfilment) of (special) wishes, and in
wishes there is nothing excessive. And whatever oblation is offered
after the cake of the animal-offering that is placed inside the victim
itself as its sacrificial sap. He offers both kinds (of oblations),
those of the Soma-sacrifice and those of the Agni(-*k*ayana), to wit,
first those of the Soma-sacrifice, and then those of the fire-altar: the
significance of this has been explained. The cake-offering of the animal
sacrifice is (performed) in a loud voice, and these (five oblations) in
a low voice, for they are an ish*t*i <span
id="fr_482"></span>[2](#fn_475). With the Pa*s*upuro*d*â*s*a he (the
Adhvaryu) says, 'Recite!--Urge!' and with these (oblations),
'Recite!--Worship!' for they are an ish*t*i <span
id="fr_483"></span>[3](#fn_476). There is the same Svish*t*ak*ri*t, and
the same I*d*â <span id="fr_484"></span>[4](#fn_477).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:41">9:5:1:41</span></span>41. Of
that same animal-offering (of the barren cow) they perform the
Samish*t*aya*g*us-oblations; they enter the expiatory bath with the
heart-spit <span id="fr_485"></span>[5](#fn_478);

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

for this animal-offering is the end. Having proceeded with the
heart-spit;--

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:42">9:5:1:42</span></span>42. And
having returned (to the fire-altar), he performs the oblations to
Vi*s*vakarman;--This Agni(-*k*ayana) indeed (includes) all sacrificial
rites (vi*s*vâni karmâ*n*i); and all these its rites have been performed
in this (agni*k*ayana): he now gratifies them, and makes them a deity by
means of an offering of sacrificial food; for only that one is a deity,
for whom an oblation is prepared, but not one for whom it is not
(prepared). Moreover, this Agni is Vi*s*vakarman (the all-worker): it is
him he thereby gratifies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:43">9:5:1:43</span></span>43.
And, again, as to why he offers the Vai*s*vakarma*n*a (oblations) <span
id="fr_486"></span>[1](#fn_479). For the fire-altar there is both a
beginning and an end: the Sâvitra <span id="fr_487"></span>[2](#fn_480)
(formulas) are the beginning, and the Vai*s*vakarma*n*a (oblations) the
end. Were he to offer only those to Savit*ri*, and not those to
Vi*s*vakarman, it would be as if he made only a beginning and no end;
and were he to offer only those to Vi*s*vakarman, and not those to
Savit*ri*, it would be as if he made only an end and no beginning. He
offers both of them, and thus makes both a beginning and an end.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:44">9:5:1:44</span></span>44.
There are eight of those (Sâvitra), and so (there are eight of) these:
thus he makes the end

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

(the same) as the beginning. The Svâhâ-call is the ninth of those <span
id="fr_488"></span>[1](#fn_481), and so it is of these: thus he makes
the end as the beginning. The oblation (âhuti) is the tenth of
those <span id="fr_489"></span>[2](#fn_482), and so it is of these: thus
he makes the end as the beginning. On that occasion he offers the
oblation continuously so as not to stop the seed, the sacrifice there
being seed;--on this occasion (he offers) with the dipping-spoon at the
Svâhâ-call, for manifest is the seed when it is born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:45">9:5:1:45</span></span>45.
\[He offers, with, Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 58-65\], 'What hath flowed from out
of the will, or the heart, or was gathered from the mind, or the eye,
after that go ye forward,--to the world of the righteous whither the
first-born seers went of old!' he thereby means those *Ri*shis <span
id="fr_490"></span>[3](#fn_483).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:46">9:5:1:46</span></span>46.
'Unto thee, O (heavenly) seat, I commit this treasure which the knower
of beings shall bring thither <span id="fr_491"></span>[4](#fn_484)!
Here the lord of the sacrifice will go after you: acknowledge ye <span
id="fr_492"></span>[5](#fn_485) him in the highest heaven!'--as the
text, so the meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:47">9:5:1:47</span></span>47.
'Acknowledge him, O ye gods, seated

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

in the highest heaven, know ye his form! When he cometh by the godward
paths, reveal ye unto him the fulfilment of his wishes!'--as the text,
so the meaning.--'Awake, O Agni, and be watchful! . . .'--'Whereby thou
carriest a thousand, . . .'--the meaning of these two has been
explained <span id="fr_493"></span>[1](#fn_486).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:48">9:5:1:48</span></span>48.
'With grass-bunch and enclosing-stick, with spoon, altar-ground and
grass-cover, with verse of praise, lead thou this our sacrifice unto
heaven, to go unto the gods!' that is, 'with these outward forms of our
sacrifice make it go to the heavenly world!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:49">9:5:1:49</span></span>49.
'What gift, what bounty, what fulfilment, what offering-presents there
are of ours,--Agni Vai*s*vakarma*n*a shall deposit them in heaven with
the gods!'--that is, 'whatever we give, seasonably or unseasonably, that
this fire-altar of Vi*s*vakarman shall place in the heavenly world!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:50">9:5:1:50</span></span>50.
'Where the streams of honey and ghee are never-failing,--there, in
heaven, Agni Vai*s*vakarma*n*a shall place us with the gods!'--as the
text, so the meaning <span id="fr_494"></span>[2](#fn_487).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:51">9:5:1:51</span></span>51.
Eight Vai*s*vakarma*n*a (oblations) he offers,--the Gâyatrî consists of
eight syllables, and Agni is of Gâyatra nature: as great as Agni is, as
great

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

as is his measure, by so much food he thus gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:52">9:5:1:52</span></span>52.
When he has performed the Vai*s*vakarma*n*a (oblations), he gives a
name <span id="fr_495"></span>[1](#fn_488) (to the fire of the altar);
for when any one has been born sound and safe, they give a name to him,
and now this (Agni) has indeed been born sound and safe.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:53">9:5:1:53</span></span>53.
Having given a name to him, he reverently approaches him; for this
(Sacrificer) builds him with his (own) whole self, and were he not to
give utterance now to this surrender of his own self, he (Agni) would
now take away his (the Sacrificer's) self; but when he now gives
utterance to this surrender of his own self, he (Agni) does not take
away his self. \[He approaches the fire\] with the Anush*t*ubh verse
(Vâ*g*. S. XVIII, 67), 'What fires of the five races of men there are
upon this earth,--thou art the chiefest of them: quicken us unto
life!'--the Anush*t*ubh, doubtless, is speech, and all the metres are
speech <span id="fr_496"></span>[2](#fn_489): he thus makes amends to
him (Agni) by all the metres. Having stood by the fire, and lifted <span
id="fr_497"></span>[3](#fn_490) it, and churned it out, he offers the
completing oblation <span id="fr_498"></span>[4](#fn_491).

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:54">9:5:1:54</span></span>54. He
then offers a dish of clotted curds to Mitra and Varu*n*a <span
id="fr_499"></span>[1](#fn_492). Now he who performs this
(Agni-*k*ayana) rite comes to be with the gods; and these two, Mitra and
Varu*n*a, are a divine pair. Now, were he to have intercourse with a
human woman without having offered this (oblation), it would be a
descent, as if one who is divine would become human; but when he offers
this dish of clotted curds to Mitra and Varu*n*a, he thereby approaches
a divine mate <span id="fr_500"></span>[2](#fn_493): having offered it,
he may freely have intercourse in a befitting way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:55">9:5:1:55</span></span>55.
And, again, as to why he offers this dish of clotted curds to Mitra and
Varu*n*a. When Pra*g*âpati was released, the seed fell from him. When
the gods restored him, they, by means of this dish of clotted curds, put
seed into him; and in like manner does this (Sacrificer) thereby put
seed into him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:56">9:5:1:56</span></span>56. Now
that Pra*g*âpati who became released is this very fire-altar which is
here being built; and the seed which fell from him is this dish of
clotted curds of Mitra and Varu*n*a; for Mitra and Varu*n*a are the
in-breathing and up-breathing, and the in-breathing and up-breathing
fashion the infused seed. A dish of clotted curds it is, because seed is
milk; and sacrifice it is, because sacrifice is the seed of sacrifice.
In a low voice it is (offered), for silently seed is shed. At the end
(of the sacrifice) it is (offered), for from the end seed is introduced.

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:57">9:5:1:57</span></span>57.
They proceed with the whey <span id="fr_501"></span>[1](#fn_494) of that
(dish of clotted curds). At this (oblation of whey) he gives a
dakshi*n*â (sacrificial gift): 'Let him give a pair of hornless
he-goats,' so (they say);--'Only by assignment, I think <span
id="fr_502"></span>[2](#fn_495):' said Mâhitthi. And, verily, this
libation of the fire-builder flows away as a libation of Soma which one
offers on a (fire) without bricks.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:58">9:5:1:58</span></span>58. He
need only lay down the naturally-perforated (bricks) <span
id="fr_503"></span>[3](#fn_496); for the naturally-perforated ones are
these worlds; and this built fire-altar is the same as these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:59">9:5:1:59</span></span>59. He
need only lay down the seasonal (bricks); for the seasonal ones are the
year, and this built fire-altar is the year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:60">9:5:1:60</span></span>60. He
need only lay down the all-light (bricks); for the all-light (bricks)
are those deities <span id="fr_504"></span>[4](#fn_497), and this built
fire-altar is those deities.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:61">9:5:1:61</span></span>61. He
need only lay down the Puna*sk*iti; for this is a repeated sacrifice
(punar-ya*gñ*a), it is a later (higher) worship of the gods: it is thus
a repeated sacrifice and the higher worship of the gods he thereby
arranges, and the repeated sacrifice inclines to him <span
id="fr_505"></span>[5](#fn_498)!--so (they say), but let him not do
this,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

for, indeed, whenever Agni is placed on the built (altar), this whole
Agni passes into that very brick <span id="fr_506"></span>[1](#fn_499):
thus whenever he offers in the fire, then these oblations of his will be
offered even as would be his oblations, when offered on a complete
*S*â*nd*ila fire-altar built up with wings and tail.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:62">9:5:1:62</span></span>62.
And, indeed, he who carries about Agni <span
id="fr_507"></span>[2](#fn_500) becomes pregnant with all beings, and
with all the gods; and he who builds him when he has not been carried
about for a year kills all beings in the form of an embryo. But, surely,
he who kills a human embryo, is despised, how much more then he who
kills him (Agni), for he is a god: 'Let no one become an officiating
priest for an (Agni) who has not been carried about for a year,' said
Vâtsya, 'lest he should be a participator in the killing of this, a
god's seed <span id="fr_508"></span>[3](#fn_501)!'

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:63">9:5:1:63</span></span>63. 'A
six-month (Agni) is the last <span id="fr_509"></span>[1](#fn_502) he
may build,' they say, 'for six-month embryos are the last <span
id="fr_510"></span>[1](#fn_502) that live when born.' If he were to
recite the Great Litany on one not carried for a year, he should recite
(only) the eighties of verses, for something incomplete is (the Agni)
not carried for a year, and something incomplete are the eighties of
verses <span id="fr_511"></span>[2](#fn_503). But, indeed, he would only
still further pull asunder that (Agni, already) pulled asunder <span
id="fr_512"></span>[3](#fn_504); and, indeed, whether he (Agni) be
carried for a year, or not carried for a year, he (the Hot*ri*) should
recite the whole of the Great Litany.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:64">9:5:1:64</span></span>64. Now
*S*â*nd*ilyâyana was once upon a time sojourning in the eastern region.
Daiyâmpâti said to him, '*S*â*nd*ilyâyana, how is Agni to be built? For,
indeed, we are loth to carry him for a year, and yet we wish to build
him.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:65">9:5:1:65</span></span>65. He
said, 'Let him by all means build him by whom he has previously been
carried for a year; for that, that (Agni) alone He builds as one that
has been carried <span id="fr_513"></span>[4](#fn_505) (as a child in
the womb).'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:66">9:5:1:66</span></span>66.
And, indeed, let him by all means build who

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

intends to press Soma for a year, for he, manifestly, supports him by
food (in the shape of) those libations.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:67">9:5:1:67</span></span>67.
And, indeed, let him by all means build who offers the Agnihotra for a
year, for he who offers the Agnihotra indeed supports him (Agni, the
fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:5:1:68">9:5:1:68</span></span>68.
And, indeed, let him by all means build who was born a year (after
conception); for Agni is the breath; it is thus him (Agni) he holds.
And, indeed, as the breath, he enters into the infused seed, and takes
possession of it; and inasmuch as he takes possession (vid) of every one
that is born (*g*âta), he is *G*âtavedas. Wherefore by all means let
even one who knows this build him as one ever carried (within him). And,
indeed, if one who knows this either drinks (Soma), or offers drink to
any one else, these libations of his will be offered even as would be
his libations, when offered on a complete *S*â*nd*ila fire-altar built
up with wings and tail.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_448"></span>[256:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_455) That is, the buying
of the Soma plants, for which see part ii, p. 69 seq.

<span id="fn_449"></span>[257:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_456) Both salt (V, 2, 1,
16; VII, 1, 1, 6) and saline soil (VII, 3, 1, 8) mean cattle.

<span id="fn_450"></span>[258:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_457) That is, the Veda,
and hence the sacrificial ritual as the sole end for which the three
collections of hymn-verses (*rik*), hymn-tunes (sâman), and sacrificial
formulas (ya*g*us) were made.

<span id="fn_451"></span>[258:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_458) The verb 'tan,' 'to
spread,' is the regular expression for the 'performing' of the
sacrifice,--a figure of speech taken from the spreading out of a web, in
which literal sense it has to be taken here.

<span id="fn_452"></span>[258:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_459) See III, 1, 3, 6,
where the injunction is given that no Samish*t*aya*g*us should be
performed for the Dîksha*n*îyesh*t*i, 'lest he who has put on the
garment of initiation should reach the end of the sacrifice before its
completion; for the Samish*t*aya*g*us is the end of the sacrifice.' It
should be remembered that the initiation-offering, however essential, is
merely a preliminary ceremony of the Soma-sacrifice, at the end of which
latter sacrifice nine Samish*t*aya*g*us oblations are offered (IV, 4, 4,
1 seq.) instead of the single one offered at the ordinary havirya*gñ*a.
The term signifies 'the formula (ya*g*us) of the completed offering
(samish*t*a).'

<span id="fn_453"></span>[258:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_460) Prof. Delbrück,
Altind. Syntax, p. 429, makes this last clause part of the Asuras’
speech or  thoughts,--'one thing they have undertaken to do, and another
they are doing.' This can hardly be right.

<span id="fn_454"></span>[259:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_461) See III, 2, 3, 23,
where it is stated that the Prâya*n*îya of the Soma-sacrifice is to end
with the *S*amyos (or *S*amyuvâka, for which see part i, p. 254 seq.);
the Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as (and Samish*t*aya*g*us) of the ordinary ish*t*i
being thus omitted.

<span id="fn_455"></span>[259:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_462) For the Âtithya,
see part ii, p. 85 seq. It is shorn of the after-offerings (in addition
to the Patnîsa*m*yâ*g*as and Samish*t*aya*g*us).

<span id="fn_456"></span>[259:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_463) For the Upasads,
see part ii, p. 204 seq.

<span id="fn_457"></span>[259:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_464) That is, performed;
but the verb (ut-sâdaya, 'to set out, or in order') is used purposely,
as if laying out for display,--so as to be in keeping with the
'spreading out' of the sacrifice.

<span id="fn_458"></span>[260:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_465) The portions from
the Savanîya pa*s*u, which is slain during the morning-service, continue
being cooked until the evening-service, when they are offered. See IV,
2, 5, 13; and part ii, p. 357, note.

<span id="fn_459"></span>[261:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_466) Literally, leapt
down (from their high station).

<span id="fn_460"></span>[261:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_467) That is, which we
left behind us when we went off.

<span id="fn_461"></span>[261:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_468) Cf. IV, 4, 4, 6.
For whatever deities this sacrifice is performed, they all are thereby
'sacrificed-to together' (sam-ish*t*a); and because, after all those
(deities) have been 'sacrificed-to together,' he now offers those
(libations), therefore they are called Samish*t*aya*g*us. See also I, 9,
2, 26, with note thereto.

<span id="fn_462"></span>[262:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_469) That is to say, the
same nine Samish*t*aya*g*us-oblations which are performed at the end of
the Soma-sacrifice (IV, 4, 4, 1 seq.). At the end of these, however, two
additional such oblations are offered on the present occasion.

<span id="fn_463"></span>[262:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_470) See I, 4, 5, 4,
'Indra is the deity of (this?) sacrifice;' IV, 4, 2, 16, 'Indra is the
leader of the sacrifice.' The first of the nine
Samish*t*aya*g*us-oblations of the Soma-sacrifice is offered to Indra.

<span id="fn_464"></span>[262:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_471) See IV, 4, 5, 1
seq.

<span id="fn_465"></span>[263:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_472) See IV, 5, 2, 1
seq.

<span id="fn_466"></span>[263:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_473) For this offering
to Mitra and Varu*n*a, see IV, 5, 1, 5.

<span id="fn_467"></span>[263:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_474) The bunch of Darbha
grass is placed in the centre of the newly ploughed altar-site; see VII,
2, 3, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_468"></span>[263:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_475) The four
logesh*t*akâs (clods of earth), being placed at the ends of the two
'spines,' represent the four quarters, marking as they do the centre of
the east, south, west, and north sides of the altar-site, sown with
seeds of all kinds; see VII, 3, I, 13 seq. The bunch of Darbha grass,
placed in the centre, would thus represent the fifth region, viz. the
one above.

<span id="fn_469"></span>[263:5](sbe4343.htm#fr_476) Though the
Prâ*n*abh*ri*ts are said to represent, not the regions, but the
(channels of the) vital airs, they are placed in rows along the
diagonals of the square body of the altar, thus marking, as it were, the
intermediate regions; whilst the fifth set is placed in a circle round
the centre. See [VIII, 1, 1, 1](sbe4303.htm#8:1:1:1) seq.

<span id="fn_470"></span>[263:6](sbe4343.htm#fr_477) The bricks of these
layers are all of them supposed to be marked by their position to relate
to the regions or quarters.

<span id="fn_471"></span>[264:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_478) For the Asapatnâs,
laid down near the ends of the spines, to drive off evil in all four
quarters, see [VIII, 5, 1, 1](sbe4319.htm#8:5:1:1); for the other two
kinds of bricks, expressly identified with the regions, see [VIII, 6, 1,
1](sbe4323.htm#8:6:1:1) seq.

<span id="fn_472"></span>[264:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_479) That is, the altar
was so full of regions that they escaped at the top.

<span id="fn_473"></span>[264:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_480) These deities are
supposed to be personifications of the four phases of the moon; whilst
Prof. Weber (Ind. Stud. XIII, p. 290) would also take the Orderer
(dhât*ri*)--by the Brâhma*n*a identified with the sun--to represent the
moon. On Sinîvalî (identified with Vâ*k*, VI, 5, 1, 9), see also A.
Kuhn, Zeitschr. f. v. Sprachf. II, p. 120; Weber, Ind. Stud. V, 230.
Anumati is identified with the earth, V, 2, 3, 4.

<span id="fn_474"></span>[265:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_481) This is an
etymological quibble resorted to in order to account for the oblation to
Pra*g*âpati as one of the oblations of the goddesses (devikâ).

<span id="fn_475"></span>[265:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_482) See [p.
248](sbe4341.htm#page_248), note [1](sbe4341.htm#fn_426).

<span id="fn_476"></span>[265:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_483) See ibid., note
[2](sbe4341.htm#fn_427).

<span id="fn_477"></span>[265:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_484) That is, for these
five oblations which are inserted between the chief oblations and the
Svish*t*ak*ri*t of the Pa*s*upuro*d*â*s*a; as above, [IX, 4, 3,
12](sbe4341.htm#9:4:3:12) seq.

<span id="fn_478"></span>[265:5](sbe4343.htm#fr_485) For this expiatory
ceremony, called the *S*ûlâvabh*ri*tha (spit-bath), <span
id="page_266">p. 266</span> and marking the conclusion of an ordinary
(nirû*dh*a) animal sacrifice--not one belonging to the
Soma-sacrifice--as well as of the offering of a sterile cow, see part
ii, p. 215.

<span id="fn_479"></span>[266:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_486) Or, perhaps,
formulas; the verses used along with the oblations being ascribed to
Vi*s*vakarman. In any case, however, these oblations are offered to
Agni, as the Vi*s*vakarman, or all-worker (vi*s*vakart*ri*), or (in the
case of Agni = Agni*k*ayana) as including all works (or sacrificial
performances).

<span id="fn_480"></span>[266:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_487) See VI, 3, 1, 1
seq.; part iii, p. 290 seq.

<span id="fn_481"></span>[267:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_488) See VI, 3, 1, 21.

<span id="fn_482"></span>[267:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_489) The Sâvitra
formulas accompany eight libations, which form, however, only one single
continuous offering (âhuti) with one svâhâ-call.

<span id="fn_483"></span>[267:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_490) For the seven
*Ri*shis, identified with the vital airs, the first existing beings, see
VI, 1, 1, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_484"></span>[267:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_491) Mahîdhara (and
apparently Sâya*n*a) seems to supply 'ya*g*amânam' to 'etam,' and
construe thus: 'Unto thee, O heavenly sent, I commit this (Sacrificer),
which treasure *G*âtavedas shall bring thither.'

<span id="fn_485"></span>[267:5](sbe4343.htm#fr_492) 'O gods, honour ye
him (the Sacrificer)!' Mahîdhara; but perhaps the *Ri*shis are addressed
in this second line. Mahîdhara takes 'atra' ('here') along with 'parame
vyoman'--'in this highest heaven.'

<span id="fn_486"></span>[268:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_493) See [VIII, 6, 3,
23](sbe4325.htm#8:6:3:23), [24](sbe4325.htm#8:6:3:24).

<span id="fn_487"></span>[268:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_494) The meaning of the
verse is, however, far from certain. The above is Mahîdhara's
interpretation, except that he takes 'yâ*h*' to mean 'and what (other)
streams there are.' It might, however, also mean--'What streams of honey
and ghee of ours are never-failing anywhere--Agni Vai*s*vakarma*n*a
shall deposit them in heaven with the gods!'--in which case due reward
for sacrifice would be prayed for.

<span id="fn_488"></span>[269:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_495) According to VI, 1,
3, 20, the newly built Agni is to be called '*K*itra,' the Bright one.

<span id="fn_489"></span>[269:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_496) Or, are Vâ*k*, the
Veda, cf. IV, 6, 7, 1 seq.

<span id="fn_490"></span>[269:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_497) Or, 'having mounted
it;'--that is to say, he heats the churning-sticks (ara*n*i) at the
altar-fire, betakes himself with them to the old (Gârhapatya)
fire-place; 'churns out' the fire, and offers on the fire thus produced.

<span id="fn_491"></span>[269:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_498) The
Udavasânîyâ-ish*t*i, consisting of a cake on five potsherds for Agni (or
a libation of ghee taken in five ladlings for Vish*n*u), is the same as
for the Soma-sacrifice, IV, 5, I, 13. But whilst there it is followed at
once by the (evening) Agnihotra, or oblation of milk regularly performed
twice a day; on the present occasion an additional oblation is
performed.

<span id="fn_492"></span>[270:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_499) The same
payasyâ-oblation is performed at the Dâkshâya*n*a modification of the
new and full-moon sacrifice (II, 4, 4, 10 seq.); sec also the Sânnâyya
of the new-moon sacrifice (part i, p. 178, note 4) which is the same
dish.

<span id="fn_493"></span>[270:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_500) Or, he enters into
a divine union.

<span id="fn_494"></span>[271:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_501) The whey (vâ*g*ina)
is offered to the (divine) Coursers, i.e. the regions or quarters; see
II, 4, 4, 22-25.

<span id="fn_495"></span>[271:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_502) The meaning of this
passage is not quite clear to me.

<span id="fn_496"></span>[271:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_503) The three
Svayamât*rinn*âs in the centre of the first, third, and fifth layers
represent the three worlds. These, and the subsequent injunctions, refer
to one who, subsequent to the Agni*k*ayana, wishes to perform a
Soma-sacrifice, without being able to repeat the Agni*k*ayana itself.
Katy. Sr. XVIII, 6, 33.

<span id="fn_497"></span>[271:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_504) See VI, 3, 3, 16;
5, 3, where the three Vi*s*va*g*yotis bricks are said to represent Agni,
Vâyu (wind), and Âditya (sun) respectively.

<span id="fn_498"></span>[271:5](sbe4343.htm#fr_505) Though there is
nothing in the text to show where this quotation <span id="page_272">p.
272</span> begins, it would seem, from Kâtyâyana's rules, that it runs
from the beginning of paragraph 58,--XVIII, 6, 33. In case of inability
(to perform a second) *k*ityâ, at a repeated Soma-sacrifice, (he may lay
down) one or other kind of the Svayamât*rinn*âs, Vi*s*va*g*yotishas, or
*Ri*tavyâs; 34. The Puna*sk*iti; 35. Or no building (at all a second
time); 36. Because the (Agni) *K*itya has become the Âhavanîya.

<span id="fn_499"></span>[272:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_506) That is (as would
seem from Sâya*n*a's interpretation), into the Âhavanîya fire,
considered as the last brick of the altar; and hence the Sacrificer's
offering-fire will for ever thereafter remain for him the *K*itya Agni.

<span id="fn_500"></span>[272:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_507) During the time of
initiation (dîkshâ), which, if at all possible, is to last for a year,
the Ukhya Agni has to be carried about by the intending Sacrificer, for
at least part of each day, in the fire-pan (ukhâ), suspended in a sling
from his neck; the pan-fire being afterwards transferred to the newly
built Gârhapatya and thence to the great fire-altar, to serve as the
*K*itya Agni, or the Âhavanîya fire. See VI, 7, I, 12 seq.

<span id="fn_501"></span>[272:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_508) In the original
this last clause is in the first person,, or in the *oratio directa*,
from the point of view of him who is asked to officiate <span
id="page_273">p. 273</span> as a priest, hence--Let no one become an
officiating priest . . ., thinking, 'Lest I should be a participator . .
.'

<span id="fn_502"></span>[273:1](sbe4343.htm#fr_510) That is to say, he
must have been carried about for at least six months; and embryos less
than six months old cannot live.

<span id="fn_503"></span>[273:2](sbe4343.htm#fr_511) This is so for the
reason that the Mahad uktham consists of more than the eighties of
verses; see [IX, 3, 3, 19](sbe4337.htm#9:3:3:19). One might feel
inclined to include this whole sentence in the preceding quotation.

<span id="fn_504"></span>[273:3](sbe4343.htm#fr_512) That is, already
too much attenuated, by being made as large as one a year old (?).

<span id="fn_505"></span>[273:4](sbe4343.htm#fr_513) Sâya*n*a remarks,
that this reply does not restrict the building of the fire-altar to one
who has carried the fire for a full year, but only discountenances the
building in the case of one who has only carried it for a few days (?).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 5, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4344)
