[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4337) 
[Next](sbe4339) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4">9:3:4</span></span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:1">9:3:4:1</span></span>1. He
then offers the Vâ*g*aprasavîya <span id="fr_385"></span>[2](#fn_379)
(set of fourteen libations),--'vâ*g*a' (strength, sustenance) means food
(anna): it thus is an 'anna-prasavîya' for him, and it is food he
thereby raises (pra-sû) for him (Agni).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:2">9:3:4:2</span></span>2. For
the gods, now that they had gratified him by that food, and consecrated
him by those objects of desire, (to wit) by that stream of wealth <span
id="fr_386"></span>[3](#fn_380), hereby gratified him once more; and in
like manner does this (Sacrificer), now that he has gratified him by
that food, and consecrated him by those objects of desire, that shower
of wealth, hereby gratify him once more.

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:3">9:3:4:3</span></span>3. And,
again, as to why he offers the Vâ*g*aprasavîya. This, to be sure, is his
(Agni's) Abhisheka. For, the gods, having gratified him by that food,
and consecrated him by those objects of desire, (to wit) by that shower
of wealth, then by this (offering) consecrated him once more; and in
like manner does this (Sacrificer), having gratified him by that food,
and consecrated him by those objects of desire, that shower of wealth,
hereby consecrate him once more.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:4">9:3:4:4</span></span>4. It
consists of (seeds of) all (kinds of) plants,--that which consists of
all plants is all food: he thus gratifies him with all food, and with
all food he thus consecrates him. Let him set aside one of these kinds
of food, and not eat thereof as long as he lives. With an udumbara
(ficus glomerata) cup <span id="fr_387"></span>[1](#fn_381) and an
udumbara dipping-spoon (he offers): the significance of these two has
been explained. They are both four-cornered,--there are four quarters:
he thus gratifies him with food from every quarter, and by means of food
from every quarter he thus consecrates him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:5">9:3:4:5</span></span>5. And,
again, as to why he performs the Vâ*g*aprasavîya;--he thereby gratifies
those same deities who have been consecrated by this very rite of
consecration by which he is now about to be consecrated, and, thus
gratified by offering, they grant him permission (to perform) this rite
of consecration, and, permitted by them, he becomes consecrated; for
only he becomes king whom the (other) kings allow to assume the royal
dignity, but not he whom

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

they do not (allow to do so). Thus when he offers in the fire he
consecrates Agni, and when he offers to these deities, he gratifies
those gods who rule over this consecration ceremony.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:6">9:3:4:6</span></span>6. And,
indeed, he offers here also the Pârtha <span
id="fr_388"></span>[1](#fn_382) (oblations);--for the gods now desired,
'May we be consecrated even on this occasion by all the rites of
consecration!' They were indeed consecrated on this occasion by all the
rites of consecration; and in like manner is the Sacrificer on this
occasion consecrated by all the rites of consecration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:7">9:3:4:7</span></span>7. Now
these Pârtha (oblations) are the Vâ*g*aprasavîya of the Râ*g*asûya; and
by offering these (oblations) he is consecrated by the Râ*g*asûya; and
the first seven of the succeeding fourteen (Vâ*g*aprasavîya oblations)
are the Vâ*g*aprasavîya ceremony of the Vâ*g*apeya <span
id="fr_389"></span>[2](#fn_383): thus, by offering these he is
consecrated by the Vâ*g*apeya. And what other seven there are, they
belong to Agni (or, the Agni*k*ayana): by offering these, he is
consecrated by the Agni-consecration.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:8">9:3:4:8</span></span>8. He
first offers those of the Râ*g*asûya, then those of the Vâ*g*apeya; for
by performing the Râ*g*asûya one becomes king (râ*g*â) and by the
Vâ*g*apeya emperor (samrâ*g*), and the position of king is (obtained)
first, and thereafter that of

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

emperor <span id="fr_390"></span>[1](#fn_384): hence after performing
the Vâ*g*apeya, one could not perform the Râ*g*asûya,--it would be a
descent, just as if one who is emperor were to become king.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:9">9:3:4:9</span></span>9. Those
(seven Vâ*g*aprasavîya oblations) of the fire-altar he offers last, for
the Agni-consecration indeed is (equal to) all those rites of
consecration, and he who is consecrated by the Agni-consecration rite
becomes everything, king and emperor: therefore he offers those of the
fire-altar last of all.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:10">9:3:4:10</span></span>10. He
then anoints him on a black antelope skin,--for the black antelope skin
is (a symbol of) the sacrifice: it is thus at the sacrifice that he
anoints him. On the hairy side (of the skin),--for the hairs are the
metres: on the metres he thus anoints him. On the left (north) side (of
the fire-altar he anoints him): the significance of this (will be
explained) further on. On (the skin laid down) with the neck-part
towards the front, for that (tends) godwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:11">9:3:4:11</span></span>11.
Some, however, anoint him on the right (south) side of the fire-altar,
on the ground that it is from the right side that food is served, and
that they thus anoint him from the food-side. But let him not do so, for
that (southern) region belongs to the Fathers, and quickly he goes to
that region whom they anoint in that way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:12">9:3:4:12</span></span>12. And
some, indeed, anoint him on the Âhavanîya, on the ground that the
Âhavanîya is the world of heaven, and that they thus anoint him in the
world of heaven. But let him not do so, for that (Âhavanîya, the
fire-altar,) is his (the Sacrificer's)

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

divine body, and this (Sacrificer, or Sacrificer's real body) is his
human one: they thus attach that divine body of his to this his mortal
body, if they anoint him in this way.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:13">9:3:4:13</span></span>13. Let
him anoint him on the left (north) side and nowhere else, for that
north-eastern region belongs to both gods and men: they thus anoint him
whilst seated and established in his own region, for he who is
established in his own seat suffers no injury.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:14">9:3:4:14</span></span>14. One
who has gained a position in the world should be anointed sitting, for
one who has gained a position is seated, so to speak;--and one who is
striving to gain one standing, for one who wishes to gain a position,
stands, so to speak. On a he-goat's skin should be anointed one desirous
of prosperity, on a black-antelope skin one desirous of spiritual
lustre, on both (kinds of skins) one desirous of both: that (skin) he
spreads north of the tail (of the fire-altar) with its hair uppermost
and its neck-part towards the east.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:15">9:3:4:15</span></span>15.
Close to the enclosing-stones <span id="fr_391"></span>[1](#fn_385):
inasmuch as the black-antelope skin is close to the enclosing-stones, so
that divine body of his is consecrated on the black-antelope skin; and
inasmuch as he is consecrated whilst keeping hold of the fire-altar he
is not cut off from that divine consecration (of the Fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:16">9:3:4:16</span></span>16. He
anoints him after making offering on the fire-altar, for that (altar) is
his divine body, and

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

this (Sacrificer himself) is his human one; and the gods indeed were
first, and thereafter the men: therefore, after making offering, he
anoints him with what remains over of that same
(offering-material) <span id="fr_392"></span>[1](#fn_386). He then
throws the dipping-spoon after (the oblations into the fire).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:17">9:3:4:17</span></span>17.
Placing himself near the (Sacrificer's) right arm, he then anoints
him <span id="fr_393"></span>[2](#fn_387), with (Vâ*g*. S. XVIII, 3-7),
'At the impulse of the divine Savit*ri*, I anoint thee, by the arms of
the A*s*vins, by the hands of Pûshan, by the support of Sarasvatî Vâ*k*,
the supporter, by the universal sovereignty of Agni!'--for Sarasvatî is
Vâ*k* (speech), and hers is all this support. Impelled by Savit*ri*, he
thus anoints him by all this support of Sarasvatî Vâ*k*, the supporter,
and by the universal sovereignty of Agni. Here he throws the cup (into
the fire), lest what is anointed (with offering material) should remain
outside the fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:4:18">9:3:4:18</span></span>18. He
anoints him h the middle of the Pârtha oblations, for the Pârtha
oblations are the year: he thus places him in the middle of the year.
Six he offers before, and six after (the consecration ceremony), for
there are six seasons: by the seasons he thus encloses (guards) him who
is consecrated on both sides. B*ri*haspati is the last of the first
(six <span id="fr_394"></span>[3](#fn_388)), and Indra the first of the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

last (six),--B*ri*haspati is the priesthood (or priestly office), and
Indra is the nobility (or political power): by the priesthood and the
nobility he thus encloses him who is consecrated on both sides.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_379"></span>[223:2](sbe4338.htm#fr_385) That is, oblations
capable of promoting or quickening strength (or food,--vâ*g*a); see part
iii, p. 37 (where read Vâ*g*aprasavîya). While the formulas of the first
seven of these oblations are the same as those used for those of the
Vâ*g*apeya (see V, 2, 2, 5-11), the formulas of the last seven of these
oblations are Vâ*g*. S. XVIII, 30-36 (for the first of which, being the
same as IX, 5, see VI, 1, 4, 4).

<span id="fn_380"></span>[223:3](sbe4338.htm#fr_386) This seems to be in
apposition to both 'that food,' and 'those objects of desire.'

<span id="fn_381"></span>[224:1](sbe4338.htm#fr_387) Or, pan. It has a
handle, and serves on this occasion in place of the offering-ladle as
well as for anointing the Sacrificer.

<span id="fn_382"></span>[225:1](sbe4338.htm#fr_388) In the same way as,
at the Râ*g*asûya, six Pârtha oblations were offered before, and as many
immediately after, the Consecration ceremony, or 'anointment' (see part
iii, p. 8 1 seq.), so also on the present occasion, except that, between
the first six Pârthas and the consecration ceremony, the Vâ*g*aprasavîya
set, referred to in the preceding paragraphs, is inserted.

<span id="fn_383"></span>[225:2](sbe4338.htm#fr_389) For these seven
oblations, see V, 2, 2, 6-11. Only the second set of seven thus is
peculiar to the Agni*k*ayana.

<span id="fn_384"></span>[226:1](sbe4338.htm#fr_390) See V, 1, 1, 12.

<span id="fn_385"></span>[227:1](sbe4338.htm#fr_391) Sâya*n*a takes
'âsp*ri*sh*t*am pari*s*rita*h*' to mean 'lightly touched (just touched)
by an enclosing-stone.' The participle would rather seem here to have an
active meaning, like 'anvârabdha' in the same paragraph.

<span id="fn_386"></span>[228:1](sbe4338.htm#fr_392) That is, with the
remainder of the mess of different kinds of seed mixed with milk and
water.

<span id="fn_387"></span>[228:2](sbe4338.htm#fr_393) That is, by
sprinkling him with the liquid, or pouring it on him.

<span id="fn_388"></span>[228:3](sbe4338.htm#fr_394) The formulas of the
twelve Pârtha oblations are the same as those used on the occasion of
the Râ*g*asûya (V, 3, 5, 8. 9), the sixth of which is 'To B*ri*haspati
hail!' and the seventh 'To Indra hail!'

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 4, 1. Fourth Adhyâya. First Brâhma*n*a](sbe4339)
