[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4322) 
[Next](sbe4324) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1">8:6:1</span></span>

### SIXTH ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:1">8:6:1:1</span></span>1. He
lays down the Nâkasads (firmament-seated bricks): the firmament-seated
ones, assuredly, are the gods. In this (layer) that whole fire-altar
becomes completed, and therein these (bricks are) the firmament (nâka),
the world of heaven: it is therein that the gods seated themselves; and
inasmuch as the gods seated themselves on that firmament, in the world
of heaven, the gods are the firmament-seated. And in like manner does
the Sacrificer, when he lays down these (bricks), now seat himself on
that firmament, in the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:2">8:6:1:2</span></span>2. And,
again, why he lays down the Nâkasads. Now at that time the gods saw that
firmament, the world of heaven, these Stomabhâgâs <span
id="fr_181"></span>[1](#fn_180). They spake,

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Think ye upon
this, how we may seat ourselves on that firmament, in the world of
heaven!' They spake,

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'Meditate ye! seek
ye a layer!' whereby, indeed, they said, 'Seek ye this, how we may seat
ourselves on this firmament, in the world of heaven!'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:3">8:6:1:3</span></span>3. Whilst
meditating, they saw these bricks, the Nâkasads, and placed them on (the
altar): by means of them they seated themselves on that firmament, in
the world of heaven; and inasmuch as through them they seated themselves
(sad) on that firmament (nâka), in the world of heaven, these are the
Nâka-sad (bricks); and in like manner does the Sacrificer, when he lays
down these (bricks), now seat himself on that firmament, in the world of
heaven.

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:4">8:6:1:4</span></span>4. He
places them in the (four) quarters; for that firmament, the world of
heaven, is the quarters: he thus establishes them in the world of
heaven. On the range of the *Ri*tavyâs (he places them); for the
*Ri*tavyâs (seasonal bricks) are the year, and the world of heaven is
the year: it is in the world of heaven he thus establishes them. Within
the Stomabhâgâs (he places them); for this is the firmament, the world
of heaven: it is therein he thus establishes them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:5">8:6:1:5</span></span>5. In
front he lays down one, with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 10), 'Queen thou art, the
Eastern region,' for a queen indeed the eastern region is;--'The divine
Vasus are thine overlords <span id="fr_182"></span>[1](#fn_181),' for
the divine Vasus are indeed the overlords of that region;--'Agni is the
repeller of shafts,' for Agni, indeed, is here the repeller of
shafts;--'The Triv*ri*t-Stoma may uphold thee on earth!' for by the
threefold hymn(-form) this one is indeed upheld on earth;--'The
Â*g*ya-*s*astra may support thee for steadiness’ sake <span
id="fr_183"></span>[2](#fn_182)!' for by the Â*g*ya-*s*astra it is
indeed supported on earth for steadiness’ sake;--'the Rathantara-sâman
for stability in the air!' for by the Rathantara-sâman it is indeed
established in the air;--'May the *Ri*shis, the first-born,
magnify <span id="fr_184"></span>[3](#fn_183) thee among the gods!'--the
*Ri*shis, the first-born, doubtless, are the vital airs <span
id="fr_185"></span>[4](#fn_184), for they are the first-born
Brahman <span id="fr_186"></span>[5](#fn_185);--'with the measure, the
width of the sky!'--that is, 'as great as the sky is, so much in width
may they broaden thee!'--

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'And he, the
upholder, and the overlord,'--these two are speech and mind, for these
two uphold everything here;--'may they all, of one mind, settle thee,
and the Sacrificer, on the back of the firmament, in the world of
heaven!' as the text, so its import.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:6">8:6:1:6</span></span>6. Then
on the right (south) side (he lays down one <span
id="fr_187"></span>[1](#fn_186)), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 11), 'Wide-ruling
thou art, the southern region,' for wide-ruling indeed is that southern
region;--'The divine Rudras are thine overlords,' for the divine Rudras
are indeed the overlords of that region;--'Indra is the repeller of
shafts,' for Indra, indeed, is here the repeller of shafts;--'The
Pa*ñk*ada*s*a-stoma may uphold thee on earth!' for by the fifteenfold
hymn it is indeed upheld on earth;--'The Praüga-*s*astra may support
thee for steadiness’ sake!' for by the Praüga-*s*astra it is indeed
supported on earth for steadiness’ sake;--'the B*ri*hat-sâman for
stability in the air!' for by the B*ri*hat-sâman it is indeed
established in the air;--'May the *Ri*shis, the first-born, magnify thee
among gods . . .!' the import of this (and the rest) has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:7">8:6:1:7</span></span>7. Then
behind (he lays down one), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 12), 'All-ruling thou
art, the western region,' for all-ruling indeed is that western
region;--'The divine Âdityas are thine overlords,' for the divine
Âdityas are indeed the overlords of that region;--'Varu*n*a is the
repeller of shafts,' for Varu*n*a, indeed, is here the repeller of
shafts;--'The Saptada*s*a-stoma may uphold thee on

<span id="page_102">p. 102</span>

earth!' for by the seventeenfold hymn it is indeed upheld on
earth;--'The Marutvatîya-*s*astra may support thee for steadiness’
sake!' for by the Marutvatîya-*s*astra it is indeed supported on earth
for steadiness’ sake;--'the Vairûpa-sâman for stability in the air!' for
by the Vairûpa-sâman it is indeed established in the air;--'May the
*Ri*shis, the first-born, magnify thee among the gods . . .!' the import
of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:8">8:6:1:8</span></span>8. Then
on the left (north) side (he lays down one), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 13),
'Self-ruling thou art, the northern region,' for self-ruling that
northern region indeed is; 'The divine Maruts are thine overlords,' for
the divine Maruts are indeed the overlords of that region;--'Soma is the
repeller of shafts,' for Soma, indeed, is here the repeller of
shafts;--'The Ekavi*ms*a-stoma may uphold thee on earth!' for by the
twenty-one-fold hymn this one is indeed upheld on earth;--'The
Nishkevalya-*s*astra may support thee for steadiness’ sake!' for by the
Nishkevalya-*s*astra it is indeed supported on earth for steadiness’
sake;--'the Vairâ*g*a-sâman for stability in the air!' for by the
Vairâ*g*a-sâman it is indeed established in the air;--'May the *Ri*shis,
the first-born, magnify thee among the gods . . .!' the import of this
has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:9">8:6:1:9</span></span>9. Then
in the middle (he lays down one <span id="fr_188"></span>[1](#fn_187)),
with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 14), 'The sovereign mistress thou art, the Great
region!' for the sovereign mistress that great region indeed is;--'the
All-gods are

<span id="page_103">p. 103</span>

thine overlords,' for the All-gods are indeed the overlords of that
region;--'B*ri*haspati is the repeller of shafts,' for B*ri*haspati,
indeed, is here the repeller of shafts;--'The Tri*n*ava- and
Trayastri*ms*a-stomas may uphold thee on earth;'--for by the
twenty-nine-fold and thirty-three-fold hymns this one is indeed upheld
on earth;--'The Vai*s*vadeva- and Âgnimâruta-*s*astras may support thee
for steadiness’ sake!' for by the Vai*s*vadeva- and Âgnimâruta-*s*astras
it is indeed supported on earth for steadiness’ sake;--'May the
*Ri*shis, the first-born, magnify thee among the gods . . .!' the import
of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:10">8:6:1:10</span></span>10.
Thus much, indeed, is the whole sacrifice, and the sacrifice is the self
of the gods: it was after making the sacrifice their own self that the
gods seated themselves on that firmament, in the world of heaven; and in
like manner does the Sacrificer now, after making the sacrifice his own
self, seat himself on that firmament, in the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:11">8:6:1:11</span></span>11. He
then lays down the Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*â ('five-knobbed') bricks; for the
Nâkasads are (parts of) the sacrifice, and so indeed are the
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs the sacrifice: the Nâkasads are these four sacrificial
priests together with the Sacrificer as the fifth; and the
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs are the Hotrâs <span id="fr_189"></span>[1](#fn_188).
Now the Hotrâs are additional (to the officiating staff, or to the
Hot*ri*) and whatever is additional is an excrescence (*k*û*d*a); and
hence, as they are five additional (bricks), they are (called)
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs <span id="fr_190"></span>[2](#fn_189).

<span id="page_104">p. 104</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:12">8:6:1:12</span></span>12.
And, again, as to why he lays down the Nâkasad-Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs;--it is
for the sake of completeness; for the Nâkasads are the self, and the
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs the mate, and this, the mate, doubtless, is one half of
the self; for when one is with his mate <span
id="fr_191"></span>[1](#fn_190), then he is whole and complete.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:13">8:6:1:13</span></span>13.
And, again, as to why he lays down the Nâkasad-Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs;--the
Nâkasads are the self, and the Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs are offspring (or
subjects) <span id="fr_192"></span>[2](#fn_191). Now progeny is
something additional to the self, and whatever is additional is an
excrescence; and hence, as they are five additional ones, they are
(called) Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:14">8:6:1:14</span></span>14.
And, again, as to why he lays down the Nâkasad-Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs;--the
Nâkasads are the regions, and the Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs, too, are the
regions: what five regions there are on this side of yonder sun, they
are the Nâkasads, and those which are on the other side are the
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs. Now those regions which are on the other side of
yonder sun are additional, and what is additional is an excrescence
(*k*û*d*a): and hence, as they are five additional ones, they are called
Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:15">8:6:1:15</span></span>15.
And, again, as to why he lays down the Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs. Now, at that
time the gods were afraid lest the fiends, the Rakshas, should destroy

<span id="page_105">p. 105</span>

these worlds of theirs from above. They put those protectors over these
worlds, to wit, those shafts and missiles; and in like manner does the
Sacrificer now put those protectors over these worlds, to wit, those
shafts and missiles.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:16">8:6:1:16</span></span>16. He
places one in front, with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 15), 'This one in front, the
yellow-haired one,'--Agni, no doubt, is in front; and as 'to his saying
of him as (being) 'in front,' it is because they take him out (of the
Gârhapatya hearth) towards the front <span
id="fr_193"></span>[1](#fn_192), and attend upon him towards the front;
and as to why he calls him yellow-haired, it is because Agni is, as it
were, yellow;--'the sun-rayed one,' for Agni's rays are like those of
the sun;--'and Rathag*ri*tsa and Rathau*g*as <span
id="fr_194"></span>[2](#fn_193), his commander and his chieftain,' the
two spring-months are these two;--'and the nymphs Pu*ñg*ikasthalâ and
Kratusthalâ <span id="fr_195"></span>[3](#fn_194),'--'quarter and
intermediate quarter,' said Mâhitthi; but army and battle these two
are;--'mordacious beasts the shaft, manslaughter the missile,'--inasmuch
as they fight in army and battle, those mordacious beasts are the shaft;
'manslaughter the missile,'--inasmuch as they slay one another,
manslaughter is the missile;--'to them be homage!' it is to them he pays
homage;--'be they gracious unto us!' they are indeed gracious to
him;--'he whom we hate, and he who hates us,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

him we put into their jaws!' whomsoever he hates, and whoever hates him,
him he puts into their jaws. 'N. N. I put into their jaws,' thus he may
name him whom he hates, and thereafter he will not be there any more.
Let him disregard this also, for indeed marked out of himself is he whom
he who knows this hates.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:17">8:6:1:17</span></span>17.
Then on the right (south) side (he places one), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 16),
'This one on the right, the all-worker,' the all-worker is this Vâyu
(the wind) who blows here, for he makes everything here; and because he
speaks of him as (being) 'on the right,' therefore it is in the south
that he blows most;--'and Rathasvana (chariot-noise) and Rathe*k*itra
(glorious on the chariot), his commander and chieftain;' these are the
two summer-months;--'and the two nymphs, Menakâ and
Saha*g*anyâ,'--'quarter and intermediate quarter,' said Mâhitthi; but
these two are heaven and earth;--'Goblins the shaft, demons the
missile;' for goblins indeed are here the shaft (weapon), and demons the
missile;--'to them be homage . . .!' the import of this has been
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:18">8:6:1:18</span></span>18.
Then behind (in the west, he lays down a brick), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV,
17), 'This one behind, the all-embracer,'--the all-embracer, doubtless,
is yonder sun; for as soon as he rises all this embracing space comes
into existence; and because he speaks of him as (being) 'behind,'
therefore one sees him only when he goes towards the back (west);--'and
Rathaprota (fixed on the chariot) and Asamaratha (of matchless chariot),
his commander and chieftain;' these are the two rainy months;--'and the
nymphs Pramlo*k*antî (the setting one) and

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Anumlo*k*antî (the
rising one),'--'quarter and intermediate quarter,' said Mâhitthi, but
they are day and night, for these two set and rise; 'tigers the shaft,
snakes the missile,' for indeed tigers are here the shaft, and snakes
the missile;--'to them be homage . . .!' the import of this has been
explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:19">8:6:1:19</span></span>19.
Then on the left (north) side (he places one), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 17),
'This one on the left, of ever flowing blessings;' on the left is the
sacrifice; and as to why he speaks of it as 'on the left,' it is because
the sacrifice is performed from the left (north) side; and as to why he
speaks of it as 'of ever-flowing blessings (sa*m*yadvasu),' they do
indeed flow together (sa*m*yanti) to the sacrifice, thinking, 'this is a
blessing;'--'and Târkshya and Arish*t*anemi, his commander and
chieftain,' these are the two autumn-months; 'and the nymphs Vi*s*vâ*k*î
(the all-inclined) and Gh*ri*tâ*k*î (the ghee-inclined),'--'quarter and
intermediate quarter,' said Mâhitthi, but they are the vedi (altar) and
the offering-spoon, for the altar is all-inclined <span
id="fr_196"></span>[1](#fn_195), and the offering-spoon is
ghee-inclined;--'water the shaft, wind the missile,'--water indeed is
here the shaft, and wind the missile, for from this side it blows hot,
and from that side cold;--'to them be homage . . .!' the import of this
has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:20">8:6:1:20</span></span>20.
Then in the middle (he lays down one), with (Vâ*g*. S. XV, 19), 'This
one above, the boon-bestower <span id="fr_197"></span>[2](#fn_196),' the
one above, doubtless, is Par*g*anya (the rain-god); and when he speaks
of him as (being)

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> 'above,' it is
because Par*g*anya is indeed above; and when he calls him the
boon-bestower, it is because from there the boon, rain, food for
creatures, is bestowed hitherwards;--'and Sena*g*it (the conqueror of
armies) and Sushena (leader of a fine army), his commander and
chieftain,' these are the two winter-months;--'and the nymphs, Urva*s*î
and Pûrva*sk*itti,'--'quarter and intermediate quarter,' said Mâhitthi,
but they are oblation and dakshi*n*â (priest's sacrificial
fee);--'thunder the shaft, lightning the missile,' for indeed thunder is
here the shaft, and lightning the missile;--'to them be homage . . .!'
the import of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:21">8:6:1:21</span></span>21.
These, then, are the shafts and missiles which the gods then put as
protectors over these worlds, and as to offspring (or subjects <span
id="fr_198"></span>[1](#fn_197)), they are the commander and chieftain;
and as to the mates, they are those nymphs,--having thus become complete
with offspring and with mates, the gods seated themselves on that
firmament, in the world of heaven; and in like manner does the
Sacrificer, having become complete with offspring and a mate, now seat
himself on that firmament, in the world of heaven.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:22">8:6:1:22</span></span>22.
Now, these are ten (Nâkasad-Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*â) bricks he lays down;--of
ten, syllables the Virâ*g* consists, and this layer is virâ*g*
(far-shining). There are, however, only five of them, for he lays them
down by two and two. And, verily, they are prayers for prosperity to
Agni (the fire-altar). He places them in the last layer, for this, the
last, layer is the end of Agni: it is thus at the end that he

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

pronounces the prayers for prosperity to Agni. There are five of them,
for at the sacrifice there are five prayers for prosperity <span
id="fr_199"></span>[1](#fn_198). Between (each) two he throws loose
soil, for these two bricks being fires, he does so fearing lest these
two fires should blaze up together. And, moreover, loose soil means
food: it is thus by means of food that he brings about concord between
them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:6:1:23">8:6:1:23</span></span>23.
Now; then, as to the order of proceeding. Having laid down (a brick) in
front, he lays down those on the right, behind, on the left, and in the
middle. Then the upper ones: having first laid down one in front, he
lays down those on the right, on the left, in the middle, and behind.
And, indeed, the world of heaven is entered from below, for the gods,
having at that time, closed up these worlds on all sides, entered the
world of heaven from below; and in like manner does the Sacrificer now,
having closed up these worlds on all sides, enter the world of heaven
from below.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_180"></span>[97:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_181) The central portion
of the fifth layer is here characterised as symbolically representing
the firmament, the blue canopy of heaven, and the region of bliss beyond
it. The outer rim of this central structure is formed by a continuous
ring of twenty-nine Stomabhâgâ (st) bricks representing, it would seem,
the horizon on which the vault of heaven rests. There is some doubt as
to the exact manner in which this ring of bricks is to be arranged.
According to Kâty. *S*rautas. XVII, 11, 10, fifteen bricks are to he
placed south (and fourteen north) of the anûka, or spine (running
through the <span id="page_98">p. 98</span> centre from west to east).
As regards the southern semicircle, the fifteen bricks are to be
distributed in such a way that eight fall within the south-easterly, and
seven into the south-westerly, quadrant. Some such arrangement as that
adopted in the diagram below would seem to be what is intended. It will
be seen that this arrangement includes two half-size bricks in the
south-easterly

<span id="img_09800"></span> ![THE CENTRAL PART OF THE FIFTH
LAYER.](img/09800.jpg)  
THE CENTRAL PART OF THE FIFTH LAYER.

quadrant, the one lying immediately south of the 'spine,' and the other
immediately east of the 'cross-spine.' It is an awkward fact, however,
that one of. the commentators on the Sûtra referred to, states that
there are to be two half-foot bricks, (one) on each side of the
spine--that is, as would seem, the 'cross-spine.' I cannot but think,
however, that this must be a mistake, as otherwise it would seem to make
the construction of a continuous ring impossible. Inside this ring, on
the adjoining range (viz. the *Ri*tavyâ <span id="page_99">p. 99</span>
range, being the fifth range from the centre, see the diagram of the
first layer, [p. 17](sbe4305.htm#page_17)), five Nâkasads (n) are placed
on the spines, with the exception of the eastern one, which is to be
placed in the second space north of the spine, that is to say, a foot
from it (so as to leave space between it and the spine for the left
Ritavyâ; cf. [VIII, 7, 1, 11](sbe4326.htm#8:7:1:11), with note). In the
south two half-sized bricks are laid down instead of one full-sized one.
All these five bricks are of half the usual thickness so as to allow
five others, the Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs (p), being placed upon them. Of the
*kh*andasyâs, or bricks representing the metres, only three sets (of
three bricks each, viz. a full-sized one flanked on either side by a
half-sized one) fall within the circle formed by the stomabhâgâ-ring,
viz. the trish*t*ubhs (t), *g*agatîs (*g*), and anush*t*ubhs (a). The
remaining space in the centre is now filled up by the Gârhapatya hearth,
consisting of eight bricks. Thereon is placed a second layer of eight
bricks exactly corresponding to the first, and called Puna*sk*iti. This
pile (marked by hatching in the sketch) thus rises above the fifth layer
by the full depth of a brick. He then lays down the two *Ri*tavyâs
(*ri*t) just within the ring on the east side; and the Vi*s*va*g*yotis
(v), representing the sun, immediately west of them. Having now filled
up the available spaces of the layer with Lokamp*rin*âs, and scattered
loose soil on it, he finally lays down two perforated bricks (marked in
the sketch by cross-hatching), the Vikar*n*î and the Svayamât*rinn*â, so
that the latter lies exactly in the centre, and the former immediately
north of it, over the 'cross-spine.'

<span id="fn_181"></span>[100:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_182) Or, perhaps, 'the
Vasus are thy divine overlords;' but see [paragraph
9](sbe4323.htm#8:6:1:9).

<span id="fn_182"></span>[100:2](sbe4323.htm#fr_183) Lit. for
unwaveringness (so as not to totter).

<span id="fn_183"></span>[100:3](sbe4323.htm#fr_184) Lit. broaden,
widen.

<span id="fn_184"></span>[100:4](sbe4323.htm#fr_185) See VI, 1, 1, 1;
[VII, 2, 3, 5](sbe4309.htm#8:2:3:5).

<span id="fn_185"></span>[100:5](sbe4323.htm#fr_186) See VI, 1, 1, 8.

<span id="fn_186"></span>[101:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_187) That is, the
southern of the two half-sized ones to be placed in this quarter.

<span id="fn_187"></span>[102:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_188) That is, he lays
down a half-sized brick immediately north of the southern one, and thus
in the direction of the centre from that brick.

<span id="fn_188"></span>[103:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_189) That is, the
offices of Hotrakas, or assistants to the Hot*ri*.

<span id="fn_189"></span>[103:2](sbe4323.htm#fr_190) These bricks would
seem to have had some kind of protuberances or bulgings (*k*û*d*a), or
perhaps tufts, resembling a man's crest-lock or top-knot (*k*û*d*â).
Possibly, however, these five bricks, <span id="page_104">p. 104</span>
being placed on the top of the Nâkasads, are themselves here represented
as something additional. Such, at any rate, seems to be the definition
of the term given in the text above and in [parag.
13](sbe4323.htm#8:6:1:13). The MS. of the commentary reads, 'kâyasya vai
tat pâvar*g*ita*m* (!) sa *k*û*d*a*h* ke*s*apu*ñg*a*h*.'

<span id="fn_190"></span>[104:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_191) This, doubtless, is
here the meaning of mithunam; and similarly in I, 7, 2, 11, we ought to
translate, 'The vasha*t*kâra is the mate of those two (anuvâkyâ and
yâ*g*yâ).'

<span id="fn_191"></span>[104:2](sbe4323.htm#fr_192) See [paragraph
21](sbe4323.htm#8:6:1:21).

<span id="fn_192"></span>[105:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_193) See [p.
3](sbe4303.htm#page_3), note [2](sbe4303.htm#fn_36).

<span id="fn_193"></span>[105:2](sbe4323.htm#fr_194) That is, 'skilled
in chariot (-fight),' and 'mighty in chariot (-fight).'

<span id="fn_194"></span>[105:3](sbe4323.htm#fr_195) The meaning of
these names is rather obscure: the symbolical explanations 'army and
battle' might seem to point to some such meanings as 'grounded on heaps'
and 'grounded on intelligence (or plan).'

<span id="fn_195"></span>[107:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_196) That is, extending
in every direction, or open (common) to all.

<span id="fn_196"></span>[107:2](sbe4323.htm#fr_197) Lit. 'he whose
boons are (bestowed) hitherwards.'

<span id="fn_197"></span>[108:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_198) See [paragraph
13](sbe4323.htm#8:6:1:13).

<span id="fn_198"></span>[109:1](sbe4323.htm#fr_199) Viz. for long life,
offspring, cattle, social distinction, and a seat in heaven;--see the
Sûktavâka I, 9, 1, 12 seqq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 6, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4324)
