[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4334) 
[Next](sbe4336) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1">9:3:1</span></span>

### THIRD ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### INSTALLATION AND CONSECRATION OF AGNI.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:1">9:3:1:1</span></span>1. He
then offers the Vai*s*vânara (cake). That Agni has now been completely
restored; he now is that deity, (Agni) Vai*s*vânara (belonging to all
men): to him he offers this oblation, and by the oblation he makes him a
deity, [for](errata.htm#2) whatever deity an oblation is prepared that
is a deity, but not one for whom no (oblation) is prepared. It is one of
twelve potsherds: twelve months are a year, and Vai*s*vânara is the
year.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:2">9:3:1:2</span></span>2. And,
again, as to why he offers the Vai*s*vânara (cake),--it is as the
Vai*s*vânara that he is about to produce that Agni: on that former
occasion, at the initiation-offering <span
id="fr_353"></span>[1](#fn_347), he pours him out in the form of seed:
and what the seed is like that is poured.

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

into the womb, such like (is the child that) is born; and inasmuch as
there he pours out Vai*s*vânara in the form of seed, therefore he now is
born as Vai*s*vânara. Silently <span id="fr_354"></span>[1](#fn_348) it
is (performed) there, for there seed (is implied) in the sacrifice, and
silently seed is infused; but distinctly on the present occasion, for
distinct (manifest) is the seed when born.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:3">9:3:1:3</span></span>3. Now,
that Vai*s*vânara is all these worlds: this earth is the All (vi*s*va),
and Agni is its man (nara); the air is the All, and Vâyu (the wind) is
its man (ruler); the sky is the All, and Âditya (the sun) is its man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:4">9:3:1:4</span></span>4. And
these worlds are the same as this head,--this (lower part of the head)
is the earth, the plants (being) the hair of its beard: this is the All,
and Agni is Speech, he is the man. That (speech) is at the top thereof,
for Agni is on the top of this (earth).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:5">9:3:1:5</span></span>5. This
(central part of the face) is the air, whence it is hairless, for
hairless, as it were, is the air; it is this All, and Vâyu (the wind) is
the breath, he is the man; he is in the middle thereof, for the wind is
in the middle of the air.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:6">9:3:1:6</span></span>6. The
sky is the (upper part of the) head, and the stars are the hair; it is
the All, and Âditya (the sun) is the eye, he is the man: it is in the
lower part of the (upper) head, for the sun is below the sky.
Vai*s*vânara is the head thereof, and this built-up Agni (the altar) is
the body: thus, having completed his body, he restores the head thereto.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:7">9:3:1:7</span></span>7. He
then offers the (cakes) to the Maruts;--

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

the Maruts’ (cakes) are the vital airs: he thus puts the vital airs into
him (Agni). \[He does so\] after offering the Vai*s*vânara; for the
Vai*s*vânara is the head: he thus puts vital airs into the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:8">9:3:1:8</span></span>8. That
(Vai*s*vânara oblation) is a single one, for single, as it were, is the
head; the others (viz. the Mârutas) are seven in number, of seven
potsherds each; and though 'seven-seven' means 'many times,' here it is
only seven <span id="fr_355"></span>[1](#fn_349): he thus places seven
vital airs in the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:9">9:3:1:9</span></span>9. That
(Vai*s*vânara oblation) is (performed in a) distinct (voice), for the
head is distinct; but indistinct the other (oblations), for indistinct,
as it were, are the vital airs. Standing he offers the former, for the
head stands, so to speak; sitting the others, for the vital airs are, so
to speak, seated.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:10">9:3:1:10</span></span>10.
Now, the first two Mâruta (oblations) he offers are these two vital airs
(in the ears): he offers them in the middle <span
id="fr_356"></span>[2](#fn_350) of the Vai*s*vânara (oblations), for
these two vital airs are in the middle of the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:11">9:3:1:11</span></span>11. And
the second pair are these two (vital airs

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

in the eyes); he offers them closer together, for closer together, as it
were, are these two vital airs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:12">9:3:1:12</span></span>12. And
the third pair are these two (vital airs in the nostrils). He offers
them closer together, for closer together, as it were, are these two
vital airs. The one to be recited in the forest <span
id="fr_357"></span>[1](#fn_351) is speech: it is to be recited in the
forest, for by speech one gets into much terrible (trouble).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:13">9:3:1:13</span></span>13.
And, again, as to why he offers the Vai*s*vânara and Mârutas,--the
Vai*s*vânara is the ruling power (chieftaincy), and the Mârutas are the
clan: he thus sets up both the chief and the clan. The Vai*s*vânara he
offers first: thus, having set up the chief, he sets up the clan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:14">9:3:1:14</span></span>14. The
former is a single (oblation): he thus makes the ruling power
(chieftaincy) to attach to a single (person), and (social) distinction
to attach to a single (person). The others are numerous: he thus bestows
multiplicity on the clan.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:15">9:3:1:15</span></span>15. The
former is (offered in a) distinct (voice), for the ruling power is
something distinct, so to speak; and the others are indistinct, for
indistinct, so to speak, is the clan. Standing he offers the former, for
the ruling power (the chief) stands, so to speak; and sitting (he
offers) the others, for the clan sits, so to speak.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:16">9:3:1:16</span></span>16. The
former he offers with the offering-ladle,

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

when the Vasha*t* is uttered, with both an invitatory formula (anuvâkyâ)
and an offering-formula (yâ*g*yâ); with the hand the others sitting,
with the Svâhâ-call: he thus makes the clan subservient and obedient to
the chieftain.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:17">9:3:1:17</span></span>17. As
to this they say, 'How do these (Mâruta oblations) also come to be
offered for him by the offering-ladle, at the Vasha*t*-call, and with
invitatory and offering formulas?' Well, the first three feet of those
seven-footed Mâruta (verses), being a three-footed Gâyatrî, are the
invitatory formula, and the last four, being a four-footed Trish*t*ubh,
are the offering-formula. The one is the bowl, and the other the handle
(of the offering-ladle), and the Svâhâ-call is the Vasha*t*-call: in
this way, then, these (Mâruta oblations) also become offered for him by
the offering-ladle, at the Vasha*t*-call, and with invitatory and
offering-formulas.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:18">9:3:1:18</span></span>18. And
the first Mâruta (cake) which he offers on the right (south) side, is
the seven (rivers) which flow eastwards. It is one of seven potsherds,
for there are seven of. those (rivers) which flow eastwards.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:19">9:3:1:19</span></span>19. And
the first (cake) which he offers on the left (north) side, is the
seasons; it is one of seven potsherds, for there are seven seasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:20">9:3:1:20</span></span>20. And
the second (cake) which he offers on the right side, is animals; it is
one of seven potsherds, for there are seven domestic animals. He offers
it close to the preceding one (representing the rivers): he thus settles
animals near water.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:21">9:3:1:21</span></span>21. And
the second (cake) which he offers on the left side, is the seven
*Ri*shis; it is one of seven potsherds, for the seven *Ri*shis are seven
in number.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> He offers it close
to the preceding one: he thus establishes the seven *Ri*shis in the
seasons.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:22">9:3:1:22</span></span>22. And
the third (cake) which he offers on the right side, is the vital airs;
it is one of seven potsherds, for there are seven vital airs in the
head. He offers it close to the preceding one: he thus puts the vital
airs so as to be close to (not separated from) the head.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:23">9:3:1:23</span></span>23. And
the third (cake) which he offers on the left side, is the metres; it is
one of seven potsherds, for there are seven metres increasing by four
(syllables respectively). He offers it close to the preceding one: he
thus places the metres close to the *Ri*shis.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:24">9:3:1:24</span></span>24. And
the Ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya is the seven (rivers) which flow
westwards; it is one of seven potsherds, for there are seven of those
(rivers) which flow westwards. It is that downward vital air of his.
That Ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya belongs to this Pra*g*âpati; for the
forest (ara*n*ya) is, as it were, concealed, and concealed, as it were,
is that downward vital air; whence those who drink of these (downward
flowing) rivers become most vile, most blasphemous, most lascivious in
their speech. Whenever he here speaks of them as belonging to the
Maruts, he makes them food for him (Agni) <span
id="fr_358"></span>[1](#fn_352) and offers it to him, and gratifies him
thereby.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:25">9:3:1:25</span></span>25.
That Vai*s*vânara (cake), doubtless, is yonder sun, and the Mâruta
(cakes) are those rays. They are of seven potsherds each, for the troops
of the Maruts consist of seven each.

<span id="page_213">p. 213</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:3:1:26">9:3:1:26</span></span>26. He
offers (the first Mâruta cake), with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 80), 'The
clear-lighted, and the bright- lighted, and the true-lighted, and the
light, and the clear, and the law-observing, and the sinless
one!'--these are their names: having completed that disk (of the sun, in
the shape of the Vai*s*vânara), he bestows those rays on it by calling
them by their names.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_347"></span>[207:1](sbe4335.htm#fr_353) Cp. VI, 6, 1, 6.
Whilst the initiation-offering of the ordinary Soma-sacrifice consists
only of a cake on eleven potsherds to Agni and Vish*n*u, that of the
Agni*k*ayana requires two further oblations, viz. a cake on twelve
potsherds to Vai*s*vânara, and a rice-pap with ghee to the Âdityas; cf.
part iii, p. 247 note.

<span id="fn_348"></span>[208:1](sbe4335.htm#fr_354) Or, rather, in a
low voice, the name of the deity being pronounced in an undertone while
the oblation is poured into the fire; see VI, 6, 1, 11. No special
formula is, however, used on either occasion.

<span id="fn_349"></span>[209:1](sbe4335.htm#fr_355) See [VIII, 1, 1,
2](sbe4303.htm#8:1:1:2). Also VI, 5, 3, 11, where the translation should
be altered accordingly.

<span id="fn_350"></span>[209:2](sbe4335.htm#fr_356) In baking the
cakes, the Vai*s*vânara is placed on the centre of the fire, and the
first two Mâruta cakes are placed north and south of it, then the
following pair of cakes behind the first, but more closely together, and
behind these the third pair, still more closely together, and finally
the last cake forming, as it were, the apex of a phalanx of Mâruta cakes
(or wind-deities) protecting (that of) Agni Vai*s*vânara. In offering
the cakes a similar method is to be followed; except that the first pair
of Mâruta cakes may be offered, not in the fire itself, but on the
previously flattened out Vai*s*vânara cake lying on the fire. Whilst the
Kâtîya-sûtra (XVIII, 4, 23) admits this as an alternative mode (though
not very clearly expressed), our passage seems to require it as the only
possible mode. Both the Vai*s*vânara and the Mâruta cakes are offered
whole.

<span id="fn_351"></span>[210:1](sbe4335.htm#fr_357)
'Ara*n*ye<sup>ऽ</sup>nû*k*ya' is the technical term applied to the odd,
or seventh, Mâruta oblation. According to Sâya*n*a it is so called after
an anuvâka of the Sa*m*hitâ, to be recited only in the forest. Possibly,
however, it is to the particular formula (Vâ*g*. S. XXXIX, 7), also
called 'vimukha' (? to be pronounced 'with averted face'), and
containing the names of the seven most terrible Maruts, that the name
applies.

<span id="fn_352"></span>[212:1](sbe4335.htm#fr_358) Probably, inasmuch
as the Maruts (and the Mâruta oblations) represent the clansmen who are
considered the legitimate 'food' or the chief, Agni Vai*s*vânara.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 3, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4336)
