[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4320) 
[Next](sbe4322) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3">8:5:3</span></span>

### THIRD BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:1">8:5:3:1</span></span>1. He
then lays down the Stomabhâgâ (praise-sharing bricks). For at that time
Indra set his mind upon that food of Pra*g*âpati, and tried to go from
him. He spake, 'Why dost thou go from me? why dost thou leave
me?'--'Give me the essence of that food: enter me therewith!'--'So be
it!' so he gave him the essence of that food, and entered him therewith.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:2">8:5:3:2</span></span>2. Now he
who was that Pra*g*âpati is this very Agni (the fire-altar) that is now
being built up; and that food is these *Kh*andasyâ (bricks); and that
essence of food is these Stomabhâgâs; and he who was Indra is yonder
Âditya (the sun): he indeed is the Stoma (hymn of praise), for
whatsoever praises they sing, it is him they praise thereby,--it is to
that same Stoma he gave a share; and inasmuch as

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

he gave a share (bhâga) to that Stoma, these are (called) Stomabhâgâs.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:3">8:5:3:3</span></span>3. \[He
lays them down, with, Vâ*g*. S. XV, 6. 7\], 'By the ray quicken thou the
truth for truth!'--the ray, doubtless, is that (sun), and ray is food;
having put together that (sun) and the essence thereof, he makes it
enter his own self;--'by the starting, by the law, quicken the
law!'--the starting, doubtless, is that (sun), and the starting also
means food: having put together that (sun) and the essence thereof, he
makes it enter his own self;--'by the going after, by the sky, quicken
the sky!'--the going after, doubtless, is that (sun), and the going
after also means food; having put together that (sun) and the essence
thereof, he makes it enter his own self. Thus whatever he mentions here,
that and the essence thereof he puts together and makes it enter his own
self: 'By such and such quicken thou such and such!'--'Such and such
thou art: for such and such (I deposit) thee!'--'By the lord, by
strength, quicken strength!' thus they (the bricks) are divided into
three kinds, for food is of three kinds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:4">8:5:3:4</span></span>4. And as
to why he lays down the Stomabhâgâs. Now the gods, having laid down the
far-shining layer, mounted it. They spake, 'Meditate ye!' whereby,
doubtless, they meant to say, 'Seek ye a layer!' Whilst meditating, they
saw even the firmament, the heavenly world, and laid it down. Now that
same firmament, the heavenly world, indeed is the same as these
Stomabhâgâs, and thus in laying down these, he lays down the firmament,
the heavenly world.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:5">8:5:3:5</span></span>5. The
first three (bricks) are this (terrestrial)

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

world, the second (three) the air, and the third (three) the sky, the
fourth the eastern, the fifth the southern, the sixth the western, and
the seventh the northern regions.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:6">8:5:3:6</span></span>6. These
twenty-one bricks, then, are these worlds and the regions, and these
worlds and the regions are a foundation, and these worlds and the
regions are twenty-one: whence they say, 'the Ekavi*ms*a
(twenty-one-fold) is a foundation.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:7">8:5:3:7</span></span>7. And
the eight bricks which remain over are the Gâyatrî consisting of eight
syllables; but the Gâyatrî is the Brahman, and as to that Brahman, it is
yonder burning disk: it burns, while firmly-established on that
twenty-one-fold one, as on a foundation, whence it does not fall down.

<span class="margnote"><span id="8:5:3:8">8:5:3:8</span></span>8. Now
some lay down a thirtieth (Stomabhâgâ), with, 'Beautifully arrayed,
quicken thou the kshatra for the kshatra!' saying, 'Of thirty syllables
is the Virâ*g* (metre) and this layer is virâ*g* (far-shining).' But let
him not do so: they (who do so) exceed (this layer so as not to be)
amounting to the twenty-one-fold, and to the Gâyatrî; and that
undiminished Virâ*g*, doubtless, is the world of Indra: in the world of
Indra they raise a spiteful enemy of equal power (to Indra), and thrust
Indra out of the world of Indra. And at his own sacrifice the Sacrificer
assuredly is Indra: in the Sacrificer's realm they raise for the
Sacrificer a spiteful enemy of equal power, and thrust the Sacrificer
out of the Sacrificer's own realm. But, surely, that fire which they
bring hither is no other than this Sacrificer: by means of his
foundation it is he who is the thirtieth (brick) in this (layer).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: VIII, 5, 4. Fourth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4322)
