[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4368) 
[Next](sbe4370) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4">10:5:4</span></span>

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

### FOURTH BRÂHMA*N*A.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:1">10:5:4:1</span></span>1.
Verily, this (brick-)built Fire-altar (Agni) is this (terrestrial)
world:--the waters (of the encircling ocean) are its (circle of)
enclosing-stones; the men its Ya*g*ushmatîs (bricks with special
formulas); the cattle its Sûdadohas <span
id="fr_764"></span>[1](#fn_752); the plants and trees its earth-fillings
(between the layers of bricks), its oblations and fire-logs <span
id="fr_765"></span>[2](#fn_753); Agni (the terrestrial fire) its
Lokamp*rin*â (space-filling brick);--thus this comes to make up the
whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler <span
id="fr_766"></span>[3](#fn_754); and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus
comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler <span
id="fr_767"></span>[4](#fn_755).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:2">10:5:4:2</span></span>2. But,
indeed, that Fire-altar also is the air:--the function of heaven and
earth (the horizon) is its (circle of) enclosing-stones, for it is
beyond the air that heaven and earth meet, and that (junction) is the
(circle of) enclosing-stones; the birds are its Ya*g*ushmatî bricks, the
rain its Sûdadohas, the rays

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

of light its earth-fillings, oblations and fire-logs; Vâyu (the wind) is
its space-filler; thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the
whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows
this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:3">10:5:4:3</span></span>3. But,
indeed, that Fire-altar also is the sky:--the (heavenly) waters are its
enclosing-stones, for even as a case <span
id="fr_768"></span>[1](#fn_756) here is closed up so are these worlds
(enclosed) within the waters; and the waters beyond these worlds are the
enclosing-stones;--the gods are the Ya*g*ushmatî bricks; what food there
is in that world is its Sûdadohas; the Nakshatras (lunar mansions) are
the earth-fillings, the oblations and the fire-logs; and Âditya (the
sun) is the space-filler;--thus this comes to make up the whole Agni;
and the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever
knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:4">10:5:4:4</span></span>4. But,
indeed, that Fire-altar also is the sun:--the regions are its
enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these <span
id="fr_769"></span>[2](#fn_757), because three hundred and sixty regions
encircle the sun on all sides;--the rays are its Ya*g*ushmatî bricks,
for there are three hundred and sixty of these <span
id="fr_770"></span>[3](#fn_758), and three hundred and sixty rays of the
sun; and in that he establishes the Ya*g*ushmatîs within the
enclosing-stones thereby he establishes the rays in the regions. And
what is between the regions and the rays, is its Sûdadohas; and what
food there is in the regions and rays that is the earth-fillings, the
oblations and

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

the fire-logs; and that which is called both 'regions' and 'rays' is the
space-filling (brick):--thus this comes to make up the whole Agni; and
the whole Agni comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever
knows this, thus comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:5">10:5:4:5</span></span>5. But,
indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Nakshatras:--for there are
twenty-seven of these Nakshatras, and twenty-seven secondary stars
accompany each Nakshatra,--this makes seven hundred and twenty <span
id="fr_771"></span>[1](#fn_759), and thirty-six in addition thereto. Now
what seven hundred and twenty bricks <span
id="fr_772"></span>[2](#fn_760) there are of these, they are the three
hundred and sixty enclosing-stones and the three hundred and sixty
Ya*g*ushmatî bricks; and what thirty-six there are in addition, they are
the thirteenth (intercalary) month, the body (of the altar); the
trunk <span id="fr_773"></span>[3](#fn_761) (consisting of) thirty, the
feet of two, the (channels of the) vital airs of two <span
id="fr_774"></span>[4](#fn_762), and the head itself being the
(thirty-fifth and) thirty-sixth,--and as to there being two of these, it
is because '*s*iras' (head) consists of two syllables;--and what (space)
there is between (each) two

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Nakshatras that is
the Sûdadohas; and what food there is in the Nakshatras that is the
earth-fillings (between the layers of bricks), the oblations and the
fire-logs; and what is called 'nakshatras' that is the space-filling
(brick):--thus this comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni
comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus
comes to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:6">10:5:4:6</span></span>6. Now,
these (amount to) twenty-one B*ri*hatîs <span
id="fr_775"></span>[1](#fn_763); and--the heavenly world being the
twenty-one-fold one <span id="fr_776"></span>[2](#fn_764) and the
B*ri*hatî (the great one)--this (altar) thus comes to be equal to the
heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma (hymn-form) and the
B*ri*hatî metre.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:7">10:5:4:7</span></span>7. But,
indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Metres; for there are seven of these
metres, increasing by four syllables <span
id="fr_777"></span>[3](#fn_765); and the triplets of these make seven
hundred and twenty syllables, and thirty-six in addition thereto. Now
what seven hundred and twenty bricks there are of these, they are the
three hundred and sixty enclosing-stones and the three hundred and sixty
Ya*g*ushmatîs; and what thirty-six there are in addition, they are the
thirteenth month, and the body (of this altar),--the trunk (consisting
of) thirty, the feet of two,

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

the vital airs of two, and the head itself being the (thirty-fifth and)
thirty-sixth; and as to there being two of these, it is because
'*s*iras' consists of two syllables.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:8">10:5:4:8</span></span>8. Now
the first ten syllables of this B*ri*hatî, consisting of thirty-six
syllables, make an Ekapadâ <span id="fr_778"></span>[1](#fn_766) of ten
syllables; and the (first) twenty make a Dvipadâ of twenty syllables;
and the (first) thirty a Virâ*g* <span id="fr_779"></span>[2](#fn_767)
of thirty syllables; and the (first) thirty-three a (Virâ*g*) of
thirty-three syllables; and the (first) thirty-four a Svarâ*g* <span
id="fr_780"></span>[3](#fn_768) of thirty-four syllables; and in that
this fire-altar is built with all metres thereby it is an
Ati*kh*andas <span id="fr_781"></span>[4](#fn_769), and (so) indeed are
all these bricks <span id="fr_782"></span>[5](#fn_770). And the three
syllables 'ish*t*akâ (brick)' are a Gâyatrî tripadâ, whence this Agni is
Gâyatra; and the three syllables 'm*ri*d' (clay) and 'âpa*h*'
(water) <span id="fr_783"></span>[6](#fn_771) also are a Gâyatrî
tripadâ: thereby also he is Gâyatra. And what is between (each two)
metres is the

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Sûdadohas; and the
food which is in the metres is the earth-fillings, the oblations, and
the fire-logs; and what is called 'metres,' that is the space-filling
(brick):--thus this comes to make up the whole Agni; and the whole Agni
comes to be the space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, comes
to be that whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:9">10:5:4:9</span></span>9. Now,
these (amount to) twenty-one B*ri*hatîs; and--the heavenly world being
the twenty-one-fold and the B*ri*hatî--this (altar) thus comes to be
equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the
B*ri*hatî metre.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:10">10:5:4:10</span></span>10.
But, indeed, that Fire-altar also is the Year,--the nights are its
enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these,
because there are three hundred and sixty nights in the year; and the
days are its Ya*g*ushmatî bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty
of these, and three hundred and sixty days in the year; and those
thirty-six bricks which are over <span id="fr_784"></span>[1](#fn_772)
are the thirteenth month, the body (of the year and the altar), the
half-months and months,--(there being) twenty-four half-months, and
twelve months. And what there is between day and night that is the
Sûdadohas; and what food there is in the days and nights is the
earth-fillings, the oblations, and the fire-logs; and what is called
'days and nights' that constitutes the space-filling (brick):--thus this
comes to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the
space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that
whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:11">10:5:4:11</span></span>11.
Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B*ri*hatîs; and--the heavenly world
being the twenty-one-fold and the B*ri*hatî--this (altar) thus comes to
be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the
B*ri*hatî metre.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:12">10:5:4:12</span></span>12.
But, indeed, that Fire-altar also-is the body,--the bones are its
enclosing-stones, and there are three hundred and sixty of these,
because there are three hundred and sixty bones in man; the marrow parts
are the Ya*g*ushmatî bricks, for there are three hundred and sixty of
these, and three hundred and sixty parts of marrow in man; and those
thirty-six bricks which are over, are the thirteenth month, the trunk,
the vital air (of the altar),--in his body there are thirty parts <span
id="fr_785"></span>[1](#fn_773), in his feet two, in his vital airs two,
and in his head two,--as to there being two of these, it is because the
head consists of two skull-bones. And that whereby these joints are held
together is the Sûdadohas; and those three whereby this body is
covered--to wit, hair, skin, and flesh--are the earth-fillings; what he
drinks is the oblations, and what he eats the fire-logs; and what is
called the 'body,' that is the space-filling (brick):--thus this comes
to make up the whole Agni, and the whole Agni comes to be the
space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that
whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:13">10:5:4:13</span></span>13.
Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B*ri*hatîs; and--the heavenly world
being the twenty-one-fold and the B*ri*hatî--this (altar) thus comes to
be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the
B*ri*hatî metre.

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:14">10:5:4:14</span></span>14.
But, indeed, that built Agni (the fire-altar) is all beings, all the
gods; for all the gods, all beings are the waters <span
id="fr_786"></span>[1](#fn_774), and that built fire-altar is the same
as those waters <span id="fr_787"></span>[2](#fn_775);--the navigable
streams (round the sun) are its enclosing-stones, and there are three
hundred and sixty of these, because three hundred and sixty navigable
streams encircle the sun on all sides; and the navigable streams,
indeed, are also the Ya*g*ushmatî bricks, and there are three hundred
and sixty of these, because three hundred and sixty navigable streams
flow towards <span id="fr_788"></span>[3](#fn_776) the sun. And what is
between (each) two navigable rivers is the Sûdadohas; and those
thirty-six bricks which remain over are the same as that thirteenth
month, and the body (of this altar, the waters <span
id="fr_789"></span>[4](#fn_777),) is the same as this gold man.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:15">10:5:4:15</span></span>15.
His feet are that gold plate and lotus-leaf(that is) the waters and the
sun's orb <span id="fr_790"></span>[5](#fn_778)--are his feet; his arms
are the two spoons, and they are Indra and Agni; the two
naturally-perforated (bricks) are this earth and the air; and the three
Vi*s*va*g*yotis (all-light) bricks are these deities--Agni, Vâyu, and

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Âditya, for these
deities, indeed, are all the light; and the twelve seasonal (bricks) are
the year, the body (of the altar, and the gold man); and the five
Nâkasads and five Pa*ñk*a*k*û*d*âs are the sacrifice, the gods; and the
Vikar*n*î the (third) Svayamât*rinn*â and the variegated stone <span
id="fr_791"></span>[1](#fn_779); and the fire which is deposited (on the
altar <span id="fr_792"></span>[1](#fn_779)) is the thirty-fifth; and
the formula of the Lokamp*rin*â (brick) <span
id="fr_793"></span>[2](#fn_780) is the thirty-sixth;--that (gold man),
indeed, the body (of the altar) is the end of everything here <span
id="fr_794"></span>[3](#fn_781): he is in the midst of all the waters,
endowed with all objects of desire--for all objects of desire are the
waters <span id="fr_795"></span>[4](#fn_782); whilst possessed of all
(objects of) desires he is without desire, for no desire of anything
(troubles) him <span id="fr_796"></span>[5](#fn_783).

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:16">10:5:4:16</span></span>16.
Regarding this there is this verse--'By knowledge <span
id="fr_797"></span>[6](#fn_784) they ascend that (state) where desires
have vanished <span id="fr_798"></span>[7](#fn_785): sacrificial gifts
go not thither <span id="fr_799"></span>[8](#fn_786), nor the fervid
practisers of rites without knowledge;'--for, indeed, he who does not
know this does not attain to that world either by sacrificial gifts or
by devout

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

practices, but only to those who know does that world belong.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:17">10:5:4:17</span></span>17.
The welkin is the earth-fillings (between the layers of brick); the moon
the oblations; the Nakshatras (lunar mansions) the fire-logs,--because
the moon resides in (or with) the Nakshatra, therefore the oblation
resides in the fire-wood: that <span id="fr_800"></span>[1](#fn_787),
indeed, is the food of the oblation, and its support; whence the
oblation does not fail (na kshîyate), for that is its food and its
support And what are called 'the gods' they are the space-filling
(brick); for by (naming) the gods everything here is named.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:18">10:5:4:18</span></span>18 It
is regarding this that it is said by the *Rik* (X, 12, 3), 'The All-gods
have gone after this thy Ya*g*us,'--for all beings, all the gods,
indeed, become the Ya*g*us here. Thus this whole Agni comes to be the
space-filler; and, verily, whosoever knows this, thus comes to be that
whole (Agni) who is the space-filler.

<span class="margnote"><span id="10:5:4:19">10:5:4:19</span></span>19.
Now, these (amount to) twenty-one B*ri*hatîs; and--the heavenly world
being the twenty-one-fold and the B*ri*hatî--this (altar) thus comes to
be equal to the heavenly world, and to the twenty-one-fold Stoma and the
B*ri*hatî metre.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_752"></span>[381:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_764) That is, either the
food obtained by the milking of the drink of immortality
(am*ri*tadohânnam), or the verse *Ri*g-veda VIII, 69, 3 (tâ asya
sûdadohasa*h*, &c.) pronounced over the 'settled' brick, and supposed to
supply vital air to the different parts of Agni-Pra*g*âpati's body
(whence it is also repeated in the B*ri*had Uktham between the different
parts of the bird-like body; cf. [p. 112](sbe4324.htm#page_112), note
[1](sbe4324.htm#fn_204)). Sây.

<span id="fn_753"></span>[381:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_765) Sâya*n*a seems to
interpret this in two different ways,--oshadhivanaspataya eva
purîshâhutisamittrayarûpâ etasya purîshâhutisamittrayarûpatvam uttaratra
spash*t*îkarishyate; atha (vâ) yad dikshu *k*a ra*s*mishu *k*ânna*m* tat
purîsha*m* tâ ahutayas tâ*h* samidha*h*.

<span id="fn_754"></span>[381:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_766) See [X, 5, 2,
8](sbe4367.htm#10:5:2:8). Viz. 'inasmuch as all become fit for their
work by being provided with fire.' Sây.

<span id="fn_755"></span>[381:4](sbe4369.htm#fr_767) Or, the
word-filler, the ruler of the world (lokâdhish*th*ât*ri*). Sây.

<span id="fn_756"></span>[382:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_768) Or, as (the valves,
or shells, of) a pod are closed up.

<span id="fn_757"></span>[382:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_769) See [p.
354](sbe4362.htm#page_354), note [2](sbe4362.htm#fn_691).

<span id="fn_758"></span>[382:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_770) See [IX, 4, 3,
6](sbe4341.htm#9:4:3:6).

<span id="fn_759"></span>[383:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_771) On this inaccurate
calculation (the real product being 729), resorted to in order to get a
total amount equal to the number of Ya*g*ushmatî bricks (756), see A.
Weber, Nakshatra, II, p. 298.

<span id="fn_760"></span>[383:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_772) That is, Nakshatras
considered as the bricks of which the fire-altar is constructed. The
latter being identical with the year, the 720 bricks represent the days
and nights of the year.

<span id="fn_761"></span>[383:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_773) Thus Sâya*n*a
(madhyadeha),--the âtman (in that case, however, the whole body) is
usually represented as consisting of twenty-five parts. Here the thirty
parts would probably be the trunk, the head, the upper and fore-arms,
the thighs and shanks, and the fingers and toes.

<span id="fn_762"></span>[383:4](sbe4369.htm#fr_774) Viz. inasmuch as
eyes, ears, and nostrils are in pairs. Sây.

<span id="fn_763"></span>[384:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_775) The B*ri*hatî verse
consisting of 36 syllables, this makes a total of 756 syllables, or the
same amount as that of the days and nights of the year, plus the days
(36) of the intercalary month.

<span id="fn_764"></span>[384:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_776) Viz. inasmuch as
the sun is 'the twenty-first,' cf. I, 3, 5, 11; VI, 2, 2, 3: svargas tv
âditya iti surake(tu)rûpo vâ loka*h* svarga*h*
ekavi*ms*atisa*m*khyâpûraka*h*. Sây

<span id="fn_765"></span>[384:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_777) The seven metres,
increasing by four syllables from 24 up to 48, consist together of 252
syllables, and hence the triplets of them amount to 756 = 720 + 36
syllables.

<span id="fn_766"></span>[385:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_778) The Ekapadâ is a
verse consisting of a single pâda, and the Dvipadâ one of two pâdas,
whilst verses in the ordinary metres consist of three or four pâdas.

<span id="fn_767"></span>[385:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_779) The Virâ*g* is a
metre consisting of 1 to 4 (usually 3) decasyllabic pâdas; the one
consisting of four such pâdas being, however, commonly called Paṅkti.
Besides this, the principal, Virâ*g*, there is, however, another
consisting of 3 pâdas of 11 syllables each.

<span id="fn_768"></span>[385:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_780) This name, which is
here applied to a verse of 34 syllables, was in VII, 4, 1, 9 used of a
verse of 10 + 10 + 11 + 11 = 42 syllables (Vâ*g*. S. XI, 29); cf. Weber,
Ind. Stud. VIII, p. 63.

<span id="fn_769"></span>[385:4](sbe4369.htm#fr_781) That is, an
over-metre, excessive metre, consisting of more than 48 syllables. The
fire-altar, being built up with all the metres (viz. with the
*Kh*andasyâ bricks, representing the metres, cf. [VIII, 3, 3,
1](sbe4313.htm#8:3:3:1) seqq.), would thus-far exceed the latter number.

<span id="fn_770"></span>[385:5](sbe4369.htm#fr_782) ? Thus Sâya*n*a:
*k*ityâgnir ati*kh*andâ iti yat tena sarvâ ish*t*akâ ati*kh*andomayya
ity uktam.

<span id="fn_771"></span>[385:6](sbe4369.htm#fr_783) That is, the
materials used for making bricks.

<span id="fn_772"></span>[386:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_784) Viz. those required
to make up the 756 Ya*g*ushmatîs.

<span id="fn_773"></span>[387:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_785) See [p.
383](#page_383), note [3](#fn_761).

<span id="fn_774"></span>[388:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_786) Viz. inasmuch as
they are the foundation and ultimate source of the universe; cf. VI, 8,
2, 2. 3; and everything is contained therein, [X, 5, 4,
3](sbe4369.htm#10:5:4:3).

<span id="fn_775"></span>[388:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_787) Viz. inasmuch as
the built Agni is the same as the sun, and the sun is surrounded by
water; cf. [p. 368](sbe4367.htm#page_368), note [1](sbe4367.htm#fn_719).

<span id="fn_776"></span>[388:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_788) It is not clear
whether these rivers are meant to be different ones from those flowing
round the sun, or whether they are the same as 'washing against' the
sun.

<span id="fn_777"></span>[388:4](sbe4369.htm#fr_789) Athokteshu
paryâyeshv agnyavayava-trayoda*s*amâsâtmika âtmâ agnyâtmanâ dhyeyânâm
apâm âtmety artha*h*. Sây.

<span id="fn_778"></span>[388:5](sbe4369.htm#fr_790) That is, in regard
to the sacrifice, the gold plate and lotus-leaf are his feet, and in
regard to the deity, the waters and the sun's disk. Sây. They are,
nevertheless, counted as four.

<span id="fn_779"></span>[389:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_792) For this stone,
which was deposited near the Âgnîdhrîya shed, and afterwards placed in
the Âgnîdhra hearth, see [p. 243](sbe4341.htm#page_243), note
[2](sbe4341.htm#fn_410).

<span id="fn_780"></span>[389:2](sbe4369.htm#fr_793) See [VIII, 7, 2,
6](sbe4327.htm#8:7:2:6).

<span id="fn_781"></span>[389:3](sbe4369.htm#fr_794) See [X, 5, 2,
6](sbe4367.htm#10:5:2:6)-[8](sbe4367.htm#10:5:2:8).

<span id="fn_782"></span>[389:4](sbe4369.htm#fr_795) Sa eva . . .
sha*t*tri*ms*adish*t*akâmayo hira*n*maya*h* purusha âtmâ
sarvabhûtadevâtmanâm apâm agnyâtmanâ dhyeyânâm madhye vartate. Sây.

<span id="fn_783"></span>[389:5](sbe4369.htm#fr_796) Sâya*n*a does not
explain this last sentence.

<span id="fn_784"></span>[389:6](sbe4369.htm#fr_797) 'Only by knowledge
is such a body (self) to be obtained by all, not by hundreds of
religious performances.' Sây.

<span id="fn_785"></span>[389:7](sbe4369.htm#fr_798) Yatra svarûpe
kâmâ*h* sarve parâgatâ viv*ri*ttâ*h* (? niv*ri*tta*h*) svayam akâmam ity
artha*h*, tad âtmasvarûpa*m* vidyayâ svarûpe*n*a ârohanti âpnuvanti.
Sây.

<span id="fn_786"></span>[389:8](sbe4369.htm#fr_799) Sâya*n*a takes
'dakshi*n*â' as instrumental, in accordance with the comment offered by
the Brâhma*n*a, which, however, is probably not meant as a close
grammatical explanation.

<span id="fn_787"></span>[390:1](sbe4369.htm#fr_800) Viz. the staying
(of the moon) in, or with, the Nakshatras, whose name is then made use
of for a fanciful etymology.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: X, 5, 5. Fifth Brâhma*n*a](sbe4370)
