[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Hinduism](../../index) 
[Satapatha Brahmana](../index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](sbe4331) 
[Next](sbe4333) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/812080144X/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Satapatha Brahmana Part IV (SBE43)*, Julius Eggeling tr. \[1897\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1">9:2:1</span></span>

### SECOND ADHYÂYA. FIRST BRÂHMA*N*A.

#### DAY OF PREPARATION FOR SOMA-SACRIFICE.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:1">9:2:1:1</span></span>1. On the
day of preparation, early in the morning, when the sun has risen, he
releases his speech.

<span id="page_182">p. 182</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Having released
his speech, he takes clarified butter, in five ladlings, and throws five
chips of gold thereon. Then these three (materials), sour curds, honey
and ghee, are poured together, either into a dish, or a pot with a wide
mouth; and he puts a handful of sacrificial grass thereon.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:2">9:2:1:2</span></span>2. He
then mounts the fire-altar, with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, II), 'Homage be to thy
heat, thy fire <span id="fr_313"></span>[1](#fn_309)! homage be to thy
flame!'--for that Agni has now been completely restored, and he now is
equal to injuring whomever he might wish to injure; and whomever he
injures, he injures either by his heat, or by his fire, or by his flame;
in this way he does not injure him thereby (etai*h*);--'Let thy darts
burn others than us! unto us be thou bright and propitious!' as the
text, so the sense.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:3">9:2:1:3</span></span>3. Having
mounted the altar, he makes the libation of fivefold-taken ghee on the
naturally-perforated (brick): the significance of this has been
explained <span id="fr_314"></span>[2](#fn_310).

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:4">9:2:1:4</span></span>4. On the
naturally-perforated (brick) he makes the libation--the
naturally-perforated one is the breath: into (the channel of) the breath
he thus puts food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:5">9:2:1:5</span></span>5. And,
again, as to why he offers on the naturally-perforated one;--this
(brick) is an uttara-vedi (high-altar) of Agni (the fire-altar); and
that former libation which he makes <span
id="fr_315"></span>[3](#fn_311) belongs to the

<span id="page_183">p. 183</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Soma-sacrifice,
but this one belongs to the fire-altar; this he now offers.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:6">9:2:1:6</span></span>6. On
that (former) occasion he makes the libation whilst looking at the gold;
for distinct is what one sees, and distinct was that high-altar; and
thrown down <span id="fr_316"></span>[1](#fn_312), indeed, are (the gold
chips) on this occasion, and indistinct is what is thrown down, and
indistinct is this high-altar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:7">9:2:1:7</span></span>7. With
the Svâhâ-call he makes the libation on that (high-altar), for distinct
(manifest) is the Svâhâ, and distinct is that high-altar; but with the
Ve*t*-call (he offers) on this (brick), for indistinct is the
Ve*t*-call, and indistinct is this high-altar. With ghee (they offer),
for with ghee they offer on the high-altar;--with fivefold-taken (ghee),
for with fivefold-taken (ghee) they offer on the high-altar:--by turns
(he makes the libations), for by turns <span
id="fr_317"></span>[2](#fn_313) they make the libations on the
high-altar.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:8">9:2:1:8</span></span>8. \[He
offers, with, Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 12, a-c resp.\], 'To the man-seated,
ve*t*!'--the man-seated one, doubtless, is the breath, and men mean
human beings: he thereby gratifies that fire (or Agni), the breath,
which is in human beings;--'To the water-seated, ve*t*!--he thereby
gratifies the fire which is in the waters;--'To the barhis-seated,
ve*t*!' he

<span id="page_184">p. 184</span>

thereby gratifies the fire which is in plants <span
id="fr_318"></span>[1](#fn_314);--'To the wood-seated, ve*t*!'--he
thereby gratifies the fire which is in trees;--'To the heaven-winning,
ve*t*!'--the heaven-winning one is this Agni (*k*itya): it is this Agni
he thereby gratifies.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:9">9:2:1:9</span></span>9. And as
to why he says, 'To the man-seated, ve*t*! To the water-seated, ve*t*!'
&c., these are names of this Agni: these names he thereby pleases. By
means of the oblation he makes them a deity: for whatever deity the
oblation is prepared, that deity (they are), not that deity for whom it
is not prepared. And, in calling them by their names, he also thereby
places those fires along with this fire.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:10">9:2:1:10</span></span>10.
These are five oblations he offers,--the fire-altar consists of five
layers, the year of five seasons, and Agni is the year: as great as Agni
is, as great as is his measure, with so much food he thus gratifies him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:11">9:2:1:11</span></span>11. He
then sprinkles him (Agni, the fire-altar) with the sour curds, honey and
ghee; when he is built up, he is born, and he is born for every (kind
of) food; and these, to wit, sour curds, honey and ghee, are every (kind
of) food: with every (kind of) food he thus gratifies him. Everywhere
(he sprinkles the altar): everywhere he thus gratifies him with every
(kind of) food.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:12">9:2:1:12</span></span>12.
And, again, as to why he sprinkles him;--here that Agni has been built
up complete: on him the gods now bestowed the highest (or last) form;
and in like manner does this (Sacrificer) now bestow on him the highest
(or last) form; but form means

<span id="page_185">p. 185</span>

food, and these, to wit, sour curds, honey and ghee, are the most
excellent kind of food: this, the most excellent form he thus bestows
upon him as his highest (property). Everywhere he sprinkles, even
outside the enclosing-stones; everywhere he thus bestows on him the
highest form;--by means of sacrificial grass-stalks (he sprinkles), for
they are pure and meet for sacrifice; by means of their tops (he
sprinkles), for the top (is sacred) to the gods.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:13">9:2:1:13</span></span>13.
And, again, as to why he sprinkles them;--of old, when the *Ri*shis, the
vital airs, joined him together, they made that 'sa*g*ûrabdîya'
(oblation) <span id="fr_319"></span>[1](#fn_315) his special fore-share,
and, when he had been built up, they made this (sprinkling) his
after-share: thus, in sprinkling him, he gratifies those *Ri*shis, the
vital airs, who, when he (Agni) had been built up, made this his
after-share. With sour curds, honey and ghee (he sprinkles): the
significance of this has been explained.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:14">9:2:1:14</span></span>14.
\[He sprinkles, with, Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 13, 14\], 'The gods of the gods,
the worshipful of the worshipful,'--'for they (the vital airs) are
indeed the gods of (among) the gods, and the worshipful of the
worshipful';--'who draw nigh unto the yearlong share,' for they do
indeed draw near to this their year-long share;--'not eaters of
oblations,--at this offering of sacrificial food,'--for the vital airs,
indeed, are not eaters of oblations;--'may themselves drink of the honey
and the ghee!'

<span id="page_186">p. 186</span>

that is, 'should themselves drink of this honey and ghee.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:15">9:2:1:15</span></span>15.
'The gods who attained godhead over the gods,'--for these gods have
indeed attained a divine state over the gods; 'who are the forerunners
of this holy work,'--the holy work is this fire-altar (and sacrifice),
and they are the forerunners thereof;--'without whom no dwelling-place
becometh pure;' for without the vital airs no dwelling-place becomes
pure <span id="fr_320"></span>[1](#fn_316);--'they are not on the backs
of the sky and the earth,'--that is, 'they are neither in the sky nor on
earth: whatever breathes therein they are.'

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:16">9:2:1:16</span></span>16.
With two (verses) he sprinkles, two-footed is the Sacrificer, and the
Sacrificer is Agni: as great as Agni is, as great as is his measure,
with so much he thus sprinkles him.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:17">9:2:1:17</span></span>17. He
then descends again (from the altar), with (Vâ*g*. S. XVII, 15), 'Givers
of in-breathing, givers of off-breathing,'--for this Agni who has been
built up is all these breathings; were he not to utter at this time this
(declaration of) self-surrender, then that (Agni) would possess himself
of those breathings of his (the Sacrificer's); but now that he gives
utterance to this self-surrender, that (Agni) does not possess himself
of those breathings of his;--'Givers of in-breathing, givers of
off-breathing, givers of through-breathing, givers of lustre, givers of
room,'--he thereby says, 'A giver of this thou art to me,'--'let thy
darts burn

<span id="page_187">p. 187</span>

others than us! unto us be thou bright and propitious!'--as the text, so
the meaning.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:18">9:2:1:18</span></span>18.
Having returned (to the hall-fire) he proceeds with the (forenoon
performance of the) Pravargya <span id="fr_321"></span>[1](#fn_317) and
Upasad <span id="fr_322"></span>[1](#fn_317); and having performed the
Pravargya and Upasad, he hands to him (the Sacrificer) the fast-food or
semi-fast-food. He then (proceeds) with the (afternoon performance of
the) Pravargya and Upasad, and having obtained the object for which he
puts the (Pravargya-) cauldron on the fire, he sets out (the apparatus
of) the Pravargya.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:19">9:2:1:19</span></span>19. Let
him set it out on an island; for, when heated, that (cauldron) is
suffering pain; and were he to set it out on this (earth) its pain would
enter this (earth); and were he to set it out on water, its pain would
enter the water; but when he sets it out on an island, then it does not
injure either the water or this (earth): in that he does not throw it
into the water, it does not injure the water; and in that the water goes
all round it--water being a means of soothing--it does not injure this
earth;--let him therefore set it out on an island.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:20">9:2:1:20</span></span>20. But
let him rather set it out on the fire-altar;--for that fire-altar is
these worlds, and the enclosing-stones are the waters;--so that when he
sets it out on the fire-altar, he indeed sets it out on an island.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:21">9:2:1:21</span></span>21.
And, again, as to why he sets it out on the fire-altar;--that fire-altar
is these worlds, and those Pravargya (vessels) are Agni (fire), Vâyu
(wind), and Âditya (sun): hence, were he to set them out in any other
place than the fire-altar, he would place those gods outside these
worlds; but in that he sets them

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

out on the fire-altar, he places those gods in these worlds.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:22">9:2:1:22</span></span>22.
And, again, as to why he sets it out on the fire-altar,--the Pravargya
is the head of the sacrifice, and this built-up fire-altar is the body:
hence were he to set it out in any other place than the fire-altar, he
would place that head away from that (body), but in that he sets it out
on the fire-altar, he, having put together that body of him (Agni),
restores the head to it.

<span class="margnote"><span id="9:2:1:23">9:2:1:23</span></span>23. The
first Pravargya (vessel) he sets out close to the naturally-perforated
(brick);--the naturally-perforated one is the breath, and the Pravargya
is the head, and this built-up Agni is the body: he thus connects and
puts together the head and the body by means of (the channel of) the
breath. Having set out the Pravargya as is the way of its setting out,--

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_309"></span>[182:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_313) Or, 'Homage be to
thy burning (consuming) fire!' as Mahîdhara takes 'harase *s*o*k*ishe,'
and perhaps also the Brâhma*n*a, though 'etai*h*,' used in reference to
Agni's weapons, would rather seem to indicate a plurality of them.

<span id="fn_310"></span>[182:2](sbe4332.htm#fr_314) See VII, 2, 3, 4;
[VIII, 6, 3, 15](sbe4325.htm#8:6:3:15).

<span id="fn_311"></span>[182:3](sbe4332.htm#fr_315) See III, 5, 2,
9-11; the libation of ghee there offered on the <span id="page_183">p.
183</span> uttara-vedi being preparatory to the leading forward of the
fire to the high-altar.

<span id="fn_312"></span>[183:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_316) Each time he has
poured out some of the ghee on one of the corners, or in the centre, of
the stone; he throws one of the chips of gold thereon, without looking
at it.

<span id="fn_313"></span>[183:2](sbe4332.htm#fr_317) That libation was
made crosswise--first on the right shoulder, then on the left thigh,
then on the right thigh, then on the left shoulder, and finally in the
centre, of the (navel of the) high-altar. In the same way he offers
crosswise on the svayamât*rinn*â brick.

<span id="fn_314"></span>[184:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_318) Inasmuch as
'barhis' is the sacrificial grass spread over the vedi, or altar-ground.

<span id="fn_315"></span>[185:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_319) That is, the
oblation (made on the bunch of sacrificial grass placed in the centre of
the freshly ploughed altar-site, where the furrows meet) with the
formula (Vâ*g*. S. XII, 74) beginning 'sa*g*ûr abdo.' See VII, 2, 3, 8.

<span id="fn_316"></span>[186:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_320) It is doubtful in
what sense the author understands this part of the verse. Mahîdhara
takes it to mean, 'without whom no body moves.'

<span id="fn_317"></span>[187:1](sbe4332.htm#fr_322) For the Pravargya,
see part i, p. 44 note; and the Upasads, part ii, p. 104 seq.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX, 2, 2. Second Brâhma*n*a](sbe4333)
