<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois24) 
[Next](wois26) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE AFTER-LIFE, AND THE BANQUET OF THE KING.

Rabbi Pinchas, in the name of Rabbi Reuben, uttered this Parable.

"There was a certain king who made a feast and invited to it all the
wayfarers and strangers in his dominions; but he made a decree that
every man should bring with him something to sit upon at the feast. Some
brought with them beautiful and comfortable cushions, and some brought
handsome but hard seats, and some brought sofas to recline upon, and
some brought logs of wood, and some brought stones and boulders. The
king provided everything for the nourishment and entertainment of all
corners, and to adorn the court of the palace; but ordered that each man
should sit, at the feast, on the couch or seat that he had made or
brought for himself.

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

"Then they who were sitting on logs, and stones, and other uncomfortable
and ugly seats, grumbled at the king and said:

"'Is it to the honour of the king that we should be sitting here in such
discomfort, on stones and bits of wood?'

"And when the king heard their complaints he said to them:

"'Is it not enough for you that you disgrace my palace with stones and
logs, my palace that I have built and beautified at so much cost; but
will you also insult me and fasten an accusation upon me? Your honour
and splendour are such as you make for yourselves.'" Thus, in the world
to come the wicked are adjudged to Gehinom, and they complain in loud
anger against the Holy One, blessed be He, and say: "Behold we were
hoping for the salvation of God, and this is what has come to us!"

And the Holy One, blessed be He, sayeth unto them: "In the world in
which you were, were you not quarrelling and fighting against each
other, and slandering one another, and doing all evil things; and were
ye not contentious and acting with violence?" "Behold, all of you kindle
a fire, and compass yourselves about with sparks." Therefore "you are
only walking in the light of your own fire, and in the sparks that ye
have kindled" (Is. l. 11). Perhaps you will say that you have this at my
hands. It is not so; but you yourselves have made all this for
yourselves, therefore, "you shall lie down in sorrow" (*ibid*.), "it is
at your own hands that you suffer all this." The condition of your souls
in the life to come,

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

in the banquet of eternal splendour that God has provided, will be such
as you prepare for yourselves.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Midrash Koheleth*.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Many Mansions in the Life to Come](wois26)

</div>
