<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois28) 
[Next](wois30) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE WISE AND THE FOOLISH GUESTS AT THE KING'S FEAST.

"Let thy garments always be white, and let not oil be wanting for thine
head." "Doth, then, the Scripture care about white garments, and oil for
the hair?" asks Rabbi Jochanan ben Zachai. "For have not the heathen
plenty of white garments and many oils for anointing the head?"

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Behold the
Scripture speaks, in figurative language, of the commandments: of
religious duties and good works, and of the Torah. Rabbi Judah, the
Prince, likened it to a certain king who made a banquet and invited
travellers and strangers to it. He sent word to them: "Wash ye, make ye
clean and anoint yourselves, and wash your clothes and prepare
yourselves for the banquet of the king." But he did not appoint a time.
Then the prudent among them made themselves ready and waited at the
entrance of the palace. They said: "In the palace of the king nothing
will be wanting, and there need be no signs of preparation, but the
feast may be ready at any time." The stupid among them did not prepare
themselves. They said: "There cannot be a great banquet without much
stir and trouble and gathering together of stores and provisions. We
need not disturb ourselves until we see signs of preparation at the
palace." And they joined themselves with their fellows, and thought only
of their common and everyday interests, and took no thought of the word
of the king. And the plasterer went to his plastering and the potter to
his clay, and those working with pitch and tar, and at other dirty
trades, went on with their ordinary occupations.

Suddenly came the word of the king: "Let all come to the banquet!" And
the servants of the king hastened them, and pressed them to come at the
bidding of the king. Then those that had prepared themselves, came in
their honour and their glory, and those that had not prepared
themselves, came in their pollution and uncleanliness. And the

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

king rejoiced over the wise that had done according to his bidding, and
who, moreover, had honoured the royal palace; and he was angry with
those who had taken no heed of his word, and who had polluted his royal
palace with all the uncleanliness that clung about their garments, and
who had treated it with contempt.

Then said the king: "Those that have prepared themselves for my
presence, and were ready when I called, shall come and feast at the
royal table, and those that did not prepare themselves shall not eat at
the banquet." They thought perhaps they might depart, but the king
replied: "No, but those shall recline at the banquet and eat and drink,
while these stand upon their feet, and are smitten, and look on,
distressed." Thus of the life to come, this is what Isaiah says (lxv.
13): "My servants shall eat and you shall be hungry." It is said, in the
name of Rabbi Meir, that also the unprepared were allowed to sit at the
table of the king, but not allowed to eat and drink, and their suffering
was infinitely greater than if they had been made to stand. For they who
stand and do not eat and drink are only like waiters and attendants, but
those who sit at the board and are not treated as guests are shamed and
disgraced.

And this is a truer picture of the life to come as indicated by the
prophet Malachi (iii. 18): "Then shall ye return and discern between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that serveth God and him that
serveth him not." Let thy garments always be white in sinlessness, and
let the ointment of good deeds and holiness be never lacking for thy
head. . . There is an old traditional

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

saying transmitted by the sages of the Mishnah, "Return to God in
repentance, one day before thy death." His disciples asked Rabbi Eliezar
"But how is a man to know the day of his death, so that he may become
penitent?"

"That is just the point," explained the Rabbi. "Repent to-day; to-morrow
you may die."

A man should be found turning from sin to God every day of his life,
therefore, it is said, let thy garments at all times be white.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Briar Rose that Saved the Trees](wois30)

</div>
