<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois10) 
[Next](wois12) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TRAVELLER AND THE TREE IN THE DESERT.

Rabbi Levi spoke this parable in the name of Rabbi Johanan.

A certain traveller went forth, and for days he wandered through the
desert and found no town, no village, no oasis, no tree and no water,
and no living thing. And he went on, day after day, for ten days. And
after he had gone on for ten days, he espied one tree in the distance.
And he said to himself, "Perhaps beneath that tree there may be water."
When he came up to it he found that it stood by a living spring. And
when he saw that it was a beautiful tree, with ripe fruit upon it, and
beautiful leafage, he rested and cooled himself beneath its shade and
ate of its fruits, and drank of the water from the fountain. And it was
very pleasant to him, and his soul was refreshed.

When he arose to go on his way, he said:

"Oh tree, how can I bless thee, and what can I say unto thee? If I say,
may thy wood be finely grown, it is so already; if I pray that thy shade
may be pleasant, it is so already; that thy foliage may be beautiful, it
is already beautiful; that thy

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

fruit may be sweet, behold it is already sweet; if I would pray for thee
that a spring may bubble up beneath thy roots to water thee, behold the
spring is already there, beneath thy roots. If I would say, mayest thou
stand in a lovely place, behold thou dost already stand in a lovely
place. What blessing, then, is there left for me to wish thee? Only that
every tree that is planted from thee may be like thee."

Thus, when the Holy One, blessed be He, created the world, ten
generations came and went and none of them was good, and none of them
produced a perfectly righteous man, and in the tenth generation, God saw
Abraham and tried him, and it was found that his righteousness had deep
roots, watered by a perennial spring of faith. He withstood temptation
and persecution for the sanctification of the name of the One true God.
He fed and sustained passers-by, and helped the penitent. He brought
some of his fellow-creatures under the wings of the Divine Presence, and
made known the glory of God in the world.

Then said the Holy One, "What blessing is there left that I can give
thee, Abraham? If I would say, thou shalt be a righteous man before Me,
or that Sarah thy wife shall be a righteous woman before Me, or that all
the children of thine house shall be righteous in My sight, behold all
this is so already! I will bless thee in that all those destined to be
of thy seed shall be like thee, a blessing to all the world, and as the
stars of heaven spread light for all, so shall thy seed, who shall be
like the stars for multitude.

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Barmidbar Rabbah*, Chap. II.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Better Feed the Poor than Entertain the Angels](wois12)

</div>
