<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois15.md) 
[Next](wois17.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE PAVILION OF THE KING'S DAUGHTER.

Why did God command the building of the Tabernacle, and sanction the
building of the Temple? Surely He requires no dwelling-place. "Behold
the Heaven and the Heaven of Heavens cannot contain Him." "Do not I fill
Heaven and Earth?" It must be for the honour of His people that He
appointed the place of meeting.

Rabbi Azariah said, in the name of Rabbi Judah the son of Simon, "This
may be likened to a king of flesh and blood, who had an only daughter,
whom he loved very dearly! When she was a little girl he always talked
with her in public. If he saw her in the court, he spoke with her, and
even rebuked her before his courtiers. When she grew up, to a
marriageable age, the king said, It is no longer for the honour of my
daughter that, whenever my daughter wishes to speak with me, I should
talk with her in public. Let a pavilion be built for her, so that
whenever I wish to speak to my daughter I may do so from inside of the

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

pavilion." So when Israel was in Egypt, the nation was yet young: "When
Israel was a child I loved him; from Egypt did I call My son" (Hosea xi.
1), and at Sinai (Deut. v. 4), "Face to face the Lord spake with you."
But from the time when they accepted the Torah, with the words: "All
that the Lord hath spoken we will do, and we will hear," they were a
fully-developed nation. Then He said, "It is not seemly for My children
that I should speak to them and correct them in public; or, when I have
hard words to say to them, that all the world should hear; but let them
build for Me a tabernacle, and when I have to speak to them I will speak
from the Tabernacle."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Barmidbar R.*, Chap. XII.

</div>

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Greedy Prince: The Vine is not Watered with Wine](wois17.md)

</div>
