<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois09) 
[Next](wois11) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE HERITAGE OF THE UNBORN PRINCE.

Six things preceded the creation of the world (says Bereshith Rabbah,
Chap. I.). Some of them were created; some existed as ideals, as part of
the thought of the Creator, to emerge, created, in the future; so that
their real being (noumena) was in existence, although ages should pass
before their appearance as phenomena.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

The *Torāh* <span id="fr_7"></span>[\*](#fn_6) was created; for we read
(Prov. viii. 22-36), "The Lord possessed <span
id="fr_8"></span>[†](#fn_7) me at the beginning of His way . . . or ever
the earth was, etc."; so, also, was the throne of glory, as we read (Ps.
xciii. 2), "Thy throne was established from of old (*Kedem* in front),
Thou art from everlasting."

The patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the people of Israel, the
sanctuary and the name of the Messiah, existed in ideal. For it is
written (Hosea ix. 10), "I saw your fathers as the first ripe fruit on
the fig-tree, at the beginning of time," and of Israel (Ps. lxxiv. 2),
"the congregation which thou didst possess before all things." The
sanctuary is spoken of (Jer. xviii. 2) as "a glorious throne on high,
from the beginning"; while of the name of the Messiah, who is the
subject of the whole of Psalm xxii., it is written (verse 17), "His name
existeth eternally." R. Ahabah Bar Rabbi Zengirah says, "Also
repentance, the coming back of the sinner to his God, existed in ideal,
before the creation of the world; as it is written (Ps. xc.), 'Before
the mountains were brought forth'; from that very hour Thou turnedst man
to contrition, <span id="fr_9"></span>[‡](#fn_8) saying, 'Return, ye
children of men.'"

The *Torah* was created before the throne of

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

glory, and Rabbi Jeremiah says, in the name of Rabbi Samuel, bar R.
Isaac, the ideal Israel—God's witness in the world, to keep His law and
spread His truth—preceded *all* else, even the *Torah*.

This may be likened to a king married to a noble and honourable woman,
who had borne no children to him. One day the king was seen passing
through a thoroughfare, when he called to his attendants and said:
"Bring me writing materials and draw up documents dedicating this street
to my son. It shall be named after him, and all that pass through it
shall know that they are walking in the way that I have given to my
son."

Then all the people exclaimed: "But he has no son, and yet he tells us
'Give this street to my son, name this street after my son.'"

Then some returned and explained to them: "This king is a great
astrologer. If he did not see into the future, and perceive the vision
of his son that is to be born to him by his queen, he would not have
spoken thus."

In like manner, if the Holy One, blessed be He, had not seen, in the
future, the people of Israel who were destined to accept the *Torah*, he
would not have inscribed in that *Torah* the words: "Command the
Children of Israel."

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

*Bereshith Rabbah*, Chap. I.

</div>

(The ideal law of right and justice, including the laws of life, the
path in which all mankind will one day walk, formed the ideal aim of the
whole

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

creation. The only reason why it is dedicated to the people of Israel,
as if it were given to them alone, is because the Creator knew, from the
beginning, that while the other nations would, for centuries, reject it,
Israel would at once accept it. Something of the same idea is expressed
in the parable of "The Traveller and Tree in the Desert.")

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_6"></span>[24:\*](wois10.htm#fr_7) *Torah*, "instruction,"
"Law," here means the spiritual, intellectual, and moral contents of
revelation as a whole.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[24:†](wois10.htm#fr_8) The *Midrash* rendering,
though forced, is here quite permissible; for the word rendered in the
*A. V.* "purchase," really means "to acquire," "to possess," while that
rendered "of old time," *Kedem*, really means "before," "in front."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[24:‡](wois10.htm#fr_9) "Contrition" is the
*correct* translation of *dakka*, which the *A. V.* erroneously renders
in this verse "destruction," a rendering entirely inconsistent with the
context and not warranted by the etymology of the word.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Traveller and the Tree in the Desert](wois11)

</div>
