<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index)  [Wisdom
of the East](../../woe/index)  [Index](index)  [Previous](wois03) 
[Next](wois05) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Wisdom of Israel*, by Edwin Collins, \[1910\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span> <span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

# THE WISDOM OF ISRAEL

### WHY GOD PERMITS IDOLATRY. <span id="fr_2"></span>[\*](#fn_2)

THEY asked our sages in Rome, says the Babylonian Talmud, "If your God
is displeased with men's worship of other gods, why does He not make it
void by destroying all idols and objects of false worship?"

"If the objects of false worship," replied our sages, "were things
unnecessary to mankind and to the world, then this might be. But,
behold, they adore the sun and moon, and the constellations; plants and
animals; and the trees and the streams, and many other things both
useful and beautiful. Shall the Creator destroy His world because of the
fools?"

Then said they of Rome:—"But there are among the objects of what you
call false worship some that are useless to mankind: stones and blocks
of wood, and hideous effigies. If your God be, as your prophet says, 'a
consuming fire,' why does He not burn up these, and spare only such as
the world really needs?"

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

"If God were to destroy some of the idols," replied our sages, "and were
to spare others, this would strengthen the hands of the idolaters. For
then, indeed, would those whose gods had been spared, exclaim: 'Behold
ours are proved to be trite gods; for all the false ones have been
destroyed.'

"Nor is this all. God has formed a world full of beauty and order; a
universe full of exquisitely adjusted laws, that work together for good.
There is nothing in it useless or evil, or even superfluous. Shall God
destroy His world, or interfere with its order and the regular working
of His perfect laws, because of the fools that abuse His gifts?

"Suppose a man steals a measure of wheat and sows his field with it:
according to judgment and religion it ought not to grow. But Nature goes
on her orderly course as fixed by the Creator, and those that treat His
laws with contempt are destined to have to render an account."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_2"></span>[17:\*](wois04.htm#fr_2) Abodah Zarah \[the
section of the Talmud dealing with "Strange Worship"—Idolatry, etc.\],
p. 54*b*. I have rendered this freely; somewhat expanding the *Mishnah*,
from the Commentaries and otherwise, and condensing the *Gemorrah*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lamp that Goes Out when its Light is Done, and the Figs that
are Gathered in their Due Season](wois05)

</div>
