[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aof08.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# THE CREED OF HALF ASIA

### TO SIN KING

THIS Creed deserves to rank among the sublimest literary productions of
the human mind, from Job to Kant, together with those of the best
thinkers of India and China.

Many devout people of the Confucian and Taoist schools, as well as
Buddhists, recite it daily just as Christians sing a choice hymn.

It states the solid fundamental principles of religion which commend
themselves, not merely to the majority of Asiatics, but also to the
majority of men universally. It includes the need of Divine Power to
save men, the great At-One-ment, Divine Inspiration, Divinest Miracles,
past, present, and to come, and Immortality.

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

When this best Eastern thought is united to the best Western thought,
whatever may be deficient in definition in either singly, may meet the
approval of that conscience which God has given to mankind collectively.

The Creed is as follows--

Hail self-existent Illuminator. Who in exercising deepest Wisdom seest
the unreality of all that is reached by the five senses, and canst save
from all troubles and dangers.

O Sariputra (the Divine Seed?), the Manifested is not different from the
Eternal, and the Eternal is not different from the Manifested. Thought
and Action are also thus mutually related.

The Divine Seed (?) is the Eternal in all laws of the Universe. He was
never born, nor will ever die.

He is neither clean nor unclean, is neither added to nor subtracted
from. He is without sorrow, and will not perish. He is without acquired
Wisdom, because he has received none.

The Illuminators depending on this Eternal Wisdom are without anxiety.
Having no anxiety, they have no fear and are far from impossible dreams
and thoughts. They are eventually immortals.

All the Illuminated past, present, and to come, depending on this Divine
Wisdom, obtain the Highest Wisdom.

Therefore know that this Divine Wisdom is a great Divine Magic, a great
brilliant magic, the greatest magic, and a magic without a peer.

It can deliver you from all kinds of troubles. This is a real truth
without any falsehood. Therefore in repeating this magic Incantation,
sum up and say--

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

  Praise, Praise,  
Praise God.  
Praise His eternal wisdom (Law)  
Praise the students of this Law  
  The Illumined!

(Translated from the Buddhist Tripitaka, Nanjio's Catalogue, No 20)
