[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aof02)  [Next](aof04.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

# 1. REASONS FOR WRITING THE BOOK

QUESTION 1. What are the reasons for writing this book?

ANSWER. The reasons for it are eight--

A. Generally speaking, it is to induce all living beings to depart from
the way of all sorrow and to obtain the highest happiness, instead of
seeking the glitter of fame and the wealth of this world.

B. It is to make clear the fundamental idea of the incarnate God
(Tathagata) in man, and to lead all beings in the right way, avoiding
error.

C. It is to lead those ripe in goodness to continue in the Mahayana
Faith without failing.

D. It is to enable those in whom the root of goodness is very small to
cultivate faith more and more.

E. It is to show how to remove evil hindrances and to strengthen well
the mind, to keep far from mad pride, and to see through the deceits of
vice.

F. It is to show how to study and correct the errors of ordinary men and
the errors of the two inferior schools (the

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Hinayana, or elementary school and the
Madhyi-yana or middle school of Buddhism).

G. It is to show the means by which one may ascend to the abode of God
(Buddha) and never lose faith.

H. It is to show the benefits of this Faith and to exhort men to
practise it.

These are the main reasons for writing this book.

QUESTION 2. As the Sutras, or classic Buddhist Scriptures, explain these
things fully, what need is there of repeating them?

ANSWER. Although the Sutras have discussed these things, yet as men's
abilities and attainments are different, the reception of instruction is
necessarily different. When the incarnate God (the Tathagata) was on
earth, all men were able to understand him. His body and mind far
excelled those of all other men. When he delivered his perfect words,
all living beings, though different in kind, understood him alike, and
therefore there was no need of explanation.

But after the Tathagata's death we find that some men, after widely
reading our Sacred Scriptures, have the power unaided to understand
them; we find that others, after only hearing a little of the Sacred
Scriptures, have the power unaided to understand much; we also find that
some have not sufficient intelligence to understand the Scriptures
unassisted by extensive explanations; whilst we find that others dislike
voluminous writings and prefer a terse style which embraces many
principles, and which they are able to understand.

Thus this book is written for the last class of men which desire to know
the general principles of the great and profound Law of the Tathagata
with its infinite applications.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2: The Fundamental Doctrine of the Mahayana Faith](aof04.md)
