[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aof07)  [Next](aof09.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

### TRANSLATOR'S SUPPLEMENTARY MATTER

# THE GREAT PHYSICIAN'S TWELVE DESIRES (VOWS)

NOTE

THE first Buddhist temple in or around Nara in Japan was built by
Koreans, at the invitation of the Japanese rulers in the sixth century
of the Christian era.

One of the most remarkable sights I have seen in Japan is a temple at
Horiyuji, near Nara, to the Great Physician (Yakushi they call him). It
is filled with innumerable votive offerings, to show that the sick were
healed by prayers to him. The zeal of modern Christian scientists is far
more than eclipsed by this wonderful record of fifteen centuries there.

By bringing the highest ideals of the East and the West together for
comparison, it is hoped that special attention should be called to this
rather than to the failings and low practices of either East or West.

The Scripture which describes this Great Physician has one very striking
passage on his twelve Vows or Purpose in coming to the world. These
twelve Vows I translate below--

1\. 1 come from Heaven with the highest wisdom to shine on infinite
innumerable worlds accompanied by thirty-two great angels, different
forms of Kwanyin, and glorious legions, it will be for the purpose of
delivering all beings, to be godlike like myself.

2\. I come with my body within and without pure as crystal, without a
flaw, with great light and profound virtue living in peace with a glory
surpassing that of sun and moon, it will be to enlighten all who are
living in darkness.

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

3\. I come again with wisdom bringing infinite knowledge and goodness so
that no living creature may suffer from any want but have all they need.

4\. I come in order that those who are in evil ways may find peace in
the way of wisdom, and in order that those who only know the old
Buddhism, may know the new Buddhism.

5\. I come in order that the multitudes who study religion may discover
the perfect way, and if they have erred on hearing my name may be
delivered from hell, and also attain to holiness.

6\. I come so that all beings who are cripples, ugly and foolish, blind,
deaf and dumb, hunchback, leprous and mad, and all sorts of suffering,
on hearing my name may be healed of all their diseases.

7\. I come so that the incurables, the homeless, those without doctors
or medicine, without friends or relatives, the poor and the sorrowful,
on hearing my name shall be delivered from all their troubles and live
in peace of mind and body, have their families flourish in abundance and
attain the highest wisdom.

8\. I come so that women driven by all sorts of trials to hate their
lives, and no longer desire to be women, on hearing my name may be
changed to men, and attain the highest wisdom.

9\. I come so that those who are in the bonds of evil spirits, or of
heresies fallen into all sorts of evil, on hearing my name may be led to
right knowledge, and gradually practise goodness and attain to the
highest wisdom.

10\. I come so that those who have fallen to the clutches of the law,
are bound and beaten and imprisoned, or are about

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

to be executed or have endless calamities, insults, sorrows burning both
body and soul, on hearing my name may secure my grace and power, and be
delivered from all their sorrows.

11\. I come so that those driven by hunger and thirst to do wrong, on
hearing my name shall be fed and satisfied with wisdom and find perfect
rest.

12\. I come so that all the poor and naked, and those suffering from
heat and cold, and divers flies and secret creepers night and day, on
hearing my name may turn to practise religion, according to their bent,
will receive the garments of highest wisdom, glorious treasures and best
music, and be fully satisfied with all.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Creed of Half Asia: To Sin King](aof09.md)
