[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](aof00)  [Next](aof02) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# NOTE BY REDACTOR

The text of this book has been redacted from the University Books (Hyde
Park, N.Y.) edition of 1960 (which bears no copyright notice). This
edition, edited by Alan Hull Walton, included lengthy introductory
material and one footnote, omitted in this etext. The page numbering in
this etext reflects the 1960 edition.

The following portion of the introduction describes some minor editorial
changes in the 1960 edition, all of which are retained in this etext:

"Richard's translation, in which he was assisted by an able Chinese
Buddhist, and for which he made continual reference to commentaries on
the work, has been left as he wrote it with the following exceptions.
The term *Tathagata* has been substituted for his *Ju Lai* (which he
considered might some times best be rendered *Messiah* in English). The
term *Bodhisattva* has likewise been substituted for his *Pusa*, or
*Pusa saints*. This brings his version more into line with other
translations made from Mahayana scriptures. ... \[A\] few small faults
and some errors in punctuation have been corrected. It has been felt
that the text was otherwise best left alone, for Richard has been quoted
by various authorities on Buddhism--more particularly by Dr Evans-Wentz
in his Tibetan series--and most readers will necessarily wish to refer
to his exact wording.

"One Chinese term which offered some difficulty was *Chen-jû* = true so,
like. In Sanskrit this would be translated as *Bhutatathata*: *Buta* (=
chen) = true, and *tathata* (= *jû*) = so, like. In Sanskrit it means
Reality, all existence, whilst in Chinese it is usually interpreted as
substance, qualities, and immutable law, the universe, or the universal.
Suzuki has translated it, justifiably, as 'Suchness', which is the
'Quality of the Void'. Other possible interpretations are 'Thusness',
'The Cosmic Order', the sum-total of all factors which shape the
universe, the norm of existence, the womb in which all things take their
shape and from whence they are born. Richard has translated this term in
various ways--*True Form*, *True Likeness*, *True Reality*, *Archetype*,
*True Model*, and so on. Occasionally, *True Reality* has been
substituted for Richard's *True Form* or *True Model*, etc.

"With these remarks we leave the reader to the text, of which its
translator said: 'If we estimate the value of books by the number of
adherents to their doctrines, then, after the Bible, the Koran, the
Confucian Classics, and the Vedas, this volume, about the size of the
Gospel of Mark, ranks next, or fifth, among the sacred books of the
world.'"

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Opening Hymn](aof02)
