[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu04)  [Next](cbu06.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# CHINESE BUDDHISM.

### INTRODUCTION.

<span class="small">Buddhism deserves examination—Researches of Remusat,
Burnouf, Koeppen, and St. Hilaire—Sanscrit manuscripts from
Nepaul—Buddhist books reveal to view the ancient Hindoo world—The
opening scene of the *Kin-kang-king*.</span>

AT the present time, when foreign intercourse with China is increasing
every year, and our knowledge of that country is extending in
proportion, an account of the history and literature of Buddhism in that
land will perhaps find more readers than at any former period. The
traveller will not fail to inquire why this Indian religion has sunk
into such helplessness and decay as he observes. The philosophical
historian naturally will wish to know the causes of the vast extension
of Buddhism, and of its present decline. The Christian missionary would
willingly learn the amount and nature of the religious feeling possessed
by the monks, and the strength of the opposition which the religion of
Christ has to expect during its propagation, from them and from the
Buddhist laity. Especially the statesman needs to be informed how far
the Chinese people are likely to be offended by the introduction of
Christianity, and whether the opposition to idolatry which it excites
will strike at any of their most dearly-cherished prejudices and
beliefs.

A religion that has extended its sway over so many Eastern nations, and
whose converts far outnumber those

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

of any other sect in the world, deserves minute investigation. The
present sketch will be necessarily too brief to do justice to the
subject, but it is hoped some results will be brought forward that may
assist the foreign observer to explain the great and long-continued
success of the Buddhistic system, the causes of its growing weakness,
and the many indications of its hopeless decay.

Among European scholars Remusat and his successors in the study of
Chinese literature have bestowed considerable attention on Buddhism, and
their labours have been rewarded with many interesting and valuable
results. Especially is the world indebted to Burnouf and St. Hilaire for
their work in this field of Buddhist inquiry, and lucid exposition of
their results. The aid to be derived from their investigations has not
been neglected in the account now given to the reader. Further, the most
direct means of gaining information is to study some parts of the
voluminous works extant in Chinese on this subject. The numerous Indian
priests who came to China early in the Christian era were indefatigable
translators, as is shown by what they have bequeathed to their
disciples. These monuments of the highly civilised race that spoke the
Sanscrit language, give to the inquiry a special literary interest. They
were till lately inaccessible in their original form. The European
students of Sanscrit for a long period sought in vain for an account of
Buddhist doctrines and traditions, except in the writings of their
adversaries. The orthodox Indians destroyed the sacred books of their
heretical brethren with assiduous care. The representations they give of
the views of their opponents are necessarily partial, and it may be
expected that what Colebrooke and others have done in elucidating
Buddhism from the polemical writings of the Brahmans, would receive
useful corrections and additions as well from Chinese sources as from
the Sanscrit manuscripts of Buddhist books obtained by Hodgson. <span
id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md)

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

An extended critique of the Buddhist literature of China and the other
countries professing Buddhism, such as Burnouf planned and partly
accomplished for India, would be a valuable contribution to the history
of the Hindoo race. The power of this religion to chain the human mind,
the peculiar principles of its philosophy, its mythological
characteristics, its mode of viewing human life, its monastic and
ascetic usages, all result from the early intellectual development of
the nation whose home is south of the Himalayas. In the Buddhist
classics it is not the life of China that is depicted, but that of
Hindostan, and that not as it is now, but as it was two thousand years
ago. The words and grammatical forms that occur in their perusal, when
deciphered from the hieroglyphic Chinese form that they have been made
to assume, remind the reader that they spring from the same stem of
which the classical languages of Europe are branches. Much of their
native literature the Buddhist missionaries left untouched—for example,
the highly-wrought epic poems and dramas that have recently attracted
the admiring notice of Europeans; but a large number of fables and tales
with a moral are found in Chinese Buddhist books. Many specimens of this
peculiar mode of composition, which, originating in Greece, was adopted
by the Hindoos, and spread into the various literatures of modern Europe
and Asia, have long since been made to wear a Chinese garb. <span
id="fr_2"></span>[1](#fn_2.md) Further, the elements of grammar and the
knowledge of the alphabet, with some important contributions from
mathematical science, have reached China through the same medium.
Several openings are thus presented into the old Hindoo world. The
country where speculative philosophy, with grammatical and arithmetical
science,

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

attained greater perfection than anywhere else in ancient times, is seen
spreading its civilisation into the neighbouring countries, and
producing remarkable and permanent changes in the national life of
China. To witness this, as may be done in the Buddhist books, cannot be
regarded as devoid of attraction. The very existence of Buddhism is
sufficient evidence of the energy of the Indian race as it was long ago.
The Mongols, Thibetans, and Singhalese, with the inhabitants of the
Indo-Chinese peninsula, combine with the Chinese and Japanese to prove
by the faith they still maintain in Buddhism the enthusiasm of its first
missionaries, and their power to influence mankind. Buddhism was not
always that decrepit and worn-out superstition that it now appears.

Having said thus much by way of preface, it is time to introduce to the
reader's attention the founder of the religion. No way of doing this
suggests itself as more suitable than to translate from the opening
scene of a popular Buddhist work called the "Diamond Classic" a few
passages, where he appears in the midst of his disciples, instructing
them in some of the principles of his system. The time, according to the
Singhalese chronology, was in the sixth century before Christ. The place
is Sha-wei, <span id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) a city in Central India.
The hero is Shakyamuni himself, *i.e.*, Buddha or Julai. The subordinate
characters are the Bikshu <span id="fr_4"></span>[2](#fn_4.md) or religious
mendicants, who are so denominated because they beg instruction for the
mind and food for the body. They consist of two classes, says the editor
of the Diamond Classic. Those who have abandoned vice and are aiming at
virtue are the small Bikshu. Those who are released from both alike are
great Bikshu. Among the latter, who

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

have gone deeper than the others into the profundities of Buddhist
doctrine, are included those called Bosat and Lahan, or, as these
characters are now pronounced by the Chinese, Pusa and Lohan.

The chief minister of the king having at Rajagriha heard Buddha's
instructions, and been deeply impressed by them, wished to invite him to
some suitable dwelling. Jeta, the king's son, had a garden. The minister
offered to buy it. The prince said by way of jest that he was willing if
he would cover it with gold. The minister, who was childless, obtained
gold-leaf and spread it over the garden. The prince then gave it him
free of cost. According to another account the minister ordered eighty
elephants loaded with gold to come immediately. The prince, admiring the
doctrine which had so affected the minister as to make him willing to
give all this gold for a hall to teach it, gave it for nothing. In a
house "in this garden, which lay outside the city Sha-wei, Buddha with
his disciples, 1250 in number, assembled. It was the time of taking
food. Buddha put on the robe" called *seng-gha-li*, and with his
*pat* <span id="fr_5"></span>[1](#fn_5.md) or "mendicant's rice bowl" in
his hand, entered the city to beg for food. When having gone from door
to door he had finished his task, he returned to his lodging-place. "His
meal being ended, he put his robe and rice vessel aside, and washed his
feet," for it was the practice of this religious reformer to walk with
naked feet. "He then sat cross-legged on a raised platform," remaining
some time in meditation before he began to teach.

“At that time the aged Subhûti, who was sitting among the crowd of
disciples, arose. With his right shoulder uncovered, and kneeling on his
right knee, he raised his joined hands respectfully, and addressed
Buddha in the following words:—"Rare is it to meet with the world's

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

honoured one, <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md) Julai, <span
id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md) who in the best manner protects his
disciples (Bosat), keeps them in his thoughts, and gives them his
instructions. World-honoured sage! (*Shï-tsun*) if good men and good
women exhibit *the unsurpassed just and enlightened heart*, how should
they place it firmly, and how should the evil risings of the heart be
suppressed and subdued?" The words in italics, corresponding to the
Sanscrit *anutara samyaksambuddhi*, <span id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8.md)
are written with Chinese characters in the text, and are explained by
the commentator as consisting of *an*, "not," *utara*, "superior,"
*samya*, "right and equal," *sambodi*, "rightly knowing." Buddha
replied, "The question is a good one, and you have truly described my
disposition. It is thus that a resting-place can be found and the heart
controlled." The words *ju-shï*, "thus," says the commentator, refer not
to what precedes, as in Chinese syntax, but to what follows, according
to the usage of Sanscrit grammar. Subhûti then expresses his anxious
desire to hear the instructions of the sage, who consequently addresses
his disciples called Bosat and Great Bosat (*Ma-ha-sat*). "All men,
whether they resemble in their nature oviparous animals," that are light
and fly, or imitate the moral dispositions and reflecting habits of "the
mammalia, or are like the fish," sprung from spawn, instinctively
following the multitude in the path of evil, "or are of the same class
with animals born by transformation," and pass through remarkable
changes, should enter that state which is final and unchangeable <span
id="fr_9"></span>[4](#fn_9.md)—the Nirvâna, <span
id="fr_10"></span>[5](#fn_10.md) "Whether they still

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

think" on the phenomena of the sensuous world "or have ceased to think,"
*i.e.*, become so far enlightened as to pay no attention to passing
scenes, "or are neither with thought nor without thought," that is, have
become entirely indifferent to life or death, appetite or aversion, love
or hatred, "they should thus seek salvation in destruction." Why do not
all living men obtain this immeasurably great release? "If the
Bodhisattwa (Bosat, *he who knows and feels*) has for his aim self, or
man, or the world of living things, or old age, he is not a true
Bodhisattwa." Buddha now bade Subhûti resume his seat, and went on to
inform him concerning the fixed place of rest for which he had inquired.
"The Bodhisattwa in action should have no fixed resting-place for his
thoughts. In what he does he should not rest on colour, sound, smell,
taste, collision, or any particular action. He should not rest in forms
of things, that is, allow himself to attend to any special sensational
phenomena. If he thus acts, his happiness and virtue will be boundless."
Buddha is asked by his disciple for a further explanation of this
doctrine. He replies by inquiring if the four quarters of space can be
measured by thought. Receiving a negative answer, he says that the same
is true of the doctrine that the Bodhisattwa in acting without regard to
particular objects obtains great happiness and virtue. He then asks if
with the material body and its senses Julai or Buddha can be truly
perceived. No, says the disciple, for body and form are not truly body
and form. Buddha himself replies by denying the existence of all matter
in the words "whatever has form is an empty delusion. If any one sees
that all things having forms are not forms, *i.e.*, nothing, he then

<span id="page_8">p. 8</span>

truly perceives Julai" in his formless and matterless reality; that is,
has attained to a profound understanding of Buddhist doctrines.

In these few passages from the *Kin-kang-king* or "Diamond Sutra," some
of the most prominent doctrines of Buddhism are brought to view,
viz.:—(I.) The happiness of the Nirvâna or state of unconsciousness
which frees him who attains it from the miseries of existence. (2.) The
mischievous influence of human life, with its struggles after particular
forms of happiness, and of the sensuous world with its deceptive
phenomena. (3.) The non-existence of matter, to be convinced of which is
to take the first grand step on the road to enlightenment.

This introduction into the Buddhist sphere of thought makes the system
appear to be based rather on philosophy than on any religious principle.
More will subsequently occur to confirm the correctness of this opinion.
With regard to the real character of Buddhism, piety towards the Ruler
of the world does not form either its foundation or the result to which
it aims to elevate its votaries. It will be seen that, while striving to
escape from the evils incident to life, and from every selfish aim, it
is nothing but selfishness in an abstract philosophical form, stripped
of the grosser qualities which are manifested in the common course of
human history.

In enumerating the various kinds of sensations conveyed to our minds by
the senses, a verb "to strike or pierce," ch‘u, is employed in place of
"touch," the familiar term of our own popular philosophy. All these
sensations are said by the Buddhists to be produced by the respective
organs with which they are connected. They are called the six kinds of
"dust" or "worldly things"—the unwelcome accretions that attach
themselves to our garments as we walk through the world. "Action," *fa*,
said to emanate from the "will," *yi*, is classed with them as the sixth
mode assumed by worldly phenomena.

The preceding specimen of Buddha's teaching, surrounded

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

by his disciples in a city of ancient India, is sufficient to introduce
the subject. The principal facts in the life of that sage will now be
detailed. Buddha will be here represented as he appears in the Chinese
biographies. They describe him as a sort of divine man, possessed
unbounded magical power, and visiting the most distant spots, as, for
example, the paradises of the gods, in an instant of time.

In giving an account of Chinese Buddhism, I feel the importance of
exhibiting Shakyamuni in the form which is familiar to the Chinese
devotee. It is well, in our picture, to retain the details of a
marvellous nature which have been so abundantly added by the Northern
Buddhists to the simplicity of the first narrative. Man cannot live
without God. This was an effort to recover the divine. When God, through
the absurdities of polytheism, was pushed out of view, the substitute
was Buddha, the perfect sage, the model ascetic, the patient and loving
teacher, the wonder-working magician, the acknowledged superior of gods
and men. Such was the conception worked out by the Hindoo mind to take
the place of the old polytheism of India, and accepted by all the
Buddhist nations north of Shakyamuni's birthplace. In the history of
religions it is of extreme importance that this fact should be
recognised and appreciated.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](cbu05.htm#fr_1.md) During his residence in
Nepaul. Of these works, the *Lotus of the Good* <span id="page_3">p.
3</span> *Law*, in Chinese *Miau-fa-lien-hwa-king*, has been translated
by Burnouf, Paris, 1852. The Rev. S. Beal, Professor of Chinese in
University College, London, has translated from Chinese *A Catena of
Buddhist Scriptures*, and *The Romantic Legend of Sâkya Buddha*.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[3:1](cbu05.htm#fr_2.md) Of these works Stanislas
Julien has translated *Les Avadanas*, consisting of tales and apologues.
1859.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[4:1](cbu05.htm#fr_3.md) Sha-wei was on the north of
the Ganges, about 200 miles above Benares. It is also written Shravasti.
All the upper part of the valley of the Ganges was embraced in what was
known as Central India.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:2](cbu05.htm#fr_4.md) This Sanscrit word is
pronounced according to K‘ang-hi *Bi-k‘u*. The orthography here adopted
for Chinese and Sanscrit words, agrees nearly with that of Sir T. Wade
and of the French writers on kindred subjects. For *ou*, the *oo* of
Morrison, u is here written.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[5:1](cbu05.htm#fr_5.md) In modern Chinese the *t*
is dropped and the *a* (*a* in father) changed to *o*. In Sanscrit the
word is *pâtra*.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[6:1](cbu05.htm#fr_6.md) A title of
Buddha—*Shï-tsun* in Sanscrit, *Lokês’vararâja* (Eitel's *Handbook of
Chinese Buddhism*), or *Lokadjyesht‘a*, v. Remusat's *Mélanges
Asiatiques*, vol. i. p. 164.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[6:2](cbu05.htm#fr_7.md) *Julai* is the Chinese
translation of Tathagata. It means literally "thus come," and is
explained, "bringing human nature as it truly is, with perfect knowledge
and high intelligence, he comes and manifests himself."

<span id="fn_8"></span>[6:3](cbu05.htm#fr_8.md) These words are pronounced
in old Chinese *a nu-ta-la sam-mia sam-bo-di*, and in Mandarin *a
neu-to-lo san-miau san-p‘u-t‘i*.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[6:4](cbu05.htm#fr_9.md) Without remainder, *Wu-yü*.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[6:5](cbu05.htm#fr_10.md) *Nit* is translated by
the commentator "go out if," and *ban*, "harassment." By the French
Sinologues it is identified with Nirvâna, the happy condition of perfect
rest at which the Hindoos aim. The dictionary *Ching-tsz-t‘ung*, says,
that "the <span id="page_7">p. 7</span> Chinese equivalent of this
Sanscrit term is, to announce that he is at rest, and that it is applied
to describe the death of Buddha, because his is not a true death like
that of other men, whose *tsing-shin* (soul) does not die." The sound
*ban* was selected, it may be, by a Hindoo who pronounced the word
Nirbana. It is called in some translations Nirwan. The Hindoo translator
would pronounce Nirwana. The Chinese character used for *ni* was called
*nit* in some parts of China, and *nir* in others.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter I: Life of Shakyamuni Till His Appearance at Benares as a
Teacher](cbu06.md)
