[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu05)  [Next](cbu07.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span> <span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

## A LIFE OF BUDDHA

### IN FOUR CHAPTERS.

### CHAPTER I.

##### LIFE OF SHAKYAMUNI TILL HIS APPEARANCE AT BENARES AS A TEACHER.

<span class="small">Previous lives—Chronology—The seventh
Buddha—Birth—Early life—Becomes a hermit—Becomes Buddha—Legendary
stories of his early preaching—*Hwa-yen-king*—Extramundane
teaching—Appearance at Benares.</span>

IN examining the Buddhist writings, the reader is at once reminded that
he has entered a field where he is deprived of the trustworthy guidance
and careful adherence to facts and dates of native Chinese authors. Not
only is this true of works that contain the wilder extravagances of
Indian mythology, and introduce the wondering disciple to the scenery
and inhabitants of numberless other worlds, even those that wear an
historical look, and yield the most information, do not fail thus to
betray their foreign origin. The doctrine of transmigrations, and an
eternal succession of kalpas past and future, is tempting to the
biographer who wishes for variety of incident. He can place his hero
wherever he pleases, in the universe boundless in space and time of the
Indian imagination. The founder of Buddhism, Shakyamuni, or the "Sage of
the house of Shakya," is a case in point. It is said of him that before
his birth more than two thousand years since in the present *kalpa*, he
had during many previous ones taken religious vows,

<span id="page_12">p. 12</span>

and honoured the Buddhas who then instructed the world. His name is
associated particularly with Dipankara, in Chinese, Janteng, a
fictitious Buddha, who received him as his disciple, and foretold that
he would in a subsequent kalpa become Buddha, and bear the name by which
he is now known. The time when this happened was too long ago to be
expressed by common Chinese numerals. It was at a distance of numberless
kalpas. <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_11.md) In modern Chinese temples,
an image behind that of Julai sometimes represents Janteng. In the kalpa
immediately preceding the present, Shakya is said to have risen to the
rank of Bodhisattwa. He was then born in the heaven called
Tushita, <span id="fr_12"></span>[2](#fn_12.md) and when the time was come
his soul descended to our world. He came on a white elephant having six
tusks. The date of Shakya's birth is very variously given. The Siamese,
Peguans, and Singhalese, all using the Pali versions of the Buddhist
classics, differ among themselves. The numbers as stated by them are
B.C. 744, 638, and 624. <span id="fr_13"></span>[3](#fn_13.md) The Chinese
historian, Ma Twan-lin, mentions two dates as assigned by various
authorities to this event, viz., 1027 and 668. The former is what is
commonly given in Chinese books. Burnouf rightly prefers the chronology
of the Southern Buddhists. Their discrepancies between themselves form
an objection, but not at all a fatal one, to such a conclusion. The
uncertainty that involves this question is an instance of the difficulty
attending researches in Indian chronology and history, as contrasted
with the fulness and accuracy of Chinese writers. What was the original
language of Buddhism is another point not yet fully determined. The
settlement of it would throw light on the chronology. Only one of the
dates can be right, for there is no doubt as

<span id="page_13">p. 13</span>

to Buddha's identity. If Sanscrit was the language in which he taught
his disciples, it must have been just dying out at the time, for the old
Buddhist inscriptions, in the countries watered by the Ganges, are in a
dialect derived from the Sanscrit and differing little from Pali. The
mother-tongue of the Hindoos must then have been already supplanted by a
derived dialect in the time of Ashôka, king of Central India, who
reigned near Patna, as both the Northern and Southern Buddhists inform
us, about 150 or 200 years after Buddha's death. It is to his age that
those monuments are ascribed. Perhaps a discussion as to whether the
Sanscrit or Pali versions of the sacred books were the earlier, may have
led to a designed altering of dates by the Northern or Southern school
of Buddhism. The deception was an elaborate one, by whichever party it
was practised, for the interval from the death of Buddha until modern
times is in the writings of both schools filled up by a series of events
and dates. <span id="fr_14"></span>[1](#fn_14.md) The lives of some of the
patriarchs, as given in Chinese books, appear too long. Ananda, a
favourite disciple of Buddha, is made to die eighty-three years after
him. Of his successors in the office of patriarch, the first two held it
for sixty-two and sixty-six years respectively. The average of the first
fourteen patriarchs is more than fifty-two years to each. Without
forgetting the simple and abstemious habits of these ancient ascetics,
their lives must be regarded as prolonged beyond probability. Perhaps
the most convincing argument for the claim of the Pali to be that which
was spoken by Buddha himself, is that the ascertained interval between
him and Ashôka is too short for the formation of a new language.

The work called *San-kiau-yi-su* <span id="fr_15"></span>[2](#fn_15.md)
places the Buddha called Shakyamuni in the seventh place among those
whom

<span id="page_14">p. 14</span>

it commemorates as having, on account of their perfect enlightenment,
received that title. The list begins with the ninety-eighth Buddha of a
preceding *kalpa*. He is called the Biba Buddha. The two next, who are
supposed to live toward the close of the same vast period of time, are
called Shï-chï and Baishevu. The three first Buddhas of the present
kalpa are said to have been named Kulusan, Kunashemuni, and Kashiapa. In
Ward's *Mythology of the Hindoos*, it is said, "The Buddhists assign to
their hero ten incarnations, and designate the histories of these
incarnations by the names of ten Hindoo sages." But the true history of
the religion begins with Shakyamuni.

Where all is fictitious, it matters not very much whether the preceding
six Buddhas were incarnations of Shakyamuni Buddha, or were separate in
their personality. There appears to be no ground for believing in any
Buddhism before Buddha. Given a hero, it is easy to invent for him six
preliminary lives, or six predecessors in the same dignity. One would
like to know whether the Mohammedan series of seven sages, selected out
of the Jewish and Christian Scriptures, from Adam to Christ, is imitated
from this Hindoo series of seven sages.

The effects of the teaching of each of the past Buddhas are recorded.
The most ancient of the seven is said to have saved 34,800 men. The
figures diminish, step by step, to 20,000, the number attributed to the
immediate predecessor of the historical Buddha.

The names of the most faithful, and also the two proficient disciples,
are given in the case of each Buddha. The city in which they lived is
also mentioned, and the tree under which they were fond of delivering
instruction. The favourite city of Shakyamuni was Shravasti, and his
tree, the Bodhi tree. His disciples were too many to number. His
faithful disciple was Rahula, his son, and his two most proficient
pupils were Shariputra and Maudgalyayana.

The true history of the Buddhist religion begins with

<span id="page_15">p. 15</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Shakyamuni. He was
the son of Suddhodana, king of the city Kapilavastu, near the boundary
of Nepaul. The king of Kapilavastu was subject to the king of Magadha, a
country in Southern Bahar, to which the Ganges provinces were then
tributary. Suddhodana is called in Chinese Tsing-*fan*—"He who eats food
freed from impurities."

Buddha was born B.C. 623, and attained the rank of Buddha at thirty-five
years of age, in B.C. 588, the sixteenth year of the reign of Bimbisara.
He died at seventy-nine, in the eighth year of the reign of Ajatashatru,
B.C. 543. These are Ceylonese dates, and are, says Turnour, too late by
sixty-five years. According to the Siamese and Birmese chronology, the
birth and death of Buddha are assigned to the years B.C. 653 and B.C.
628. Koeppen prefers the former dates, on the ground that they are
usually accepted by the Southern Buddhists, and the date of the Nirvâna
is sanctioned by a very extended official use. He suggests that the
Buddhists of China and other northern countries were influenced by the
prophecy uttered by Shakyamuni, which stated that his doctrines would
spread in China a thousand years after his death. It was in A.D. 64 that
Buddhism entered China. The Nirvâna, therefore, should have its date a
thousand years earlier. From this we may understand why the Chinese
Buddhists place the life of Buddha so much earlier than do their brother
believers in the south. Koeppen also remarks that Ceylon was converted
to Buddhism much earlier than countries north of India, and that
historical events are, therefore, more likely to be correctly recorded
in Ceylon. The events in Buddha's life were fresher in remembrance when
the early Buddhist literature of Ceylon was compiled, than when Buddhism
spread in China and other northern countries.

The accepted date in China for Buddha's birth is B.C. 1027. His name was
Siddharta, and that of his mother was Maya. She died ten days after his
birth. The question in regard to this date is thus treated by the author
of *Fo-tsu-t‘ung-ki*. He first gives six grounds for accepting

<span id="page_16">p. 16</span>

the older chronology. 1. A portent in the year B.C. 1027. According to a
work called *Cheu-shu-yi-ki*, a bright light of five colours was seen to
pierce the constellation Tai-wei, and pass over the whole west. On
seeing it, the historian Su Yeu remarked that a great sage was born in
the west. Seventy-nine years later, a white rainbow was seen, having
twelve stripes stretching from south to north. The historian Hu To,
seeing it, said, "It is the sign of the death of a great sage in the
west." 2. Kashiapmadanga said to the Han emperor, Ming-ti, who
introduced Buddhism into China, that it was in the year B.C. 1027, on
the eighth day of the fourth month, that Buddha was born. 3. The
statement of the third Chinese patriarch in the sixth century, that it
was in the fifty-first year of the cycle, on the fourth month and eighth
day. 4. Another early work of a Chinese Buddhist gives the year B.C.
1027, the month and day agreeing. 5. The same is true of a statement by
a Buddhist in the *History of the Wei*, an imperial work. 6. Early in
the seventh century, the emperor T‘ai-tsung ordered an investigation
into the date of Buddha's birth. Lieu Te-wei, a minister of State,
inquired of a famous Buddhist named Fa-lin the reason of the discrepancy
in the current accounts. The consequence was that Fa-lin settled it to
be B.C. 1027.

The same author proceeds to give several other epochs, believed in by as
many authorities. 1. Inscription on a stone pillar. This gives B.C. 718.
2. The statement of the pilgrim Fa-hien, B.C. 1197. 3. The statement of
the work *Siang-cheng-ki*, B.C. 753. 4. Another statement places it in
the time of Hia-kie, B.C. 1800. The fifth authority,
*Chung-sheng-tien-ki*, gives the date B.C. 457. The sixth states that
B.C. 687 was the year in question, and that then, according to the
*Tso-chwen*, there was a shower of falling stars. This phenomenon is
supposed to indicate Buddha's birth. A learned Buddhist, Ku-shan, argues
that the birth must have taken place in the second month of the modern
Chinese calendar, because in the Cheu

<span id="page_17">p. 17</span>

dynasty the year began two months later. To this the defenders of the
orthodox Chinese view say in reply, that in three Sutras the birth of
Buddha is said to have taken place in the fourth month, and as they were
all translated since the modern calendar was adopted, a century before
the Christian era, it is not open to us to say that it took place in the
second month.

At fifteen years of age he was, in an assembly of nobles and Brahmans,
formally invested with the rank of heir-apparent. The nobles presented
to his royal father basins filled with water from the four seas, and
ornamented with the seven precious things. They also sprinkled water on
the prince's head, and gave him the seal of the seven precious things.

At seventeen he was married to a Brahman maiden of the Shakya family
called Yashodara. He was taught in his youth every possible
accomplishment, and was supplied with all the delights that high
position and riches could afford, but he soon learned to despise them.

At eighteen years of age he left the palace to visit certain pleasure
gardens and groves. Passing the east gate of the city he saw there a
Deva who had assumed the form of an old man, with white hairs and
crooked back. He thought sadly on the rapidity with which men grow old.
They become aged like lightning, and yet are not afraid. Going out
again, the same divinity presented himself at the south gate in the
disguise of a sick man, with languid features and swelled paunch. At the
west gate he saw a dead man, and the members of his family laughing as
they followed him to the grave. He went out once more, and saw at the
north gate a begging priest, a Bikshu in fact. He wore the garb of an
ascetic, and carried a bowl. A staff was in his hand. The prince asked
him who he was. He replied, "I am a Bikshu, practising sacred duties,
and always obtaining the reward of freedom from action." As he finished
these words he rose into the air, and was soon out of sight. The prince
thought, "I fear

<span id="page_18">p. 18</span>

lest I may be pressed down by old age, sickness, death, the miseries I
have witnessed. This Bikshu has arrived at the perception of my
feelings. He shows me the path of deliverance." From this time the
prince began to desire the ascetic life.

At twenty-five years old he sought an interview with his father, and
said, "Kindness and affection, multiplied as they may be, lead but to
partings. Allow me to enter on the ascetic life, that I may learn what
wisdom is." His father tried in vain to detain him. On the seventh day
of the second month the prince, while reflecting on the life of the
recluse, emitted from his body a light which shone to all the palaces of
the Devas. These beings then knew that Siddharta had become a recluse,
and came to congratulate him. He asked their aid, and left his father's
palace in the night-time under their escort, resolved to be a hermit,
and saying, "If the eight miseries"—viz., birth, death, sickness, love,
hatred, &c.—"be not abandoned, wisdom cannot be attained." He refused to
return to his father's palace, and lived on the Himalaya Mountains in
solitary spots, trying various methods to attain mental satisfaction,
but in vain. He lived on hemp and barley, and assuaged his thirst with
snow, till at thirty years of age he came to the perception of the true
condition and wants of mankind. "He sighed, and said, 'It is strange
that all men while they have within them *Julai* (the capacity of
perceiving the true nature of life and worldly phenomena), and possess
knowledge and virtue as the original property of their nature, should be
entangled by deceptive thoughts and remain in ignorance of these
things.' After this he lived forty-nine years, and delivered thirty-five
discourses of special importance."

There were, during Buddha's life, five principal periods of instruction.

I. The time of delivering the *Hwa-yen-king*.—The scene was mostly in
the paradises of the Devas, and the audience was composed of
mythological personages. This

<span id="page_19">p. 19</span>

was the first grand outburst of Buddhist thought, and it belongs to the
"Greater development."

II\. The deer garden period.—Buddha now becomes historical. His teaching
and his audience are human. This is the period of instruction in the
four miseries, examples of which we have in the *Sutra of Forty-two
Sections*, and other works.

III\. The teaching of squareness and equality;—where all the principles
of Shakyamuni's philosophy appear in symmetry, as in the
*Leng-yen-king*.

IV\. The period of the Prajna.—Here Shakyamuni becomes most coldly
metaphysical, and expounds the doctrine of salvation for man and all
living beings in the triumphant tone of an icy logic. The miseries of
society are to be terminated by minute hair-splitting and belief in
certain profound abstractions, which, after all that may be said for
them, are simply impossibilities.

V. The closing period of Buddha's public life included the announcement
of the Lotus of the Good Law, and the doctrine of Nirvâna. Here, in
prospect of death, the warmth of human feeling returns. Shakyamuni
becomes sympathetic and touching, as in the days of youth when he
founded the Hindoo monastic societies, and when, as an enthusiastic
preacher, he visited one after another the great cities of Oude and
Bahar.

At first Buddha appeared like the sun in the east illuminating the tops
of the western hills. Bodhisattwas from immense distances were
attracted, and came to recognise him as the teacher whose instructions
would guide mankind to the highest truth. This was the Hwa-yen period.
Next the sun shone on the valleys, and then upon the wide plains. After
the Bodhisattwas had been taught, the first disciples of the human race,
the *Shramanas*, or "listeners," were instructed in the valleys, and
then all mankind in the plains. The changes of milk are referred to in
illustration. The first teaching was like milk fresh from the cow. There
are four subsequent

<span id="page_20">p. 20</span>

stages, cream, ordinary butter, rich butter, and the oil which appears
on the surface in the last boiling process. In Mongolia and North China
milk is boiled to make butter.

The Hwa-yen doctrine is described also as *tun*, "an abrupt outburst."
The teaching of the Bikshus is "gradual and elementary" (*tsien*),
proceeding step by step from the *Book of the Forty-two Sections* to the
*Leng-yen*, or "Square and equal," and from thence to the *Prajna
paramita*. Beyond that, in the later years of his life, Buddha unfolded
the "secret" (*pi-mi*) and "unfixed" (*pu-ting*) aspects of his
doctrine.

The scene of the delivery of the *Hwa-yen* Sutra was laid in nine
places. The first was under the *Bodhi* tree of *Aranya* in the kingdom
of Magadha. This is different from the *Bodhi* tree of the *Agama*
Sutras of the Small Development school. *Aranya* is "wild," "a quiet
place," "belonging to the woods;" and *Aranyakah* "a forester," "a
hermit," "living in seclusion" (see Eitel). The addition of *ka* marks
an agent. Before Buddha's time, and during his youth, the hermit life
had already become a fashion in India. He would, when a young and
enthusiastic hermit, find himself more at home with men of this class
than any other. In some green glade of the forests that skirt the mighty
Himalayas, Shakyamuni is pictured by his northern followers with
numberless mythological personages assembled before him. P‘u-hien, or,
as he is called in Sanscrit, *Samantabhadra*, is the principal speaker.
He is one of the fabulous Bodhisattwas. Manjusiri, another, follows hit.

The scene is then suddenly changed to the paradises of the Devas. Indra
receives Buddha in one of his palaces <span
id="fr_16"></span>[1](#fn_16.md)

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

on the Sumeru Mountain, and utters an encomium upon him in a speech in
which he states that Kashiapa Buddha had discoursed on the same spot. He
is followed by ten Bodhisattwas, who all speak in praise of Buddha's
wisdom.

Buddha is next found in the heaven of Yama, the Indian Pluto, and after
this in that called Tushita, literally "the happy," where his mother
Maya resides. After this, the scene of the instructions and encomiums of
the Bodhisattwas in the presence of Buddha is transferred to other Deva
paradises, where Indra and other gods of the Brahmanical mythology hold
conference with them.

Last of all, at the close of this long Sutra, the scene is laid in the
garden of Jeta as in the "Sutra of the Diamond," *Kin-kang-king*.
Shariputra and other disciples are there by anticipation, but do not see
Buddha, nor the magnificent assemblage of Bodhisattwas. Before the
assembly breaks up, Manjusiri takes his farewell of Buddha, and sets
forth on a southward journey among mankind. Shariputra and 6000 Bikshus
went to him for instruction. He exhorted them to practise the duties of
the Bodhisattwas, that they might obtain the *samadhi* of faultless
vision, and see the Buddha regions and all the Buddhas. Manjusiri then
proceeded to the "city of happiness," on the east of which he met the
youth familiarly known among the Northern Buddhists as
Shan-ts‘ai-t‘ung-tsi, who became his disciple and learned from him the
knowledge of Bodhi. He also traversed Southern India, where he taught in
110 cities.

Shakyamuni himself says very little in the course of this Sutra. It is
intended rather for developing the mythology of the great Bodhisattwas.
As such, it is highly valued in China, where the images of Wen-shu
(Manjusiri) and P‘u-hien are common in the temples. P‘u-hien in one
speech mentions China under the name Chen-tan, <span
id="fr_17"></span>[1](#fn_17.md) as a

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

region where many Bodhisattwas have been engaged in past times in
instructing the people.

But the time had arrived when Shakyamuni must become a teacher of
mankind, and we now find him suddenly making his appearance at Benares.

Legend having resolved to exalt Shakyamuni to the utmost extent of her
resources, busied herself particularly with the year when he attained
that perfect vision of truth which is called the state of Buddha.

He had passed six years in the exercises of severe abstinence and
meditation. One day he thought, "I had better eat, lest the heretics
should say that Nirvâna is attained in famishing the body. Let me eat,
and then attain to perfect knowledge." He went to the Nairanjana river
to bathe. Here a shepherdess gave him food which suddenly grew on a
lotus-flower at her feet. He took it, and felt his strength return. He
went to sit under a banyan tree (Pippala), or tree of Bodhi. The god
Indra brought him a straw seat. He sat here, resolved not to move till
the transformation he was about to undergo should be completed.

The king of the Maras, perceiving that the walls and foundations of his
palace were shaking, thought in himself, "Gautama is now attaining
perfect knowledge. Before he has reached the height of wisdom, I will go
and trouble him." He went with bow and arrows, and attendant demons, to
the tree where the object of his attack was sitting. He then addressed
him—"Bodhisattwa! give up the monastic principle (*c‘hu-kia fa*), and
become a 'wheel king.' <span id="fr_18"></span>[1](#fn_18.md) If you rise
not, I will shoot my darts at you." The Bodhisattwa was unmoved. The
darts, as they fell, became lotus flowers. The king of the Maras then
offered him his three daughters to attend on him. Shakyamuni said, "You
attained, by a small act of virtue, the body

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

of a Deva. You think not on the perishing, but seek to tempt me. You may
leave me; I need you not." The king of the Maras again said, "I will
resign to you my throne as a Deva, with the instruments of all the five
pleasures." "No," replied the Bodhisattwa, "you attained the rank of
Ishwara by some charitable deed. But this happiness has an end. I wish
it not."

An army of spirits now issued from the ground and rebuked the tempter,
who, as his last device, summoned a host of demons to assault the
unconquerable youth. The air was filled with grim faces, gnashing teeth,
and bristling spears. The Bodhisattwa looked on this scene as if it were
child's play. A spirit in the air was now suddenly heard to say, "The
Bodhisattwa attains this day, under the Bodhi tree, the perfection of
knowledge. Here stands the diamond throne of many past Buddhas. It is
not for you to disturb him. Cease your hostility, and wait upon him with
respect." The king of the Maras then returned to his palace.

It was on the seventh day of the second month that Shakyamuni, after
this victory, attained the rank of Buddha. This is described as entering
into a state of reverie, emitting a bright light, and reflecting on the
four modes of truth. <span id="fr_19"></span>[1](#fn_19.md) It is added,
that he comes to the complete knowledge of the unreality of all he once
knew as good and evil acting, long and short life, and the five paths of
the metempsychosis, leading all living beings into a perpetual
interchange of sorrow and joy. As the morning star of the eighth day of
the month appeared, he suddenly awoke to this consciousness, and
attained the perfect view of the highest truth.

As soon as Shakyamuni had risen from the state of

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> P‘usa to that of
Fo, the assembly of the forty-one great teachers embodying the law, and
of innumerable Devas, Nagas, and other supernatural beings, gathered
round him, as the clouds gather round the moon.

To them he discoursed, as already described, in the *Hwa-yen-king*.

While he was meditating on the hopelessness of attempting the
instruction of mankind, none but a Buddha being able to comprehend what
Buddha knew, it first appeared better that he should enter at once into
the Nirvâna. But from this wish he was dissuaded by Brahma and Indra,
who came to intercede for mortals, and induce Buddha to become a public
teacher. During seven days he received in silence Brahma's entreaties.
In the second week he reflected on the sufferings and sorrows of man. In
the third week, he said, "I ought to open the gate of the sweet law. Who
should first hear it? The hermit Arara, who desired the perfect
knowledge of truth? Let me first save him." A voice in the air said, "He
died yesterday." Again he thought, "Then let the hermit Nalana be the
first." The voice again said, "He died last night." He thought once
more, "The five messengers sent by the minister of state had a like
wish. Let them first hear the law." Buddha accordingly set out for
Benares.

On the way, he sat by a pool in a state of *samadhi* for seven days. A
blind Naga (snake or dragon) that lay in the pool felt the light that
shone from Buddha restore his vision. He came out of the water, was
transformed into a youth, and received the vows as a disciple.

On the seventh day of the third month, the spirit of the tree under
which Buddha had for seven days been in a state of *samadhi*, took
notice of Buddha's long abstinence from food. Five hundred travelling
merchants passed at the moment, and the oxen that drew their waggons
proved unable to pull the vehicles over the obstacles that lay in the
road. Two of the merchants came to the tree to ask

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the spirit's aid. The spirit advised them of the presence of Buddha near
the pool, and said they should offer him food. They gave him barley
mixed with honey. The four kings of the Devas (who are seen in the front
hall of Buddhist temples) took from the mountain stones four
sweet-smelling bowls, which they found there by a happy chance. In these
they offered the food. Buddha took all the bowls, for fear of giving
offence to any of the kings. He then piled them up on his left hand,
and, with his right (by magical manipulation), formed them into one,
holding it so that all present might see it. Then, after uttering a
charm, he ate the food, and proceeded at once to administer the vows to
the two merchants, who, with their companions, all attained high grades
in Buddhist knowledge.

Buddha, in this instance, imposed on the neophytes the ordinary five
prohibitions suited for men and Devas. This must be regarded, therefore,
as *exoteric* teaching. But as the grade attained was high in proportion
to the amount of training, it belongs so far to the unfixed or arbitrary
division of the exoteric doctrine *Hien-lu-chï-pu-ting-kiau*,
"manifested, and not fixed teaching."

It is at this point in Shakya's biography that a new section begins.

Mankind were not at this time in a state to receive the doctrine of the
Greater development, and Buddha must be content to leave the
brilliantly-illuminated regions of the great Bodhisattwas and shine upon
the retired valleys, where he will, by a gradual process of teaching,
reform and make happy such groups as he may meet of ordinary mortals in
their wretchedness and desolation. He will, for the time, postpone his
more elevated discourses, and proceed to Benares to teach the rudiments
of his system. The shining robes of the recognised Buddha must be
exchanged for the tattered garb of the ascetic. This is to him a
temporary disguise.

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

The Northern school, with all the looseness of its chronology, professes
great exactness in dates.

<div align="center">

|        |      |                                   |
|--------|------|-----------------------------------|
| Month. | Day. | Event.                            |
| 2      | 8    | Shakyamuni becomes Buddha.        |
| „      | 29   | Teaches the Hwa-yen doctrine.     |
| 3      | 6    | In reverie by the pool.           |
| „      | 7    | Receives food from the merchants. |
| „      | 8    | In the garden at Benares.         |

</div>

In these dates, says the biographer, intervals of three, four, and five
weeks may be observed.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_11"></span>[12:1](cbu06.htm#fr_11.md) *A-send-gi-kap*. The
Sanscrit word *Asankhyâ* means "innumerable." *Kalpa* is applied to
periods of time varying from a few hundreds to many thousand years.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[12:2](cbu06.htm#fr_12.md) Tushita now pronounced
*Tushïto*.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[12:3](cbu06.htm#fr_13.md) See Klaproth's *Life of
Buddha*, and Turnour's *Examination of the Pali Buddhistical Annals*.

<span id="fn_14"></span>[13:1](cbu06.htm#fr_14.md) The suggestion of
Turnour to account for the sixty-five years discrepancy of the
Singhalese and Greek dates is, that dates were altered to reconcile
Buddha's prophecies with facto. This throws light on the design of the
Northern Buddhists in antedating Buddha's birth by 447 years.

<span id="fn_15"></span>[13:2](cbu06.htm#fr_15.md) *San-kiau-yi-su*,
"Supplementary account of the three religions."

<span id="fn_16"></span>[20:1](cbu06.htm#fr_16.md) The *Tau-li-t‘ien*, or
"Heaven of the number 33;" in Sanscrit, *Triyastrimsas*. Sumeru is
probably Elburz, an isolated mountain of the Caucasus range, 18,000 feet
in height, and surrounded by low ground. The syllable *su*, like *el*,
is a prefix. If this supposition be correct, the Hindoo race, when
forming its legends of the Deva worlds in their first form, must have
lived in the vicinity of the Caucasus. *Su* = *El;* *Me* = *Bu;* *Ru* =
*r*.

<span id="fn_17"></span>[21:1](cbu06.htm#fr_17.md) *Hwa-yen-king*, chap.
xxvi. *Tan* means "country," as in Hindostan, Afghanistan.

<span id="fn_18"></span>[22:1](cbu06.htm#fr_18.md) A king who rules the
world, and causes the wheel of doctrine everywhere to revolve. The great
Ashôka was a wheel king. The word is *Chakravarti* in Sanscrit, from
*Chakra*, "wheel," the symbol of activity, whether of Buddha in
preaching, or of kings like Ashôka in ruling.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[23:1](cbu06.htm#fr_19.md) These are, *Ku*,
"misery," *Tsi*, "assembling," *Mie*, "destruction," and *Tau*, "the
path," consisting in knowledge of misery, truth, and oppressive
restraints, the need of separation from the ties of passion, the
possibility of destroying the desires, and the path of salvation as
regards the practical Buddhist life.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter II: Life of Buddha From His Appearance as a Teacher at
Benares to the Conversion of Rahula](cbu07.md)
