[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu13)  [Next](cbu15) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_188">p. 188</span>

### CHAPTER IX.

#### THE BUDDHIST MORAL SYSTEM.

<span class="small">The Ten virtues and Ten vices—The cause of human
stupidity is in the passions—The Five prohibitions—The Ten
prohibitions—Klaproth's praise of Buddhism—But it is atheistic, and
therefore this praise should be qualified—Kindness to animals based on
the fiction of transmigration—Buddhism teaches compassion for suffering
without inculcating obedience to divine law—Story of Shakyamuni—Sin not
distinguished from misery—Buddhists teach that the moral sense is
innate—They assign a moral nature to animals—The Six paths of the
metempsychosis—Hindoo notions of heaven and hell—Countless ages of joy
and suffering—Examples—Exemption from punishment gained by meritorious
actions—Ten kings of future judgment—Fate or Karma—Buddhism depreciates
heaven and the gods—Buddha not God, but a Saviour—Moral influence of the
Paradise of the Western heaven—Figurative interpretation of this
legend—The contemplative school identifies good and evil—No moral
distinctions in the Nirvâna—Buddhism has failed to produce high
morality—The Confucianist condemnation of the Buddhists—Mr. P. Hordern's
praise of Buddhism in Birmah—The Birmese intellectually inferior to the
Chinese—Kindness to animals known to the Chinese before they received
Buddhism—Buddha's reasons for not eating flesh.</span>

THE books of primitive Buddhism exhibit a higher moral tone than is
found in the larger works full of metaphysical abstractions, which
succeeded them. The "Book of Forty-two Sections," translated in the
first century, and belonging to the former class, speaks of Ten vices
and Ten virtues as belonging to mankind. The vices are: three of the
body—killing, stealing, and adultery; four of the lips—slandering,
reviling, lying, and elegant words (uttered

<span id="page_189">p. 189</span>

with a vicious intention); three of the mind—jealousy, hatred, and
"folly" (*ch‘ï*), the last of which includes not believing in "the
Honoured Three" (*Buddha*, *Dharma*, *Sanga*), and holding erroneous
opinions. The opposites of these are the Ten virtues.

In the same work Buddha says: "That which causes the stupidity and
delusion of man is love and the desires." "Man having many faults, if he
does not repent, but allows his heart to be at rest, sins will rush upon
him like water to the sea. When vice has thus become more powerful it is
still harder than before to abandon it. If a bad man becomes sensible of
his faults, abandons them and acts virtuously, his sin will day by day
diminish and be destroyed, till he obtains full enlightenment."

In the work *Kiau-ch‘eng-fa-shu*, the three vices of the mind are
described as—covetousness, hatred, and folly. The Ten virtues that
correspond to the Ten vices are there stated to be—preserving life,
almsgiving, a "pure and virtuous life" (*fan-hing*), peaceful words,
yielding words, truthful words, plain unadorned words, abstinence from
quarrelling, mercy, and "acting from good causes" (*yin*-*yuen*).

Hardy, in describing the Buddhism of Ceylon, states the four sins of
speech to be—lying, slander, abuse, and unprofitable conversation. The
three sins of the mind he states to be—covetousness, malice, and
scepticism.

The disciple of Buddha, whether he enters a monastery or wears the
prescribed dress and continues in the family, must pledge himself to the
five following things:—(1.) not to kill; (2.) not to steal; (3.) not to
commit adultery; (4.) not to lie; (5.) not to drink wine. These are
called *Wu-kiai*, "The five prohibitions." In Hardy's *Manual of
Buddhism*, five evils to be avoided are mentioned—viz., (1.) drinking
intoxicating liquors; (2.) gambling; (3.) idleness; (4.) improper
association; (5.) frequenting places of amusement.

In the work called *Sheng-t‘ien-shïh-kiai-king*, "The book

<span id="page_190">p. 190</span>

of birth in heaven through keeping the ten prohibitions," a Deva informs
Buddha that he was born in the "heaven of the Thirty-three Devas" (that
of Indra Shakra), as a reward for reverencing the "Three Precious Ones"
(Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood), for not inflicting death, or
stealing, or committing adultery, or slandering, or deceiving, or lying,
or drinking wine, or eating flesh, or coveting, or holding false
opinions.

In the work *Kiau-ch‘eng fa-shu*, the Ten prohibitions are stated to
be:—(1.) killing; (2.) stealing; (3.) adultery; (4.) lying; (5.) selling
wine; (6.) speaking of others' faults; (7.) praising one's-self and
defaming others; (8.) parsimony joined with scoffing; (9.) anger, and
refusing to be corrected; (10.) reviling the Three Precious Ones.

In the comment on the *Fan-wang-king*, a work of the Great Development
school in the Discipline division, by Chï-hiü, the Ten prohibitions are
identified with the Ten vices, but in the text the prohibitions are
given as in the last quotation.

Other lists of prohibitions might be transcribed amounting to two
hundred and fifty, and even higher numbers. For these it will be
sufficient to refer to the works already mentioned.

Klaproth, having in view these moral precepts, and their effects on the
character of nations, speaks of Buddhism as being of all religions next
to Christianity in elevating the human race.

He says: "The wild nomades of Central Asia have been changed by it into
amiable and virtuous men, and its beneficent influence has been felt
even in Northern Siberia."

The beneficent influence of this religion would have been much greater
had it recognised the love and fear of God as the first of all the
virtues. Buddhism, by ascribing the creation, continuance, and
destruction of the world to an ever-changing fate, avoided the necessity
of admitting a supreme God. This was the side the Buddhists took in
their controversies with the Brahmans in India.

<span id="page_191">p. 191</span>

Atheism is one point in the faith of the Southern Buddhists. By the
Chinese Buddhists each world is held to be presided over by an
individual Buddha, but they do not hold that one supreme spirit rules
over the whole collection of worlds. Klaproth affirms that, according
to, the Buddhists and the other Hindoos, "the universe is animated by a
single spirit, individualised under innumerable forms, 'by' (*par*)
matter which does not exist except in illusion." This spirit, however,
is not God, the universal Creator and Preserver, and separated from the
world by His everlasting personality.

Good has resulted doubtless in many instances from the prominent
exhibition made by this system of the virtues and vices enumerated. But
much more good would have been done if they had rested on a better
basis, and been supported by a different view of the future state. The
crime of killing rests chiefly on the doctrine of metempsychosis, which
ascribes the same immortal soul to animals that it does to man. Faithful
Buddhists are told not to kill the least insect, lest in so doing they
should cause death to some deceased relative or ancestor whose soul
animates the insect. On this account the corresponding virtue is stated
to be *fang-sheng*, "to save life," constantly applied by the Buddhist
priests and common people of China to the preservation of the lives of
animals. The monks are vegetarians for the same reasons. They abstain
from flesh because they will not share in the slaughter of living
beings. They also construct reservoirs of water near the monasteries, in
which fish, snakes, tortoises, and small shell-fish, brought by
worshippers of Buddha, are placed to preserve them from death. Goats and
other land animals are also given over sometimes to the care of the
monks, and it is a custom in some monasteries, as at T‘ien-t‘ung, near
Ningpo, to feed a bird with a few grains of rice just before the morning
meal has commenced. When the priest appears at the door, the little
bird, which is watching in the neighbourhood,

<span id="page_192">p. 192</span>

and knows how to act on the occasion, flies to receive the gift.

In the Buddhist account of human sins and duties no obligation is
included except the duty of lessening the sum of human misery and
promoting happiness. This accords with the anecdote already related of
Shakyamuni in his youth. His father, remembering the forewarning of a
hermit, that the prince his son would wish to abandon the world, erected
for him three palaces, where everything fascinating was placed to keep
him from such a purpose. The son of a Deva came down to praise the
beauty of the gardens and groves.

But the prince, then eighteen years old, wished to go out and see the
city. The king sent him with a wise minister to attend him. A Deva
appeared at one of the city gates transformed into an old man resting on
a staff. At another gate a Deva appeared as a sick person in pain and
helpless. At another gate he saw a corpse attacked by ravens—also a
Deva. The prince asked in each case the reason of what he saw. The wise
counsellor told him these sufferings came from the natural state of the
world, and could not be avoided. People must grow old, must suffer from
sickness, and must die. The prince was not satisfied, and the next day,
seeing a Deva dressed as a monk, he dismounted from his horse and asked
him who he was. The reply was, "A Shamen <span
id="fr_95"></span>[1](#fn_95) who has left the world." The prince asked
him why he had left the world. He said, because he saw men exposed to
the evils of birth, old age, sickness, and death; he therefore left the
world to seek truth and save living beings. The disguised Deva then
ascended into the air and disappeared.

At nineteen, assisted by the Devas, Shakyamuni is said to have gone
through the air on horseback two hundred and fifty miles to Baga, a
mountain belonging to the

<span id="page_193">p. 193</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Himalayas. Here he
lived as a hermit for six years, and became prepared for the office he
was to assume.

According to the view thus presented of the great object of Buddha's
teaching, it is to deliver men from suffering. This is done by
persuading them to enter on the monastic or hermit life, and act in
obedience to the directions of Buddha. This system looks on mankind as
involved in misery rather than guilt. The Ten vices are rather to be
regarded as faults, into which men fall from delusion and ignorance,
than positive sins. The common people in China, whose phraseology is
extensively infected with Buddhist ideas, see in every attack of
sickness, and in other misfortunes, a close connection with "sin"
(*tsui*). They hold that sin is the cause of suffering. Yet they do not
mean by this wilful sin, but some improper act done unconsciously, or in
childhood, as treading on an insect, wasting rice-crumbs, or misusing
paper that has the native characters upon it. Or they refer the calamity
to the sins of a former life. Hence they regard themselves as more to be
pitied than blamed for the *tsui* or "sin" of which their ill fortune
gives evidence.

This is an example of the mode in which the better tendencies of the
Buddhist system are neutralised by its omissions. Its moral precepts,
good as most of them are, would have more power, and the true character
of sin be more felt by the people, if the authority of God were
recognised as the great reason for acting well—the source of moral
obligation.

Buddhism shook the faith of the Chinese in Heaven as a personal ruler,
and put the Buddhas and Bodhisattwas in the place of that personal
ruler. The effect of Buddhism in part was to urge the Chinese mind to
see in Heaven only impersonal and material power. Thus the good effect
of its moral teaching was neutralised; and then the Chinese had good
moral teaching before.

The question that has been raised by European moralists as to whether
man has from his natural constitution an

<span id="page_194">p. 194</span>

inborn moral sense, is decided by the Buddhists, though without holding
a controversy on the subject, in the affirmative. They may be said to
appeal to a natural conscience, when they teach that all men have within
them a good moral nature, and that this principle of good is only
prevented from making men virtuous and happy by contact with the world
and the delusions of the senses. This is similar to the Confucian
doctrine, that all men are born good, and it is only by falling into
evil habits subsequently that they become vicious. Most systems of
morals, indeed, <span id="fr_96"></span>[1](#fn_96) in words or by
implication, admit the existence of conscience, because all men possess
it, and cannot be made to understand moral distinctions without
it. <span id="fr_97"></span>[2](#fn_97) The existence of a system of
virtues and vices shows the operation of conscience on the maker of it,
as the use of that system in moral instruction involves an appeal to
conscience in the disciple. The identification of conscience, however,
with natural goodness, by the Confucianists and the Buddhists, obscures
its true character as the judge between right and wrong. And to tell men
that they are naturally good is not only assuming, in compliment to
human nature, a fact that should be proved, but it is also likely to
induce those who are thus taught to look leniently on their own vices as
originating solely in the influences of the outside world. The
feebleness of the Buddhist appeal to conscience, as the source of moral
obligation, is further increased by its assigning the same originally
good nature to each member of the animal creation that it does to man.

The motives to well-doing, drawn from a future state of retribution in
this system, are derived from the Hindoo popular account of heaven and
hell. The Six life-paths into which living beings can be born are—(1.)
"Devas"

<span id="page_195">p. 195</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (gods); (2.) men;
(3.) "Asuras" (monsters); (4.) "hell" (naraka); (5.) hungry ghosts; (6.)
animals. The first three are assigned to the good, the latter three to
the wicked. The moral action is called *yin* (cause), and its recompense
*kwo* (fruit). All beings, whether virtuous or vicious, continue to be
re-born in one of these six states, until saved by the teaching of
Buddha.

Buddha said: "To leave the three evil states is difficult. When the
state of man has been attained, to leave the female sex and be born in
the male, is difficult. To have the senses and mind and body all sound
is hard. When this is attained, to be born in Central India is hard." He
continues to say, that to meet Buddha and be instructed, to be born in
the time of a good king, to be born in the family of a Bodhisattwa, and
to believe with the heart in the Three Honoured Ones, are all difficult.

Buddha said, <span id="fr_98"></span>[1](#fn_98) in a discourse
delivered in the heaven of Indra Shakra, that whatever good man or woman
heard the name of Ti-tsang Bodhisattwa, and in consequence performed an
act of praise or worship, or repeated that Bodhisattwa's name, or made
an offering to him, or drew a picture of him, such a person would
certainly be born in the heaven of Indra Shakra.

The same Bodhisattwa tells the mother of Buddha, who resides in the
paradise just mentioned, that “disobedience to parents, with slaying,
and wounding, are punished with an abode in the place of suffering
called *Wu-kien-ti-yü*. Slandering the Three Precious Ones, or wounding
the person of Buddha, or dishonouring the sacred books, or breaking the
vows, or stealing from a monk, are punished in a similar way. Their
punishment will last for ten millions of millions of *kalpas*. Then
their sin being compensated for by sufficient suffering, they will be
released.

"If a woman with an ugly countenance and sickly constitution prays to
this Bodhisattwa, she will, for a million of *kalpas*, be born with a
beautiful countenance." If any

<span id="page_196">p. 196</span>

men or women perform music before the image of the same deity, sing, and
offer incense, they shall have hundreds and thousands of spirits to
protect them day and night, so that no unpleasant sound may enter their
ears. Any one who slanders or ridicules a worshipper of this Bodhisattwa
will be transported to the "Avichi naraka" (*O-pi ti-yü*) till the end
of this *kalpa*. He will then be born a wandering hungry ghost, and,
after a thousand *kalpas* become an animal. After a thousand kalpas more
he will again become a man.

Such are a few specimens of the doctrine of retribution as taught to the
popular mind. It is easy to see that such sensual conceptions of the
future existence of man must degrade the common notions of the people on
duty and virtue. The objects for which the common people in China
worship in the Buddhist temples are almost all of a very inferior
nature. Religious worship, which ought to concern the recovery of man to
pure virtue, and the restoration of direct communication with God by the
forgiveness of sin, is changed into an instrument for acquiring various
kinds of material happiness.

The opinion the Buddhists hold on the forgiveness of sin is, that it can
be attained by repentance and meritorious actions. A definite amount of
gifts and worship will gain the removal of a corresponding amount of sin
and its attendant suffering. Thus, a filial daughter, by a certain
number of days spent in worshipping a Bodhisattwa, or a Buddha, can
obtain the rescue of a mother from hell.

In the popular view of the future state, the Hindoo king of death,
"Yama" (*Yen-lo*) holds a high place as the administrator of the
punishments of hell. Nine others are joined with him of Chinese origin.
They are called the Ten kings. The wicked at death are conducted to them
to receive judgment.

The decree by which men are born into the Six states of the
metempsychosis is merely that of fate, expressed in the words *yin-kwo*,
"cause and effect," or, employing one

<span id="page_197">p. 197</span>

factor only, *yin-yuen*, "causation," or "fate" (*karma*). "Good
actions" are also sometimes called *yin-yuen*, because they ultimately
bring happiness to the doer.

The motive to a good life, drawn from heavenly happiness, cannot be
considered a strong one, when the Devas and their felicity are
systematically depreciated, as they are in Buddhism. The "Devas" (or
popular Hindoo gods; in Chinese, *t‘ien*) are all mortal, and limited in
power. The state of man may be so elevated as to approach to that of the
paradise of the Devas. Some men attain to nearly the same power as the
gods, *e.g.*, Krishna. Southey, in the *Curse of Kehama*, has made that
personage, although a man, a terror to the kings of the Devas, and such
a representation is in accordance with Hindoo notions. So in Chinese
Buddhist temples, the visitor sees the highest of celestial beings
listening humbly to Buddha.

It may be said that it is not correct to institute or imply a parallel
between God as He is in the view of the Christian, and the Hindoo
deities. It may be said that a parallel between God and Buddha would be
more just. But Buddha is a world-born man, who washes away his sins like
others, by penances, offerings, and the teaching of some enlightened
instructor. He is not said to create the universe, nor to act as the
judge of mankind. He is simply a teacher of the most exalted kind, who,
by superior knowledge, passes out of the world of delusion, and
gradually attains the Nirvâna. His attitude towards his disciples is
simply that of an instructor, not an authoritative superior. The tie by
which the disciple is attached to him is that of voluntary not
compulsory obedience.

In fact, the character ascribed to Buddha is rather that of a Saviour
than that of God. The object of his life and teaching is to rescue
living beings from their misery. While such is the character of Buddha
as he is described in books, he is, as an object of popular worship,
like the great Bodhisattwas, simply regarded as a powerful divinity.

<span id="page_198">p. 198</span>

A brief notice will here be taken of the ethical views of some of the
Chinese sects. The Tsing-tu school substitutes a paradise of purely
Buddhist invention for that of Hindoo mythology. It makes birth in the
Western heaven, the abode of Amitabha Buddha, the reward of virtue. The
description of this paradise consists entirely of things pleasing to the
senses. It is popularly regarded as real, but the founder of the
Yün-ts‘i school in his commentary on the "Amitabha Sutra," <span
id="fr_99"></span>[1](#fn_99) explains it as figurative. According to
this explanation, the Western heaven means the moral nature, confirmed,
pure, and at rest. Amitabha means the mind, clear, and enlightened. The
rows of trees mean the mind cultivating the virtues. The music means the
harmony of virtues in the mind. The flowers, and particularly the lotus,
mean the mind opening to consciousness and intelligence. The beautiful
birds mean the mind becoming changed and renovated.

It is evident that, on adopting this mode of commenting on the fable of
the Western heaven, it cannot any longer be honestly held out as a
future state of reward, to attract men to good actions.

The object of this figurative interpretation of the Western paradise of
Amitabha was, doubtless, to redeem the Tsing-tu school from the
discredit into which it had fallen, by abandoning the Nirvâna in favour
of a sensual heaven. The original inventors of the fiction must also
have had such a notion of it as that here given, while they did not try
to prevent its being accepted as real by the ignorant and uninquiring.

In the contemplative school, founded by Bodhidharma, the distinction of
vice and virtue is lost. To the mind that is given up to its own
abstract meditations, the outer world becomes obliterated. A person who
attends simply to his own heart may revile Buddha without sin, for
nothing is sin to him. He does not make offerings or pray. All actions
are the same to him. This system;

<span id="page_199">p. 199</span>

however, is not in opposition to ethical distinctions. It only aims to
enter a higher sphere. It seeks to attain a sort of Nirvâna even in the
present life.

In the books of this school, as in others where the unreality of all
sensible phenomena is maintained, virtue and vice occupy an inferior
position. These notions only come into existence through the
imperfection of the present state. They disappear altogether when an
escape from it is effected, by admission into the higher region of pure
enlightenment. Virtue and vice, life and death, happiness and misery,
the antithetical states originated in the world of delusions to which we
belong, are all condemned together as constituting a lower state of
existence. All beings should strive to be freed from them, and to rise
by Buddha's teaching to that perfection where every such diversity,
moral or physical, will be lost in unity. The Nirvâna does not admit any
such distinctions as those just mentioned. It is absolute and pure
illumination, without anything definite attached to it, whether good or
evil, pain or pleasure. Thus there is no place for ethics, except in the
lower modes of life.

It is common for intelligent priests in China of the contemplative
school to defend their system of idolatry by saying that they do not
worship images themselves. They are intended for the ignorant who cannot
comprehend the deeper principles of their religion. Religion being
purely a matter of the heart, offerings and prostrations are really
unnecessary. This exemplifies how what is regarded as a highly virtuous
action in the common people, ceases to be so in the case of one who, as
he thinks, has made some progress towards the state of Buddha. According
to this view the consistent Buddhist will offer worship to no being
whatever. He simply aims to raise himself above all the common feelings
of human life.

We cannot wonder that the Buddhist system of ethics having such
deficiencies and such faults as have been pointed out, has failed to
produce high morality among its

<span id="page_200">p. 200</span>

votaries. The mass of the people have gained from it the notion of a
future retribution, but what is the use of this when the promised state
beyond death consists merely of clumsy fiction? The metempsychosis,
administered by a moral fate, has only provided them with a convenient
means for charging their sinfulness and their misfortunes on a former
life. What virtue the people have among them is due to the Confucian
system. Buddhism has added to it only idolatry, and a false view of the
future state, but has not contributed to make the people more virtuous.

Klaproth complains of "a worthy and learned English missionary" (Dr.
Marshman of Serampore) for saying, "Unhappily for mankind, Buddhism . .
. was now fitted to spread its baneful influence to any extent."

These modes of expression are not, however, by any means too strong to
describe the effects of this religion in China if we accept the
Confucianist view of Buddhism. No thorough-going disciple of Confucius
would think this language too strong if only Buddhism be judged from the
standpoint of political and social morality. Surely if the Confucianist
cannot see how the monk, who forsakes his family and his duties as a
working citizen, is to be excused from heavy condemnation, the Christian
also may be permitted to criticise with severity a system which denies
the authority of God, identifies the moral nature of men and animals,
teaches mankind to look to man instead of to God for redemption, and
amuses the imagination with the most monstrous fictions of the unseen
world and of the future state.

The morality of Buddhism has received very high praise from more recent
writers. Professor Max Müller says, "The moral code of Buddhism is one
of the most perfect the world has ever known." Mr. P. Hordern, the
Director of Public Instruction in Birmah, says, “The poor heathen is
guided in his daily life by precepts older and not less noble than the
precepts of Christianity. Centuries

<span id="page_201">p. 201</span>

before the birth of Christ men were taught by the life and doctrine of
one of the greatest men who ever lived lessons of the purest morality.
The child was taught to obey his parents and to be tender of all animal
life, the man to love his neighbour as himself, to be true and just in
all his dealings, and to look beyond the vain shows of the world for
true happiness. Every shade of vice was guarded by special precepts.
Love in its widest sense of universal charity was declared to be the
mother of all the virtues, and even the peculiarly Christian precepts of
the forgiveness of injuries and the meek acceptance of insult were
already taught in the farthest East.

"Throughout Birmah it is a daily thing to see men, women, and children
kneeling on the road side, their hands clasped, and their faces turned
devoutly to a distant pagoda; while at the weekly festivals, or the full
moons, the devotions of the mass of the population is among the most
interesting spectacles in the whole East."

It is otherwise in China. Though the Buddhists have good precepts they
are very much neglected, even in the teaching. Books containing hard
metaphysical dogma such as the non-existence of matter, form much more
the subject of daily reading. The monks are subject constantly to the
Confucianist criticism that they are not filial to parents nor useful
working members of the commonwealth. A widely-extended monastic system
does not approve itself to the Chinese political consciousness any more
than it has done to European governments in times of revolution. The
charge of laziness and neglect of social duties was made the ground of
persecution in former days. At present, while Confucianism has ceased to
persecute Buddhism, it has never withdrawn its indictment against it on
the ground of morality. Indeed, all the force of the moral teaching of
the Chinese is in Confucianism and not in Buddhism. It is the moral
sense of the Chinese themselves that is energetic and influential so far
as they are really a moral people. The Buddhist

<span id="page_202">p. 202</span>

moral code is feebleness itself compared with the Confucianist. This is
partly because it is entangled by the coexistence with it of monkery as
a life, and of the metempsychosis and metaphysical nihilism as dogma.

Then in regard to the power of Buddhism to elevate a people above the
vain shows of the world and render then devotional, the conclusion to be
drawn from the effect of this religion in the Chinese is very different
from that adopted by Mr. Hordern in regard to Birmah. The Chinese
intellect is strong and independent in its judgments, and it does not
accept the fictions of Buddhism. The Hindoo mind cannot dominate the
Chinese mind, and the contemplative life has no attractions for the
countrymen of Confucius. The foreign resident in China does not witness
the appearance of devotion which has won the admiration of Mr. Hordern
in Birmah.

The power shown by Buddhism to win the faith of the Birmese I should
rather trace to the superiority of the Hindoo race over the mountain
tribes of the Indo-Chinese peninsula. The Birmese belong, with the
Thibetans, to the Bod race, which, having no intellectual development of
its own, accepted the Hindoo religion when brought them by the Buddhist
teachers. The superiority of Hindoo arts and civilisation helped
Buddhism to make this conquest. Bishop Bigandet <span
id="fr_100"></span>[1](#fn_100) says: “The Birmese want the capability
to understand the Buddhist metaphysics. If the Buddhist moral code in
itself has the power to influence a people so far as to render them
virtuous and devotional, independently of the element of intellectual
superiority, we still lack the evidence of it.

"The success of Buddhism is in this respect the reverse of the success
of Christianity, which, originating in Judea, subjugated both Greece and
Rome without aid from intellectual superiority."

I just add here that the Confucianists do not allow that kindness to
animals was first taught them by Buddhism.

<span id="page_203">p. 203</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> They find it in
their own ancient books. Thus Mencius made the compassion felt by a
prince, Tsi Siuen-wang, for a bullock about to be slaughtered, a ground
for his exhibiting compassion still more for the people he governed. He
had been distressed at the shuddering of the bullock chosen for
sacrifice, and ordered it to be changed for a sheep, which was done.
Confucianism assumes that pity for animals is natural for the human
heart. The mother of Mencius moved her residence from the neighbourhood
of a butcher's shop because she would not have her boy, while of tender
years, witness daily that which would make him cruel.

Yet it cannot fairly be denied that beneficial effects must follow from
the great prominence and publicity assigned to compassion as an
attribute of Buddha to be imitated by every devout believer. The
salvation of multitudes from suffering is held up as his great
achievement, and to this he was prompted by disinterested pity.

This the Confucianists would probably admit, while they would never
allow that there is any ground to believe in the Buddhist
metempsychosis, on which pity for animals is often made to rest for its
basis. With Buddhist temples and monks everywhere, the Chinese do not
accept the teaching that the souls of men migrate into animals, nor do
the monks cordially maintain it.

Among the reasons the Buddhists give for sparing the life of all
animals, they do not mention the duty of not inflicting unnecessary
pain, nor do they say that Buddha has a sovereign power to make laws,
and he having made this law it must be obeyed.

Their reasons are of a lower sort, or they are based on dogmatised
necessity. This, like other matters, is by the Buddhists treated in a
thoroughly utilitarian and selfish way. Only in one point it is not so.
They are invariably conscious of "moral fate," the *karma*, pervading
the universe by an inevitable and unconquerable

<span id="page_204">p. 204</span>

force. Kindness to animals is sure to bring happiness, as cruelty will
cause misfortune.

The following are the reasons given by Buddha for abstinence from animal
food:—

*First*, In the endless changes of the metempsychosis, persons in the
relation to me of any of the six divisions of kindred have become, from
time to time, some of the animals used for food. To avoid eating my
relations I ought to abstain.

*Second*, The smell and taste are not clean.

*Third*, The smell causes fear among the various animals.

*Fourth*, To eat animal food prevents charms and other magical devices
from taking effect.

The writer who invented these reasons and put them in the mouth of
Buddha, did not add the certainty of the retribution of the *karma*, as
an additional motive for showing compassion to objects possessed of
life, but this is understood and lies underneath all Buddhistic thought.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_95"></span>[192:1](cbu14.htm#fr_95) In Sanscrit,
*Shramana;* but according to the commentator on the "Life of Buddha,"
Shakamananga, meaning "Diligence and cessation."

<span id="fn_96"></span>[194:1](cbu14.htm#fr_96) Paley and those who
side with him, who have attempted to construct a moral system without a
natural sense of right and wrong in man, must be excepted.

<span id="fn_97"></span>[194:2](cbu14.htm#fr_97) Morality is now
accounted for by evolution. The School of Darwin and Spencer refuses to
accept moral law as eternal. Yet all the Asiatic religions make it their
basis.

<span id="fn_98"></span>[195:1](cbu14.htm#fr_98) Vide *Ti-tsang-king*.

<span id="fn_99"></span>[198:1](cbu14.htm#fr_99)
*O-mi-to-king-su-ts‘au*, by Lieu-sï-ta-shï.

<span id="fn_100"></span>[202:1](cbu14.htm#fr_100) See *Vie de Gaudama*,
p. 412.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter X. The Buddhist Calendar](cbu15)
