[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu16)  [Next](cbu18) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_221">p. 221</span>

### CHAPTER XII.

#### THE BUDDHIST UNIVERSE.

<span class="small">The universe passes through incessant
changes—*Kalpas* of various lengths—*Kalpas* of establishment, of
destruction, &c.—Saha world—Sumeru mountain—The Southern continent is
Jambudvipa—Heaven of the thirty-three—Tushita paradise—Upper tier of
paradises—Heavens of form and of desire—Heavens without form—Brahma's
paradise—No wise man is born there, because Brahma says he created the
universe—The hells—Story from the "Ti-tsang Sutra."</span>

THE universe, according to the Buddhists, is in a constant state of
change. The periods in which its changes take place are called *kalpas*
(*kie-po* or *kie*.) Eighty small *kalpas* make one large *kalpa*. The
inhabitants of the Brahma heaven live through twenty small *kalpas*, and
their chief, Mahabrahma, through sixty. *Kalpas* are divided into the
small *kalpa*, the *kalpa* of establishment and destruction, and the
great *kalpa*. In the small *kalpa*, the age of mankind diminishes from
an immeasurable length to ten years, and then increases to a length of
from ten to eighty thousand years. In twenty of such periods the world
is completed. Through twenty more it remains in the same state. After
twenty more the world is destroyed, and there remains nothing but
vacancy during twenty more. The first forty mean *kalpas* make up the
*kalpa* of establishment. The other forty compose that of destruction.
All of them taken together form a great *kalpa*. We live in the second
intermediate *kalpa*, or that

<span id="page_222">p. 222</span>

in which the world continues in its completed state, in a period called
the *hien kalpa* or "Age of wise men" (*Mahabhadra-kalpa*). There are
still eleven small kalpas to be passed before the age of destruction
commences. During the "eighth *kalpa*" (*Mandu-kalpa*), immediately
preceding the present, a hundred Buddhas successively appear. Shakyamuni
is the fourth Buddha of the *Mahabhadra-kalpa*. In his time the age of
man had already gradually diminished to a hundred years, and the same
process of gradual subtraction by one year at a time is still going on.
In the centre of the Saha world, or that ruled by Shakyamuni, is the
Sumeru mountain. A wide sea separates this from eight other mountains.
Outside these mountains, beyond another wide sea, is a great circular
mountain mass of iron. A thousand such circular iron mountain chains
constitute one "small world" (*siau-ts‘ien-shï-kiai*). Three thousand
such walls form a "great world" (*ta-ts‘ien-shï-kiai*). This is the Saha
world.

Within each iron wall are four continents, and a sun and moon to shine
upon them. It is in the southernmost of these continents, Jambudvipa in
the case of our own world, that India and all countries known to the
Hindoos are situated. Far to the north is the Sumeru mountain, one
million one hundred and twenty thousand miles high, and whose depth in
the sea is equally great. It is composed of gold on its east side, of
"lapis-lazuli" (*lieu-li*, spelt in full, according to the old
pronunciation, *be-lu-li* and *be-du-li;* in Sanscrit, *vaiduria* <span
id="fr_104"></span>[1](#fn_104)) on the south, of "crystal" (*p‘o-li*,
"glass;" in Sanscrit, *sp‘atika*) on the north, and silver on the west.

Travelling south from Jambudvipa across the Southern

<span id="page_223">p. 223</span>

ocean, there are three hundred and sixty thousand six hundred and
sixty-three "yojanas" <span id="fr_105"></span>[1](#fn_105) (*yeu-siün*)
to the circular mountain mass of iron. This mountain's depth in the sea
is three hundred and twelve yojanas, and its height about the same. Its
circumference is three million six hundred and ten thousand three
hundred and fifty yojanas. Each iron-bound world has a Sumeru mountain
in its centre. Supposing the world to be under the eternal law of change
sketched above, Buddhist authorities give no account of its first
origin, not feeling the need of a doctrine of creation. The physical
causes engaged in its periodical formation and destruction are water,
wind, and fire. These are three of the four elements *ti*, *shui*,
*hwo*, *feng*, "earth, water, fire, and air," which are supposed to form
the basis of all things. They are perhaps to be taken in the sense of
elemental causes rather than elemental atoms.

Over and under this world of mountains, seas, and continents are two
others, heaven and hell. Of celestial regions there are thirty-two
inhabited by the divinities of the older Hindoo mythology. For the
Buddhas and Bodhisattwas, peculiar to Buddhism, other abodes are found.
Among the thirty-two heavenly regions, ten are called worlds of desire;
including, among others, the heaven of the sun and moon, the heaven of
the four kings of Devas, and the heaven of the thirty-three or paradise
of Indra Shakra, who has under him thirty-three powerful Devas. There
are also the Yama paradise, the Tushita paradise, the "Nimala paradise"
(*Hwa-lo*), and the paradise of "Paranimita" (*T‘a-hwa-tsï-tsai*).

At the base of the Sumeru mountain reside *shens*, "spirits," and
Yakshas. Half-way up the mountain is the paradise of the Four kings of
Devas. On the summit is the *Tau-li* or "Trayastrinsha" (thirty-three)
heaven,

<span id="page_224">p. 224</span>

*i.e.*, the paradise of Shakra, king of the gods. The rest of these
celestial abodes are fixed in vacancy, each as high again as the one
beneath it.

The next tier of these paradisiacal regions consists of eighteen. They
are called heavens of form, denoting that the senses are still in
activity there, though there is freedom from that influence of the
passions which is still felt in the regions of desire near the world of
men. The eighteen heavens of form are divided into stages of
contemplation. Three belong to the first, second, and third stages, and
nine to the fourth. The first stage is appropriated to the Brahmas,
divided into three classes, the (Mahabrahma or) "king," officers of
state, and people. Each of these classes has a paradise assigned to it.
The heavens above these have various names compounded of the ideas of
purity, light, virtue, abstraction, and tranquillity. In the highest of
them all, Akanit‘a, resides "Maha Ishwara," or *Ma-he-shwa-ra*.

The uppermost tier of four, "formless," as they are called, derive their
names from the notions of vacancy, knowledge, destitution of all
properties, and negation of all thought.

Of these thirty-two heavens, five are inhabited only by sages,
twenty-five by sages and common men together, and two by common men
alone. One of the latter is the paradise of Mahabrahma. A wise man can
never be born in the abode of Brahma, say the Buddhist cosmogonists,
because that deity, in his ignorance of causes, asserts that he can
create heaven, earth, and all things. He being so arrogant as this, no
wise man would go to live in his heaven. The other is the paradise of
abstraction, where those heretics who disbelieve in the Nirvâna, but aim
to gain a state of perfect mental abstraction, will hereafter be born.
They will there enjoy five hundred years of freedom from the sufferings
of life in a state of mindless vacancy; but since they will not tread
the path of the Nirvâna, evil desires must afterwards arise, and they
must

<span id="page_225">p. 225</span>

be born subsequently in hell. No wise man, therefore, would willingly go
to that heaven.

One of the higher worlds is assigned for the residence of those
disciples of Buddha who have attained the rank of Anagamins and
Lo-hares. Those who are shortly to become Buddha are first born into the
Tushita paradise.

Mara, king of the "demons" (*mo-kwei*), resides in the space below the
Brahma heaven.

These heavens are peopled by Devas. Men from the four continents of our
own world may be born into them by transmigration into the body of a
Deva. The Devas are born and die, their bodies are of great stature,
they wear clothing, have horses and elephants to ride upon, marry, eat
and drink, and perform many other actions resembling mankind. Above the
worlds of desire, there is no distinction of sexes.

To become an inhabitant of these worlds is regarded as a reward for good
actions, for those who have lived previously in lower states of
existence. But it is still a punishment when viewed in comparison with
the attainment of Nirvâna or any of the higher grades of discipleship
under the teaching of Buddha.

The Buddhist "hells" (in Sanscrit, *niliya* or *naraka*), the prisons of
the lost, are in some cases situated under the region inhabited by man.
Twenty thousand yojanas (280,000 miles) below the Jambu continent is one
called the *Avichi naraka*, or the "Hell of unintermitted torments." The
Yama naraka is half-way between. Others are among fabled mountains, or
on the shores of a great sea. In Chinese books they are called by a
common name *ti-yü*, "earth-prisons."

In the "Ti-tsang Sutra" is a story of a maiden of the Brahman caste,
whose mother had been condemned to the *Wu-kien ti-yü*, or "Avichi
naraka." Full of distress, she went to a temple to pray for help from an
ancient Buddha whose image was there adored. In reply to her offerings
and prayers a voice addressed her—that of the Buddha

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

represented by the image. She was told to sit at home and meditate on
the name of the same Buddha. While doing so she fell, after a day thus
spent, into a state of deep reverie, and found herself on the banks of
an ocean. Here she saw many beasts of prey with iron bodies, flying and
walking on the sea. Multitudes of unhappy men and women were also
swimming there, and were constantly bitten by these ferocious animals.
The maiden, supported by the power of Buddha, did not feel terrified. A
demon king addressed her kindly, and informed her that she was come to
the great iron mountain girdle that surrounds the world. "I have heard,"
said the maiden, "that hell is here; how can I reach it?" *Ans*. "Only
by spiritual power, and of merit self-acquired." *Qu*. "And who are
these unhappy criminals suffering in this sea?" *Ans*. "They are the
wicked inhabitants of the Jambu continent who have recently died. After
forty-five days, if no one performs any meritorious act for their
benefit, they must first be transported to this place. Eastward are two
other 'seas of misery' (*k‘u-hai*), where the punishment inflicted is
still greater." *Qu*. "But where is hell?" *Ans*. "Within these three
seas there are many thousand prisons, but of the larger kind only
eighteen." *Qu*. "My mother died not long since; where now is her soul?"
The good-hearted demon king answered this question by another. *Qu*. "O
Bodhisattwa, what sort of life did your mother formerly lead?" *Ans*.
"My mother held heretical opinions. She ridiculed and slandered the
'Three treasures' (Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood). If she became a
believer for a time, she soon ceased to honour them." *Qu*. "What was
her name?" *Ans*. "My father and mother were both of the Brahman caste.
Their names were Shira and Yetili." The demon king, holding up his
joined hands respectfully to the Bodhisattwa, said, "Holy maiden,
return. Dismiss all sad thoughts. It is now three days since the sinful
Yetili was born an inhabitant of paradise. The filial love that prompted
such acts to save a parent, and such piety

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

towards an ancient Buddha, are sufficient not only to preserve a mother
from hell, but also to raise innumerable other persons to heaven." The
Brahman maiden then returned to consciousness as from a dream.
Reflecting on what had happened, she visited again the shrine of the
ancient Buddha, and made a vow that through innumerable coming *kalpas*
she would perform acts of merit for the deliverance from suffering of
multitudes of living beings. Shakyamuni Buddha added, addressing
Manjusiri, "That demon king and Brahman maiden have now become the
Tsai-sheu Bodhisattwa and the Ti-tsang Bodhisattwa."

This story must serve instead of a detailed description of the Buddhist
hells. It will be sufficient to say of them that they combine all that
is horrible to each of the senses. Every form of torment, mental and
physical, that can befall the unhappy violators of a good conscience and
of the Buddhist law, are found there. The extremes of cold and heat,
cutting, flaying, biting, insulting, and tantalising, have to be endured
by such persons according to their deserts. Demons of the most monstrous
shapes and most cruel dispositions terrify them in every possible way.
All that fire and water, knives and clubs, can by ingenuity be made to
do in tormenting, is there done.

The preceding brief sketch of the "three worlds" (*san-kiai*) almost all
refers to what is common to the other native Hindoo sects. Buddhism
adopted the national belief in regard to the form of the universe,
including the worlds of reward and punishment. It belongs to all forms
of Buddhism in China or elsewhere.

The Northern Buddhists have, however, gone further, and framed a much
more extensive cosmogony, which deserves a separate consideration.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_104"></span>[222:1](cbu17.htm#fr_104) The *d* and *t* in
these two Sanscrit words are the cerebral *d* and *t*, usually printed
with a dot under them. They approach the sound of *l*. The Buddhist
dictionary, *Yi-ts‘ie-king-yin-i*, says, that the word *p’o-li* is in
its full Sanscrit form, *sa-p‘a-ti-ka*. In K‘ang-hi, we are told, "the
Roman empire has glass of five colours," *ta-ts‘in-yeu-wu-se-p‘o-li*. In
Buddhist books it means "rock crystal." Why the aspirate is not
preserved in the common colloquial term *po-li* "glass," is not clear.

<span id="fn_105"></span>[223:1](cbu17.htm#fr_105) There are two kinds
of *yojana*. One consists of four *goshalas*, the other of eight. A
*goshala* is the distance at which the bellowing of a bull can be heard,
or nearly two miles.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIII. The Extended Universe of the Northern
Buddhists](cbu18)
