[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu14)  [Next](cbu16.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_205">p. 205</span>

### CHAPTER X.

#### THE BUDDHIST CALENDAR.

<span class="small">National festivals—Festivals in honour of celestial
beings—In honour of the Buddhas and Bodhisattwas—In honour of characters
in Chinese Buddhist history—Supplemental anniversaries—Singhalese
Buddhists keep a different day for Buddha's birthday—In the T‘ang
dynasty Hindoo astronomers reformed the calendar—Gaudamsiddha—The week
of India and Babylon known to the Chinese—Word *mit* for Sunday—Peacock
Sutra—The Hindoo *Rahu* and *Ketu*.</span>

ONE of the most instructive illustrations of a religion is its calendar.
Not only do the fasts and festivals kept by a people point out in
succession who are the personages held by them in the highest honour;
they also contain an epitome of the history and doctrines of the
religion they believe, and especially aid in opening to observation the
popular religious life.

The work called *Ts‘ing-kwei*, "Regulations of the Priesthood," contains
instructions for the observance of all fasts and festivals through the
year. From it are extracted the following details of anniversaries:—

1\. NATIONAL.

*Emperor's birthday*.—The ceremonial for this anniversary lasts a week,
embracing three days before and three after the day in question. It is
called *Sheng-tsie*, "Sacred festival."

*Empress's birthday*.

*Day of receiving an imperial message at the monastery*.—Six persons are
sent out "five *li*" (nearly two miles) to

<span id="page_206">p. 206</span>

meet it. On its approach, the monks, headed by their chief, issue from
the monastery, and bow their foreheads to the ground three times.

*Four monthly feasts*.—These are at the new and full moons, and on the
8th and 23d of the month. They are called *Kin-ming sï-chai*, "The four
feasts illustriously decreed." The last two words refer to a decree of
an emperor of the Sui dynasty in A.D. 584, requiring the special
observance of the monthly feasts in the 1st, 5th, and 9th months;
because then the great Southern continent was prayed for, in which China
is included.

*Anniversaries of emperors’ deaths*.—Those of the present dynasty only
are included.

2\. CELESTIAL BEINGS

*Day of worshipping the Devas* (*Kung-T‘ien*).—All the chief personages,
whether Devas, spirits, demons, Asuras, Rakshas, &c., of the Hindoo
older mythology, are worshipped on this occasion. This observance rests
for its authority on the *Kin-kwang-ming-king*, "The Bright Sutra of
Golden Light."

*Eclipses of the Sun and Moon*.—In the services for these days, the sun
and moon are addressed as "Bodhisattwas" (*P‘u-sa*), and the power of
Buddha is invoked to deliver them. Hence the name of the service,
*Hu-jï*, *Hu-yue*, "Delivering the sun and moon." The prayers offered
for them are considered as gratitude for their light.

*Sacrifice to the Moon*, 8*th month*, 15*th day*.—The ground for this
observance is that this day is, according to national tradition, the
moon's birthday. As in the service for eclipses, *Namo*, "Honour to,"
the introductory formula of worship, is used in addressing the moon. She
is called in full *Yue-kung-t‘ai-yin-tsun-t‘ien-p‘u-sa*, "The moon in
her mansion, luminary of night, honoured Deva and Bodhisattwa."

*Prayer for fine weather*.—Prayer to various Buddhas, and other
divinities.

<span id="page_207">p. 207</span>

*Prayer for rain*.—Worship is performed towards the East, and prayers
offered to the Dragon king, the various Buddhas, &c.

*Prayer for snow*.—Ditto.

*Prayer against locusts*.—To various Devas and spirits.

*Prayer to Wei-to* (Veda).—The Deva Wei-to is the protector of the
Buddhist religion. When the supplies of the monastery fail, he is prayed
to, to replenish them. He is chief general of the army of the four
Mahadevas.

*Birthday of Wei-to*, 6*th month*, 3*d day; according to some the* 13*th
day*.—Wei-to is a deity of Hindoo mythology, who protects three of the
four continents into which the world is divided. (See Remusat's Notes to
*Foĕ* *kouĕ ki*.)

*Birthdays of the divine protectors of the monasteries*.—They are
three:—(1.) Hwa-kwang, 9th month, 28th day; (2.) *Lung-wang*, or
*Naga-raja*, the "Dragon King;" (3.) *Kwan-ti*, the "God of war," 5th
month, 13th day, according to the common account; but according to his
biography in the national annals, 6th month, 24th day. These three
personages take the place of eighteen worshipped in India. One of them
is the well-known hero of the "Three Kingdoms." They receive the same
honours that are awarded to Wei-to.

*Birthday of the Kitchen god*, 6*th month*, 24*th day*, 8*th month*, 3*d
day*, *and* 12*th month*, 24*th day*.—The Buddhists say, to excuse
themselves for adopting a Tauist superstition, that the Kitchen god they
worship is not the Tsau-kiün venerated commonly by the people, but a
king of the "Kinnaras" (a fabulous race of celestial beings), who became
a Chinese priest in the T‘ang dynasty, and was appointed at death to
preside over the vegetarian diet of the monks. This is a lame defence of
what is evidently a self-interested accommodation to popular notions.

3\. THE BUDDHAS AND BODHISATTWAS.

*Birthday of Shakyamuni*, 4*th month*, 8*th day*.—He is also called
Buddha, "Tathâgata" or *Julai*, and Gautama,

<span id="page_208">p. 208</span>

and is revered as *Pun-shï*, the "Teacher of the world during the
present *kalpa*."

*Anniversary of Shakyamuni's elevation to the rank of Buddha*, 12*th
month*, 8*th day*.—The phrase in use is *Ch‘eng-tau*, "Attained the
summit of knowledge and virtue."

*Anniversary of Buddha's entrance into the Nirvâna*, 2*d month*, 15*th
day*.

*Birthday of Yo-shï Fo* (The Buddha who instructs in healing,
Bhaishajyaguru Buddha), 9*th month*, 30*th day*.—The world governed by
this Buddha is in the East.

*Birthday of O-mi-to Fo or* "*Amida*" (Amitabha) *Buddha*, 11*th month*,
17*th day*.—The Buddha who rules in the universe to the west of that
governed by Shakya, and grants the request of all those who pray to him
to admit them to the Western heaven.

*Birthday of Mi-li Fo* (Maitreya Buddha), 1*st month*, 1*st day*.—The
Buddha who is to succeed Shakyamuni in the government of the world.
Maitreya was visited in one of the paradises by Shakyamuni, and foretold
his destiny.

*Birthday of the female Buddha, Chun-ti*, 3*d month*, 6*th day*.—Great
powers of sorcery are attributed to this personage.

*Birthday of* "*Wen-shu p‘u-sa*" (Manjusiri Bodhisattwa), 4*th month*,
4*th day*.—One of the Bodhisattwas of Northern Buddhism.

*Birthday of* "*P‘u-hien p‘u-sa*" (Samantabhadra), 2*d month*, 21*st
day*.—A fictitious Bodhisattwa of Northern Buddhism.

*Birthday of* "*Kwan-shï-yin p‘u-sa*" (Avalôkitêshwara), 2*d month*,
19*th day*.—This fabulous Bodhisattwa has in China been usually
represented with female attributes. In the *Fa-hwa-king*, *Kwan-yin* is
described as being able to assume any form at pleasure, whether that of
Buddhas, Devas, men, or others, and as being guided in such voluntary
metamorphoses by a constant desire to proclaim the Buddhist doctrine to
those who need it, in the form most likely to effect the object.
Kwan-yin is thus able to save

<span id="page_209">p. 209</span>

any of the inhabitants of the *Saha* (or Saba) world, *i.e.*, the
present race of mankind. When *Kwan-yin* is translated, not
inappropriately, "Goddess of mercy," it should be remembered that female
attributes are only temporarily assumed by the Bodhisattwa in question.
(See the "Kwan-yin" section, near the end of the *Fa-hwa-king*.)

*Birthday of Ta-shï-chï p‘u-sa*, 7*th month*, 13*th day*.—The position
of this Bodhisattwa is to the right of Amitabha Buddha, while Kwan-yin
takes the left. They are styled together, "the Three Sages of the West"
(*Si-fang-san-sheng*).

*Birthday of Ti-tsang p‘u-sa*, 7*th month*, 30*th day*.

4\. CHARACTERS IN CHINESE BUDDHIST HISTORY.

*Anniversary of the death of* "*Bodhidharma*" (*Ta-mo*), 10*th month*,
5*th day*.—The first of the six patriarchs.

*Death of Pe-Chang*, 1*st month*, 19*th day*.—He was a teacher of
Bodhidharma's system in the T‘ang dynasty. He wrote the work
*Ts‘ing-kwei* from which these notices of fasts and festivals are taken.

*Death of Chï-k‘ai*, 11*th month*, 24*th day*.—The founder of the
T‘ien-t‘ai school.

*Death of Hien-sheu*, 11*th month*, 14*th day*.—A founder of a school
bearing his name, and advocating the "Great Development" system
(*Ta-ch‘eng*).

*Death of Tau-siuen*, 10*th month*, 3*d day*.—A founder of the
Discipline school.

*Death of Hwei-yuen*, 8*th month*, 6*th day*.—A founder of the Tsing-tu
school.

*Death of the founder of the monastery*,—also of a priest's own
religious instructor, of the priests who admitted him to the vows, and
of his parents.

5\. SUPPLEMENTARY ANNIVERSARIES.

*Commencement of summer* (*Li-hia*), 4*th month*, 16*th day*.—This
anniversary is traced to the usage of the earliest Hindoo Buddhists,
who, when summer arrived, came together

<span id="page_210">p. 210</span>

and remained associated under strict monastic rule during the hot
months. This period over, they began their begging excursions afresh.

"*Yü-lan-p‘en*" (*U-lam*) *ceremony, for feeding hungry ghosts*, 7*th
month*, 15*th day*.—The authority for this festival is the *Yü-lan-p‘en
Sutra*, translated into Chinese about A.D. 270. It terminates the
summer, as the preceding began it.

*End of summer*, 7*th month*, 16*th day*.

*Commencement and end of winter* (*Li-tung*, *Kiai-tung*), 10*th month*,
15*th day*, and 1*st month*, 15*th day*.

*First day of the year*.—Special worship.

*Birthday of Shakra*, 1*st month*, 9*th day*.—Shakra, or Indra, god of
the atmosphere, is, in the modern editions of *Pe-chang-ts‘ing-kwei*,
"Manual of Buddhist Regulations and Festivals," identified with the
well-known Tauist divinity *Yü-ti*. Oriental religions are so mutually
complimentary, that they sometimes adopt each other's divinities without
scruple. The Sanscrit 'Indra Shakra' is rendered in Chinese *Ti-shï*
(formerly *shak*).

*Birthday of* "*Yo-wang p‘u-sa*" (*Bhâishajyarâja*), "Medical king and
Bodhisattwa," 4*th month*, 15*th day*.

*Birthday of the Bodhisattwa* "*Lung-shu*" (*Nagarjuna*), or
"Dragon-tree," 7*th month*, 25*th day*.—He was the fourteenth patriarch,
and author of the "Hundred Discourses," one of the most noted of the
Buddhist Shastras.

*Birthday of the ancient Buddha Jan-teng*, "Light lamp" (*Dipankara
Buddha*), 8*th month*, 22*d day*.—Shakyamuni in a former kalpa was a
disciple of this Buddha.

*Winter solstice*.—Special worship.

*Birthday of the Bodhisattwa Hwa-yen*, 12*th month*, 29*th day*.

The method of observing these anniversaries, and the prayers to be used,
are very minutely detailed in the book from which these notices are
translated.

The dates are those of the lunar months of the Chinese national almanac.

<span id="page_211">p. 211</span>

It may be doubted whether more than a very few of them are identical
with the festivals of the Southern Buddhists, viz., those of Ceylon,
Siam, and Birmah, there being several of the great Bodhisattwas who are
not mentioned in works by foreign authors treating of the Buddhism of
those countries.

In Ceylon the prevalent legend of Gautama's life states that he was born
on the day of the full moon in the second month of spring. This differs
irreconcilably.

In this popular calendar, there is no mention of anything astronomical;
yet in the T‘ang dynasty Buddhist calculators from India were invited to
undertake the improvement of the imperial calendar.

Gaudamsiddha, in the eighth century, published a work called
*Kieu-chï-li*. It is a translation from a Hindoo original. In it the
days of the week are apportioned among the planets in the following
order: *Yung-hwo*, "Mars;" *Ch‘en-sing*, "Mercury;" *Sui-sing*,
"Jupiter;" *T‘ai-pe*, "Venus;" *Chen-sing*, "Saturn." <span
id="fr_101"></span>[1](#fn_101.md)

These planets, with the sun and moon, form the *ts‘i-yau*, "seven bright
celestial objects." They constitute the mythological week of seven days,
which sprang up in Babylonia, and spread to India, and also to Europe in
the days of the Roman empire.

Some Chinese almanacs call Sunday the day of *Mit*, the Persian
"Mithras," a name for the sun. *Mit* is spoken of as a *Hwei-hwei* word.
This term *Hwei-hwei* is one of the names for the Persian language among
the Chinese. It is the word *ouighour*.

In the *Kung-ch‘io-king*, "Peacock Sutra," the days of the week are also
given. This work is a translation by a Chinese priest named Yi-tsing.
When Mr. Wylie was visiting Peking on one occasion, he went with me to a
monastery to consult the "Peacock Sutra" in the library.

<span id="page_212">p. 212</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> We were
courteously received, and allowed to take it home with us for a few
days.

Many superstitious beliefs and observances native to India were imported
to China by the Hindoo Buddhists. They taught much that was not at all
purely Buddhist. The education they received embraced a wide range.
Metaphysics, astronomy, medicine, and other subjects were taught in
India in the old times of Buddhist prosperity, probably much as they are
now in the lamaseries of Mongolia.

Thus the ascending and descending nodes of the moon's orbit were known
as two monsters, called "Rahu" and "Ketu," in modern Chinese, *Lo-heu*
and *Ki-tu*. At eclipses, the Chinese story of a wild dog eating the sun
and moon is derived from this piece of Hindoo mythology. In native
almanacs these names are preserved in the nomenclature of astrology, and
the conception is encouraged that the earth's shadow crossing the moon
is a dark heavenly body, and a sort of planet of a dark nature, becoming
risible only at eclipses.

The Indian year of three seasons is described, but no attempt has been
made to interfere with the Chinese seasons of three months each. The
Buddhists have arranged their calendar of festivals and fasts to suit
the Chinese months.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_101"></span>[211:1](cbu15.htm#fr_101.md) See *Chinese
Recorder*, 1872. Mr. Wylie, "On the Knowledge of a weekly Sabbath in
China," pp. 40-45. But add to Mr. Wylie's very full and interesting
statements, that *Mit* is "Mithras" here, and in page 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XI. Relation of Buddhism to the Older Hindoo
Mythology](cbu16.md)
