[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu17)  [Next](cbu19) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

### CHAPTER XIII.

#### THE EXTENDED UNIVERSE OF THE NORTHERN BUDDHISTS.

<span class="small">Primitive Buddhism aimed at moral improvement and
the Nirvâna—Its mythology was of popular growth—The Mahayana mythology
was introduced by the metaphysicians of Buddhism itself—Nagarjuna, the
chief inventor—*Hwa-yen-king*—An extended universe invented to
illustrate dogma—Ten worlds beyond the Saha world in ten different
directions—New divinities to worship—Amitabha—His world in the
West—Kwan-yin and Ta-shï-chï—The world of Ach‘obhya Buddha in the
East—World of Yo-shï Fo, the healing teacher—Mercy, wisdom, &c., are
symbolised in the Bodhisattwas—Wu-t‘ai shan in China is introduced in
the *Hwa-yen-king*.</span>

ABOUT four centuries after the time of Shakyamuni, or Gautama as he is
more commonly called in Birmah and Ceylon, a great increase to the
Sanscrit literature of the Buddhist religion began to be made. Very
little had been added to the national mythology by the founder and first
propagators of this system, except what respected Buddha himself. Their
aim was to inculcate virtue, encourage the ascetic life, and urge
persons of all castes and both sexes to aim at deliverance from the
evils of existence and the attainment of the Nirvâna. They based their
teaching on the existing doctrine of metempsychosis, of the gods and
other classes of beings, and of heaven and hell. These had been united
from the earliest infancy of the Hindoo nation in one system. By the
transmigration of souls, all in heaven or earth, whether gods, men,
demons, or inferior animals, are linked together into one chain of
animated existence, and compose one world. It is the

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

business of a Buddha and a Bodhisattwa to instruct these beings in moral
truths, and assist them to escape from all the six forms of life, into a
state of perfect enlightenment and tranquillity. The mythological
element, as it existed in early Buddhism, was even then an old creation
of the popular mind that had grown up with the first literary efforts of
the nation. In this respect it agrees with most other mythologies, in
the fact of its originating, not in philosophical schools, but among the
people themselves.

To this was added a legendary element. Long tales were invented to
illustrate the great merits and powers of Buddha. Free use was made in
these narratives of those vast periods of time into which the Hindoos
divide the past history of the world. The biography of the great sage
was extended by attributing to him numberless previous lives. The manner
in which, from small beginnings, he rose by self-sacrificing and
meritorious acts to be lord of the world, and "teacher of gods and men"
(*t‘ien-jen-shï*), is minutely recorded. But the scene is not extended
in any other way. New worlds are not invented in far distant space. The
writers of these legends, while they represent their hero as visiting
the celestial regions to instruct their inhabitants, or as becoming by
transmigration an inhabitant of those paradisiacal residences for long
terms of years, do not transgress the limits of the popular Hindoo
universe.

The Northern Buddhists, however, about the beginning of the Christian
era, pushed the bounds of their system much further. Men appeared at
that time in Northern India devoted to metaphysical discussion, who
aimed to develop to the utmost the principles of Buddhism. <span
id="fr_106"></span>[1](#fn_106) In adding to the number of Buddhas and
Bodhisattwas, they felt it necessary to frame new worlds to serve as
suitable abodes for them. With their peculiar philosophy it was easy to
do this. Not believing in the existence of the

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

world of the senses, there was no more difficulty in admitting to their
system an unlimited number of fictitious worlds and fictitious Buddhas
than in continuing to recognise the universe of their predecessors. They
named their system Mahayana, *Ta-ch‘eng*, or "Great Development." Among
these teachers the leading mind was *Lung-shu*, or "Nagarjuna," as he is
called by the Thibetans. Csoma Körösi, cited in Hardy's *Manual of
Buddhism*, says, "With Nagarjuna originated what is known in Thibet as
the Madhyamika system in philosophy. The philosophers in India had
taught either a perpetual duration or a total annihilation with respect
to the soul. He chose a middle way, hence the name of this sect." The
Chinese "Central Shastra" (*Chung-lun*), which bears his name as the
author, contains this system, and his opinions may therefore be regarded
as nearly those of the T‘ien-t‘ai school, whose doctrine is based on
that work, and of which Lung-shu is consequently regarded as the first
founder.

This circumstance throws light on the objects of Lung-shu in composing
the Sutras of which he was the author. For this school gives a
symbolical interpretation to the mythology of the Buddhist books. The
very popular and influential Sutra called *Hwa-yen-king* came from the
pen of Lung-shu. The Chinese preface to that work says that Lung-shu
p‘u-sa, having exhausted the study of all human literature, entered the
Dragon palace to examine the Buddhist "pitaka" (*san-tsang*). He there
found three forms of the *Hwa-yen-king*. The largest was divided into
sections whose number is expressed by the particles contained in a world
of dust. The next consisted of twelve hundred sections, and the smallest
of forty-eight sections. The last and least he gave to the world with
its present title, and he must therefore be regarded as its author.

This and other works of the Great Development class contain a great
extension of the mythological element of Buddhism. Many new Buddhas and
Bodhisattwas here appear, distinguished by various high attributes of

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

goodness, knowledge, and magical power. To afford room for the display
of these attributes, new worlds are located at pleasure in the boundless
regions of space. But the whole of this imaginative creation was
probably intended by the authors to be symbolical. According to the
explanation of the T‘ien-t‘ai school, and of the esoteric Buddhists, the
whole of this fictitious universe was meant to illustrate certain
Buddhist dogmas. It was the extreme scepticism of the Buddhist
philosophers that paved their way to this mode of teaching their system.
In the T‘ien-t‘ai commentary on the *Fa-hwa-king*, the symbolical method
of interpreting this mythological creation of the fancy may be seen
exemplified.—(See *Fa-hwa-hwei-i*).

Some specimens of this mythology will now be given.

The *Hwa-yen-king* says that, on one occasion, Buddha was presiding over
an assembly at a place of meeting called Aranyaka, in the kingdom of
Magadha. He saw approaching a multitude of Bodhisattwas from distant
worlds. They asked to be instructed in regard to the "lands where the
Buddhas resided." (*Fo* "*ch‘ah*," spelled in full in the old
pronunciation, *ch‘a-ta-la;* in Sanscrit, *kshêtra*, "land." <span
id="fr_107"></span>[1](#fn_107)) Buddha accordingly entered on a
description of the kingdoms of the Buddhas. To the east, after passing
worlds equal in number to the dust of ten of these kingdoms, there is
one termed the golden-coloured world. The Buddha of "wisdom unmoved"
presides there. *Wen-shu* (Manjusiri) and a crowd of other Bodhisattwas
attend his instructions, as he sits on a lion dais surrounded by lotus
flowers. To the south, west, and north, and to the north-east,
south-east, south-west, and north-west, are other worlds at a distance
equally great. Towards the zenith and nadir two other worlds make up the
number ten, each having a governing Buddha,

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

and a countless number of Bodhisattwas, who perform to him an act of
worship, and humbly receive his instructions.

The same work also describes the ten worlds that come next to the one in
which we live, on the east, south, west, and north, and the other
directions as before. Each of them is ruled by a Buddha, to whom prayers
are to be offered, in which he is to be addressed under ten different
names.

The moral import of these worlds and their Buddhas is contained in the
names that are given them. These names are formed symmetrically, and
carry the reader and the worshipper round a circle of Buddhist ideas.
Thus the significations of the appellations given to the Buddhas are
such as surpassing wisdom, self-possessed wisdom, Brahmanical wisdom,
&c. The leading Bodhisattwas receive such denominations as chief in the
law, chief in merit, chief in visual power, &c.

It was thus that these Buddhist philosophers employed the imagination as
an instrument of moral instruction, just as western authors write a poem
or a novel for a similar end. They were men whose minds were cultivated
to the utmost subtlety in argument, as the Shastras, works by the same
authors, and taken up exclusively with philosophical discussions,
abundantly show. They did not, therefore, believe in the truth of these
fanciful creations. Their metaphysical creed would prevent it, and there
is not wanting such indirect evidence to the fact as has been already
adduced. But what shall be said to the morality of such modes of
teaching a religion? These sceptical writers cannot be shielded from the
charge of practising a vast and systematic deception on the common
people, in inducing them to regard these imaginary beings with religious
reverence. Falsehood is involved in the very form of the Buddhist
Sutras, for they are attributed unhesitatingly in all their
multitudinous variety and voluminous extent to Shakyamuni himself.
Ananda, the cousin and favourite disciple of the sage in his declining
years, is put

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

forward as the compiler from memory of all these works. The practice of
worshipping the divinities introduced in these new mythological
creations was also directly encouraged, and this new idolatry spread
with great rapidity throughout the countries where Northern Buddhism
prevails.

To illustrate these statements more fully, reference must be made to the
more popular personages and better-known worlds in the new mythology.
Among these fabled worlds located in distant space, the best known is
the paradise of Amitabha. In the *Wu-liang-sheu-king* (Amitabha Sutra),
Buddha tells a tale of a king in a former *kalpa* who left the world,
adopted the monkish life, assumed the name *Fa-tsang*, "Treasure of the
law," and became, by his rapid growth in knowledge and virtue, a
Bodhisattwa. To the Buddha who was his teacher he uttered forty-eight
wishes, having reference to the good he desired to accomplish for all
living beings, if he should attain the rank of Buddha. Ten *kalpas*
since, he received that title with the name "Amitabha" (*O-mi-to Fo*),
and now resides in a world far in the West, to fulfil his forty-eight
wishes for the benefit of mankind. Ten million kingdoms of Buddhas
separate his world from our own. It is composed of gold, silver,
lapis-lazuli, coral, amber, a stone called *ch‘a-ku*, and cornelian.
There is there no Sumeru mountain, nor iron mountain girdle, nor are
there any prisons for punishment. There is no fear of becoming a hungry
ghost, or an animal by transmigration, for such modes of life are
unknown there. There are all kinds of beautiful flowers, which the
inhabitants pluck to present as offerings to the thousands and millions
of Buddhas that reside in other parts of space. Birds of the most
beautiful plumage sing day and night of the five principles of virtue,
the five sources of moral power, and the seven steps in knowledge. The
listener is so affected by their music, that he can think only of
Buddha, the Law, and the Priesthood. The life-time of this Buddha is
without limit, lasting through

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

countless *kalpas*, and therefore he is called "Amitabha"
(*Wu-liang-sheu*, "Boundless age"). Two Bodhisattwas reside there,
anxious to save a multitude of living beings, who, with Amitabha, are
worshipped assiduously by the Northern Buddhists. They are, says the
*Wu-liang-sheu-king*, Kwan-shï-yin and Ta-shï-chï. They radiate light
over three thousand great worlds. They attained their rank by good deeds
performed in our own world, and were rewarded by birth into the Western
paradise of Amitabha.

The *Amitabha Sutra*, after minutely dilating on this paradise,
describes nine other worlds at a corresponding distance from our own,
and occupying, as in the former case, the cardinal points and
intermediate positions, with the zenith and nadir. Ach‘obhya and other
Buddhas rule in the East, numerous as the sands of the Ganges, each
proclaiming the doctrine that instructs and saves to the inhabitants of
his own kingdom. A similar account is given of the other worlds and
their Buddhas.

The two Sutras already cited, together with one called
*Kwan-wu-liang-sheu-king*, are entirely occupied with Amitabha and his
paradise. These three works form the textbooks of the Tsing-tu school,
whose very numerous publications, suited to the popular taste, and based
on the doctrine of these Sutras, are very widely disseminated among the
Chinese people at the present day.

In the last-mentioned work, Buddha, when seated in the midst of his
disciples, is said to have poured forth from his eyebrows a flood of
golden light which shone to all the surrounding worlds. This light
returning was seen by the assembly to form itself into a golden tower on
Buddha's head. It was like the Sumeru mountain, and by its splendour
many kingdoms of Buddhas were revealed to view. One was constructed of
the Seven precious stones and metals, another of lotus flowers, another
was like the palace of Ishwara, another like a crystal mirror. A
disciple, struck by this magnificent display,

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

expressed a desire to be born in the Western heaven, and Buddha told him
how he might have his desire gratified. This is an example of the manner
in which the inventors of this mythology intended, by scenes of vastness
and splendour, to affect the reader's or listener's mind. Feelings
favourable to the influence of Buddhist ideas were thus to be called
into action.

Another of these creations which has gained considerable notoriety is a
world in the East ruled by *Yo-shï Fo* (Bhaishajyaguru Buddha). There
intervene between that world and ours, kingdoms of Buddhas to the number
of ten times the sands of the Ganges. This personage, when he was a
Bodhisattwa, uttered twelve great wishes for the benefit of living
beings, including the removal of various bodily and mental calamities
from those who are afflicted with them, and the lengthening of their
life. Hence his name, "The healing Teacher." In attendance on him are
two leading Bodhisattwas, whose names, *Ji-kwang-pien-chau*, and
*Yue-kwang-pien-chau*, signify the "Far-shining light of the sun" and
"of the moon." The world in which he resides is composed of
lapis-lazuli, its walls and palaces of the seven precious stones and
metals, its streets of gold, thus resembling, as is observed by the
author of the *Yo-shï-king*, the *Ki-to-shï-kiai*, or "Paradise of
Amitabha." He is worshipped as a deity who removes sufferings and
lengthens life, and is in fact the symbol of these ideas. While many of
the fabulous beings introduced in the literature of Northern Buddhism
have no image or shrine in the temples of the present day, Yo-shï Fo is
one of those who are very seldom omitted in the arrangement of these
edifices.

The freedom of imagination in creating new worlds and new deities, in
which the authors of this literature indulged, would naturally lead to
incongruities. Newly-invented worlds would be located in regions already
appropriated by previous writers. In the *Fa-hwa-king*, a circle of
eight worlds, with two Buddhas to each, is described.

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Amitabha and
Ach‘obhya occur in the west and east respectively, the account agreeing
in this respect with that in the *Amitabha Sutra*, but the other names
do not harmonise; so that in several cases new Buddhas are imagined in
regions preoccupied by those created at an earlier date.

Accounts of many more of these fancied worlds might be collected from
other works. For example, in the *Pei-hwa-king*, one in the south-east
with its Buddha, is described with minuteness.

The symbolical character of this mythology is seen very clearly in the
attributes of the Bodhisattwas, who play in it such an important part,
and who are the objects of such extended popular worship in the Buddhist
countries of the North. In Kwan-yin, mercy is symbolised; wisdom, in
Wen-shu; and happiness, in P‘u-hien. To the philosophic Buddhists, these
personages, with Amitabha, Yo-shï Fo and the others are nothing but
signs of ideas. The uninstructed Buddhists believe in their real
existence, but all the evidence goes to show that they were invented by
the former class of Buddhists, and palmed upon the people by them as
real beings proper to be worshipped.

A near parallel to this is the setting up of the image of Reason to be
popularly adored, by the atheists of the first French revolution. If, as
some think, the pantheism of Germany will, according to the common law
of progress in human perversity, result in polytheism, we have here an
example of the way in which such a new idolatry will possibly be
introduced.

I append here some further account of Manjusiri, the Bodhisattwa
honoured at Wu-t‘ai shah in North China.

These notices will also show how in the expansion of the mythology which
we meet with in the Sutras of the Great Development, even China is made
one of the countries, and Wu-t‘ai one of the mountains, where Buddha
delivered discourses.

We learn from the Mongol account of Wu-t‘ai, that

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Manjusiri is
addressed in prayer as the enlightener of the world. His wisdom is
perfect, and is symbolised by the sword he holds in his right hand;
because his intellect pierces the deepest recesses of Buddhist thought,
and cuts knots which cannot otherwise be solved.

He is also represented as holding in his hand a volume of Buddha's
teaching, of which a flower is the symbol. He is styled also the lamp of
wisdom and of supernatural power.

He is said to drive away falsehood and ignorance from the minds of all
living beings, and on this ground the lama who compiles the books prays
to him for knowledge in reverential terms.

The *Hwa-yen-king*, called in Mongol *Olanggi sodar*, is cited in this
work as recording an assembly of numberless Bodhisattwas at Wu-t‘ai,
among whom Manjusiri is conspicuous in power and in honour. To faithful
Buddhists, the mention, in a discourse of Buddha, of a Chinese mountain,
is evidence of the superhuman knowledge of the sage. But as we know that
Nagarjuna was the real writer of this work, we look upon it rather as
proof that the geography of China was known to the translators of the
works of this copious author, and that they lived in a time when this
mountain had already become a favourite abode of the devotees of this
religion in that country.

In another book quoted by the author, Manjusiri is informed by Buddha,
that it is his duty to seek the instruction and salvation of the Chinese
by making his home at Wu-t‘ai, and there causing the wheel of the law to
revolve incessantly on the five mountains of the five different colours,
and crowned by five variously-shaped pagodas.

The lotus will not grow at Wu-t‘ai. It is too cold. How shall Manjusiri
be born from its ample couch of leaves? The magical power of Buddha
causes a lotus to grow from the seed of a certain tree. Thus he was
without father or mother, and was not stained with the "pollution of the
common world" (*orchilang*).

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

The legend of Manjusiri at Wu-t‘ai seemed to require the authority of
Buddha. The translators of the Mahayana Sutras in the T‘ang dynasty—in
order to supply this want—did not scruple to insert what they pleased in
their translations. Certainly Wu-t‘ai was not a Buddhist establishment
till some centuries after Nagarjuna. If some Sanscrit scholar would
consult the Nepaulese *Hwa-yen-king*, he would probably find nothing
there about Wu-t‘ai shan. It would be curious to note what the original
says in those passages where China is introduced by the translators.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_106"></span>[229:1](cbu18.htm#fr_106) *Vide* Burnouf's
account of the third Buddhist council held in Cashmere, in his
*Introduction à l’Histoire du Buddhisme Indien*.

<span id="fn_107"></span>[231:1](cbu18.htm#fr_107) The dictionary
*Yi-ts‘ie-king-yin-i* adds, that this word, used for "land or "kingdom,"
is the root of the word *Kshatrya*, the second of the four castes, to
which belong the royal families of India, the *Kshatryas* being Lords of
the soil.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XIV. Buddhist Images and Image Worship](cbu19)
