[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu28)  [Next](cbu30) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_380">p. 380</span>

### CHAPTER XXIV.

#### BUDDHISM AND TAUISM IN THEIR POPULAR ASPECTS.

<span class="small">The popularity of Buddhism rests on its doctrine of
retribution, and not on its ethics—Magical claims of the
Tauists—Kwan-yin, since the twelfth century, usually a female—Powers and
claims of Kwan-yin—Popular Buddhism loves to have prayers said for the
dead—Hopes for paradise hereafter—Popular Tauism believes in haunted
houses, in charms, and in the efficacy of the wizard in controlling
demons—The present head of the Tauists and chief magician—Went from
Western China to Kiang-si, where he has ever since resided as hereditary
Pope—The Tauist divinity Yu-hwang shang-ti has incarnations assigned to
him—Chang Sien the bowman, a physician—Tail-cutting delusion—Tauist
prayers for the dead—The Buddhist *Yen-lo wang*, "God of death"—The
eight genii—The eighteen Lo-hans—The Tauist delusions dangerous
politically—T‘ien-tsin massacre—Need of the light of education—The
effect of the assault of Christianity on these religions.</span>

BY the popular aspects of these two religions, I mean their aspects at
the present time, in as far as they exercise an influence on the popular
mind. They were popular formerly in a sense different from that in which
they are popular at present. Thus, preaching was common among Buddhists
in the early ages of their religion. The principal duty of a shaven monk
was to explain the doctrine of Shakyamuni as a deliverance from the
misery of life. At present the popularity of Buddhism certainly does not
rest on any activity in expounding the doctrines of their faith that we
have the opportunity of witnessing. It rests rather on the supposed
magical powers of the priests, on

<span id="page_381">p. 381</span>

the merit believed to attach to gifts presented for the support of
monks, monasteries, and liturgical services, and on the wide-spread
belief that such merit will be followed by all kinds of happiness. The
early books of Buddhism abound in beautiful moral precepts, proceeding
from the lips of a man who, through a long life, was animated by a pure
and lofty asceticism. They are tinged with a proud scorn of worldly
glory, and with a firm consciousness that there is nothing so good for a
man as to listen to the teaching of his own better nature, while he
shuts his ears closely to the siren voices of all sins and all
temptations. Assuredly this is not what makes Buddhism popular now. For
these early books are never, or almost never, read in the liturgical
services; and as to striving to be good, the Buddhists do not act so as
to indicate that this aim is vital and vigorous among them. The sharp
eyes of the Confucianists are upon them, and the judgment they pass on
them is unfavourable. The Confucianists represent them as drones in the
community. They describe them as not like the useful silkworm, which
gives to man the material of the textile fabric, but as being like the
moth, which destroys that fabric. Then, why is Buddhism still believed
by the people? The answer is, that they believe in the magical efficacy
of Buddhist prayers, and in moral causation; or, in other words, the law
of moral retribution which Buddhism teaches. It is on these accounts
that money flows into the Buddhist treasury for the erection and repair
of temples and pagodas, and for the support of innumerable priests. If I
give money to gild sacred images, the law of causation will give me back
happiness—*Yin-kwo pu-mei*.

The history of Tauism has been similar. What has come now of the
philosophy of Lau-kiün and Chwang Cheu? It is much too abstruse for the
modern Tauist mind. The Tauists of the present day do not occupy their
attention with mysterious speculations on the pure and the true. Nor yet
do they give attention to the alchemy

<span id="page_382">p. 382</span>

of the Han dynasty. They have ceased to experiment on the elixir of
life, or the transmutation of all metals into gold. Instead of this,
they occupy themselves with writing charms for driving demons out of
houses, and with reading prayers for the removal of calamities. When you
meet a Tauist of this generation, you do not meet with either an
alchemist or a philosopher. The man you see claims, however, to be able
to do very great things. He will undertake to drive out a demon from the
body of a madman, and from a haunted house, to cure the sick by magic,
and to bring rain in time of drought by his prayers. He will protect by
his charms the quiet citizen and the adventurous traveller from all
sorts of dangers; and, when there is mourning in the house, he will—like
the Buddhist monk—hire out his services to read passages from the
liturgies of his religion, which shall, by their magic power, quickly
transfer the soul of the dead to the land of happiness on high.

A Chinese writer says in a characteristic way: "The three religions
differ in their doctrines. Yet as to the aim, to save mankind, they are
at one. In Buddhism no personage holds so large a place in saving
mankind as Kwan-shï-yin. In Tauism there is no one equal to Lü
Chun-yang. In the *Ju-kiau* there is no one to be compared with
Confucius and Mencius." In this extract, <span
id="fr_137"></span>[1](#fn_137) Kwan-yin is represented as more
prominent in saving men than Buddha himself. Such is the modern
development of Buddhism, and it is the popular Buddhism of the day.
Kwan-yin was introduced into Indian Buddhism not long before the
Christian era. In China, Kwan-yin was worshipped probably in the Han
dynasty, but was not so popular as afterwards. A modern change has taken
place in the image of Kwan-yin. Down to the early part of the twelfth
century, Kwan-yin was represented as a man. In a book of drawings of the
time of Siuen-ho, <span id="fr_138"></span>[2](#fn_138) and in the works
remaining of famous painters

<span id="page_383">p. 383</span>

of the T‘ang and Sung dynasties, Kwan-yin is always a man. In later
times it has become the custom to represent Kwan-yin frequently as a
woman. This has been the custom for about six hundred years. Kwan-yin is
in masculine costume in temples where great attention is paid to
precedent, but the popular taste is in favour of a goddess rather than a
god. Hence the appellation in English, "Goddess of Mercy," founded on
the phrases commonly applied to her, *Ta-ts‘ï ta-pei kieu-k‘u kieu-nan*,
"Great mercy, great pity; salvation from misery, salvation from woe."
That one of the many metamorphoses of Kwan-yin should have become a very
common—in fact the most common—image of this divinity, may be taken as
an indication that, in deifying ideas, the Buddhist mind in China
delights to assign feminine attributes to that of mercy. It is easy to
understand how the *Sung-tsï Kwan-yin*, or "Kwan-yin, the giver of
sons," should become extremely popular.

The salvation of mankind by teaching is a conception very characteristic
of Chinese Buddhism. This belongs to all those fancied personages called
Fo and P‘u-sa. For example, the mission of Kwan-yin is the salvation of
men. It is symbolised by her thirty-two metamorphoses. In these shapes
she enters various kingdoms as a saviour. Among these representations
are seen the eighty-four thousand arms and hands with which she guides
the ignorant and the lost. The doctrines taught by Kwan-yin are the
non-existence of matter, and the infiniteness of the knowledge and mercy
of Buddha. All evils are summed up in ignorance. To acquire knowledge of
the emptiness of existing things is to become saved. It is this that is
meant by the salvation of men through the agency of the goddess of
mercy. In accordance with a vow she assumes some one of her thirty-two
shapes, and proceeds to the various kingdoms of the world to convert
men, and to the regions where gods, giants, demons, and fairies reside,
to protect, instruct, and save all. Kings, governors, and

<span id="page_384">p. 384</span>

people are renovated by the power of mercy. They are said to lose their
fear, to be extricated from the thrall of delusion, to become perfect,
and to have the power of aiding themselves or others. Kwan-yin is
represented as being able, by uttering charms, to assume numberless
shapes for the sake of saving. She saves by mercy, by wisdom, by
entering into a state. She obtains the great self-reliant power by which
she can ensure that those who pray for sons and those who pray for the
state of *samadhi* shall attain it, and those who pray for deliverance
from dangers, or for old age, shall also secure them. She is able to
give Nirvâna to her petitioners by the same power. This is said to be
her great mercy and pity. All the Buddhas and Bodhisattwas have powers
analogous to these. But none are so prominent, perhaps, in this respect,
as Kwan-yin. Manjusiri (*Wen-shu*), whose seat of worship is Wu-t‘ai
shan in Shan-si, is, even in North China, where his worship most
prevails, much less thought of than Kwan-yin. Probably P‘u-hien, the
seat of whose worship is Wo-mei shan, in the province of Sï-ch‘wen, is
even less esteemed than Manjusiri, and *a fortiori* than Kwan-yin. It
would seem, then, to be a fact important in modern Buddhist history,
that the most popular of the divinities of this religion should be
presented first with male and afterwards with female attributes, and
that the change of sex in the images should have been accomplished
within the last few centuries.

Yet it should not be forgotten that Kwan-yin is, properly speaking, to
be regarded as masculine even at the present time. The feminine form is
a specially popular metamorphosis. If we wish to go further back and to
be still more careful in our analysis, Kwan-yin is but a form of Buddha,
coming into the world of suffering mankind in a lower position than
Buddha, in order more effectually to instruct and save the ignorant.
Thus P‘u-hien and Wen-shu are in the same way said to be ancient Buddhas
appearing among men as the two helpers of Shakyamuni,

<span id="page_385">p. 385</span>

who styles one of them chang-tsï, "eldest son," and the other siau-nan,
"little boy." Wen-shu is the god of wisdom, and P‘u-hien of action.
Wen-shu rides a lion, and P‘u-hien an elephant. The lion symbolises
boldness, bravery, and a fresh, eager, and advancing spirit. The
elephant indicates care, caution, gentleness, and a weighty dignity.
This is Buddhist symbolism. It is interesting in itself, because it
explains the images. The object of the images is partly instruction, and
partly the awakening of devout feelings in the minds of worshippers. The
image of a Fo or a P‘u-sa is intended to combine in its appearance
wisdom, benevolence, and victory—the wisdom of a philosopher, the
benevolence of a redeemer, and the triumph of a hero. All perfections
are collected in the holy image—perfect power, perfect virtue, infinite
compassion, infinite boldness, and infinite knowledge. These are
intended to be represented in the images. This symbolism is, however,
not exactly what excites faith and devotion in the rich supporters of
the Buddhist religion. It is rather a belief in the magical power of the
Buddhist divinities and priests, and confidence in the doctrine of
retribution for the bestowment of liberal gifts.

Priests are invited to perform a liturgical service for the dead. It is
called *kung-te*, "merit." Its object is to give the deceased a better
position in the next life than he would otherwise enjoy. This is founded
on the metempsychosis. Souls may be re-born in a better or worse state
of existence. The magical power of Buddha may exalt a man from a birth
into hell to a birth into the world once more. Buddha's power may cause
a poor man to be born in the next life as a rich man. The choir of
priests wield this power. They profess to have the power to
*ch‘au-tu-ling-hwun*, "save the soul." This means to transfer the soul
from an undesirable abode in the next life to a very happy one. The
people believe that the priests by beating cymbals and drums, knocking
the wooden fish and chanting prayers, can redeem the deceased person
from the

<span id="page_386">p. 386</span>

punishment due to his sins. This is expressed by the phrase, *shu-tsui*,
"redeem from guilt."

For a service of one day in the house of the dead person, the name
*tso-kung-te* is used. For a service of three days, *pai-ch‘an* is often
used. The favourite name (much may be learned from favourite names)
*O-mi-to Fo* tells of an expected paradise. It speaks of the longing for
a happy hereafter. Here Buddhism has abandoned the legitimate Nirvâna of
Shakyamuni, and preferred to allow the people's craving for immortality
to dominate the philosopher's dogma of a return to the absolute. A
favourite title of Omi-to Fo is *Tsie-yin Fo*, "The guiding Buddha." He
guides from earth to the Western paradise. The legend of O-mi-to is
connected with that of Kwan-yin. The school which teaches it is called
that of "The peaceful land." In China and Japan this school has always
been a popular one. It is so especially in Japan. I was much struck
while in that country with inscriptions on tombs. A large number of the
inscriptions in ordinary cemeteries indicate that the person there
buried died in hope of being taken to "The peaceful land." It is
different in China, where Confucianism has prevented Buddhism from
taking a firm hold on the hearts of the people. No such inscriptions
occur in Chinese cemeteries. Japan has been more thoroughly penetrated
with Buddhism than China. Yet in China the funeral procession for the
dead bears many marks of Buddhist influence, though the ordinary
cemeteries do not. Thus the *hwun fan*, or "soul's banner," carried
before a coffin in such a procession has on the top a lotus-flower, and
below three strips of cloth, the middle one of which contains the
characters *pan-yi*, which imply faith in the departure of the soul to
the Western heaven. The "portrait of the dead," *shen-siang*, is placed
beside it in what is called the *tso-ting*. Below the portrait is a
tablet to be worshipped. On the right hand is another banner called
*ming-tsing*, on which are recorded the titles of the deceased. Now it
will be noticed here that

<span id="page_387">p. 387</span>

the wooden frame like a baldachino holding the picture is Buddhist. It
contains the stool on which a Buddhist monk sits crosslegged when
living, and on which he is placed sitting in the same attitude when
dead. Five Buddhist priests and five Tauists read prayers at the grave
of persons who are rich and high in office. The liturgies read are such
as the *Sin-king*, "Heart classic," and the *Kwan-yin-king*. In
reference to use in funeral processions, these liturgies are called
*Chwen-ts‘ai-king*, "Liturgy for 'turning' (or guiding) the coffin" on
its path to the grave. The Nirvâna is too abstruse for the popular
faith. It has been replaced by the Paradise of the Western heaven.

The belief in the existence of hermit heroes, and of various malevolent
spirits and demons, is a marked characteristic of popular Tauism.
Haunted houses are avoided in all parts of China. The power of expelling
demons from haunted houses and localities, is believed to belong chiefly
to the hereditary chief of the Tauists, Chang Tien-shï, and
subordinately to any Tauist priest. To expel demons he wields the sword
that is said to have come down, a priceless heirloom, from his ancestors
of the Han dynasty. All demons fear this sword. He who wields it, the
great Tauist magician, can catch demons and shut them up in jars. These
jars are sealed with a "charm" (*fu*). I have heard that at the home of
this chief of wizards on the Dragon and Tiger mountain in the province
of Kiang-si, there are many rows of such jars, all of them supposed to
hold demons in captivity. The wizard himself is believed to be a power.
The charm is a power. The sword he wields is a power. The efficacy of a
charm is increased by the supposed magical gifts of the Tauist wizard
from whom it is obtained. To secure the services of the great Kiang-si
wizard is very expensive. Only the wealthy who can expend a thousand
taels of silver without being pinched can afford the luxury of feeling
quite sure that, by the agency of this wizard, the demons who trouble
them are completely subjugated. The residence of this wizard is called
Chên-jên

<span id="page_388">p. 388</span>

fu. In giving him the title *Chên-jên*, the meaning is that he is
regarded as having attained perfect power and virtue. He is the ideal
man. Men under the domination of the passions are not called *Chên-jên*.
The Tauist discipline gives a man the rule over himself and over nature.
He who possesses this is called a "True man." The word *chên*, "true,"
cannot be fully translated into English in such cases as this without
embracing the ideas "real," "perfect," "ideal," and "most elevated." It
is higher than *sien*, "immortal," but not so high as *sheng*, "holy."

The present chief wizard is like his predecessors. His wife belongs to a
Kiang-si family. Tauism in the persons of its wizards retains marriage.
Buddhism introduced the disuse of marriage. Tauism, being anterior to
that much more ascetic and self-denying system, knew nothing of
celibacy.

It may be asked, from whence came the wizards and their charms, and
their supposed power to subdue the bad influences of demons in
disturbing neighbourhoods by apparitions and uncanny noises, and in
causing sickness and death? It may be answered, that before the
introduction of Buddhism, but especially in the Han dynasty, this folly
was rife in the popular belief, and has continued so till now. There
were wizards in the Shang dynasty, but no details remain of what they
did. In the Han dynasty, the wizards stand out in their completeness.
They were greatly honoured by prince and people, and have continued to
be so in the person of the Chang T‘ien-shï till the present day.

This personage assumes a state which mimics the imperial regime. He
confers buttons like the emperor. He has about thirty persons
constituting his courtiers and high officers. Tauists come to him from
various cities and temples to receive promotion. He invests them with
certain titles, and gives seals of office to those Tauists who are
invested. They have similar powers to his, and can, for example like
him, subdue demons by pasting

<span id="page_389">p. 389</span>

charms on doors, which prevent them from entering. The Chang Tien-shï,
in his capacity as a sort of spiritual emperor, addresses memorials to
Yü-ti in heaven. His position will be understood from this circumstance.
He is chief official on earth of Yü-hwang-ti in heaven, and as such is
in the habit of addressing to him "memorials" called *piau*. His duty is
defined as the driving away and expulsion of demons by charms, and their
destruction by the magic sword.

In all parts of China, the charms seen pasted on the doors of houses
testify to the dominant idea of popular Tauism, and to the universal
fear of demons, which Tauism encourages. Certainly it is not
Confucianism that maintains in rigour this absurd dread of evil spirits
wandering through the air, disturbing the public tranquillity,
occasioning alarms which sometimes spread like an epidemic from city to
city, and leading the uninstructed populace to trace fevers, madness,
ague, drowning, accidental death of travellers, suicide, and any sort of
unaccountable discomfort, to the imaginary agency of invisible and
malevolent beings. To subdue them is the office of the Tauist magician.
The person honoured with the credit of having invented the charm is
Chang Tau-ling. It was called *fu*, because written on bamboo tallies
such as were anciently used by officers of government, and which are
made to fit in shape one with another as a security against imposture,
in accordance with the meaning of the verb *fu*. They are to be seen
pasted on door lintels, the occupants of the house believing that the
sight of the magical characters written on the charm will prevent evil
spirits from entering.

The magicians were in the Han dynasty called—not without a touch of
sarcasm—the "Feathered scholars" (*Yü-shï*), as being able to fly. The
legend of Chang Tau-ling, ancestor of the Chang T‘ien-shï, head of the
Tauist hierarchy at the present time, is sometimes stated as follows:—In
the latter part of the second century, this Pope of

<span id="page_390">p. 390</span>

the Tauists, if he may be so called, was engaged in the province now
called Sï-ch‘wen in the *Ho-ming shan* (Mountain where the crane
*sien-ho* calls), in manipulating the "elixir of the dragon and tiger,"
*lung-hu-tan*. He met a spirit who said, "In the Pe-sung mountain is a
stone house where may be found writings of the three emperors and a
liturgical book. By getting these you may ascend to heaven, if you pass
through the course of discipline which they enjoin." He dug and found
them. By means of them he was able to fly, to hear distant sounds, and
to leave his body. Lau-kiün then came down to him on the night of the
feast of lanterns, and ordered him to subdue the demons of the "Shu
country" (*Sï-ch‘wen*), in order to confer blessings on humanity.
Lau-kiün gave him a powerful and secret "charm" (*lu*), a "liturgy"
(*king*), a "composition in verse or measured prose" (*kiue*), a "sword"
(*kien*), and a "seal" (*yin*). After going through a thousand days of
discipline, and receiving instructions from a certain goddess called
Yü-nü, who taught him to walk about among the stars, he proceeded to
fight with the king of the demons, to divide mountains and seas, and to
command the wind and thunder to come and go. All the demons fled before
him, leaving not a trace behind of their retreating footsteps. On
account of the prodigious slaughter of demons by this hero, the wind and
thunder were reduced to subjection, and various divinities came with
eager haste to acknowledge their faults. In nine years he gained the
power to ascend to heaven and prostrate himself before the first in rank
of the Three Pure Ones. A temple in Ch‘eng-tu is said to have been the
place where Lau-kiün discoursed to Chang Tau-ling. He afterwards went
eastward, and settled his residence on the mountain *Lung-hu shan*,
where his descendants have ever since resided in possession of great
honour and emolument, as his hereditary representatives. The present
occupant of the patriarchate had to fly at the time of the T‘ai-p‘ing
rebellion, and the temple where he resides was partially

<span id="page_391">p. 391</span>

destroyed. The repairs of the buildings are now nearly completed.

The popular divinity, Yü-hwang shang-ti, is an ancient magician, exalted
to this dignity probably by the Tauist writers of the T‘ang
dynasty. <span id="fr_139"></span>[1](#fn_139) In the *Pen-hing-king* of
the Tauist collection it is said, that a magician of the Chang family
was the son of a king in a former *kalpa*, who, instead of succeeding
his father, became a hermit, and after eight hundred *kalpas*, and much
patient endurance of injuries, attained to the rank of the "Golden
immortals" (*Kin-sien*), and at the same time a Buddha with a special
title, *Tsing-tsing-tsï-jan-chio-ju-lai*, "The pure, calm, and
spontaneously perceiving Ju-lai." After a million more *kalpas* he
became Yü-ti, or *Yü-hwang ta-ti*, "Emperor of all the immortals." In
the same way, *Tsï-wei ta-ti*, "God of the stars round the north pole,"
is the emperor who rules over the presiding gods of all the stars,
according to the one account. The magician Chang and the magician Liu
mounted dragons and rode up through the sky towards heaven, and Chang
gained in the race.

In the Tsin dynasty, A.D. 300, Cheu Hing is reported to have died and
risen again. He is said to have related what he saw when dead. He saw
*T‘ien-ti*, the "Heavenly emperor," enter the chief hall of his palace.
Clouds, purple in colour, dense and dark, obstructed the view above him.
His face was a square foot in size. Cheu Hing was told by those on his
right and left, "This is the heavenly emperor Chang." His palace is the
Yü-ts‘ing kung, which is represented in temples by a building beneath
the abode of the Three Pure Ones. It is the heaven to which the soul
flies when Tauist prayers are supposed to help the dead to reach the
Tauist heaven. The expressions

<span id="page_392">p. 392</span>

are—*Hwun fei ch‘ung-siau*, "The soul flies to the high firmament;"
*Ling-t‘eng t‘ien-kung*, "The soul ascends to the heavenly palace."
These passages are the earliest I have yet found giving the family name
Chang to Yü-ti. This magician or god Chang is to be distinguished from
Chang Tau-ling as already described, ancestor of the present Chang
T‘ien-shï, and from the medical divinity Chang Sien, who was, in fact, a
distinguished physician of the Sung dynasty. The personage called Chang
Sien, in common Chinese paintings, with bow and arrow shooting at the
moon, is this physician who lived about seven hundred years ago.

In the tail-cutting delusion, which died out in 1879, after spreading
over the country like an epidemic, we see an example of Tauist ideas.
The fairy that cuts off hair is checked and prevented by a charm. A
written charm curled up in the plaited queue at the back of the head is
a protective shield against all the assaults of witchcraft. Tauism
attempts to soothe the fears of the people by this artifice. In Peking
lately I myself heard that a writer of charms hired men to go along the
streets shouting to people that for safety they should place charms in
their hair, and detailing cases of the loss of queues in the night, or
while men were sleeping in the day-time. These hired men brought to the
writers of charms a great increase of custom. Every one wished to buy
one. There must be something in it, for every one talked of it. We must,
they said to themselves, buy a charm. The charm used in Peking against
the danger of waking without a queue, consists of four mysterious
characters, which are all found in Kang-hi's dictionary. They were, we
are there told, used against a similar delusion in the Ming dynasty.

The Tauism of to-day meets us with this special characteristic. Yet it
is but one part of the popular Tauism, which in great part consists of a
monastic institute for reading liturgical books after the Buddhist
fashion.

Dr. Yates says, in his lecture on Ancestral Worship and

<span id="page_393">p. 393</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Fung-shui, that
Buddhism borrowed from Tauism. But, in fact, it is rather the other way
in the main. Buddhism indeed borrowed from Tauism the worship of
Kwan-ti, as it has borrowed from Confucianism the use of ancestral
tablets for the worship of the priests of a monastery. But there is no
room for doubt, that the general programme of the arrangements of a
Tauist monastery, with the occupations of the inmates, is Buddhistic.
The whole scheme of prayers for the dead is so. As to prayers for rain,
they are essential in China in every religion. For popular and for state
reasons it is necessary to have them, the reason being the same in all
Buddhist countries. When therefore the Hindoos and other Buddhists came
to China, and found prayers for rain already existing in the Confucian,
the imperial, and the popular worship, they would in offering prayers
for the same object, be only doing what they were accustomed to do in
their own country. They can scarcely be said to be borrowed by any
religion. The popular character of the prayers of the Tauists for the
dead is different in some respects from the Buddhist, but in the chief
features it is evidently imitated. The old classical word *ts‘iau*, for
example, is not used in describing the services of the Tauists for the
dead. The phrase *pai-ch‘an* is used. One is called *Ch‘au-t‘ien-ch‘an*,
or "Prayer of looking toward heaven;" another is *Yü-hwang-ch‘an*,
"Prayer of Yü-hwang." This word *ch‘an* is Buddhist. The object of
reciting these books is to save the souls of the dead by affording them
a speedy ascent to the palace of Yü-hwang. The hell of the Buddhists is
repeated by the Tauists in their descriptions of the future state. The
variety of torments and punishments to be inflicted on criminals in the
next world may be seen with all the harrowing details in the temples of
*Tung-yo to-ti*, "The god of *T‘ai-shan*," a mountain god who is
supposed to rule the under world. He corresponds in attributes somewhat
to *Ti-tsang-wang p‘u-sa*, the Buddhist deliverer from hell. Like this
Buddhist god, he rules only as a saviour and

<span id="page_394">p. 394</span>

shares his authority with a large group of inferior divinities, whose
offices as ministers of punishment to those who deserve chastisement,
are illustrated on the walls by rough paintings, or by clay images,
moulded and painted in the Chinese method, in the temples of *Tung-yo
to-ti*. Among statements which I made years ago and have now to correct
as imperfect or erroneous is this, that the Tauists have no hell, but
only a heaven. In fact they have both, for the rough wall drawings and
clay mouldings found in the east and west buildings of the temples of
*Tung-yo* prove it. These are not, however, many centuries old, and they
form a part of the mass of legend and myth which they have
unscrupulously borrowed from the Buddhists. *Yama*, "God of Death" in
India, the *Yen-lo-wang* of China, with the ten courts of judgment which
rule over the guilty, sentences them to punishment and has it
administered after death. This forms the basis of the Tauist hell.

Modern Chinese art is very much pervaded with Tauist ideas. The eight
genii meet us everywhere. The manufacturers of
[porcelain](errata.htm#6), bronze, and carved bamboo ornaments are never
weary of representing these eight personages. They belong to the class
of hermits. The love of external nature was very much developed in the
T‘ang dynasty. Poetry was the favourite occupation of the literati. They
gave attention to no severe studies. Every beautiful spot among lakes,
waterfalls, and mountains was selected for a hermitage or a monastery.
Buddhism and Tauism received a wonderful expansion. It was just the era
for the legends of the eight genii to spring into existence. It was an
age of sentimental feeling. The great national poets flourished in the
same dynasty as the eight Tauist hermits. Li T‘ai-pe and Tu Fu gained
their fame at the same time that the sixteen, and afterwards eighteen,
Lo-hans became popular. These Lo-hans are the Buddhist equivalents of
the fairies and hermits of Tauism. The sixteen were Hindoos, while the
two added names were

<span id="page_395">p. 395</span>

those of Chinese Buddhists. All the eight genii were Tauists of the
T‘ang dynasty.

We see the effect of Buddhist and Tauist teaching in the present race of
Chinese. The Tauist religion especially is responsible for those
superstitions which have a dangerous character. The epidemic of the
fairy powder was fatal to the peace of communities. The absurd charges
brought against the martyred Sisters of Mercy in Tientsin were based on
ideas which, although usually represented as popular, and as the native
growth of the Chinese mind, are in fact correctly placed to the account
of Tauism. It is dangerous to the state that religious teachings should
be encouraged which tend to foster and originate popular delusions
entailing such frightful results. Every man, whether a Christian or not,
ought on moral grounds, and on the greatest happiness principle itself,
if he thinks that is a safer basis, to desire the extinction of a
religious system which encourages dangerous and lying delusions. Then
there is the tail-cutting. The Tauists accept and endorse the whole
system of popular delusion which originated the tail-cutting. They
believe in the existence of just such fairies as are said to cut off
men's queues. They make money by selling the charms which are
represented to be a protection against such demons. Popular Tauism then
is worthy of decided condemnation, from every Christian and every
enlightened lover of mankind, whatever be his belief. There are beliefs
in the Tauist religion which not only need to be attacked by books
written from the Christian standpoint of thought, but which may very
properly be condemned in the proclamations of magistrates, on account of
their tendency to produce dangerous tumults and lamentable breaches of
the peace. What a field is here presented for the teaching of science,
and the spread of a practical system of improved education in China!
Dense intellectual darkness clouds the people's minds. There is pressing
need for the extension of a system of education which should strike at
the root

<span id="page_396">p. 396</span>

of superstition and enable the rising youth of the country to avoid
falling into the thrall of those delusive imaginations which have grown
up under the fostering care of the Tauists during the last two hundred
years.

It is a great misfortune for a nation to have an extensive sacerdotal
caste, whose interest it is to continue, generation after generation,
the belief in deceptive fancies which check the free growth of true
ideas and all healthy habits of thought. Their livelihood depends on the
people continuing to believe in demons, fairies, and charms. The
missionary and the schoolmaster, the magazine and the newspaper, are all
needed to check these bad influences, and replace dangerous and
injurious popular notions, by healthy and useful knowledge, to he
gathered from God's two books, that of Nature and that of Revelation.
Then as to the effects of Buddhism, it may be said to have been good in
some respects. It bears a consistent testimony to the vanity of the
world, and the essential and immense superiority of soul purity to
earthly grandeur. But in founding on this a monastic institute, it has
followed a wrong plan, and failed to attain the purity desired. It
teaches the need of a personal redeemer to rescue from the moral evils
attendant on our present existence. But this redeemer is a Buddha or a
Bodhisattwa, a man or being possessing none of the powers attributed to
him. Among the prominent and most pernicious evils for which the popular
Buddhism of the present day is responsible is idolatry. It is an
enormous evil that Buddhism has placed the Buddhas and Bodhisattwas in
the position in the reverence of the people, that ought to be held only
by the Creator and Father of the world. Idolatry puts fiction in the
stead of truth, and, as we every day see in China, renders the mind
indifferent to truth. This, too, is a vast evil. Confucianism makes
everything of morality; and the worship of Buddhist images, when it is
complied with, becomes a moral duty on the part of the emperor or the
magistrate, only because it is *li* (ceremonial duty), not

<span id="page_397">p. 397</span>

because the Buddhist religion itself can have any just claim to it. But
Buddhism, by putting forward the image, debases and misleads the
national mind, by drawing it away from the proper object of human
worship. Our great contest as Christian missionaries is with
Confucianism. There is found the intellect, the thought, the literature,
the heart of the nation. But we have also a preliminary struggle with
Buddhism and Tauism. These constitute three mighty fortresses, erected
by human skill and effort, to impede the progress of Christianity.
Confucianism is the citadel of the enemy raising its battlements high
into the clouds, and manned by multitudes who are animated by a belief
in their superiority and their invincible strength. The taking of this
fortress is the conclusion of the war. But Buddhism and Tauism each
represents a fortress which must also be captured and destroyed. So far
as argument and intellect are concerned, these fortresses are weakly
manned. But think of the numbers, the millions on millions, who are
deceived by these superstitions, and held fast by chains of spiritual
darkness. Let the Christian host of soldiers press on, and detail its
battalions, first to overthrow these strongholds of rebellion against
God; and when they are destroyed, let another earnest effort be made to
destroy the last and strongest of the towers of the enemy. Then, when
all these three fortresses are overthrown, and China becomes a subject
kingdom under the Messiah's peaceful reign, it will be the greatest
triumph ever achieved for Christianity since the time when the emperor
Constantine became a Christian, and the Roman religion and power, and
the Greek philosophy were dragged as captives behind the car of the
victorious Redeemer.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_137"></span>[382:1](cbu29.htm#fr_137) From
*Ping-shu-pi-t‘an*.

<span id="fn_138"></span>[382:2](cbu29.htm#fr_138) From A.D. 1119 to
1126.

<span id="fn_139"></span>[391:1](cbu29.htm#fr_139) The title Yü-ti
occurs in Tauist books earlier than the T‘ang dynasty, but not the full
title with four characters. This belongs evidently to the T‘ang dynasty,
the age of Buddhist influence, and to the belief in metamorphoses, and a
former life, borrowed from India. I asked the Tauist patriarch when in
Shanghai, how long it was since Chang T‘ien-ti first received his title.
He only replied, "From the beginning of the universe."

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXV. On the Use of Sanscrit by the Chinese
Buddhists](cbu30)
