[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Buddhism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](cbu25)  [Next](cbu27.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book at
Amazon.com](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B0029LHUYM/internetsacredte.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*Chinese Buddhism*, by Joseph Edkins, \[1893\], at Intangible Textual
Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_327">p. 327</span>

### CHAPTER XXI.

#### FENG-SHUI; OR, THE WIND AND WATER SUPERSTITION OF THE CHINESE.

<span class="small">An obstacle to civilisation—Meaning of *Feng*,
"Wind"—Of *Shui*, "Water"—Use of cyclic characters—Meaning of *Lung*,
"Dragon"—Names of the geomancers—Hindoo nomenclature—*Sha-ch‘i*
"Destructive vapour"—Dark arrow—*Chen-wu*, or "Protecting
shield"—*Feng-shui* professedly based on the "Book of Changes"—Modern
*Feng-shui* is based on the *Han-lung-king*—Buddhist element in
*Feng-shui*—The four elements of the Greeks—The Hindoo "Air and water"
is *Feng-shui*—Earth, water, fire, and air are creative forces, existing
in successive *kalpas*, and forming successive worlds—Resemblance to the
theories of the Ionian philosophers—Geomancy in the T‘ang dynasty—*Rahu*
and *Ketu*—The *Feng-shui* system grew out of Buddhism—Native element in
*Feng-shui*—Nine fancied stars—Causes of the contour of hills and
plains—Stars of the six houses—*Feng-shui* inconsistent with genuine
Confucianism.</span>

EVERYTHING can be made plainer by investigation. Everything can be
understood better by the bringing together of facts. The *Feng-shui* of
the Chinese deserves to be examined, for it is one of the great
obstacles to the progress of civilisation.

It interferes with commercial enterprise. It checks the efforts of
missionary zeal. It interrupts the free thought of the people, and keeps
them wrapped in the mummy folds of ancient prejudices.

Within the last thirty years this peculiar system of native
Geomancy <span id="fr_124"></span>[1](#fn_124.md) has been made the ground
for refusing

<span id="page_328">p. 328</span>

the establishment of the electric telegraph at Shanghai, of railways, of
a road from Tientsin to the Chai-tang coalmines, and of I do not know
how many more manifest and desirable improvements, all which would be of
the greatest advantage to the people of the district. I begin with the
explanation of terms. *Feng*, "Wind," is the first which occurs. It may
be illustrated in this way.

A grave should not have a hollow near it. The wind will blow into the
grave from that hollow and gradually disturb the bones and the coffin.
In ten years they will be half turned over. In twenty years or so they
may be entirely turned over. In that case the posterity of the dead will
suffer by a kind of material necessity. Such a wind is called a
*wa-feng*, from *wa*, "hollow." An outer wind must not be allowed to
invade the chamber of the dead, for fear the family fortunes should be
disturbed. Thus the filial piety which takes care of the tombs of
parents has a material reward, and may be nothing beyond a coarse
selfishness; on the other hand, the want of it is visited by a natural
retribution, involving sickness, poverty, loss of descendants, and
degradation in the social scale.

The aim of the geomancer is to find a spot where the *feng*, "cold air
which issues from the earth," is hidden. This they call *ts‘ang-feng*.
Where there are no hollows it is safe to dig the grave, for here there
is no outlet by which this pernicious wind may disturb the dead.

The second term to be explained is *Shui*, "Water." The grave must be
carefully chosen. The configuration of the earth is caused by the
dragon, whose shape is seen in the mountain boundary cast upon the
evening sky. The dragon may be traced to its source. It is observable in
the flow of the mountain stream, or in the contour of the earth. The
hollow river bed and the variety of hill and valley are caused by the
dragon. Trace the water of a valley to its source; that is the point
from which commences the influence that controls human destiny. Water is
the element in which the dragon delights. Its winding

<span id="page_329">p. 329</span>

shape as it meanders through a plain gives evidence of this, for the
dragon prefers crooked paths. Since then the dragon gives prosperity,
elevates the king and the sage, and is the symbol of all exaltation,
social, political, or moral, it is all important to consider the
position of water when selecting the site of the grave. In the valley of
the Ming tombs the water flows from the north-west, passes under a
bridge in front of the grave of the emperor Yung-lo, and then pursues
its way down towards the plain of Peking on the south-east. Hills in
horse-shoe form embrace the valley. The *feng-shui* is good.

If the water flows past a certain point of the geomancer's compass, it
causes prosperity; at another, it brings misfortune. If, for instance,
to be more particular in detail, the branching point of water be at the
north-east, north-west, south-east, or south-west points of the compass,
it is possible that there may be prosperity. If it be at the
east-north-east, west-south-west, south-south-east, or north-north-west,
the elder sons and brothers of the deceased will become scattered and
poor. Water at the east by north, west by south, south by east, or north
by west points, will ensure happiness to his children, they not being
the eldest or youngest. The same children will suffer misfortune if
water flow past the north by east and west points.

The chief use of the geomancer's compass is to determine, in regard to
the water, the direction of flow, the primary source, the points of
junction, and the points from which it starts afresh at a new angle. The
grave must be chosen so that the presaged fate, as fixed by the manual
of geomancy, may be of the most favourable kind.

The cutting of a new road would alter the course of water, and in
various ways affect the calculation of the geomancer; and, as the graves
of the past generation are found everywhere, there is no spot where the
minds of the people will not be disturbed by projects involving the
construction of roads. If the mistake in the selection of a grave site
leads to poverty, sudden death, and other

<span id="page_330">p. 330</span>

calamities, may not a railway cutting, or any disturbance in the course
of streams, be equally deleterious? The faith in *feng-shui* must be
first eradicated before the Chinese can be induced to look with favour
on railways or any description of new roads. If the government should
consent to such improvements, their action ought to be accompanied by
edicts and publications authoritatively condemning the superstition, and
showing what solid reasons there are for disbelieving the whole system
of the geomancers. This would aid greatly in soothing the minds of the
hostile and calming the fears of the ignorant.

But to proceed: the water before a tomb must be running water. Riches
and rank flow like water capriciously from one point to another. Hence
riches and rank are supposed to depend on the undisturbed flow of the
stream which passes under the bridge in front of the tomb. Man inhabits
the tomb, and his destiny is affected by the surrounding circumstances.
Riches and rank are attached to flowing water, and, if due care is taken
by the geomancer and by the posterity of the dead, a perpetual stream of
worldly honour and wealth may be expected to flow into the possession of
the family.

It may be instructive to dwell for a moment on this superstition,
proving, as it does, that quite as dense a cloud of ignorance rests on
China as upon Europe before it was illumined by the sun of Christianity
and of modern knowledge. On the geomancer's compass the twelve cyclic
characters, *tsu ch‘eu*, *yin*, &c., are inscribed at equal distances
interspersed with other cycles. The first, *tsu*, begins at the north
point, and is at the back of the tomb, which faces the south. The order
of the words is from east to west, according to the diurnal motion of
the sun and stars. Let the observer imagine himself standing at the back
of one of those common tombs, which are protected on the north
side <span id="fr_125"></span>[1](#fn_125.md) by a long curved bank
overgrown with grass.

<span id="page_331">p. 331</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Behind him on the
horizon is *tsu*, next on the left is *ch‘eu*, and so on to the south
point, *wu*. If there is a bend in the course of the water, or a
junction of two streams on the north at *tsu*, the posterity of the
occupant of the grave will be thieves if poor, and robbed if rich. If on
the northeast they will die young, and be left as widows, and men
without children. At the third division, they will be greatly subject to
diseases. If the geomancer notices that the bend is in the east point of
the horizon, he will be bound to foretell that the posterity of the dead
will be vagabonds. At the next two stations the special evils indicated
are disobedience and rebellion at the one, and at the other the
consequence will be that a snake will grow of itself in the tomb. This
is a very bad sign, and presages restlessness for the bones of the dead
and the fortunes of the living. It brings the evil wind of unhappy
destiny with special force upon the occupier of the tomb. The south
indicates that the descendants of the dead will lead licentious lives.
Here I stop; but the geomancer does not rest till he has boxed the
compass with a variety of evils supposed to befall the possessor of an
ill-chosen site for his grave. Such a system is well adapted to increase
the authority of the *feng-shui sien-sheng*, or "geomancer." He must be
well skilled in all the indications which the traditions and books of
his profession single out as of importance.

These deceivers of their fellow-men who make their living by practising
on the superstitious tendencies of t their patrons, are sometimes
wanting in care for their reputation. They often carry the thing too
far. They are held up to ridicule not uncommonly by the people, and
especially because the word *feng*, "wind," is also identical in sound
with *feng*, "lunatic." The country people ridicule them as they stand
on the grave site to make observations, or creep on the ground, or sit
on their thighs, or superintend the erection of a mound of grass clods,
or come out at evening with a lanthorn to set on the

<span id="page_332">p. 332</span>

mount, as an assistance to them in considering at a distance the
desirable or unfavourable features of the site in question.

Very like is all this to the astrology of the Chaldeans, that system of
magic and fortune-telling against which Christianity had to fight in the
days of Hippolytus and Origen. The one applied the cycles of astronomy
to divination with the object of making gain by telling fortunes. The
other makes use of the same cycles in geomancy to obtain money by
forefending evil and coaxing a good destiny upon him who pays the
conjuror. He will become the most popular and best esteemed geomancer
who makes the most cunning observations on the contour of the country
and the arrangement of the streams of water at the spot where the grave
is, or where it is intended to be made.

It is often the case that the care bestowed by the Chinese on the graves
of their ancestors may be less from respect for the deceased than from
fear of ill consequences to themselves and their descendants. Large sums
are spent by the rich in the hope of obtaining the best possible
*feng-shui* for their ancestral tombs. Thus the stream of prosperity
will always flow continuously onwards in the history of their families,
securing them freedom from poverty, misery, sickness, and obscurity. The
filial piety of China is less sincere than is by many supposed. It is
more selfish than generous, more calculating than spontaneous. The moral
sense is deadened in this country by the prevailing desire for riches
and rank; and the moral retribution which attends the acts of
individuals and nations, is too much hidden from view by a superstitious
belief in an unintelligent physical retribution, <span
id="fr_126"></span>[1](#fn_126.md) such as is taught by the Buddhists. When
God as governor is banished from the world, atheistic philosophers
substitute an impersonal Fate, whose decrees sometimes are in harmony
with the moral sense in man, but are perhaps much oftener influenced by
low motives, such

<span id="page_333">p. 333</span>

as are believed by the superstitious to control the acts of the fetish.
In this sense it may be said that the Chinese have retrograded in
proportion as the *feng-shui* and similar superstitions have extended
among them. In the days of Confucius the moral sense was probably
brighter than it is now, and there was less of superstition. He lived
nearer to the early times of the Old Testament monotheism. Even in his
age, if we compare the knowledge of God then possessed by the Chinese
with that found in the older classics, we are compelled to admit that
there was deterioration. He felt less than the emperors T‘ang and Wen
Wang, the influence of the personal idea of God as the actual moral
governor of the world. As the faith in a personal God grew dim, the
moral sense also lost its keenness, and the physical heaven came to be
regarded as an object of worship.

The third word I shall explain is *Lung*, "Dragon." The word means that
which rises and is lofty in location. It is used of mountains and of
national or individual prosperity. The fabulous dragon of China is a
monster with scales like a crocodile, and having five-clawed feet. He
has no wings, and when he rises in the air, it is by a power he is
supposed to possess of transforming himself at pleasure. He can make
himself large or little, and rise or fall, just as he chooses. The
Chinese dragon, which is a flying saurian, is not like the Greek dragon,
which belonged to the serpent family, but seems to be an original
Chinese creation, or is connected in some ancient and unknown way with
the West. For our present purpose it is sufficient to regard it as
purely native, and the most probable cause I can name of the attributes
of the dragon is similarity of sound with words meaning "high" and
"ascend." Among the words with which it may be identified by etymology,
through the mutations of letters, are *shang*, "to ascend;" *cheng*,
"the upward motion of steam;" *teng*, "to go up;" *sheng*, also "to go
up;" *lung*," high;" and *lung*, "hill." The geomancer calls all high
land *lung*, and

<span id="page_334">p. 334</span>

all low land *shui*. The dragon rules the high land, and water the low
land. The chains of hills which almost encircle Peking are the
protecting dragon, which is believed to ensure its prosperity. The hills
which surround in a similar way the Ming tombs are the dragon, which for
three centuries protected that dynasty. The mountain chains which bound
the province of Chi-li are connected with the Manchurian mountains which
cradled the imperial family in the days of its comparative obscurity. As
the seat of empire is in Peking, and it is there the reigning family
resides, it is of the highest importance not to disturb its protecting
dragon. On plains the Chinese make a long mound behind a tomb. This is
also the protecting dragon of that tomb and of the family it represents.
It is called the hill, and its office is to keep off the north wind.
When high land is wanting, trees make an excellent shield against bad
influence. <span id="fr_127"></span>[1](#fn_127.md)

The geomancer's books say that the dragon follows the course of the
water. He originates his influence where the water takes its beginning,
and remains permanently where two streams meet. They mean here the
influence which produces happiness and misery by a capricious
retribution mixed with a coarse natural philosophy. Divine Providence is
here kept out of view, and is by implication denied. The elements—fire,
air, earth, and water—dominate. It is by their combinations and
activities that human fate is determined. The geomancer's dragon causes
men's elevation, longevity, and riches; and his influence varies
according as he has more of water, or of earth, or of any other element.
The course of the dragon must be in each instance examined, and it is
decided by the direction of the water. But the contour of the ground,
whether rising or falling, high or low, must also be considered. Such
investigations were made, for example, in regard to the site of the
grave of the emperor Yung-lo, and hence the selection of that beautiful
valley

<span id="page_335">p. 335</span>

where the Ming emperors are buried. The Manchu emperors afterwards
despoiled the tombs of that dynasty. Much of the teak timber and marble
was brought away to use in the new edifices of Yuen-ming-yuen and the
other pleasure grounds of the imperial family. Then they began to fear
the consequences on themselves and their descendants. The influence from
the Ming tombs on the north might have a disastrous effect upon them
while enjoying their summer retirement. They therefore erected those
geomantic walls which are seen on the hill sides facing north-north-east
on the way to Hei-lung-t‘an from Peking. These walls, it was supposed,
would check the pernicious influences which might otherwise strike them
from the invisible retributive power, which was still supposed to watch
over the last resting-place of the once mighty dynasty of the Ming.

It is plain that the geomancer's capricious retribution, if believed in
by a nation, must have most injurious consequences in its manifest
interference with the doctrine of moral retribution. It is of a piece
with the luck of the Chinese calendar, the belief in the efficacy of red
colour and favourite moral sentences in keeping off demons, the choice
of days for marriages and funerals, and the remainder of the endless
list of native superstitions still believed in in this country.

In describing the effect of the dragon, the geomancers say he can remove
the "spirit of death," the *sha-ch‘i*, and preserve life. The *sha* is a
malicious principle, the shed of the Hebrew and Arabic languages, and
the *ch‘itgur* of the Mongols. When this principle invades the body, man
dies. They believe, however, that this enemy who kills and injures men
is not invincible. The dragon has the power of checking it. It is
curious to notice that here we have to do with impersonal yet living
principles. The *sha* does not receive a proper name. In a Western
country these superstitions would have been clothed in the language of a
graceful mythology. The Chinese, belonging

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

altogether to a more primitive and prosaic type than the Greek race, are
content with simply calling them good and evil principles.

I shall now say a few words on the professional names assumed by the
geomancers. They call themselves professors of *ti-li*, "the doctrine or
description of the earth," "geography." This name is in contrast with
*tien-wen*, "astronomy," which means the description of heaven
astronomically and astrologically, as *ti-li* geographically and
geomantically is of earth.

What astrology is when compared with astronomy, such is geomancy when
compared with geography. The astrological section in the geomancer's
books is bulky. They tell us that the stars shining down (or coming
down, for they suppose them movable) give the mountains their form. Some
adopt the Hindoo nomenclature, and make the Sumeru mountain the centre
of the mountain and river system of the world. Others, who object to
offer su great a concession to the foreign doctrine of Buddhist books,
prefer to assign this honour to Kwun-lun, the old Chinese name of the
mountains dividing Thibet from Tartary. On the north side of these
mountains, the Chinese probably resided for a time before proceeding to
take possession of their present home, and the same chain has always
taken a prominent place in their notions of geography. It is the
backbone from which the other mountain chains proceed, and they form
together a kind of terrestrial skeleton. The rivers form the veins and
arteries, and the mountains the bones, of a living earth. The whole is
imagined to be so like the heavens, that certain stars correspond to
certain terrestrial spaces, and exercise rule over them. Kwun-lun rules
the hills, as the Pole star rules the stars. When the geomancer takes
his position to inspect a site for a grave, house, or city, he fixes
upon a spot which is called *hiue*, a name that may be translated into
English by, what are indeed possibly, its etymological equivalents,
"hole" or "hollow." The

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

windings of the surface in its neighbourhood, whether stone, sand, or
loam, extending all round until the view is bounded by hills or the
horizon, constitute the constellations which encircle it as the stars do
the pole. As in heaven, the twenty-eight zodiacal groups represent the
Blue dragon in the east, the Red bird in the south, the White tiger in
the west, and the Black warrior in the north, so it is supposed to be in
the limited horizon of which the centre is the required site. It is in
accordance with this system, half astrological and half geomantic, that
the professor of *ti-li* proceeds in searching for what he calls the
"true dragon" in each case.

The expression *k’an-yü* is also used. This is a favourite name on the
signboards of Peking geomancers. The best explanation of this phrase
seems to be that which represents *k‘an* as "heaven," *yü* as "earth."
*K‘an* is the covering let down over an idol, as in the phrase
*Fo-k‘an*, "A shrine for Buddha," and it here represents the sky as a
canopy stretched over the world. *Yü* is the "chariot" in which man is
borne. It is not so well known as it should be, that in China in the Han
dynasty a gleam of true light shone on the minds of some of the literati
in regard to the system of the world. They accepted the noble idea,
probably propagated from the West through Central Asia, that the earth
moves, while the heavens are at rest. Pythagoras, if this be true, had
disciples even so far away as China. It is possible that the phrase
*k‘an-yü* may hint at this idea. Hence the application of the *yü*,
"chariot," to geography and the earth.

Another term requiring explanation is *sha-ch‘i*. It is this which is
feared when a *ying-pei*, or "shield wall," is erected before a house
door. The dangerous vapour known as *sha-ch‘i*, causing various
calamities, might enter by an unprotected door. Every house entrance in
Peking has its devices for preventing straight access. The path must
wind, and many methods are employed to save the house from the unwelcome
intrusion. But there may be some

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

confusion here; for the idea of a winding entrance to a house arises
from the desire to keep men at a distance, as well as demons, and to
make a limit between what is public and what is private.

The "secret arrow," *an-tsien*, is a name given to evil influences
coming by a small lane in front of a door, or the lane itself is so
called. To oppose the bad influences travelling along a lane towards an
open door, a stone lion on a pillar, carved with characters indicating
the capability of resistance, is placed opposite the entrance, and it is
thought to be so useful that nearly every lane in Peking is thus
defended. This and similar "protecting shields" are termed *chen-wu*.
Some Buddhist structures are built to act as *chen-wu*. Such are pagodas
and temples. In the same way operate inscriptions and tigers cut in
paper. It is usual to carve stone pillars employed as *chen-wu* with the
words *Tai-shah-shï-kan-tang*, because T‘ai-shan is the most honourable
of mountains, and mountains are a protecting shield to buildings and
graves. The carving of the above sentence (meaning, "This stone from
T‘ai-shan dares to resist") is supposed to constitute a sufficient
barrier.

Among other things that should not be opposite to a house door are a
well, a grindstone, the corner of a wall, a temple, two streets
crossing, and the entrance to a lane.

Among things that protect a house and its inmates is a little image of
Kwan-ti, god of war, erected on the roof. A stone arrow is also employed
for a similar purpose. It is believed to be a defence against the "dark
arrow" of the malignant demon.

Among inscriptions over a door of great efficacy is one in honour of
Kiang T‘ai-kung, a hero of the Chen dynasty—"Kiang T‘ai-kung is here;
there is then no fear," *Kiang-t‘ai-kung-tsai-tsï-pe-wu-king-kü*.

To have a temple behind a house is a most favourable sign. To be on the
east side is also lucky. But to be on the west is bad, and on the north
worse. *Yang-chai*, *yin-chai*, the "light house and dark house," each
has its *feng-shui*.

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

In regard to the origin and history of *feng-shui*, a few notes here
appended may be found useful in the absence of minute information on an
obscure subject.

It professes to be based on the *Yi-king*, where a rude system of nature
is traced by means of a cycle of eight elements, including heaven,
earth, mountains, lakes, thunder, &c. On this are founded methods for
seeking good fortune and avoiding ill. On account of its classical
authority and repute, every fortune-teller naturally claims that his
rules find their origin here.

The real *feng-shui* of the present generation is, however, to be found
rather in the *Han-lung-king* and such works which are of modern date.
The name of this treatise means the "Book for shaking the Dragon." It is
of the last century.

It is a system which has been in course of formation since the Han
dynasty, and has in it Buddhist, Tauist, and Confucian elements, or, as
it should rather be stated, Buddhist and native.

Let us begin with the Buddhist. The very name *feng-shui* has in it a
tinge of Hindoo notions. The Buddhist Hindoos in China taught the Indian
natural philosophy. Their elements were four, namely:—*ti*, "earth;"
*shui*, "water;" *hwo*, "fire;" *feng*, "air." As these agree with the
Greek doctrine of physics, we may perhaps ascribe its origin to Greece
or rather to Babylon, that great centre of ancient civilisation which
deserved still more than Egypt to be called "Mother of the sciences."

Writers on India tell us that the natives of that country, when they
speak of climate, always call it "air and water." <span
id="fr_128"></span>[1](#fn_128.md) Since then the Chinese word *feng*,
"wind," was used by them for air, one of the four elements, it is highly
probable that the Hindoo physics have something to do with the origin of
the name by which the Chinese geomantic doctrine is known.

To illustrate the way in which the old Hindoo philosophers

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

discoursed on the elements, I shall here mention <span
id="fr_129"></span>[1](#fn_129.md) that they speak of white clouds as
having in them more of the element of earth, of black clouds as having
more of water, of red as having more of fire, and of yellow as having
more of air.

Thunder they believe to be caused by the meeting in the clouds of the
wind area with the water area, of the wind area with the earth area, and
of the wind area with the fire area.

Calamities caused by wind, fire, and water have local limits in the
Buddhist universe. Thus fire works destruction no higher than to the
paradise called *Kwang-yin t‘ien*, "The heaven of brightness and
sound." <span id="fr_130"></span>[2](#fn_130.md) So also with the other
elements, each has its sphere and its period of efficiency. The *kalpas*
are terminated by one or other of these powerful elemental forces. By
their interaction the world is formed, changed, destroyed, and renewed.
It was under the influence of such a philosophy that Milton said (for in
his time the Greek doctrine of the elements was still undisturbed in
Europe)—

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">"Air, and ye elements the eldest birth  
  Of nature's womb, that in quaternion run,  
Perpetual circle multiform, and mix  
  And nourish all things, let your ceaseless change  
Vary to your great Maker still new praise."</span>

</div>

The heaven of Brahma is said to have been formed by wind blowing on
water, in which grew up of itself a vast mass of moist matter. On this
again the wind blew, and out of it formed the palace of Brahma, which
exhibited in abundance the most beautiful combinations of the precious
metals and stones of every kind known to man.

The sea is said to have been formed by the mighty winds of heaven
blowing upon the earth till they dug in it a vast hollow. In this was
placed an immense collection

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

of water, which settled itself in its bed and became the ocean.

Here the wind is seen as a great creating agency. *An impersonal actor*
is the aspect in which each of the four elements is regarded by the
Hindoo philosophy of nature. This accords well with the superficial view
of natural phenomena taken by the Eastern Asiatic mind. The Semite and
the believer in the Bible view the events of creation and of universal
nature as caused by God. Science comes into the field of nature, and
finds out what are the second causes operating to produce observed
phenomena. The Christian believer, when convinced of their truth,
accepts the results of science as safe and genuine additions to our
knowledge, and as harmonising with the teachings of religion. With the
Eastern Asiatics it is different. The elemental philosophy of the
ancient Hindoos could not be scientific, nor could it base its system of
nature on a series of patient observations. It was not in the capacity
of the Hindoo to undertake such inquiries. He was content, then, to
imagine where he could not discover. He therefore willingly adopted that
view of nature—probably in its origin Greek, and ultimately
Babylonian—which made of the four elements as many active powers
controlled in their working, not by a conscious will, but by a blind yet
retributive necessity.

It is interesting to note the resemblances between the Hindoo physical
system of the world and that of the Ionian philosophers. Thales of
Miletus, who lived B.C. 600, held that water is the origin of things.
Out of water everything is derived, and to it everything ultimately
returns. Heraclitus of Ephesus believed the one principle which
underlies all phenomena to be fire. The world is formed, he taught, by
evolution from fire; not made by God or by man. This fire is a rational
intelligence controlling the universe. It also is the human soul.
Anaximenes said that the physical principle which originates nature is
air, and all the elements may be resolved into

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

this. Air made dense gave birth to the earth, and from the earth were
formed the heavenly bodies. The air acts by motion impressed on it from
eternity, causing in it alternate rarefaction and compression. This air
he thought to be eternal. Anaximander of Miletus was a friend of Thales.
He held the elements of the world to be simple and unchangeable, and
taught that they formed all things by concurrence with homogeneous
particles already existing. <span id="fr_131"></span>[1](#fn_131.md)

Let it be observed that all these philosophers regarded matter as the
cause of all things. They lived two centuries before Anaxagoras,
Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle, who extended their inquiries into the
world of mind, and taught a system in which either mind in the abstract,
or God, was regarded as the source of the world.

No more do they resemble Pythagoras, who, living early enough to be the
contemporary of some of them, formed a system of his own based on
numbers. The secret soul of the world which causes its various phenomena
is a principle of harmony.

Zeno, founder of the Stoics, coming after Socrates and Plato, went hack
to that principle of the Ionian philosophy which finds the origin of the
universe in physical elements. The universe, he said, comes into being
when the primary substance passes from the state of fire into that of
air, then takes the form of water, and finally throws off both its thick
portions to become earth, and its rarer parts to become air, afterwards
fire. He also held with Heraclitus and with the Hindoos, that the world
passes through successive periods of decay and reformation, that is to
say, the Indian *kalpas*.

There does not seem much danger, then, in ascribing the Hindoo
philosophy of the elements to the Ionian school for its germ. The effect
of Alexander's conquest was felt in India in new views communicated on
mathematics, astronomy, architecture, and physics. Hence we learn why

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

the doctrine of the four elements was so extensively taught by the
Buddhists in Chinese literature of that religion.

According to this view, the *feng-shui* of the Chinese may be traced to
the early Greek philosophy as one of its causes. During the three
centuries before the birth of Christ the region of the Punjab was ruled
for a long period by Greek kings, and it was here that many of the
Buddhist books were written. Some of the most prolific writers of this
religion resided in the Punjab and its neighbourhood during the Greek
domination over Persia, Parthia, Bactria, and a part of North-western
India. What wonder if they proceeded to supplement their system by the
materialistic philosophy of the Ionians? They were pleased with a
cosmogony which had no recourse to the doctrine of a Creator.

The following account of what took place in the eighth century will
illustrate the influence of Buddhism on the geomancy of that time. Sü
Kien, an official of high rank, when about to bury his wife, inquired of
a friend how he should construct the grave with regard to its mound and
limits. His friend told him of a Buddhist priest of the city of
Hwang-cheu, who knew how to connect the affairs of men with those of
demons and spirits. The grave should be deep and narrow; deep for
darkness, and narrow for security. Below the surface twelve feet is the
limit of earth, and eleven feet lower is the commencement of water. The
earth and water regions have each a dragon to take care of them. The
dragon reveals himself in the one case in six years, in the other case
in twelve. If a trench be of ordinary limits, the spirit's path is not
tranquil. The grave should therefore be twenty-four feet deep. Instead
of lime-plaster, use starch. Do not place earthenware pitchers in the
tomb, because they are allied to the element of fire. Do not place gold
in the tomb, lest it should become an elf. Do not place orpiment or
arsenic in the tomb, because they are hot by nature. Let the grass and
trees on the tomb be withered and not fresh.

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Melt iron into the
shape of cows and pigs; they will keep the two dragons in subjection.
Smooth and clean jade-stone has the power to harmonise the hundred
spirits of nature. Place it in the tomb to illuminate the path of the
spirits.

As a further proof of Hindoo influence on the Chinese mind in the
formation of the circle of ideas known as the *feng-shui*, *t‘ien-wen*,
and *ti-li*, may be mentioned the names Rahu <span
id="fr_132"></span>[1](#fn_132.md) and Ketu, to denote the genius of the
ascending and descending nodes of the moon's orbit. Also the use of the
triangle, connecting three points of the horizon a hundred and twenty
degrees apart, in casting the horoscope is common to China and India.
Then also from the mention in books of geomancy of the Sumeru mountain
as the centre of the world, it is evident that they have borrowed from
India.

It was for such portions of Buddhist teaching that the Chinese mind had
a special affinity. The Chinese are fond of materialism. As Shakyamuni
taught Buddhism, it was an ascetic morality. His followers soon gave it
a decidedly metaphysical cast. Then followed the materialistic phase,
when magic, astrology, and geomancy were developed. The Hindoo Buddhists
who taught in China brought with them the whole educational system of
their time. In it was included much belonging to the three branches of
superstition just mentioned.

In accordance with this view *feng-shui* as now believed is a very
modern thing, and subsequent to the spread in the country of Hindoo
thought. The mixing of Indian with Chinese ideas produced both the Sung
philosophy <span id="fr_133"></span>[2](#fn_133.md)

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

and the modern *feng-shui*, which has been chiefly developed in the
present dynasty.

I now proceed to the native element in the *feng-shui*. This may be
made, so far as it is physical, to include astrology and the doctrine of
starry influences and the elements as taught in the native Chinese
literature. The nine fancied stars which move about in the air, and are
either lucky or malignant according to circumstances, must here be
referred to. They form an extensive portion of the geomancer's system of
follies. All this may be described as the Tauist part of the
*feng-shui*.

After this a few words must be added respecting the moral or Confucian
element in the *feng-shui*, and the effect of the example of
distinguished Confucianists in encouraging popular superstition on this
subject.

After a brief allusion to the north star and the chief northern
constellations, the writer of the work called *Han-lung-king* goes on to
describe minutely the influence of the nine stars, or influences, which
move through the atmosphere and cause prosperity and adversity to men.

The first is *Tan-lang*, "Covetous wolf." It has twelve characteristics.
Of these five are lucky and seven unlucky. The lucky are pointed, round,
flat, straight, and small. The unlucky are not in the middle, crooked,
one-sided, precipitous, turned over, broken, and empty. The pointed is
shaped like a bamboo sprout. The round is complete on all sides. The
flat is perfectly level like a lying silkworm. The straight indicates
absence of one-sidedness. The other characteristics are the appearance
of being ready to fall over, the presentation of a precipitous cliff, of
the breaking off of a watercourse, hollowing into caves, and so on.

Diagrams in accordance with these indications are given of neighbouring
hills which are supposed to exert a corresponding influence on a grave
according to their shape. The writer adds in the rough poetry of books
such as this, "Men say the covetous wolf is good, not knowing that pure
and chaste desires are still more important. With

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

all the advantages derivable from the covetous wolf, without pureness
and honour, no person, even if he acquired rank, would attain to the
three highest, anciently known as the San-kung." The prevailing element
is wood.

Looking at the diagram only, the reader sees a conical hill or
elevation, a mushroom shaped outline, and a series of four or five
conical hills presented in half profile. These appearances all prove the
presence of the "covetous wolf."

The second moving star is *Chü-men*," Great door." The form loved by
this spirit is flat at the top and square on the sides. When a hill
presents the appearance of a square or trapezium with the upper line
horizontal, the phenomenon is caused by the presence of this influence.
Wood is the prevailing element.

The third star is *Lu-tsun*, "Rank preserved." Nine shapes in hills mark
its presence. Its favourite shape has a flat top, a cylindrical body
like a drum, and at the bottom it spreads into five branches like the
toes of the human feet. Properly it should be a malignant star, because
its shape partakes of a spotted and mixed nature. But it is able to
adapt itself to conditions which secure good luck. It causes men to
attain the lower ranks of promotion, such as the chief magistracy of
cities of the second and third ranks, and, in certain circumstances,
gives the control of troops or of literary examinations. The five-toed
appearance is represented in the map as sometimes three or four toed.
There are also other modifications. Earth is the ruling element.

The fourth star, [Wen-chü](errata.htm#5.md), "Literary windings," belongs
to the element of water. It loves the shape of the snake when seen
moving with three or four bends of the body. The "Men of the Dragon,"
*Lung-kia*, as the geomancers call themselves, can detect the presence
of this influence in the contour of hills. It has, like the other stars,
a normal and several occasional shapes. When thin, it is the snake
proper; if thicker, it is a caterpillar; if still wider, it becomes a
cast net. The geomancers profess to attend

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

to the points of bending in the snake, because these indicate the line
of water-flow and of the dragon's influence.

The fifth star is *Lien-cheng*, "Purity and uprightness." Its element is
fire. The ancients highly valued it, says the manual, and called it Red
flag and "Brilliant vapour," *Yau-k‘i*. It likes a lofty position,
rugged heights, umbrella folds, and the shape of a flattened ball. One
form it assumes is that of the "Dragon tower," *Lung-leu*, which is a
conical elevation, overtopping all beside it. Another is that of the
"Palace of precious things," *Pau-tien*, in forming which several cones
of equal height are seen in parallel rows. The imaginations of the
geomancers lead them also to fancy the appearance in rocky outline of
the tortoise and the serpent guarding some little mountain gorge. This
is considered to be an indication of the best kind of dragon influence,
for here passes some water channel.

The sixth star is *Wu-chü*, "Military windings." Its element is metal.
It is round at the top and broad at the bottom, like a bell or an
inverted cooking-pan. In judging of the hill shapes that belong to this
star, it is easy to mistake the demon for the dragon. This is specially
the case when the shape observed is that of an inverted spoon, the spoon
being like the tail of the Great Bear, or rather the "Seven stars,"
usually called *Pe-teu*, in their entireness. The demon and the dragon
are both in the habit of assuming the shape of an inverted "dust-pan"
(*ki*), an inverted "spoon" (*sho*), and an inverted "palm," *chang*
(palm of the hand). The skill of the geomancer is displayed in
distinguishing the appearances. The demon may affect any one of the nine
stars; and, as there is the fourfold form, square, round, crooked, and
straight, there may be thirty-six shapes to be considered. Generally
speaking the locality of the demon is behind the "grave site" (*hiue*),
and the corresponding genius in front of it is called *kwan*, "officer."
If the demon and the genius of office look at the tomb site, it is a
lucky sign. If they turn their backs to it, the dragon of prosperity
will not take up his place there.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

The seventh star, *Po-kiun*, "Breaker of the phalanx," is referred to
metal. It has one normal and four peculiar shapes. The normal shape is
that of three round-headed cones, seen one rising above another like the
folds of a flag when carried by a person walking. Below it has
ugly-looking points like spear points. Persons seeing these conclude too
hastily that this star is malignant and unlucky. It is so, but in
certain circumstances it may become highly serviceable for acquiring
riches and rank. Consider what stars it corresponds to in the sky. Its
power is formed by the descending influence of the "Three terraces,"
*San-t‘ai*, three pairs of stars in our Great Bear. Upon high hills the
celestial essence of these stars collects, and becomes formed into six
terrestrial or atmospheric stars, called *Lu-fu*, the "Six palaces."
They are all mingled with the influences of the five elements.

STARS OF THE SIX HOUSES.

<div align="center">

|     |                                   |                                     |                                  |
|-----|-----------------------------------|-------------------------------------|----------------------------------|
|     | <span class="small">Shape.</span> | <span class="small">Element.</span> | <span class="small">Name.</span> |
| 1\. | Round                             | Metal                               | *T‘ai-yang*, "Great light"       |
| 2\. | Oblong, round                     | Metal                               | *T‘ai-yin*, "Lesser light."      |
| 3\. | Round head, long body             | Wood                                | *Tsï-k‘i*, "Purple vapour."      |
| 4\. | Alive, crooked, moving            | Water                               | *Yue-pu*, "Moon disturber."      |
| 5\. | Square                            | Earth                               | *Ki*, "Plan."                    |
| 6\. | Conical                           | Fire                                | *Lo*, "Net."                     |

</div>

The eighth star, *Tso-fu*, "Left assistant," is under the influence of
the element of metal. Its normal shape is that of a head with a napkin
wrapped round it, in front high, behind low. This star is a servant to
the great dragon, who gives shape to the constellations of astronomy.
*Fu* (the eighth) and *Pi* are two stars seen near α in Hercules, called
by the Chinese *Ti-tso*, "Emperor's throne," and by European
astronomers, *Ras Algethi*. On account of their proximity to the throne,
it is assumed that these stars confer honour on men by their influence
if happily directed.

The ninth star, *Yeu-pi*, "Right assistant," has no fixed shape. Its
element is water. Flatness is its favourite

<span id="page_349">p. 349</span>

characteristic. Where hills break off and give place to the plain, it
loves to be. It rules even surfaces. It is therefore called *Yin-yau*,
"Hidden glory." It is also fond of narrow threads and dim vestiges of
things. The snake creeping through grass, the fish leaping on sand, the
spider's thread, the traces of horses' hoofs, and the strings of the
lyre are presided over by this star. It likes that which is half real
and half unreal, and which is scarcely visible to the eye. The aid of
this star is said to be particularly valuable in cases of doubtful
*feng-shui*. The unskilled geomancer will say, "This is a level plain, I
can make nothing of it; I need some elevation to guide me in the
diagnosis of the neighbourhood." He forgets that water flows not only
down a hill but even on a plain, and that there is a difference of level
there. One inch is enough for the true "discerner of the dragon." Or the
tyro in the mysteries of the *feng-shui* folly may say, "This ground is
wet. The fault is fatal. You must not bury your dead here." Fool that he
is, he perceives not that to decide so hastily is most unwise. Does not
the wetness come from an unusual flow of water? When the water
disappears, this place will be soon as dry as those which are higher.
The Right assistant loves this state of doubt, and hence the differences
in opinion between geomancers respecting the characteristics of the same
spot or region.

It may be said generally in regard to the nine stellar influences that,
when seeking for a lucky hollow, you find, for example, here the
appearance of a breast, there of a swallow's nest, here a ploughshare,
there a comb, here the turned-up hand, there the spear or lance, and
there a hanging lanthorn; these effects of starry influence point out
the true nature of the desired "hollow" (*hiue*). The dragon makes the
hollow, and in seeking it the correct indications of the dragon's action
must be followed.

It would be of little use to follow the Chinese geomancers further into
the lucky and unlucky effects of these stars, their division of hills
into "male" (*hiung*) and

<span id="page_350">p. 350</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> "female" (*ts‘ï*),
into "patriarch" (*tsu*) and "small hills" (*siau-feng*), and into
"branches" (*chï*) and "stems" (*kan*). Enough has been said.

This whole doctrine of starry influences may be readily traced back to
the system of the Tauists in the Han period. Hwai An-tsï, Wei Pe-yang,
Pau Po-tsï, and others, taught just such a philosophy of nature as might
give origin to the more modern views of the geomancers. Astrology and
alchemy were then in their glory. The former of these influenced
geomancy and encouraged popular belief in moving starry influences. From
whence came that astrology? The answer should be from Western Asia and
India, but full data on this point are wanting. Not only the imaginary
stars of the geomancers must be traced to the Han period, but all those
star genii and demons of the imperial calendar which are popularly
believed to be in perpetual movement in people's houses, in streets, and
in the air, may be assigned to the same origin. It was then that the
habit began in China of regarding the stars as movable beings regulating
the affairs of kingdoms, cities, and individuals. Though the names of
the nine stars are new, they are identified by the geomancers with the
seven stars of the Great Bear and two neighbouring stars. They move up
and down in the ether of space, and are either visible as individual
stars, or, if invisible, traverse the world each with an elemental force
of its own, to give form, character, and vigour to those parts of nature
to which they attach themselves.

The remaining element in *feng-shui* which now comes to be considered is
moral. The choice of a grave is to be made in accordance with the rules
of geomancy, because filial piety requires it, and it is sanctioned, it
is said, by the example of the sages.

To prove, however, that Confucius himself believed at all in any of the
nonsense connected with geomancy is very difficult. It is said in the
biography of the sage by Sï-ma Chien that, not knowing where his
father's grave

<span id="page_351">p. 351</span>

was, he inquired of the mother of a friend. Learning from her the
locality, he buried his mother there. In the *Li-ki* it is said of
Confucius that he was at first unwilling to make a mound over the grave,
because the ancients did not. At last he consented to carry out the
suggestion, but the person left in charge of this duty soon came to the
sage to announce in an agitated manner that rain had fallen and reduced
the mound to a level. Confucius regretted that he had allowed himself to
depart from primitive simplicity. These little incidents seem to show
that he had no notion of geomancy, and that he loved simplicity.

In early times it was enough for emperors to be buried on high mountains
under a large mound, while feudatory princes were content with hillocks,
and the common people found their last resting-place in the plain. There
was no thought then of the course of water flowing past the tomb.

An ancient said, "I have been of no benefit to mankind while living. Let
me not injure them when I am dead. Choose my burying place where the
earth yields no food for man." Others have said, "If a man dies on the
hills, let him be buried on the hills. If he dies in the lowlands, let
him be buried in the lowlands." This was said with a view to economy. It
would be a useless expense to convey the body to a distance. For the
same reason another noted person of the Han period ordered his son to
bury him without a coffin in a grave dug in the ground. In the T‘ang
dynasty a high officer gave directions that he should be buried in a
plain manner, without monument or stone of any kind, and over his grave
the villagers were to be allowed to plough and sow as of old.

Such dying instructions as these have been carefully preserved by the
Chinese literati, who felt that they were more in accordance with true
wisdom than the follies which afterwards grew into vogue. They show the
proper standpoint of the genuine Confucianist. With him everything must
give way to moral considerations.

In arguing against *feng-shui* and the other superstitions

<span id="page_352">p. 352</span>

of the Chinese, we ought to find on this ground a fast friend in the
true follower of Confucius. The freedom of Confucius from superstition
is one of the best proofs of the greatness of his mind, and a main cause
of his ascendancy over the literary class. His utterances on the danger
of excessive reverence to the *kwei-shen* have been a barrier against
Buddhism, and prevented the extension of its soporific influence over
the whole nation. The literati have thus been kept in an independent and
self-sustained position, and have not become quite overwhelmed by this
intrusive foreign element. Hence, the scions of scholarly families and
students who have read extensively are trained in a school of ideas
antagonistic to superstition. These men, therefore, may be appealed to
in aid of our opposition to the *feng-shui*. They are ashamed of it.
They disown it if brought in argument to close quarters. They only
comply with it from an unwillingness to act contrary to custom. The
great minds among them avoid even the appearance of compliance, but
these are not many.

Considering that the enlightened Chinese are thus disposed, there could
be no harm done by a studied attack on the whole system of geomancy in a
book prepared for the purpose. It would not be offensive to the true
Confucianist, and it would afford opportunity to teach much good
philosophy and truer views of nature than those to which they have been
accustomed. But perhaps the whole structure is so flimsy that it will
fall of itself, without laying siege to it or directing the ordnance of
argument against it. The shining of true science may pale its
ineffectual fire, and cause it to disappear as a thing of darkness,
without special effort to bring about its extinction.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_124"></span>[327:1](cbu26.htm#fr_124.md) Geomancy is properly
divination by means of lines or points drawn on the earth. The Chinese
*feng-shui* may be called "geomancy," because it divines by means of
lines noticed in the shape of streams and hills.

<span id="fn_125"></span>[330:1](cbu26.htm#fr_125.md) In Southern China
this bank is carried around the north, east, and west sides.

<span id="fn_126"></span>[332:1](cbu26.htm#fr_126.md) This is the *karma*,
which is essential to the Buddhist metempsychosis.

<span id="fn_127"></span>[334:1](cbu26.htm#fr_127.md) See Essay by Rev. Dr.
Yates.

<span id="fn_128"></span>[339:1](cbu26.htm#fr_128.md) See Sir James
Martin's *Influence of Tropical Climates on Europeans*.

<span id="fn_129"></span>[340:1](cbu26.htm#fr_129.md) *Fa-yuen-chu-lin*,
chap. iv. This work is a Buddhist cyclopædia of the T‘ang dynasty.

<span id="fn_130"></span>[340:2](cbu26.htm#fr_130.md) *Fa-yuen-chu-lin*,
chap. i.

<span id="fn_131"></span>[342:1](cbu26.htm#fr_131.md) Smith's *Dictionary
of Greek and Roman biography and Mythology*.

<span id="fn_132"></span>[344:1](cbu26.htm#fr_132.md) In Chinese, *Lo-heu*
for *La-hu*. The twenty-eight constellations of the Chinese zodiac were
identified with the Hindoo *Nakshatras* in the Han dynasty.

<span id="fn_133"></span>[344:2](cbu26.htm#fr_133.md) It would be
interesting to trace the effect of Greek and Indian materialistic
philosophy on the formation of the modern Chinese cosmogony. It is not
uncommon for doctrines to be attributed to the Chinese as a nation which
only belong to a particular modern sect of the literati. While some
writers attack the Chinese for beliefs which they do not hold, such an
examination of the modern native philosophy might prove useful.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XXII. Buddhist Phraseology in Relation to Christian
Teaching](cbu27.md)
