<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb09)  [Next](spb11) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### THE TEN COMMANDMENTS.

Exodus xx. 1–17.

And God spake all these words, saying.

1\. I am the Lord thy God, who brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage.

2\. Thou shalt have no other gods before me. Thou shalt not make unto
thee a graven image; nor the form of anything that is in heaven above,
or that is in the earth beneath, or that is in the water under the
earth; thou shalt not bow down thyself unto them, nor serve them: for I
the Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children,

<span id="page_106">p. 106</span>

upon the third and upon the fourth generation, unto them that hate me:
and shewing lovingkindness to the thousandth generation, unto them that
love me and keep my commandments.

3\. Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the
Lord will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain.

4\. Remember the sabbath day to keep it holy. Six days shalt thou labor,
and do all thy work: but the seventh day is a sabbath unto the Lord thy
God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy
daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maidservant, nor thy cattle, nor thy
stranger that is within thy gates: for in six days the Lord made heaven
and earth, the sea and all that is therein, and rested on the seventh
day: wherefore the Lord blessed the sabbath day and hallowed it.

5\. Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee.

6\. Thou shalt not murder.

7\. Thou shalt not commit adultery.

8\. Thou shalt not steal.

9\. Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor.

<span id="page_107">p. 107</span>

10\. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor s house, thou shalt not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his manservant nor his maidservant, nor his ox, nor
his ass, nor any thing that is thy neighbor's.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Thirteen Principles of the Faith](spb11)

</div>
