<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb11)  [Next](spb13.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### AFTERNOON SERVICE FOR WEEKDAYS.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee.
(Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy is the people, whose
God is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever
and ever.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is
unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy splendor, and on thy marvellous deeds, will
I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount
thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in
thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great
lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones
shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory
of his kingdom.

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth
throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are
bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest them their food in due
season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he
destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord; and let all flesh bless
his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise
ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

<span class="small">*On Fast Days the Scroll of the Law is taken from
the Ark, and the portion of the Law beginning Vy’chal is read*.</span>

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

*The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years, [p.
123](#page_123.md), is to be said standing*.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence say:—*

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us
in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day of Passover
say:—*

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy,

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest
thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of
mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who killest and
quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

*During the Ten Days of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy
rememberest thy creatures unto life?</span>

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead. <span id="fr_10"></span>[\*](#fn_8.md)

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

*When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy
God," [p. 114](#page_114.md)*.

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

*Reader*.—Those over against them say, Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed he the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God
and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

Thou favorest man with knowledge, and teachest mortals understanding. O
favor us with knowledge, understanding and discernment from thee.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, gracious Giver of knowledge.

Cause us to return, O our Father, unto thy Law; draw us near, O our
King, unto thy service, and bring us back in perfect repentance unto thy
presence. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who delightest in repentance.

Forgive us, O our Father, for we have sinned; pardon us, O our King, for
we have transgressed;

(*On Fast Days Selichoth are inserted here*.)

for thou dost pardon and forgive. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who art
gracious, and dost abundantly forgive.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

Look upon our affliction and plead our cause, and redeem us speedily for
thy name's sake; for thou art a mighty Redeemer. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, the Redeemer of Israel.

*On Fast Days the Reader here says "Answer us," etc., [p.
51](spb05.htm#page_51.md), and concludes thus:—*

<span class="small">Blessed art thou, O Lord, who answerest in time of
trouble.</span>

Heal us, O Lord, and we shall be healed; save us and we shall be saved;
for thou art our praise. Vouchsafe a perfect healing to all our
wounds; <span id="fr_11"></span>[\*](#fn_9.md) for thou, almighty King, art
a faithful and merciful Physician. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who healest
the sick of thy people Israel.

Bless this year unto us, O Lord our God, together with every kind of the
produce thereof, for our welfare; give a blessing

*During the Winter Season <span id="fr_12"></span>[\*\*](#fn_10.md)
substitute for the last sentence:*

<span class="small">Give dew and rain for a blessing upon the face of
the earth.</span>

upon the face of the earth. O satisfy us with thy goodness, and bless
our year like

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

other good years. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest the years.

Sound the great horn for our freedom; lift up the ensign to gather our
exiles, and gather us from the four corners of the earth. Blessed art
thou, O Lord, who gatherest the banished ones of thy people Israel.

Restore our judges as at the first, and our counsellors as at the
beginning; remove from us grief and suffering; reign thou over us, O
Lord, thou alone, in lovingkindness and tender mercy, and justify us in
judgment. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the King who lovest righteousness
and judgment.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the King of Judgment.</span>

And for slanderers let there be no hope, and let all wickedness perish
as in a moment; let all thine enemies be speedily cut off, and the
dominion of arrogance do thou uproot and crush,

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

cast down and humble speedily in our days. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
breakest the enemies and humblest the arrogant.

Towards the righteous and the pious, towards the elders of thy people
the house of Israel, towards the remnant of their scribes, towards the
proselytes of righteousness, and towards us also may thy tender mercies
be stirred, O Lord our God; grant a good reward unto all who faithfully
trust in thy name; set our portion with them for ever, so that we may
not be put to shame; for we have trusted in thee. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, the stay and trust of the righteous.

And to Jerusalem, thy city, return in mercy, and dwell therein as thou
hast spoken; rebuild it soon in our days as an everlasting building, and
speedily set up therein the throne of David. <span
id="fr_13"></span>[\*](#fn_11.md) Blessed art thou, O Lord, who rebuildest
Jerusalem.

<span id="page_118">p. 118</span>

Speedily cause the offspring of David, thy servant, to flourish, and let
his horn be exalted by thy salvation, because we wait for thy salvation
all the day. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who causest the horn of salvation
to flourish.

Hear our voice, O Lord our God; spare us and have mercy upon us, and
accept our prayer tin mercy and favor; for thou art a God who hearkenest
unto prayers and supplications: from thy presence, O our King, turn us
not

<span id="page_119">p. 119</span>

empty away; <span id="fr_14"></span>[\*](#fn_12.md) for thou hearkenest in
mercy to the prayer of thy people Israel. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
hearkenest unto prayer.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

*On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the
following is added:—*

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be
accepted before thee, with

<span id="page_120">p. 120</span>

the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah the son or David thy servant,
of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy people the house of Israel,
bringing deliverance and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy,
life and peace on this day of

*On New Moon say—*

the New Moon.

*On Passover—*

the Feast of Unleavened Bread.

*On Tabernacles—*

the Feast of Tabernacles.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us
for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and
mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us;
for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and
merciful God and King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

*Congregation in an undertone:—*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and the Creator of all
things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and
holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us: so
mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather
<span id="page_121">p. 121</span> our exiles to thy holy courts to
observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect
heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee Blessed be the God to whom
thanksgivings are due.

</div>

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives

<span id="page_121">p. 121</span>

which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy
charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy
wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening, morn
and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou,
merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped
in thee.

*On Chanukah and Purim say:—*

<span class="small">We thank thee, etc., [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63.md)</span>

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence say:—*

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

<span id="page_122">p. 122</span>

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the
sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless
thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace

*During the Ten Days of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">In the book of life, blessing, peace and good
sustenance may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all
thy people the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed
art thou, O Lord, who makest peace.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy, people Israel with peace.

<span class="small">O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from
speaking guile; and to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my
soul be unto all as the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul
pursue thy commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make
their counsel of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the
sake of thy name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the
sake of thy holiness do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy
beloved ones may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer
me. Let the words of my mouth and</span>

<span id="page_123">p. 123</span>

the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my Rock
and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make
peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence, Friday excepted, say Our Father, Our
King, [p. 67](spb05.htm#page_67.md). Then say the following; but if
Tachanun is omitted, the Reader, immediately after the Amidah, says the
whole Kaddish [p. 125](#page_125.md)*.

<span class="small">And David said unto Gad, I am troubled exceedingly;
let us fall, I pray thee, into the hand of the Lord, for his mercies are
many; but let me not fall into the hand of man.</span>

O thou who art merciful and gracious, I have sinned before thee. O Lord,
full of mercy, have mercy upon me and receive my supplications.

Psalm vi.

O Lord, rebuke me not in thine anger: neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure. Be gracious unto me, O Lord; for I am withered away: O
Lord, heal me; for my bones are troubled. My soul also is sore troubled:
and thou, O Lord, how long? Return, O Lord, deliver my soul: save me for
thy lovingkindness’

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

sake. For in death there is no remembrance of thee: in the grave who
shall give thee thanks? I am weary with my groaning; every night I make
my bed to swim; I melt away my couch with my tears. Mine eye wasteth
away because of grief; it waxeth old because of all mine adversaries.
Depart from me, all ye workers of iniquity; for the Lord hath heard the
voice of my weeping. The Lord hath heard my supplication; the Lord will
receive my prayer. All mine enemies shall he ashamed and sore troubled:
they shall turn back, they shall be ashamed suddenly.

O Guardian of Israel, guard the remnant of Israel, and suffer not Israel
to perish, who say, Hear, O Israel.

O Guardian of an only nation, guard the remnant of an only nation, and
suffer not an only nation to perish, who proclaim the unity of thy name,
saying, The Lord our God, the Lord is One.

O Guardian of a holy nation, guard the remnant of a holy nation, and
suffer not a holy nation to perish, who thrice repeat the three-fold
sanctification unto the Holy One.

O Thou who art propitiated by prayers for mercy, and art conciliated by
supplications, be thou propitious and reconciled to an afflicted
generation; for there is none that helpeth.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

<span class="small">Our Father, our King, be gracious unto us and answer
us, for we have no good works of our own; deal with us in charity and
lovingkindness, and save us.</span>

As for us, we know not what to do; but our eyes. are upon thee.
Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy lovingkindnesses; for they
have been ever of old. Let thy lovingkindness, O Lord, be upon us,
according as we have waited for thee. Remember not against us the
iniquities of our ancestors: let thy tender mercies speedily come to
meet us; for we are brought very low. Be gracious unto us, O Lord, be
gracious unto us; for we are sated to the full with contempt. In wrath
remember to be merciful. For he knoweth our frame; he remembereth that
we are dust. Help us, O God of our salvation, for the sake of the glory
of thy name; and deliver us, and pardon our sins, for thy name's sake.

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One. blessed be he:

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

though he be high above all the blessings and hymns praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

*Reader*.—May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by
their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Reader*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Reader*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may ne make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to
him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us
like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other
families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as
unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee
and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy
One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the
foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens
above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is
our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none
besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day,
and lay it to thine heart,

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

that the Lord he is God in heaven above and upon the earth beneath:
there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold
the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the
earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be
perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of
flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the
wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and
know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before
thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name
let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do
thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is
thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glory; as it is written in
thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever. And it is said, And the
Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall the Lord be
One, and his name One.

*The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner*.

*Mourner*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Mourner*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

*Mourner*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and
honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be
he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Mourner*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Mourner*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_8"></span>[113:\*](spb12.htm#fr_10.md) *Reader*.—We will
sanctify thy name in the world even as they sanctify it in "the highest
heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[115:\*](spb12.htm#fr_11.md) *The following Prayer
for a Sick Person may be introduced here:—*

May it be thy will, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, speedily to
send a perfect healing from heaven, a healing of soul and body unto the
sick . . . among the other sick of Israel.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[115:\*\*](spb12.htm#fr_12.md) *From the Fourth of
December until the First Day of Passover*.

<span id="fn_11"></span>[117:\*](spb12.htm#fr_13.md) *On the Fast of the
Ninth of Ab the following is added:—*

Comfort, O Lord our God, the mourners of Zion, and the mourners of
Jerusalem, and the city <span id="page_118">p. 118</span> that is in
mourning, laid waste, despised and desolate; in mourning for that she is
childless, laid waste as to her dwellings, despised in the downfall of
her glory, and desolate through the loss of her inhabitants: she sitteth
with her head covered like a barren woman who hath not borne. Legions
have devoured her; worshippers of strange gods have possessed her: they
have put thy people Israel to the sword, and in wilfulness have slain
the loving ones of the Most High. Therefore let Zion weep bitterly, and
Jerusalem give forth her voice. O my heart, my heart! how it grieveth
for the slain! My bowels, my bowels! how they yearn for the slain! For
thou, O Lord, didst consume her with fire; and with fire thou wilt in
future restore her, as it is said, As for me, I will be unto her, saith
the Lord, a wall of fire round about, and I will be a glory in the midst
of her. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who comfortest Zion and rebuildest
Jerusalem.

"Speedily," etc.

<span id="fn_12"></span>[119:\*](spb12.htm#fr_14.md) *On Fast Days the
Congregation here say the following:—*

Answer us, O Lord, answer us on this day of the fast of our humiliation,
for we are in great trouble. Turn not to our wickedness; conceal not thy
face from us, and hide not thyself from our supplication. Be near, we
entreat thee, unto our cry; let thy lovingkindness be a comfort to us;
even before we call unto thee answer us, according as it is said, And it
shall come to pass that, before they call, I will answer; while they
‚are yet speaking, I will hear; for thou, O Lord, art he who answereth
in time of trouble, who delivereth and rescueth in all times of trouble
and distress;

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Evening Service for Weekdays and the Termination of the
Sabbath](spb13.md)

</div>
