<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb18)  [Next](spb20.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_226">p. 226</span>

### ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR SABBATHS.

*For the Additional Service on the Intermediate Sabbath of a Festival
see Service for the Festivals*.

*The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," [p.
237](#page_237.md), is said standing*.

<span class="small">O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall
declare thy praise.</span>

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in
life, and inscribe us in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living
God.</span>

O King, Helper, Saviour and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the
First day of Passover say:—*

<span class="small">Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to
fall.</span>

<span id="page_227">p. 227</span>

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy
rememberest thy creatures unto life?</span>

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead. <span id="fr_21"></span>[\*](#fn_19.md)

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence, conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

<span id="page_228">p. 228</span>

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

*Reader*.—His glory filleth the universe: his ministering angels ask one
another, Where is the place of his glory? Those over against them say,
Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—From his place may he turn in mercy and be gracious unto a
people who, evening and morning, twice every day, proclaim with
constancy the unity of his name, saying in love, Hear—

*Cong*.—Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

*Reader*.—One is our God; he is our Father; he is our King; he is our
Saviour; and he of his mercy will let us hear a second time, in the
presence of all living (his promise), "To be to you for a God."

*Cong*.—"I am the Lord your God."

*Reader*.—And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart from

<span id="page_229">p. 229</span>

our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God and King. Blessed
art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the last Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

 <span id="fr_22"></span>[\*](#fn_20.md) Thou didst institute the Sabbath,
and didst accept its offerings; thou didst command its special
obligations with the order of its drink offerings. They that find
delight in it shall inherit glory for everlasting; they that taste it
are worthy of life; while such as love its teachings have chosen true
greatness. Already from Sinai they were commanded concerning it; and
thou hast also commanded us, O Lord our God,

<span id="page_230">p. 230</span>

to bring thereon the additional offering of the Sabbath as is meet. May
it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to lead us up in
joy unto our land, and to plant us within our borders, where we will
prepare unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the
continual offerings according to their order, and the additional
offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offering of
this Sabbath day we will prepare and offer up unto thee in love,
according to the precept of thy

<span id="page_231">p. 231</span>

will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through the hand of
Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:

And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year, without blemish,
and two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering,
mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt
offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the
drink offering thereof.

They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy
kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them

<span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

shall be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou
didst find pleasure in the seventh day. and didst hallow it; thou didst
call it the desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy
commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy
goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve
thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let

<span id="page_233">p. 233</span>

us inherit thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest
thereon. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

<span id="page_234">p. 234</span>

*Congregation in an undertone:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings
be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and
hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to
preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy
statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing
that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings
are due.</span>

</div>

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto
thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy
miracles, which are daily with us, and for thy wonders and thy benefits,
which are wrought at all times, evening, morn and noon. O thou who art
all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou, merciful Being, whose
lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped in thee.

*On Chanukah say, "We thank thee also," etc. [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63.md)*.

<span id="page_235">p. 235</span>

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

<span class="small">O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a
happy life.</span>

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

*At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is
introduced:—*

<span class="small">Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the
three-fold blessing of thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant,
which was spoken by Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as
it is said, The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face
to shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face
unto thee, and give thee peace.</span>

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us
and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us
together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy
countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law

<span id="page_236">p. 236</span>

of life, lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and
peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all
tinges and in every hour with thy peace.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good [sustenance](errata.htm#3.md)
may we be remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people
the house of Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth

<span id="page_237">p. 237</span>

and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before thee, O Lord, my
Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he
make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings, praises and consolations, which are
uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

*Reader*.—May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by
their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

<span id="page_238">p. 238</span>

*Reader*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord who made heaven and earth.

*Reader*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may be make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

There is none like our God: none like our Lord.

There is none like our King: none like our Savior.

Who is like our God: who is like our Lord? Who is like our King: who is
like our Savior?

We will give thanks unto our God: we will give thanks unto our Lord.

We will give thanks unto our King: we will give thanks unto our Savior?

Blessed be our God: blessed be our Lord. Blessed be our King: blessed be
our Savior. Thou art our God: thou art our Lord. Thou art our King: thou
art our Savior. Thou art he unto whom our fathers burnt incense of
spices.

<span id="page_239">p. 239</span>

Talmud Babli: Treatise Cerithoth 6, a.

The compound forming the incense <span id="fr_23"></span>[\*](#fn_21.md)
consisted of balm, onycha, galbanum and frankincense, in quantities
weighing seventy manehs each; of myrrh, cassia, spikenard and saffron,
each sixteen manehs by weight; of costus twelve, of aromatic bark three,
and of cinnamon nine manehs; of lye obtained from a species of leek,
nine kabs; of Cyprus wine three seahs and three kabs: though, if Cyprus
wine was not procurable, old white wine might be used; of salt of Sodom
the fourth part of a kab, and of the herb Maaleh Ashan a minute
quantity. R. Nathan says, a minute quantity was also required of the
odoriferous herb Cippath, that grew on the banks of the Jordan; if,
however, one added honey to the mixture, he rendered the incense unfit
for sacred use, while he who, in preparing it, omitted one of its
necessary ingredients, was liable to the penalty of death. Rabban
Simeon, son of Gamaliel, says, the balm is a resin that exudes from the
wood of the balsam tree. The lye obtained from a species of leek was
rubbed over the onycha to improve it, while the Cyprus wine was used to
steep it in, so that its odor might be more pungent.

*Mishnah: End of Treatise Tamid*.

These were the Psalms which the Levites used to recite in the Temple—

On the first day of the week they used to recite (Psalm xxiv.), The
earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof; the world and they that
dwell therein.

On the second day (Psalm xlviii.), Great is the Lord and exceedingly to
be praised, in the city of our God, in his holy mountain.

<span id="page_240">p. 240</span>

On the third day (Psalm lxxxii.), God standeth in the congregation of
the mighty; he judgeth among the judges.

On the fourth day (Psalm xciv.), God of vengeance, Lord, God of
vengeance, shine forth.

On the fifth day (Psalm lxxxi.), Exult aloud unto God our strength;
shout for joy unto the God of Jacob.

On the sixth day (Psalm xciii.), The Lord reigneth; he hath robed him in
majesty; the Lord hath robed him, yea, he hath girded himself with
strength: the world also is set firm, that it cannot be moved.

On the Sabbath (Psalm xcii.), A psalm, a song for the Sabbath Day. It is
the psalm and song also for the hereafter, for the day which will be
wholly a Sabbath, and will bring rest in life everlasting.

Talmud Babli. End of Treatise Berachoth.

R. Eleazer said in the name of R. Chanina, The disciples of the sages
increase peace throughout the world, as it is said, And all thy children
shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall be the peace of thy
children. Read not here *banayich*, thy children (or disciples), but
*bonayich*, thy builders.—Great peace have they who love thy Law; and
there is no stumbling for them. Peace be within thy rampart, prosperity
within thy palaces. For my brethren and companions’ sake, I would fain
speak peace concerning thee. For the sake of the house of the Lord our
God I would seek thy good. The Lord will give strength unto his people;
the Lord will bless his people with peace.

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to
him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us
like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us

<span id="page_241">p. 241</span>

like other families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a
portion as unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend
the knee and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings,
the Holy One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid
the foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens
above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is
our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none
besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day,
and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and
upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold
the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the
earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be
perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of
flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the
wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and
know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before
thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name
let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do
thou reign over them speedily, and for ever and ever. For the kingdom is
thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign in glom; as it is written in
thy Law, The Lord shall reign for ever

<span id="page_242">p. 242</span>

and ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be King over all the earth:
in that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

*The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner*.

And now, I pray thee, let the power of the Lord be great, according as
thou hast spoken. Remember, O Lord, thy tender mercies and thy
lovingkindnesses; for they have been ever of old.

*Mourner*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Mourner*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Mourner*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and
honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be
he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Mourner*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Mourner*.—He who maketh peace in his high place, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

<span id="page_243">p. 243</span>

He is Lord of the universe, who reigned ere any creature yet was formed:

At the time when all things were made by his desire, then was his name
proclaimed King.

And after all things shall have had an end, he alone, the dreaded one,
shall reign;

Who was, who is, and who will be in glory. And he is One, and there is
no second to compare to him, to consort with him:

Without beginning, without end; to him belong strength and dominion.

And he is my God—my Redeemer liveth—and a rock in my travail in time of
distress;

And he is my banner and my refuge, the portion of my cup on the day when
I call.

Into his hand I commend my spirit, when I sleep and when I wake;

And with my spirit, my body also: the Lord is with me, and I will not
fear.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

UNITY HYMN FOR THE SABBATH DAY

*In some Congregations the following is said before "Blessed be he who
spake," [p. 19](spb05.htm#page_19.md)*.

Of old thou didst rest on the seventh day; thou didst therefore bless
the Sabbath.

For every work of thine praise is prepared for thee; thy loving ones
bless thee at all times.

Blessed be the Lord, the Maker of them all, the living God and
everlasting King.

For from of old there hath rested upon thy servants the abundance of thy
mercies and thy loving kindnesses.

But in Egypt thou didst begin to make known that thou art exalted far.

Above all gods, when thou didst execute great judgment: upon the
Egyptians and upon their gods.

<span id="page_244">p. 244</span>

When thou didst cleave the Red Sea, thy people saw thy great hand, and
they feared.

Thou didst guide thy people, so that thou mightest make unto thyself a
name of glory to manifest thy greatness.

Thou spakest also with them from the heavens, when the clouds dropped
water.

Thou knewest their wanderings in the wilderness, in a land of drought,
where none passed through.

Thou gavest to thy people the corn of heaven, flesh abundant as the
dust, and water from the rock.

Thou didst drive out many nations, and they took possession of their
land and of the labor of the peoples;

That they might observe thy statutes and laws, the words of the Lord,
which are pure words.

And they delighted themselves with fat pastures, and with rivers of oil
from the flinty rock.

When they rested, they built thy holy city, and adorned the house of thy
sanctuary.

Then thou saidst, Here will I dwell for length of days: I will surely
bless her provision.

There they shall sacrifice sacrifices of righteousness; thy priests also
shall be clothed with righteousness.

The house of Levi also shall chant pleasant songs; they shall shout for
joy and sing unto thee.

The house of Israel and they that fear the Lord shall give glory and
thanks unto thy name, O Lord.

Thou hast dealt out exceeding kindness to the earliest ages; deal thus
kindly also with the latest.

O Lord, rejoice over us, even as thou didst rejoice over out fathers,

To multiply us and deal kindly with us; and we will for ever give thanks
unto thee for thy goodness.

O Lord, rebuild thy city speedily, for it is called by thy name.

And make the horn of David to flourish therein, and dwell in the midst
thereof for ever, O Lord.

There we will offer sacrifices of righteousness, and there may our
oblation be pleasant as in former days.

<span id="page_245">p. 245</span>

bless thy people with the light of thy countenance; for they desire to
do thy will.

And in thy good will fulfil our desire; look, we beseech thee, we are
thy people, all of us.

Thou hast chosen us to be unto thee a treasured people: let thy blessing
be upon thy people for ever.

And we will continually declare thy praise, and praise thy glorious
name.

Of thy blessing let thy people be blessed, for every one whom thou
blessest is blessed.

As for me, while I have my being, I will praise my Creator, and I will
bless him all the days of my appointed time.

Let the name of the Lord be blessed for ever, from everlasting even to
everlasting.

As it is written: Blessed be the Lord, the God of Israel, from
everlasting even to everlasting. And all the people said, Amen, and
praised the Lord. Daniel answered and said, Blessed be the name of God
for ever and ever: for wisdom and might are his. And it is said: Then
the Levites, Jeshua, Kadmiel, Bani, Hashabneiah, Sherebiah, Hodiah,
Shebaniah, and Pethahiah said, Stand up and bless the Lord your God from
everlasting to everlasting: and let them bless thy glorious name, that
is exalted above all blessing and praise. And it is said: Blessed be the
Lord, the God of Israel, from everlasting even to everlasting: and let
all the people say, Amen: praise ye the Lord. And it is said, And David
blessed the Lord in the presence of all the congregation: and David
said, blessed art thou, O Lord, the God of Israel our father, from
everlasting to everlasting.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_19"></span>[227:\*](spb19.htm#fr_21.md) *When the Reader
repeats the Amidah, the following is added to "holy God," [p.
229](#page_229.md)*.

Reader.—We will reverence and sanctify thee according to the mystic
utterance of the holy Seraphim, who hallow thy name in the sanctuary, as
it is written by the hand of thy prophet, And they called one unto the
other and said,

<span id="fn_20"></span>[229:\*](spb19.htm#fr_22.md) *On Sabbath and New
Moon*.

Thou didst form thy world from of old; thou hadst finished thy work on
the seventh day; thou hast loved us and taken pleasure in us, hast
exalted us above all tongues, hast sanctified us by thy commandments,
hast brought us near, O our King unto thy service, and called us by thy
great and holy name. Thou, O Lord our God, also gavest us in love
Sabbaths for rest and New Moons for atonement. But because we sinned
against thee, both we and our fathers, our city hath been laid waste,
our sanctuary is desolate, our splendor hath gone into exile, and the
glory hath been removed from the <span id="page_230">p. 230</span> house
of our life, so that we are not able to perform our obligations in thy
chosen house, in that great and holy house which was called by thy name,
because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary.
May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, to lead us up
in joy unto our land, and to plant us within our borders, where we will
prepare unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the
continual offerings according to their order, and the additional
offerings according to their enactment; and the additional offerings of
this Sabbath day and of this New Moon we will prepare and offer up unto
thee in love, according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast <span
id="page_231">p. 231</span> prescribed for us in thy Law through the
hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said: And
on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish, and
two tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering, mingled
with oil, and the drink offering thereof: this is the burnt offering of
every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the drink
offering thereof.

And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering
unto the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, seven he-lambs of the
first year without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink
offerings as hath been ordained, three tenth parts of an ephah for each
bullock, and two tenth parts for the ram, and one tenth part for each
lamb, with wine according to the drink offering thereof, and a he-goat
wherewith to make atonement, and the two continual offerings according
to their enactment. <span id="page_232">p. 232</span>

They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy
kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall
be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find
pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thon didst call it the
desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest, and on this Sabbath day
renew this New Moon unto us for good and for blessing, for joy and for
gladness, for salvation and comfort, for sustenance and maintenance, for
life and peace, for pardon of sin and forgiveness of iniquity (*during
Leap Year:—*<span id="page_233">p. 233</span> and for atonement of
transgression); for thou hast chosen thy people Israel from among all
nations, and hast made thy holy Sabbath known unto them, and hast
appointed unto them statutes for the beginnings of the months. Blessed
art thou, O Lord, who sanctifiest the Sabbath, Israel and the beginnings
of the months.

<span id="fn_21"></span>[239:\*](spb19.htm#fr_23.md) Exod. xxx. 31–38.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hymn of Glory](spb20.md)

</div>
