<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb26)  [Next](spb28) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_319">p. 319</span>

### ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR THE NEW MOON

*The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," [p.
324](#page_324), is to be said standing*.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

O king, Helper, Savior and shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the First Day, of Passover
say:—*

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead. <span id="fr_51"></span>[\*](#fn_46)

<span id="page_320">p. 320</span>

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord the holy God.

*When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy
God."*

\* *Reader*.—We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they
sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy
prophet:

And they called one unto the other and said,

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

*Reader*.—Those over against them say, Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God
and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

The beginnings of the months thou didst assign unto thy people for a
season of atonement throughout their generations. While they offered
unto thee acceptable sacrifices, and goats for a sin offering to atone
for them, these were to be a memorial for them all, and the salvation of
their soul from the hand of the enemy. O do thou establish a new altar
on Zion, and

<span id="page_321">p. 321</span>

we will offer upon it the burnt offering of the New Moon, and prepare
he-goats for thine acceptance; while we all of us rejoice in the service
of the sanctuary, and in the songs of David thy servant, Which shall
then be heard in thy city and chanted before thine altar. O vouchsafe
unto them everlasting love, and the covenant of the fathers remember
unto the children. Bring us with exultation to Zion thy city, and to
Jerusalem thy sanctuary with everlasting joy, and there will we prepare
unto thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual
offerings according to their order, and the additional offerings
according to their enactment; and the additional offering of this New
Moon we will prepare and offer unto thee in love according to the
precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed for us in thy Law through
the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of thy glory, as it is said:

And in the beginnings of your months ye shall offer a burnt offering
unto the Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, seven he-lambs of the
first year without blemish. And their meal offering and their drink
offerings as hath been ordained, three tenth parts of an ephah of fine
flour for each bullock, two tenth parts for the ram, one tenth for each
lamb, and wine according to the drink offering of each, a goat for
atonement, and two daily offerings according to their institution.

Our God and God of our fathers, renew this month unto us for good and
for blessing, for joy and gladness, for salvation and consolation, for
support and sustenance,

<span id="page_322">p. 322</span>

for life and peace, for pardon of sin and forgiveness of iniquity, (*in
Leap Year add*, and for atonement of transgression); for thou hast
chosen thy people Israel from all nations, and hast appointed unto them
statutes for the beginnings of the months. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
sanctifiest Israel and the beginnings of the months.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto
thy hand, and for our souls

*Congregation in an undertone*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings
be to thy great and holy name, because thou hast kept us in life and
hast preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to
preserve us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy
statutes, to do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing
that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings
are due.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_323">p. 323</span>

which are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us,
and for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times,
evening, morn, and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail
not; thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have
ever hoped in thee.

*On Chanukah say, "We thank thee also," etc., [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63)*.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

*At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is
introduced:—*

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of
thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by
Aaron and his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The
Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and
give thee peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us
and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us
together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy
countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the

<span id="page_324">p. 324</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Law of life,
lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing mercy, life and peace; and
may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and
in every hour with thy peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before
thee. O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high
places, may he make peace for us all and for all Israel, and say ye,
Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

*Kaddish, [p. 92](spb05.htm#page_92).*

*"It is our duty," etc., [p. 93](spb05.htm#page_93).*

*Mourner's Kaddish, [p. 94](spb05.htm#page_94).*

*Psalm civ, [p. 264](spb22.htm#page_264)*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_46"></span>[319:\*](spb27.htm#fr_51) (See page
[320](#page_320))

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service for Festivals](spb28)

</div>
