<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb21)  [Next](spb23.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_250">p. 250</span>

### AFTERNOON SERVICE FOR SABBATHS.

Happy are they that dwell in thy house: they will be ever praising thee.
(Selah.)

Happy is the people, that is in such a case: happy the people, whose God
is the Lord.

Psalm cxlv. A Psalm of Praise: of David.

I will extol thee, my God, O King; and I will bless thy name for ever
and ever.

Every day will I bless thee; and I will praise thy name for ever and
ever.

Great is the Lord, and exceedingly to be praised: and his greatness is
unsearchable.

One generation shall laud thy works to another, and shall declare thy
mighty acts.

On the majestic glory of thy grandeur, and on thy marvellous deeds, will
I meditate.

And men shall speak of the might of thy awful acts; and I will recount
thy greatness.

They shall pour forth the fame of thy great goodness, and shall exult in
thy righteousness.

The Lord is gracious and merciful; slow to anger and of great
lovingkindness.

The Lord is good to all; and his tender mercies are over all his works.

All thy works shall give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and thy loving ones
shall bless thee.

They shall speak of the glory of thy kingdom, and talk of thy power.

To make known to the sons of men his mighty acts, and the majestic glory
of his kingdom.

<span id="page_251">p. 251</span>

Thy kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and thy dominion endureth
throughout all generations.

The Lord upholdeth all that fall, and raiseth up all those that are
bowed down.

The eyes of all wait upon thee; and thou givest then. their food in due
season.

Thou openest thine hand, and satisfiest every living thing with favor.

The Lord is righteous in all his ways, and loving in all his works.

The Lord is nigh unto all them that call upon him, to all that call upon
him in truth.

He will fulfil the desire of them that fear him; he also will hear their
cry, and will save them.

The Lord guardeth all them that love him; but all the wicked will he
destroy.

My mouth shall speak of the praise of the Lord: and let all flesh bless
his holy name for ever and ever.

But we will bless the Lord from this time forth and for evermore. Praise
ye the Lord.

And a redeemer shall come to Zion and to them that turn from
transgression in Jacob, saith the Lord. And as for me, this is my
covenant with them, saith the Lord: my spirit that is upon thee, and my
words which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seed's
seed, saith the Lord, from henceforth and for ever.

<span id="page_252">p. 252</span>

But thou art holy, O thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel. And
one cried unto another, and said, Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts:
the whole earth is full of his glory.  <span
id="fr_26"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md)And they receive sanction the one from the
other, and say, Holy in the highest heavens, the place of his divine
abode; holy upon earth, the work of his might; holy for ever and to all
eternity is the Lord of hosts; the whole earth is full of the radiance
of his glory. Then a wind lifted me up, and I heard behind me the voice
of a great rushing (saying), Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his
place.  <span id="fr_27"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md)Then a wind lifted me up,
and I heard behind me the voice of a great rushing, of those who uttered
praises, and said, Blessed be the glory of the Lord from the region of
his divine abode. The Lord shall reign for ever and ever.  <span
id="fr_28"></span>[\*](#fn_24.md)The kingdom of the Lord endureth for ever
and to all eternity. O Lord, the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Israel,
our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of
the heart of thy people, and direct their heart unto thee. Arid he,
being merciful, forgiveth iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time
he turneth his anger away, and doth not stir up all his wrath. For thou,
O Lord, art good and forgiving, and abounding in lovingkindness to all
them that call upon thee. Thy righteousness is an everlasting
righteousness, and thy Law is truth. Thou wilt show truth to Jacob and
loving kindness to Abraham, according as thou hast sworn unto our
fathers from the days of old. Blessed be the Lord day by day; if one
burdeneth us.

<span id="page_253">p. 253</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> God is our
salvation. (Selah.) The Lord of hosts is with us; the God of Jacob is
our stronghold. (Selah.) O Lord of hosts, happy is the man who trusteth
in thee. Save, Lord: may the King answer us on the day when we call.
Blessed is our God, who hath created us for his glory, and hath
separated us from them that go astray, and hath given us the Law of
truth and planted everlasting life in our midst. May he open our heart
unto his Law, and place his love and fear within our hearts, that we may
do his will and serve him with a perfect heart, that we may not labor in
vain, nor bring forth for confusion. May it be thy will, O Lord our God
and God of our fathers, that we may keep thy statutes in this world, and
be worthy to live to witness and inherit happiness and blessing in the
days of the Messiah and in the life of the world to come. To the end
that my glory may sing praise unto thee, and not be silent: O Lord my
God, I will give thanks unto thee for ever. Blessed is the man that
trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. Trust ye in the Lord
for ever; for in Jah the Lord is an everlasting rock. And they that know
thy name will put their trust in thee; for thou hast not forsaken them
that seek thee, Lord. It pleased the Lord, for his righteousness’ sake,
to magnify the Law and to make it honorable.

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

<span id="page_254">p. 254</span>

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

And as for me, may my prayer unto thee, O Lord, be in an acceptable
time: O God, in the abundance of thy lovingkindness, answer me in the
truth of thy salvation.

*The first section of the Lesson from the Pentateuch of the following
Sabbath is read*.

*For Order of Reading the Law see pp. [81](spb05.htm#page_81.md)–87*.

*While the vestments are being replaced upon the Scroll, Psalm, xcii.,
[p. 248](spb20.htm#page_248.md), is said*.

*The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," [p.
260](#page_260.md), is to be said standing*.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses, and possessest all
things; who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love
wilt bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence say:*

Remember us unto life, O King, who delightest in life, and inscribe us
in the book of life, for thine own sake, O living God.

<span id="page_255">p. 255</span>

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the
First Day of Passover say:—*

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall,

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest and causest salvation to spring forth?

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:*

Who is like unto thee, Father of mercy, who in mercy rememberest thy
creatures unto life?

Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord,
who quickenest the dead. \* (See page [256](#page_256).md).

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

<span id="page_256">p. 256</span>

*When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is said, to "holy
God."*

\* *Reader*.—We will sanctify thy name in the world even as they
sanctify it in the highest heavens, as it is written by the hand of thy
prophet: And they called one unto the other and said,

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

*Reader*.—Those over against them say, Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart from our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God
and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*During the Ten Days of Penitence conclude the Blessing thus:—*

<span class="small">the holy King.</span>

Thou art One and thy name is One, and who, is like thy people Israel, an
unique nation on the earth? Glorious greatness and a crown of salvation,
even the day of rest and holiness, thou hast given unto thy
people:—Abraham was glad, Isaac rejoiced, Jacob and his sons rested
thereon:—a rest vouchsafed in generous love, a true and faithful rest, a
rest in peace and tranquillity,

<span id="page_257">p. 257</span>

in quietude and safety, a perfect rest wherein thou delightest. Let thy
children perceive and know that this their rest is from thee, and by
their rest may they hallow thy name.

Our God and God of our fathers, accept our rest; sanctify us by thy
commandments, and grant our portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy
goodness, and gladden us with thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve
thee in truth; and in thy love and favor, O Lord our God, let us inherit
thy holy Sabbath; and may Israel, who hallow thy name, rest thereon.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest the Sabbath.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire-offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

*On New Moon and the Intermediate Days of Passover and Tabernacles the
following is added:—*

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise, come and be
accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers, of Messiah
the son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy
people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance

<span id="page_258">p. 258</span>

and well-being, grace, lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this
day of

*On New Moon—*

<span class="small">the Feast of the New Moon.</span>

*On Passover—*

<span class="small">the Feast of Unleavened Bread.</span>

*On Tabernacles—*

<span class="small">Tabernacles.</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Remember us, O
Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us for blessing,
and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and mercy, spare us
and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us; for our eyes
are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and merciful God and
King.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restorest thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever; thou art the Rock of our lives, the
Shield of our salvation through every generation. We will give thanks
unto thee and declare thy praise for our lives which are committed unto
thy hand, and for our souls which are in thy charge, and for thy
miracles, which are daily with us, and for

*Congregation in an undertone*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning. Blessings and thanksgivings
be to thy great and holy name because thou hast kept us in life and hast
preserved us: so mayest thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve
us. O gather our exiles to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to
do thy will, and to serve thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give
thanks unto thee. Blessed be the God to whom thanksgivings are
due.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_259">p. 259</span>

thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times, evening,
morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not; thou,
merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever hoped
in thee.

*On Sabbath of Chanukah say: We thank thee, etc., [p.
63](spb05.htm#page_63.md)*.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

O inscribe all the children of thy covenant for a happy life.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

Grant abundant peace unto Israel thy people for ever; for thou art the
sovereign Lord of all peace; and may it be good in thy sight to bless
thy people Israel at all times and in every hour with thy peace.

*On the Sabbath of Penitence say:—*

In the book of life, blessing, peace and good sustenance may we be
remembered and inscribed before thee, we and all thy people the house of
Israel, for a happy life and for peace. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who
makest peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

<span id="page_260">p. 260</span>

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before
thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He who maketh peace in his high
places, may he make peace for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

<span class="small">May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our
fathers, that the temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our
portion in thy Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the
days of old, and as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah
and Jerusalem be pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as
in ancient years.</span>

*The following is omitted on such occasions as those on which Tachanun
is omitted on Week-days:—*

Thy righteousness is an everlasting righteousness, and thy Law is truth.
Thy righteousness also, O God, is very high; thou who hast done great
things, O God,

<span id="page_261">p. 261</span>

who is like unto thee? Thy righteousness is like the mountains of God;
thy judgments are a great deep man and beast thou savest, O Lord.

*Reader*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Reader*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Reader*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and honored,
magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be he; though
he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and consolations,
which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Accept our prayer in mercy and in favor.

*Reader*.—May the prayers and supplications of all Israel be accepted by
their Father who is in heaven; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

Reader.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and for
all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from Lord who made heaven and earth.

*Reader*.—He who maketh peace in his high places. may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

<span id="page_262">p. 262</span>

It is our duty to praise the Lord of all things, to ascribe greatness to
him who formed the world in the beginning, since he hath not made us
like the nations of other lands, and hath not placed us like other
families of the earth, since he hath not assigned unto us a portion as
unto them, nor a lot as unto all their multitude. For we bend the knee
and offer worship and thanks before the supreme King of kings, the Holy
One, blessed be he, who stretched forth the heavens and laid the
foundations of the earth, the seat of whose glory is in the heavens
above, and the abode of whose might is in the loftiest heights. He is
our God; there is none else: in truth he is our King; there is none
besides him; as it is written in his Law, And thou shalt know this day,
and lay it to thine heart, that the Lord he is God in heaven above and
upon the earth beneath: there is none else.

We therefore hope in thee, O Lord our God, that we may speedily behold
the glory of thy might, when thou wilt remove the abominations from the
earth, and the idols will be utterly cut off, when the world will be
perfected under the kingdom of the Almighty, and all the children of
flesh will call upon thy name, when thou wilt turn unto thyself all the
wicked of the earth. Let all the inhabitants of the world perceive and
know that unto thee every knee must bow, every tongue must swear. Before
thee, O Lord our God, let them bow and fall; and unto thy glorious name
let them give honor; let them all accept the yoke of thy kingdom, and do
thou reign over them speedily, and for ever

<span id="page_263">p. 263</span>

and ever. For the kingdom is thine, and to all eternity thou wilt reign
in glory; as it is written in thy Law The Lord shall reign for ever and
ever. And it is said, And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in
that day shall the Lord be One, and his name One.

*The following Kaddish is said by a Mourner*

*Mourner*.—Magnified and sanctified be his great name in the world which
he hath created according to his will. May he establish his kingdom
during your life and during your days, and during the life of all the
house of Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Mourner*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Mourner*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and
honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be
he; though he be high above all the blessings and hymns, praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Mourner*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Mourner*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for
us and for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

<span id="page_264">p. 264</span>

*From the Sabbath after "the Rejoicing of the Law" until the Sabbath
before Passover, the following Psalms are read:—*

Psalm civ.

Bless the Lord, O my soul: O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou hast
robed thee in splendor and majesty. He covereth himself with light as
with a garment; he stretcheth out the heavens like a curtain: he layeth
the beams of his upper chambers in the waters; he maketh the clouds his
chariot; he walketh upon the wings of the wind. He maketh winds his
messengers; his ministers flaming fire: he founded the earth upon its
bases, that it might not be moved for ever. Thou didst cover it with the
deep as with a vesture; the waters stood above the mountains. At thy
rebuke they fled; at the voice of thy thunder they hasted away. The
mountains rose, the valleys sank unto the place which thou hadst founded
for them. Thou hast set a bound that they may not pass over; that they
turn not again to cover the earth. He sendeth forth springs into the
valleys; they run among the mountains. They give drink to every beast of
the plain; the wild asses quench their thirst. By them the birds of the
heaven have their dwelling, they utter their voice from among the
branches. He giveth drink to the mountains from his upper chambers: the
earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works. He causeth grass to grow
for the cattle, and herbs for the service of man; that he may bring
forth bread from the earth; and wine that maketh glad the heart of man,
and oil to make his face to shine, and bread that strengtheneth man's
heart. The trees of the Lord are satisfied; the cedars of Lebanon which
he hath planted; where the birds make their nests: as for the stork, the
fir trees are her house. The high mountains are for the wild goats; the
rocks are a refuge for the conies. He made the moon for seasons: the sun
knoweth its going down. Thou makest darkness, and it is night; wherein
all the beasts of the forest do move. The young lions roar after their
prey, and seek their food from God. The sun ariseth, they get them

<span id="page_265">p. 265</span>

away, and lay them down in their dens. Man goeth forth unto his work and
to his labor until the evening How manifold are thy works, O Lord! In
wisdom hast thou made them all: the earth is full of thy possessions.
Yonder is the sea, great and of wide extern therein are moving things
innumerable, living creatures both small and great. There the ships make
their course; there is leviathan whom thou hast formed to sport therein.
These all wait upon thee, that thou mayest give them their food in due
season. Thou givest unto them, they gather; thou openest thine hand,
they are satisfied with good. Thou hidest thy face, they are confounded;
thou gatherest in their breath, they die, and return to their dust. Thou
sendest forth thy spirit, they are created; and thou renewest the face
of the ground. Let the glory of the Lord endure for ever; let the Lord
rejoice in his works. He looketh on the earth, and it trembleth; he
toucheth the mountains, and they smoke. I will sing unto the Lord as
long as I live; I will sing praise to my God while I have my being. May
my meditation be sweet unto him: as for me, I will rejoice in the Lord.
Sinners shall be consumed out of the earth, and the wicked shall be no
more. Bless the Lord, O my soul: praise ye the Lord.

Psalm cxx.

A Song of Degrees. In my distress I cried unto the Lord, and he answered
me. Deliver my soul, O Lord, from a lying lip, and from a deceitful
tongue. What shall he give unto thee, and what shall he add unto thee,
thou deceitful tongue? Sharpened arrows of a mighty man with coals of
juniper. Woe is me, that I sojourn in Mesech, that I dwell among the
tents of Kedar. My soul hath full long had her dwelling with him that
hateth peace. I am all peace; but when I speak, they are for war.

Psalm cxxi.

A Song of Degrees. I lift up mine eyes unto the hills: whence will my
help come? My help is

<span id="page_266">p. 266</span>

from the Lord, the maker of heaven and earth. He will not suffer thy
foot to slip: he that guardeth thee will not slumber. Behold, he that
guardeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. The Lord is thy
guardian: the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand. The sun shall not
smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. The Lord shall guard thee from
all evil; he shall guard thy soul. The Lord shall guard thy going out
and thy coming in, from this time forth and for evermore.

Psalm cxxii.

A Song of Degrees; of David. I was glad when they said unto me, Let us
go unto the house of the Lord. Our feet stood within thy gates, O
Jerusalem; Jerusalem that art built up as a city that is compact
together: whither the tribes go up, even the tribes of the Lord, for a
testimony unto Israel, to give thanks unto the name of the Lord. For
there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; may they prosper that love thee. Peace
be within thy rampart, prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren
and companions’ sakes I would fain speak peace concerning thee. For the
sake of the house of the Lord our God I would seek thy good.

Psalm cxxiii.

A Song of Degrees. Unto thee do I lift up mine eyes, O thou that
dwellest in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes of servants look unto the
hand of their master, as the eyes of a maiden unto the hand of her
mistress, so our eyes look unto the Lord our God, until he have pity
upon us. Have pity upon us, O Lord, have pity upon us: for we are full
sated with contempt. Our soul is full sated with the mocking of those
that are at ease, with the contempt of the proud.

Psalm cxxiv.

A Song of Degrees; of David. If it had not been the Lord who was on our
side, let Israel now say:

<span id="page_267">p. 267</span>

if it had not been the Lord who was on our side, when men rose up
against us, then they had swallowed us up alive, when their wrath was
kindled against us; then the waters had overwhelmed us, the stream had
gone over our soul; then the proud waters had gone over our soul.
Blessed be the Lord, who hath not given us a prey to their teeth. Our
soul escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers: the snare was
broken, and we escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who made
heaven and earth.

Psalm cxxv.

A Song of Degrees. They that trust in the Lord are as Mount Zion, which
cannot be moved, but abideth for ever. The mountains are round about
Jerusalem, and the Lord is round about his people, from this time forth
and for evermore. For the sceptre of wickedness shall not rest upon the
lot of the righteous, that the righteous put not forth their hands unto
iniquity. Dc good, O Lord, unto those that are good, and to them that
are upright in their hearts. But as for such as turn aside unto their
crooked ways, the Lord will destroy them with the workers of iniquity.
Peace be upon Israel.

Psalm cxxvi.

A Song of Degrees. When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion, we
were like unto them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with laughter,
and our tongue with exultation: then said they among the nations, The
Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done great things
for us; whereat we rejoiced. Bring back our captivity, O Lord, as the
streams in the south. They that sow, in tears shall reap in joy. Though
he goeth on his way weeping, hearing the store of seed, he shall come
back with joy, bearing his sheaves.

<span id="page_268">p. 268</span>

Psalm cxxvii.

A Song of Degrees; of Solomon. Except the Lord build the house, they
labor in vain that build it: except the Lord watch over the city, the
watchman waketh but in vain. It is vain for you to rise up early, and so
late take rest, and eat the bread of toil: such things he giveth unto
his beloved in sleep. Lo, children are an heritage of the Lord: the
fruit of the womb is his reward. As arrows in the hand of a mighty man,
so are the children of youth. Happy is the man that hath filled his
quiver with them: they shall not be ashamed, when they speak with
enemies in the gate.

Psalm cxxviii.

A Song of Degrees. Happy is every one that feareth the Lord, that
walketh in his ways. When thou shalt eat the labor of thine hands, happy
shalt thou be, and it shall be well with thee. Thy wife shall be as a
fruitful vine, in the recesses of thine house: thy children like olive
plants, round about thy table. Behold thus shall the man be blessed that
feareth the Lord. May the Lord bless thee out of Zion: mayest thou see
the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life. Yea, mayest thou see thy
children's children. Peace be upon Israel.

Psalm cxxix.

A Song of Degrees. To the full have they afflicted me from my youth up,
let Israel now say; to the full have they afflicted me from my youth up:
yet have they not prevailed against me. The plower; plowed upon my back,
they made long their furrows. The Lord is righteous: he hath cut asunder
the cords of the wicked. Let them be ashamed and turned backward, all
they that hate Zion. Let them be as the grass upon the housetops, which
withereth before it shooteth forth: wherewith the mower filleth not his
hand, nor he that bindeth sheaves his bosom: neither do

<span id="page_269">p. 269</span>

they which go by say, The blessing of the Lord be upon you; we bless you
in the name of the Lord.

Psalm cxxx.

A Song of Degrees. Out of the depths have I cried unto thee, O Lord.
Lord, hear my voice: let thine ears be attentive to the voice of my
supplications. If thou, Lord, shouldst mark iniquities, O Lord, who
could stand? But there is forgiveness with thee, that thou mayest be
feared. I wait for the Lord, my soul doth wait, and in his word do I
hope. My soul waiteth for the Lord, more than watchmen wait for the
morning; yea, more than watchmen for the morning. O let Israel hope in
the Lord; for with the Lord there is lovingkindness, and with him is
plenteous deliverance. And he shall deliver Israel from all his
iniquities.

Psalm cxxxi.

A Song of Degrees; of David. Lord, my heart is not haughty, nor mine
eyes lofty, neither do I exercise myself in great matters, or in things
too marvellous for me. Surely I have stilled and quieted my soul, like a
weaned child with his mother; my soul is with me like a weaned child. O
Israel, hope in the Lord from this time forth and for evermore.

Psalm cxxxii.

A Song of Degrees. Lord, remember for David all his affliction; how he
sware unto the Lord, and vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob: Surely I
will not come into the tent of my house, nor go up unto the couch of my
rest; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids;
until I find out a place for the Lord, a habitation for the Mighty One
of Jacob. Lo, we heard of it in Ephrathah: we found it in the fields of
Jaar. Let us go into his habitation; let us worship

<span id="page_270">p. 270</span>

at his footstool. Arise, O Lord, unto thy resting place; thou, and the
ark of thy strength. Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and
let thy loving ones exult. For the sake of David thy servant turn not
away the face of thine anointed. The Lord hath sworn unto David in
truth—he will not turn from it—: of the fruit of thy body will I set
upon thy throne. If thy children will keep my covenant, and my
testimonies that I shall teach them, their children also shall sit upon
thy throne for evermore. For the Lord hath chosen Zion; he hath desired
it for his habitation. This is my resting-place for ever: here will I
dwell; for I have desired it. I will abundantly bless her provision: I
will satisfy her needy with bread. Her priests also will I clothe with
salvation; and her loving ones shall exult aloud. There will I make a
horn to spring forth unto David: I have prepared a lamp for mine
anointed. His enemies will I clothe with shame; but upon him his crown
shall shine.

Psalm cxxxiii.

A Song of Degrees; of David. Behold, how good and pleasant it is for
brethren to dwell together in unity! It is like the goodly oil upon the
head, that runneth down upon the beard, even Aaron's beard; that runneth
down upon the skirt of his garments; like the dew of Hermon, that
runneth down upon the mountains of Zion: for there the Lord commandment
the blessing, even life for evermore.

Psalm cxxxiv.

A Song of Degrees. Behold, bless ye the Lord, all ye servants of the
Lord, who stand in the house of the Lord in the night seasons. Lift up
your hands towards the sanctuary, and bless ye the Lord. The Lord bless
thee out of Zion; even he that made heaven and earth.

*"It is our duty." [p. 262](#page_262.md).*

*Mourner's Kaddish, [p. 263](#page_263.md)*

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_24"></span>[252:\*](spb22.htm#fr_28.md) The Chaldee paraphrase
of the preceding verse.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ethics of the Fathers](spb23.md)

</div>
