<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb22)  [Next](spb24) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_271">p. 271</span>

### ETHICS OF THE FATHERS.

*One of the following chapters is read on each Sabbath from the Sabbath
after Passover until the Sabbath before New Year*.

<span class="small">All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as
it is said (Isaiah lx, 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they
shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of
my hands, that I may be glorified.</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> I.

(1.) Moses received the Torah <span id="fr_29"></span>[\*](#fn_25) on
Sinai, and handed it down to Joshua; Joshua to the elders; the elders to
the prophets; and the prophets handed it down to the men of the Great
Synagogue. They said three things: Be deliberate in judgment; raise up
many disciples, and make a fence round the Torah. (2.) Simon the Just
was one of the last survivors of the Great Synagogue. He used to say,
Upon three things the world is based: upon the Torah, upon the Temple
service, and upon the practice of charity. (3.) Antigonos of Socho
received the tradition from Simon the Just. He used to say, Be not like
servants who minister to their master upon the condition of receiving a
reward; but be like servants who minister to their master without the
condition of receiving a reward; and let the fear of Heaven be upon you.
(4.) José, the son of Joezer, of Zeredah, and José, the son of Jochanan,
of Jerusalem, received the tradition from the preceding. José, the son
of Joezer, of Zeredah, said, Let thy house be a meeting house for the
wise; sit amidst the dust of their feet, and drink their words with
thirst. (5.) José, the son of Jochanan, of Jerusalem, said, Let thy
house be open wide; let the poor be the members of thy household,

<span id="page_272">p. 272</span>

and engage not in much gossip with women. This applies even to one's own
wife; how much more then to the wife of one's neighbor. Hence the sages
say, Whoso engages in much gossip with women brings evil upon himself,
neglects the study of the Torah, and will in the end inherit Gehinnom.
(6.) Joshua, the son of Perachyah, and Nittai, the Arbelite, received
the tradition from the preceding. Joshua, the son of Perachyah, said,
Provide thyself a teacher, and get thee a companion, and judge all men
in the scale of merit. (7.) Nittai, the Arbelite, said, Keep thee far
from a bad neighbor, associate not with the wicked, and abandon not the
belief in retribution. (8.) Judah, the son of Tabbai, and Simeon, the
son of Shatach, received the tradition from the preceding. Judah, the
son of Tabbai, said, (In the judge's office) act not the counsel's part;
when the parties to a suit are standing before thee, let them both be
regarded by thee as guilty, but when they are departed from thy
presence, regard them both as innocent, the verdict having been
acquiesced in by them. (9.) Simeon, the son of Shatach, said, Be very
searching in the examination, of witnesses, and be heedful of thy words,
lest through them they learn to falsify. (10.) Shemayah and Abtalyon
received the tradition from the preceding. Shemayah said, Love work,
hate lordship, and seek no intimacy with the ruling power (11.) Abtalyon
said, Ye sages, be heedful of your words, lest ye incur the penalty of
exile and be exiled to a place of evil waters, and the disciples who
come after you drink thereof and die, and the Heavenly Name be profaned.
(12.) Hillel and Shammai received the tradition from the preceding.
Hillel said, Be of the disciples of Aaron, loving peace and pursuing
peace, loving thy fellow-creatures, and drawing them near to the Torah.
(13.) He

<span id="page_273">p. 273</span>

used to say, A name made great is a name destroyed; he who does not
increase his knowledge decreases it; and he who does not study deserves
to die; and he who makes a worldly use of the crown of the Torah shall
waste away. (14.) He used to say, If I am not for myself, who will be
for me? And being for my own self, what am I? And if not now, when?
(15). Shammai said, Fix a period for thy study of the Torah; say little
and do much; and receive all men with a cheerful countenance. (16.)
Rabban Gamaliel said, Provide thyself a teacher, and be quit of doubt,
and accustom not thyself to give tithes by a conjectural estimate. (17.)
Simeon, his son, said, All my days I have grown up amongst the wise, and
I have found nought of better service than silence; not learning but
doing is the chief thing; and whoso is profuse of words causes sin.
(18.) Rabban Simeon, the son of Gamaliel, said, By three things is the
world preserved: by truth, by judgment, and by peace, as it is said,
Judge ye the truth and the judgment of peace in your gates (Zech. viii.
16).

<span class="small">Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy
One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave
them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased
the Lord, for his righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it
honorable (Isaiah xlii, 21).</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> II.

<span class="small">All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as
it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they
shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of
my hands, that I may be glorified.</span>

(1.) Rabbi said, Which is the right course that a man should choose for
himself? That which he feels to be honorable to himself, and which also
brings him honor from mankind.

<span id="page_274">p. 274</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Be heedful of a
light precept as of a grave one, for thou knowest not the grant of
reward for each precept. Reckon the loss incurred by the fulfilment of a
precept against the reward secured by its observance, and the gain
gotten by a transgression against the loss it involves. Reflect upon
three things, and thou wilt not come within the power of sin; Know what
is above thee—a seeing eye, and a hearing ear, and all thy deeds written
in a book. (2.) Rabban Gamaliel, the son of Rabbi Judah the Prince,
said, An excellent thing is the study of the Torah combined with some
worldly occupation, for the labor demanded by them both makes sin to be
forgotten. All study of the Torah without work must in the end be futile
and become the cause of sin. Let all who are employed with the
congregation act with them for Heaven's sake, for then the merit of
their fathers sustains them, and their righteousness endures for ever.
And as for you, (God will then say,) I account you worthy of great
reward, as if you had wrought it all yourselves. (3.) Be on your guard
against the ruling power; for they who exercise it draw no man near to
them except for their own interests; appearing as friends when it is to
their own advantage, they stand not by a man in the hour of his need.
(4.) He used to say, Do His will as if it were thy will, that He may do
thy will as if it were His will. Nullify thy will before His will, that
He may nullify the will of others before thy will. (5) Hillel said,
Separate not thyself from the congregation; trust not in thyself until
the day of thy death; judge not thy neighbor until thou art come into
his place; and say not anything which cannot be understood at once, in
the hope that it will be understood in the end; neither say, When I have
leisure I will study; perchance thou wilt have no leisure. (6.) He used
to say, An empty-headed man cannot be a sinfearing man, nor can an
ignorant person be pious, nor can a shamefaced man learn, nor a
passionate man teach, nor

<span id="page_275">p. 275</span>

can one who is engaged overmuch in business grow wise. In a place where
there are no men, strive to be a man. (7.) Moreover, he saw a skull
floating on the surface of the water: he said to it, Because thou
drownedst others, they have drowned thee, and at the last they that
drowned thee shall themselves be drowned. (8.) He used to say, The more
flesh, the more worms; the more property, the more anxiety; the more
women, the more witchcraft; the more maid-servants, the more lewdness;
the more men-servants, the more robbery;—the more Torah, the more life;
the more schooling, the more wisdom; the more counsel, the more
understanding; the more charity, the more peace. He who has acquired a
good name, has acquired it for himself; he who has acquired for himself
words of Torah, has acquired for himself life in the world to come. (9.)
Rabban Jochanan, the son of Zacchai. received the tradition from Hillel
and Shammai. He used to say, if thou hast learnt much Torah, ascribe not
any merit to thyself, for thereunto wast thou created. (10.) Rabban
Jochanan, the son of Zacchai, had five disciples, and these are they,
Rabbi Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, Rabbi Joshua, the son of Chananya,
Rabbi José, the Priest, Rabbi Simeon, the son of Nathaniel, and Rabbi
Eleazar, the son of Arach. (11.) He used thus to recount their praise:
Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, is a cemented cistern, which loses not a
drop; Joshua, the son of Chananya—happy is she that bare him; José, the
Priest, is a pious man; Simeon, the son of Nathaniel, is a fearer of
sin; Eleazar, the son of Arach, is like a spring flowing
[with](errata.htm#5) ever-sustaining vigor. (12.) He used to say, If all
the sages of Israel were in one scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the
son of Hyrcanus, in the other, he would outweigh them all. Abba Saul
said in his name, If all the sages of

<span id="page_276">p. 276</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Israel were in one
scale of the balance, and Eliezer, the son of Hyrcanus, also with them,
and Eleazar, the son of Arach, in the other scale, he would outweigh
them all. (13.) He said to them, Go forth and see which is the good way
to which a man should cleave. R. Eliezer said, A good eye; R. Joshua
said, A good friend; R. José said, A good neighbor; R. Simeon said, One
who foresees the fruit of an action; R. Eleazar said, A good heart.
Thereupon he said to them, I approve the words of Eleazar, the son of
Arach, rather than your words, for in his words yours are included.
(14.) He said to them, Go forth and see which is the evil way that a man
should shun. R. Eliezer said, An evil eye; R. Joshua said, A bad friend;
R. José said, A bad neighbor; R. Simeon said, One who borrows and does
not repay,—it is the same whether one borrows from man or from the
all-present God; as it is said, The wicked borroweth, and payeth not
again, but the righteous dealeth graciously and giveth (Psalm xxxvii.
21); R. Eleazar said, A bad heart. Thereupon he said to them, I approve
the words of Eleazar, the son of Arach, rather than your words, for in
his words yours are included. (15.) They each said three things. R.
Eliezer said, Let thy friend's honor be as dear to thee as thine own;
and be not easily moved to anger; and repent one day before thy death.
And (he further said), Warm thyself by the fire of the wise; but beware
of their glowing coals, lest thou be burnt, for their bite is the bite
of the fox, and their sting is the scorpion's sting, and their hiss is
the serpent's hiss, and all their words are like coals of fire. <span
id="fr_30"></span>[\*](#fn_26) (16.) R. Joshua said, The evil eye, the
evil inclination, and hatred of his fellow-creatures put a

<span id="page_277">p. 277</span>

man out of the world. (17.) R. José said, Let the property of thy friend
be as dear to thee as thine own; qualify thyself for the study of the
Torah, since the knowledge of it is not an inheritance of thine, and let
all thy deeds be done for the sake of Heaven. (18.) R. Simeon said, Be
careful to read the Shema’ and to say the Amidah; and when thou prayest,
regard not thy prayer as a fixed mechanical task, but as an appeal for
mercy and grace before the All-present, as it is said, For he is
gracious and full of mercy, slow to anger and abounding in
lovingkindness, and repenteth him of the evil (Joel ii. 13); and be not
wicked in thine own esteem. (19.) R. Eleazar said, Be watchful in the
study of the Torah, and know what answer to give to the unbeliever; know
also before whom thou toilest, and who thy Employer is, who will pay
thee the reward of thy labor. (20.) Rabbi Tarphon said. The day is
short, and the work is great, and the laborers are sluggish, and the
reward is much, and the Master of the house is urgent. (21.) He used
also to say, It is not thy duty to complete the work, but neither art
thou free to desist from it; if thou hast studied much Torah, much
reward will be given thee; and faithful is thy Employer to pay thee the
reward of thy labor; and know that the grant of reward unto the
righteous will be in the time to come.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he,
was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious
Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his
righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah
xlii. 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_278">p. 278</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> III.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah
lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified.

(1.) Akabya, the son of Mahalalel, said, Reflect upon three things, and
thou wilt not come within the power of sin: know whence thou camest, and
whither thou art going, and before whom thou wilt in future have to give
account and reckoning. Whence thou earnest:—from a putrefying drop;
whither thou art going:—to a place of dust, worms and maggots; and
before whom thou wilt in future have to give account and
reckoning:—before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be
he. (2.) R. Chanina, the Vice-High-Priest, said, Pray for the welfare of
the government, since but for the year thereof men would swallow each
other alive. (3.) R. Chananya, the son of Teradyon, said, If two sit
together and interchange no words of Torah, they are a meeting of
scorners, concerning whom it is said, The godly man sitteth not in the
seat of the scorners (Ps. i. 1); but if two sit together and interchange
words of Torah, the Divine Presence abides between them; as it is said,
Then they that feared the Lord snake one with the other: and the Lord
hearkened and heard, and a book of remembrance was written before him,
for them that feared the Lord, and that thought upon his name (Mal. iii.
16). Now, the Scripture enables me to draw this inference in respect to
two persons; whence can it be deduced that if even one person sedulously
occupies himself with the Torah, the Holy One, blessed be he, appoints
unto him a reward? Because it is said, Though he sit alone, and meditate
in stillness, yet he taketh it (the reward) upon him (Lam. iii.
27). <span id="fr_31"></span>[\*](#fn_27) (4.) R. Simeon said, If three
have eaten at a table and have spoken there no words of Torah, it is as
if they had eaten

<span id="page_279">p. 279</span>

of sacrifices to dead idols, of whom it is said, For all their tables
are full of vomit and filthiness; the All-present is not (in their
thoughts) (Isa. xxviii. 8). But if three have eaten at a table and have
spoken there words of Torah, it is as if they had eaten at the table of
the All-present, to which the Scripture may be applied, And he said unto
me, This is the table that is before the Lord (Ezek. xli. 22). (5.) R.
Chanina, the son of Chachinai, said, He who keeps awake at night, and
goes on his way alone, while turning his heart to vanity, such a one
forfeits his own life. (6.) R. Nechunya, son of Hakkanah, said, Whoso
receives upon himself the yoke of the Torah, from him the yoke of the
kingdom and the yoke of worldly care will be removed; but whoso breaks
off from him the yoke of the Torah, upon him will be laid the yoke of
the kingdom and the yoke of worldly care. (7.) R. Chalafta, the son of
Dosa, of the village of Chananya, said, When ten people sit together and
occupy themselves with the Torah, the Shechinah abides among them, as it
is said, God standeth in the congregation <span
id="fr_32"></span>[\*](#fn_28) of the godly (Psalm lxxxii. 1). And
whence can it be shown that the same applies to five? Because it is
said, He hath founded his band <span id="fr_33"></span>[†](#fn_29) upon
the earth (Amos ix. 6). And whence can it be shown that the same applies
to three? Because it is said, He judgeth among the judges <span
id="fr_34"></span>[‡](#fn_30) (Psa. lxxxii. 1). And whence can it be
shown that the same applies to two? Because it is said, Then they that
feared the Lord spake one with the other; and the Lord hearkened, and
heard (Mal. iii. 16). And whence can it be shown that the same applies
even to one? Because it is said, In every place where I cause my name to
be remembered I will come unto thee and I will bless thee (Exod. xx.
24). (8.) R. Eleazar, of Bertotha, said, Give unto Him of what is His,
seeing that thou and what thou hast are His: this is also found
expressed by David, who said, For all things come of Thee, and of Thine
own we have given Thee (1 Chron. xxix. 14). (9.) R. Jacob said, He who
is walking by the way and studying, and breaks off his study and says,
How fine is that tree, how fine is that fallow, him the Scripture
regards as if he had forfeited his life. (10.) R. Dostai, the son of
Jannai, said

<span id="page_280">p. 280</span>

in the name of R. Meir, Whoso forgets one word of his study, him the
Scripture regards as if he had forfeited his life, for it is said, Only
take heed to thyself, and keep thy soul diligently, lest thou forget the
things which thine eyes have seen (Deut. iv. 9). Now, one might suppose
that the same result follows even if a man's study has been too hard for
him. To guard against such an inference, it is said (*ibid*.), And lest
they depart from thy mouth all the days of thy life. Thus, a person's
guilt is not established until he deliberately and of set purpose
removes those lessons from his heart. (11.) R. Chanina, the son of Dosa,
said, He in whom the fear of sin comes before wisdom, his wisdom shall
endure; but he in whom wisdom comes before the fear of sin, his wisdom
will not endure. (12.) He used to say, He whose works exceed his wisdom,
his wisdom shall endure; but he whose wisdom exceeds his works, his
wisdom will not endure. (13.) He used to say, He in whom the spirit of
his fellow-creatures takes delight, in him the Spirit of the All-present
takes delight; and he in whom the spirit of his fellow-creatures takes
not delight, in him the Spirit of the All-present takes not delight.
(14.) R. Dosa, the son of Horkinas, said Morning sleep, and midday wine,
and children's talk, and attending the houses of assembly of the
ignorant put a man out of the world. (15.) R. Eleazar Hammudai said, He
who profanes things sacred, and despises the festivals, and puts his
fellow-man to shame in public, and makes void the covenant of Abraham
our father, and makes the Torah bear a meaning other than the right,
such a one, even though knowledge of the Torah and good deeds be his,
has no share in the world to come. (16.) R. Ishmael said, Be submissive
to a superior, affable to a suppliant, and receive all men with

<span id="page_281">p. 281</span>

cheerfulness. (17.) R. Akiba said, Jesting and levity lead a man on to
lewdness. The Massorah <span id="fr_35"></span>[\*](#fn_31) is a fence
to the Torah. tithes are a fence to riches; vows are a fence to
abstinence; a fence to wisdom is silence. (18.) He used to say, Beloved
is man, for he was created in the image of God; but it was by a special
love that it was made known to him that he was created in the image of
God, as it is said, For in the image of God made he man (Gen. ix. 6).
Beloved are Israel, for they were called children of the All-present;
but it was by a special love that it was made known to them that they
were called children of the All-present, as it is said, Ye are children
unto the Lord your God (Deut. xiv. 1). Beloved are Israel, for unto them
was given the desirable instrument; but it was by a special love that it
was made known to them that that desirable instrument was theirs,
through which the world was created, as it is said, For I give you good
doctrine: forsake ye not my Law (Prov. iv. 2). (19.) Everything is
foreseen, yet freedom of choice is given; and the world is judged by
grace, yet all is according to the amount of the work. (20.) He used to
say, Everything is given on pledge, and a net is spread for all the
living: the shop is open; and the dealer gives credit; and the ledger
lies open; and the hand writes; and whosoever wishes to borrow may come
and borrow; but the collectors regularly make their daily round, and
exact payment from man whether he be content or not, and they have that
whereon they can rely in their demand, and the judgment is a judgment of
truth; and everything is prepared for the feast. (21.) R. Eleazar, the
son of Azaryah, said, Where there is no Torah, there are no manners;
where there are no manners, there is no Torah: where there is no wisdom,
there is no fear of God; where there is no fear of God, there is no
wisdom; where there is no knowledge, there is no understanding; where
there is no understanding, there is no

<span id="page_282">p. 282</span>

knowledge: where there is no meal, there is no Torah; where there is no
Torah, there is no meal. (22.) He used to say, He whose wisdom exceeds
his works, to what is he like? To a tree whose branches are many, but
whose roots are few; and the wind comes and plucks it up and overturns
it upon its face, as it is said, And he shall be like a lonely juniper
tree in the desert, and shall not see when good cometh but shall inhabit
the parched places in the wilderness, a salt land and not inhabited
(Jeremiah xvii. 6). But he whose works exceed his wisdom, to what is he
like? To a tree whose branches are few, but whose roots are many, so
that even if all the winds in the world come and blow upon it, it cannot
be stirred from its place, as it is said, And he shall be as a tree
planted by the waters; and that spreadeth out its roots by the river,
and shall not perceive when heat cometh, but his leaf shall be green;
and shall not be troubled in the year of drought, neither shall cease
from yielding fruit (Jeremiah xvii. 8). (23.) R. Eleazar Chisma said,
The laws concerning the sacrifices of birds and the purification of
women are ordinances of moment; astronomy and geometry are the
after-courses of wisdom.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he,
was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious
Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his
righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah
xlii. 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> IV.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah
lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified.

(1.) Ben Zoma said, Who is wise? He who learns from

<span id="page_283">p. 283</span>

all men, as it is said, From all my teachers I have gotten understanding
(Psalm cxix. 99). Who is mighty? He who subdues his passions, as it is
said, He that is slow to anger is better than the mighty, and he that
ruleth over his spirit than he that taketh a city (Prov. xvi. 32). Who
is rich? He who rejoices in his portion, as it is said, When thou eatest
the labor of thine hands, happy art thou, and it shall be well with thee
(Psalm cxxviii. 2); happy art thou in this world, and it shall be well
with thee in the world to come. Who is honored? He who honors others, as
it is said, For them that honor me I will honor, and they that despise
me shall be held in contempt (1 Sam. ii. 30). (2.) Ben Azzai said, Run
to do even a slight precept, and flee from transgression; for precept
draws precept in its train, and transgression, transgression; for the
recompense of a precept is a precept, and the recompense of a
transgression, a transgression. (3.) He used to say, Despise not any
man, and carp not at any thing; for there is not a man that has not his
hour, and there is not a thing that has not its place. (4.) R. Levitas,
of Jabneh, said, Be exceedingly lowly of spirit, since the hope of man
is but the worm. (5.) R. Jochanan, the son of Berokah, said, Whosoever
profanes the Name of Heaven in secret will suffer the penalty for it in
public; and this, whether the Heavenly Name be profaned in ignorance or
in wilfulness. (6.) R. Ishmael, his son, said, He who learns in order to
teach, to him the means will be vouchsafed both to learn and to teach;
but he who learns in order to practice, to him the means will be
vouchsafed to learn and to teach, to observe and to practice. (7.) R.
Zadok said, Separate not thyself from the congregation; (in the judge's
office) act not the counsel's part; make not of the Torah a crown
wherewith to aggrandise thyself, nor a spade wherewith to dig. So also
used Hillel to say, He who makes a worldly use of the crown of the Torah
shall waste away. Hence thou mayest infer, that whosoever derives a
profit for himself from the words of the Torah is

<span id="page_284">p. 284</span>

helping on his own destruction. (8.) R. José said, Whoso honors the
Torah will himself be honored by mankind, but whoso dishonors the Torah
will himself be dishonored by mankind. (9.) R. Ishmael, his son, said,
He who shuns the judicial office rids himself of hatred, robbery and
vain swearing; but he who presumptuously lays down
[decisions](errata.htm#6) is foolish, wicked and of an arrogant spirit.
(10.) He used to say, Judge not alone, for none may judge alone save
One; neither say (to thy judicial colleagues), Accept my view, for the
choice is theirs (to concur); and it is not for thee (to compel
concurrence). (11.) R. Jonathan said, Whoso fulfils the Torah in the
midst of poverty shall in the end fulfil it in the midst of wealth; and
whoso neglects the Torah in the midst of wealth shall in the end neglect
it in the midst of poverty. (12.) R. Meir said, Lessen thy toil for
worldly goods, and be busy in the Torah; be humble of spirit before all
men; if thou neglectest the Torah, many causes for neglecting it will
present themselves to thee, but if thou laborest in the Torah, He has
abundant recompense to give thee. (13.) R. Eliezer, the son of Jacob,
said, He who does one precept has gotten himself one advocate; and he
who commits one transgression has gotten himself one accuser. Repentance
and good deeds are as a shield against punishment. (14.) R. Jochanan,
the sandal maker, said, Every assembly which is in the Name of Heaven
will in the end be established, but that which is not in the Name of
Heaven will not in the end be established. (15.) R. Eleazar, the son of
Shammua, said, Let the honor of thy disciple be as dear to thee as thine
own, and the honor of thine associate be like the fear of thy master,
and the fear of thy master like the fear of Heaven. (16.) Judah said, Be
cautious in study, for an error in study may

<span id="page_285">p. 285</span>

amount to presumptuous sin. (17.) R. Simeon said, There are three
crowns: the crown of Torah, the crown of priesthood, and the crown of
kingdom; but the crown of a good name excels them all. (18.) R. Nehorai
said, Wander forth to a home of the Torah, and say not that the Torah
will come after thee; for there thy associates will establish thee in
the possession of it; and lean not upon thine own understanding. (19.)
R. Jannai said, It is not in our power to explain either the prosperity
of the wicked or the afflictions of the righteous. (20.) R. Mattithyah,
the son of Cheresh, said, Be beforehand in the salutation of peace to
all men; and be rather a tail to lions than a head to foxes. (21.) R.
Jacob said, This world is like a vestibule before the world to come;
prepare thyself in the vestibule, that thou mayest enter into the hall.
(22.) He used to say, Better is one hour of repentance and good deeds in
this world than the whole life of the world to come; and better is one
hour of blissfulness of spirit in the world to come than the whole life
of this world (23.) R. Simeon, the son of Eleazar, said, Do not appease
thy fellow in the hour of his anger, and comfort him not in the hour
when his dead lies before him, and question him not in the hour of his
vow, and strive not to see him in the hour of his disgrace. (24.) Samuel
the younger used to quote, Rejoice not when thine enemy falleth, and let
not thine heart be glad when he stumbleth: lest the Lord see it and it
displease him, and he turn away his wrath from him (Prov. xxiv. 17, 18).
(25.) Elisha, the son of Abuyah, said, If one learns as a child, what is
it like? Like ink written on clean paper. If one learns as an old man,
what is it like? Like ink written on blotted paper.

<span id="page_286">p. 286</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> (26.) R. José, the
son of Judah, of Chephar Babli, said, He who learns from the young, to
what is he like? To one who eats unripe grapes, and drinks wine from his
vat. And he who learns from the old, to what is he like? To one who eats
ripe grapes, and drinks old wine. (27.) R. Meir said, Look not at the
flask, but at what it contains: there may be a new flask full of old
wine, and an old flask that has not even new wine in it. (28.) R.
Eleazar Hakkappar said, Envy, cupidity and ambition take a man from the
world. (29.)He used to say, They that are born are destined to die; and
the dead to be brought to life again; and the living to be judged, to
know, to make known, and to be made conscious that he is God, he the
Maker, he the Creator, he the Discerner, he the Judge, he the Witness,
he the Complainant; he it is that will in future judge, blessed be he,
with whom there is no unrighteousness, nor forgetfulness, nor respect of
persons, nor taking of bribes: know also that everything is according to
the reckoning: and let not thy imagination give thee hope that the grave
will be a place of refuge for thee; for perforce thou wast formed, and
perforce thou wast born, and thou livest perforce, and perforce thou
wilt die, and perforce thou wilt in the future have to give account and
reckoning before the Supreme King of kings, the Holy One, blessed be he.

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One blessed be he,
was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious
Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his
righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah
xlii. 21).

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_287">p. 287</span>

##### <span class="smallcaps">Chapter</span> V.

All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as it is said (Isaiah
lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they shall inherit the
land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I
may be glorified.

\(1\) With ten Sayings <span id="fr_36"></span>[\*](#fn_32) the world
was created. What does this teach us? Could it not have been created
with one Saying? It is to make known the punishment that will befall the
wicked who destroy the world that was created with ten Sayings, as well
as the goodly reward that will be bestowed upon the just who preserve
the world that was created with ten sayings. (2.) There were ten
generations from Adam to Noah, to make known how longsuffering God is,
seeing that all those generations continued provoking him, until he
brought upon them the waters of the flood. (3.) There were ten
generations from Noah to Abraham, to make known how longsuffering God
is, seeing that all those generations continued provoking him, until
Abraham our father came, and received the reward they should all have
earned. (4.) With ten trials our father Abraham was tried, and he stood
firm in them all, to make known how great was the love of our father
Abraham. (5.) Ten miracles were wrought for our fathers in Egypt, and
ten at the Sea. (6.) Ten plagues did the Holy One, blessed be he, bring
upon the Egyptians in Egypt, and ten at the Sea. (7.) With ten
temptations did our fathers tempt the Holy One, blessed be he, in the
wilderness, as it is said, And they have tempted me these ten times, and
have not hearkened to my voice (Numb. xiv. 22). (8.) Ten miracles were
wrought for our fathers in the Temple: no woman miscarried from the
scent of the holy flesh; the holy flesh never became putrid; no fly was
seen in the slaughter house: no unclean accident ever befell the high
priest on the Day of

<span id="page_288">p. 288</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Atonement; the
rain never quenched the fire of the wood-pile on the altar; neither did
the wind overcome the column of smoke that arose therefrom; nor was
there ever found any disqualifying defect in the omer (of new barley,
offered on the second day of Passover), or in the two loaves (the first
fruits of the wheat-harvest, offered on Pentecost), or in the shewbread;
though the people stood closely pressed together, they found ample space
to prostrate themselves; never did serpent or scorpion injure any one in
Jerusalem; nor did any man ever say to his fellow, The place is too
strait for me to lodge over night in Jerusalem. (9.) Ten things were
created on the eve of Sabbath in the twilight: <span
id="fr_37"></span>[\*](#fn_33) the mouth of the earth (Numb. xvi. 32);
the mouth of the well (*Ibid*. xxi. 16); the mouth of the ass (*Ibid*.
xxii. 28); the rainbow; the manna; the rod (Exod. iv. 17); the
Shamir; <span id="fr_38"></span>[†](#fn_34) the shape of the written
characters; the writing, and the tables of stone: some say the
destroying spirits also, and the sepulchre of Moses, and the ram of
Abraham our father; and others say, tongs also made with tongs <span
id="fr_39"></span>[‡](#fn_35). (10.) There are seven marks of an
uncultured, and seven of a wise man. The wise man does not speak before
him who is greater than he in wisdom; and does not break in upon the
speech of his fellow; he is not hasty to answer; he questions according
to the subject matter, and answers to the point; he speaks upon the
first thing first, and upon the last last; regarding that which he has
not understood he says, I do not understand it, and he acknowledges the
truth. The reverse of all this is to be found in an uncultured man.
(11.) Seven kinds of punishment come into the world for seven important
transgressions. If some give their tithes and others do not, a dearth
ensues from drought, and some suffer hunger while others are full. If
they all determine to give no tithes, a dearth ensues from tumult and
drought. If they further resolve

<span id="page_289">p. 289</span>

not to give the dough-cake (Numb. xv. 20), an exterminating dearth
ensues. Pestilence comes into the world to fulfil those death penalties
threatened in the Torah, the execution of which, however, is not within
the function of a human tribunal, and for the violation of the law
regarding the fruits of the seventh year (Levit. xxv. 1–7). The sword
comes into the world for the delay of justice, and for the perversion of
justice, and on account of the offence of those who interpret the Torah
not according to its true sense. Noxious beasts come into the world for
vain swearing, and for the profanation of the Divine Name. Captivity
comes into the world on account of idolatry, immorality, bloodshed, and
the neglect of the year of rest for the soil. (12.) At four periods
pestilence grows apace: in the fourth year, in the seventh, at the
conclusion of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the Feast of
Tabernacles in each year: in the fourth year, for default of giving the
tithe to the poor in the third year (Deut. xiv. 28, 29); in the seventh
year, for default of giving the tithe to the poor in the sixth year; at
the conclusion of the seventh year, for the violation of the law
regarding the fruits of the seventh year, and at the conclusion of the
Feast of Tabernacles in each year, for robbing the poor of the grants
legally assigned to them. <span id="fr_40"></span>[\*](#fn_36) (13.)
There are four characters among men: he who says, What is mine is mine
and what is thine is thine, his is a neutral character:—some say, this
is a character like that of Sodom; he who says, What is mine is thine
and what is thine is mine, is a boor; he who says, What is mine is thine
and what is thine is thine, is a saint; he who says, What is thine is
mine and what is mine is mine, is a wicked man. (14.) There are four
kinds of tempers: he whom it is easy to provoke and easy to pacify, his
loss disappears in his gain; he whom it is hard to provoke and hard to
pacify, his gain disappears in his loss; he whom it is hard to provoke
and easy to pacify is a saint; he whom it is easy to provoke and hard to
pacify is a wicked man. (15.) There are four qualities in disciples: he
who quickly understands and quickly forgets, his gain disappears in his
loss; he who understands with difficulty and forgets with difficulty,
his loss disappears

<span id="page_290">p. 290</span>

in his gain; he who understands quickly and forgets with difficulty, his
is a good portion; he who understands with difficulty and forgets
quickly, his is an evil portion. (16.) As to almsgiving there are four
dispositions: he who desires to give, but that others should not give,
his eye is evil towards what appertains to others (since almsgiving
brings blessing to the giver); he who desires that others should give,
but will not give himself, his eye is evil against what is his own; he
who gives and wishes others to give is a saint; he who will not give and
does not wish others to give is a wicked man. (17.) There are four
characters suggested by those who attend the house of study: he who goes
and does not practise secures the reward for going; he who practises but
does not go secures the reward for practising; he who goes and practises
is a saint; he who neither goes nor practises is a wicked man. (18.)
There are four qualities among those that sit before the wise: they are
like a sponge, a funnel, a strainer, or a sieve: a sponge, which sucks
up everything; a funnel, which lets in at one end and out at the other;
a strainer, which lets the wine pass out and retains the lees; a sieve,
which lets out the bran and retains the fine flour. (19.) Whenever love
depends upon some material cause, with the passing away of that cause,
the love too passes away; but if it be not dependent upon such a cause,
it will not pass away for ever. Which love was that which depended upon
a material cause? Such was the love of Amnon and Tamar. And that which
depended upon no such cause? Such was the love of David and Jonathan.
(20.) Every controversy that is in the Name of Heaven shall in the end
lead to a permanent result, but every controversy that is not in the
Name of Heaven shall not lead to a permanent result. Which controversy
was that which was in the Name of Heaven? Such was the controversy of
Hillel and Shammai. And that which was not in the Name of Heaven? Such
was the controversy of Korah and all his company. (21.) Whosoever causes
the multitude to be righteous, through him no sin shall be brought
about: but he who causes the multitude to sin

<span id="page_291">p. 291</span>

shall not have the means to repent (the sins of others being beyond the
remedial action of his repentance). Moses was righteous and made the
multitude righteous; the righteousness of the multitude was laid upon
him, as it is said, He executed the justice of the Lord and his
judgments with Israel (Deut. xxxiii. 21). Jeroboam, the son of Nebat,
sinned and caused the multitude to sin: the sin of the multitude was
laid upon him, as it is said, For the sins of Jeroboam which he sinned
and which he made Israel to sin (1 Kings xv. 30). (22.) Whosoever has
these three attributes is of the disciples of Abraham our father, but
whosoever has three other attributes is of the disciples of Balaam the
wicked. A good eye, a humble mind and a lowly spirit (are the tokens) of
the disciples of Abraham our father; an evil eye, a haughty mind and a
proud spirit (are the signs) of the disciples of Balaam the wicked. What
is the difference between the disciples of Abraham our father and those
of Balaam the wicked? The disciples of Abraham our father enjoy this
world and inherit the world to come, as it is said, That I may cause
those that love me to inherit substance, and may fill all their
treasuries (Prov. viii. 21); the disciples of Balaam the wicked inherit
Gehinnom and descend into the pit of destruction, as it is said, But
thou, O God, wilt bring them down into the pit of destruction:
bloodthirsty and deceitful men shall not live out half their days; but I
will trust in thee (Psalm lv. 24). (23.) Judah, the son of Tema, said,
Be strong as a leopard, light as an eagle, fleet as a hart, and strong
as a lion, to do the will of thy Father who is in heaven. He used to
say, The bold-faced are for Gehinnom, the shame-faced for the Garden of
Eden. (He said further) May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of
our fathers, that the Temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant
our portion in thy Law. (24.) He used to say, At five years the age is
reached for the study of the Scripture, at ten for the study of the
Mishnah, at thirteen for the

<span id="page_292">p. 292</span>

fulfilment of the commandments, at fifteen for the study of the Talmud,
at eighteen for marriage, at twenty for seeking a livelihood, at thirty
for entering into one's full strength, at forty for understanding, at
fifty for counsel, at sixty a man attains old age, at seventy the hoary
head, at eighty the gift of special strength (Psalm xc. 10), at ninety
he bends beneath the weight of years, at a hundred he is as if he were
already dead and had passed away from the world. (25.) Ben Bag Bag said,
Turn it (the Torah) and turn it over again, for everything is in it, and
contemplate it, and wax gray and old over it, and stir not from it, for
thou canst have no better rule than this. (26.) Ben He He said,
According to the labor is the reward.

<span class="small">Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy
One, blessed be he, was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave
them a copious Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased
the Lord, for his righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it
honorable (Isaiah xlii. 21).</span>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### CHAPTER VI <span id="fr_41"></span>[\*](#fn_37)

<span class="small">All Israel have a portion in the world to come, as
it is said (Isaiah lx. 21), And thy people shall be all righteous; they
shall inherit the land for ever, the branch of my planting, the work of
my hands, that I may be glorified.</span>

The sages taught the following in the style of the Mishnah,—Blessed be
he that made choice of them and their Mishnah. (1.) R. Meir said.
Whosoever labors in the Torah for its own sake merits many things; and
not only so, but the whole world is indebted to him: he is called
friend, beloved, a lover of the All-present, a lover of mankind: it
clothes him

<span id="page_293">p. 293</span>

in meekness and reverence; it fits him to become just, pious, upright
and faithful; it keeps him far from sin, and brings him near to virtue:
through him the world enjoys counsel and sound knowledge, understanding
and strength, as it is said, Counsel is mine, and sound knowledge; I am
understanding; I have strength (Prov. viii. 14 <span
id="fr_42"></span>[\*](#fn_38)): and it gives him sovereignty and
dominion and discerning judgment; to him the secrets of the Torah are
revealed; he is made like a never-failing fountain, and like a river
that flows on with ever-sustained vigor he becomes modest,
longsuffering, and forgiving of insults; and it magnifies and exalts him
above all things. (2.) R. Joshua, the son of Levi, said, Every day a
Bath-kol (a heavenly voice) goes forth from Mount Sinai, proclaiming
these words, Woe to mankind for contempt of the Torah, for whoever does
not labor in the Torah is said to be under the divine censure, as it is
said, As a ring of gold in a swine's snout, so is a fair woman who
turneth aside from discretion (Prov. xi. 22); and it says, And the
tables were the work of God, and the writing was the writing of God,
graven upon the tables. Read not *charuth* (graven), but *cheruth*
(freedom), for no man is free but he who labors in the Torah. But
whosoever labors in the Torah, behold he shall be exalted, as it is
said, And from Mattanah to Nachaliel, and from Nachaliel to Bamoth <span
id="fr_43"></span>[‡](#fn_39) (Numb. xxi. 19). (3.) He who learns from
his fellow a single chapter, a single rule, a single verse, a single
expression, or even a single letter, ought to pay him honor, for so we
find with David, King of Israel, who learnt only two things from
Ahitophel, <span id="fr_44"></span>[§](#fn_40) and yet regarded him as
his master, His guide and his familiar friend, as it is said, But it was
thou, a man, mine equal, my guide, and my familiar friend (Psalm 1v.
14). Now, is it not an argument from minor to major? Ii David, the King
of Israel, who learned only two things from Ahitophel, regarded him as
his master, guide and familiar

<span id="page_294">p. 294</span>

friend, how much more ought one who learns from his fellow a chapter,
rule, verse, expression, or even a single letter, to pay him honor? And
honor is nothing but Torah, as it is said, The wise shall inherit honor
(Prov. iii. 35); and the perfect shall inherit good (*Ibid*. xxviii.
10). And good is nothing but Torah, as it is said, For I give you good
doctrine, forsake ye not my Torah (*Ibid*. iv. 2). (4.) This is the way
that is becoming for the study of the Torah: a morsel of bread with salt
thou must eat, and water by measure thou must drink, thou must sleep
upon the ground, and live a life of trouble the while thou toilest in
the Torah. If thou doest this, Happy shalt thou be and it shall be well
with thee (Psalm cxxviii. 2); happy shalt thou be in this world, and it
shall be well with thee in the world to come. (5.) Seek not greatness
for thyself, and court not honor; let thy works exceed thy learning; and
crave not after the table of kings; for thy table is greater than
theirs, and thy crown is greater than theirs, and thy Employer is
faithful to pay thee the reward of thy work. (6.) The Torah is greater
than the priesthood and than royalty, seeing that royalty demands thirty
qualifications, <span id="fr_45"></span>[\*](#fn_41) the priesthood
twenty-four, <span id="fr_46"></span>[†](#fn_42) while the Torah is
acquired by forty-eight. And these are they: By audible study; by
distinct pronunciation; by understanding and discernment of the heart;
by awe, reverence, meekness, cheerfulness; by ministering to the sages,
by attaching oneself to colleagues, by discussion with disciples; by
sedateness; by knowledge of the Scripture and of the Mishnah; by
moderation in business, in intercourse with the world, in pleasure, in
sleep, in conversation, in laughter; by longsuffering; by a good heart;
by faith in the wise; by resignation

<span id="page_295">p. 295</span>

under chastisement; by recognizing one's place, rejoicing in one's
portion, putting a fence to one's words, claiming no merit for oneself;
by being beloved, loving the All-present, loving mankind, loving just
courses, rectitude and reproof; by keeping oneself far from honor, not
boasting of one's learning, nor delighting in giving decisions; by
bearing the yoke with one's fellow, judging him favorably, and leading
him to truth and peace; by being composed in one's study; by asking and
answering, hearing and adding thereto (by one's own reflection); by
learning with the object of teaching, and by learning with the object of
practising; by making one's master wiser, fixing attention upon his
discourse, and reporting a thing in the name of him who said it. So thou
hast learnt, Whosoever reports a thing in the name of him who said it
brings deliverance into the world, as it is said, And Esther told the
king in the name of Mordecai (Esther ii. 22). (7.) Great is the Torah
which gives life to those that practise it in this world and in the
world to come, as it is said, For they are life unto those that find
them, and health to all their flesh (Prov. iv. 22); and it says, It
shall be health to thy navel, and marrow to thy bones (*Ibid*. iii. 8);
and it says, It is a tree of life to them that grasp it, and of them
that uphold it every one is rendered happy (*Ibid*. iii. 18); and it
says, For they shall be a chaplet of grace unto thy head, and chains
about thy neck (*Ibid*. i. 9); and it says, It shall give to thine head
a chaplet of grace: a crown of glory it shall deliver to thee (*Ibid*.
iv. 9); and it says, For by me thy days shall be multiplied, and the
years of thy life shall be increased (*Ibid*. ix. 11); and it says,
Length of days is in its right hand; in its left hand are riches and
honor (*Ibid*. iii. 16); and it says, For length of days, and years of
life, and peace shall they add to thee (*Ibid*. iii. 2). (8.) R. Simeon,
the son of Judah, in the name of R. Simeon, the son of Jochai, said,
Beauty, strength, riches, honor, wisdom, old age and a hoary head and
children are comely to the righteous and comely to the world, as it is
said, The hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found

<span id="page_296">p. 296</span>

in the way of righteousness (*Ibid*. xvi. 31); and it says, The glory of
young men is their strength, and the adornment of old men is the hoary
head (*Ibid*. xx. 29); and it says, A crown unto the wise is their
riches (*Ibid*. xiv. 24); and it says, Children's children are the crown
of old men, and the adornment of children are their fathers (*Ibid*.
xvii. 6); and it is said, Then the moon shall be confounded and the sun
ashamed; for the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion and in
Jerusalem, and before his elders shall be glory (Isaiah xxiv. 23). R.
Simeon, the son of Menasya, said, These seven qualifications which the
sages enumerated as becoming to the righteous were all realized in Rabbi
Judah the Prince, and in his sons. (9.) R. José, the son of Kisma, said,
I was once walking by the way, when a man met me and saluted me, and I
returned the salutation. He said to me, Rabbi, from what place art thou?
I said to him, I come from a great city of sages and scribes. He said to
me, If thou art willing to dwell with us in our place, I will give thee
a thousand thousand golden dinars and precious stones and pearls. I said
to him, Wert thou to give me all the silver and gold and precious stones
and pearls in the world, I would not dwell anywhere but in a home of the
Torah; and thus it is written in the book of Psalms by the hands of
David, King of Israel, The law of thy mouth is better unto me than
thousands of gold and silver (Psalm cxix. 72); and not only so, but in
the hour of man's departure neither silver nor gold nor precious stones
nor pearls accompany him, but only Torah and good works, as it is said,
When thou walkest it shall lead thee; when thou liest down it shall
watch over thee; and when thou awakest it shall talk with thee (Prov.
vi. 22):—when thou walkest it shall lead thee—in this world; when thou
liest down it shall watch over thee—in the grave; and when thou awakest
it shall talk with thee—in the world to come. And it says, The silver is
mine, and the gold is

<span id="page_297">p. 297</span>

mine, saith the Lord of hosts (Haggai ii. 8). (10.) Five pos. sessions
the Holy One, blessed be he, made especially his own in his world, and
these are they, The Torah, heaven and earth, Abraham, Israel, and the
house of the sanctuary. Whence know we this of the Torah? Because it is
written, The Lord possessed me as the beginning of his way, before his
works, from of old (Prov. viii. 22). Whence of heaven and earth? Because
it is written, Thus saith the Lord, The heaven is my throne, and the
earth is my footstool: what manner of house will ye build unto me? and
what manner of place for my rest? (Isaiah lxvi. 1); and it says, How
manifold are thy works, O Lord! In wisdom hast thou made them all: the
earth is full of thy possessions (Psalm civ. 24). Whence of Abraham?
Because it is written, And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of
the Most High God, possessor of heaven and earth (Genesis xiv. 19).
Whence of Israel? Because it is written, Till thy people pass over, O
Lord, till the people pass over which thou hast acquired (Exod. xv. 16);
and it says, As for the saints that are in the earth, they are noble
ones in whom is all my delight (Psalm xvi. 3). Whence of the house of
the sanctuary? Because it is written, The place, O Lord, which thou hast
made for thee to dwell in, the sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have
prepared (Exod. xv. 17); and it says, And he brought them to the border
of his sanctuary, to this mountain which his right hand had acquired
(Psalm lxxviii. 54). (11). Whatsoever the Holy One, blessed be he,
created, in his world he created but for his glory, as it is said,
Everything that is called by my name, it is for my glory I have created
it, I have formed it, yea, I have made it (Isaiah xliii. 7); and it
says, The Lord shall reign for ever and ever (Exod. xv. 18).

Rabbi Chananya, the son of Akashya, said, The Holy One, blessed be he,
was pleased to make Israel worthy; wherefore he gave them a copious
Torah and many commandments, as it is said, It pleased the Lord, for his
righteousness’ sake, to magnify the Torah and make it honorable (Isaiah
xlii. 21).

*"It is our duty," etc., [p. 262](spb22.htm#page_262). Mourner's
Kaddish, [p. 263](spb22.htm#page_263)*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_25"></span>[271:\*](spb23.htm#fr_29) The word Torah is left
untranslated. It is variously used for the Pentateuch, the Scriptures,
the Oral Law, as well as for the whole body of religious truth, study
and practice.

<span id="fn_26"></span>[276:\*](spb23.htm#fr_30) The highest gifts, if
abused, may prove a source of suffering to those whom they are designed
to benefit.

<span id="fn_27"></span>[278:\*](spb23.htm#fr_31) Where biblical verses
are employed not in a strictly literal sense, it is to be observed that
the Rabbis, like other preachers, made use of such passages for
homiletical purposes, as illustrations of their meaning rather than as
logical foundations for their teaching. It was felt that additional
weight would attach to any opinion with which some point of contact
could he found in the Scriptures.

<span id="fn_28"></span>[279:\*](spb23.htm#fr_32) Ten are the minimum to
form a "congregation" (Edah).

<span id="fn_29"></span>[279:†](spb23.htm#fr_33) Five, the minimum to
constitute a "band" (Aguddah).

<span id="fn_30"></span>[279:‡](spb23.htm#fr_34) The smallest judicial
tribunal was composed of three judges.

<span id="fn_31"></span>[281:\*](spb23.htm#fr_35) The oral tradition, in
accordance with which the text of the Scriptures is determined and
interpreted.

<span id="fn_32"></span>[287:\*](spb23.htm#fr_36) In Genesis i. the
sentence, "And God said," occurs nine times. Verse 1, "In the beginning
God created heaven and earth," is taken as another "Saying" in
accordance with Psalm xxxiii. 6. "By the word of the Lord were the
heavens made."

<span id="fn_33"></span>[288:\*](spb23.htm#fr_37) All phenomena that
seemed to partake at once of the natural and the supernatural, were
conceived as having had their origin in the interval between the close
of the work of creation and the commencement of the Sabbath.

<span id="fn_34"></span>[288:†](spb23.htm#fr_38) A worm, spoken of in
the legendary history of Solomon (See *Gittin*, 68*a*, *Sotah*, 48*b*).
It is said to have had the power of splitting the hardest stone upon
which it was placed, and was therefore used by Solomon in building the
Temple, in the construction of which no iron tool was to be employed.

<span id="fn_35"></span>[288:‡](spb23.htm#fr_39) A type of the various
means and instruments which, tending in their descent and distribution
to the benefit of mankind, have their origin with God.

<span id="fn_36"></span>[289:\*](spb23.htm#fr_40) The gleanings, the
forgotten sheaves, and the corners of the field. *See* Levit. xix. 9;
Deut. xxiv. 19.

<span id="fn_37"></span>[292:\*](spb23.htm#fr_41) This chapter, called
Chapter on the Acquisition of the Torah, or Boraitha of R. Meir, is not
a part of the Mishnah, but of the collection of rabbinical dicta next in
authority to it, and known as Boraithoth, or "External Teachings."

<span id="fn_38"></span>[293:\*](spb23.htm#fr_42) Wisdom, of which the
Torah is the embodiment, speaks these words.

<span id="fn_39"></span>[293:‡](spb23.htm#fr_43) A play upon the words
of the text: Mattanah = "gift"; Nachaliel = "the heritage of God";
Bamoth = "high places."

<span id="fn_40"></span>[293:§](spb23.htm#fr_44) In the two matters
referred to in Psalm lv. 15, "We took sweet counsel together," and "We
walked into the house of God with the throng," David is said to have
followed the teaching of Ahitophel.

<span id="fn_41"></span>[294:\*](spb23.htm#fr_45) See *Sanhedrin* ch.
ii.

<span id="fn_42"></span>[294:†](spb23.htm#fr_46) See *Baba Kama*,
110*b*, and *Mid. Tanchuma*, section *Bamidbar*.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service for the Conclusion of the Sabbath](spb24)

</div>
