<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb30)  [Next](spb32.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_336">p. 336</span>

### ADDITIONAL SERVICE FOR THE FESTIVALS

*To be said on Passover, Pentecost and Tabernacles, and on the
intermediate days of Festivals*.

*The following prayer (Amidah) to "as in ancient years," [p.
347](#page_347.md), is said standing*.

O Lord, open thou my lips, and my mouth shall declare thy praise.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, God of Abraham,
God of Isaac, and God of Jacob, the great, mighty and revered God, the
most high God, who bestowest lovingkindnesses and possessest all things
who rememberest the pious deeds of the patriarchs, and in love wilt
bring a redeemer to their children's children for thy name's sake.

O King, Helper, Savior and Shield. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the Shield
of Abraham.

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save.

*From the Sabbath after the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly until the
First Day of Passover say:—*

Thou causest the wind to blow and the rain to fall.

Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness, quickenest the dead with
great mercy, supportest the falling, healest the sick, loosest the
bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in the dust. Who is like
unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth thee, O King, who
killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to spring forth? Yea,
faithful art thou to

<span id="page_337">p. 337</span>

quicken the dead. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who quickenest the dead. \*

Thou art holy, and thy name is holy, and holy beings praise thee daily.
(Selah.) Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

*When the Reader repeats the Amidah, the following is added to "holy
God," [p. 338](#page_338.md)*.

\* *Reader*.—We will reverence and sanctify thee according to the mystic
utterance of the Holy Seraphim, who hallow thy name in the sanctuary, as
it is written by the hand of thy prophet, And they called one unto the
other and said,

*Cong*.—Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: the whole earth is full
of his glory.

*Reader*.—His glory filleth the universe: his ministering angels ask one
another, Where is the place of his glory? Those over against them say,
Blessed—

*Cong*.—Blessed be the glory of the Lord from his place.

*Reader*.—From his place may he turn in mercy and be gracious unto a
people who, evening and morning, twice every day, proclaim with
constancy the unity of his name, saying in love, Hear—

*Cong*.—Hear, O Israel: the Lord our God, the Lord is One.

*Reader*.—One is Our God; he is our Father; he is our King, he is our
Savior; and he of his mercy will let us hear a second time, in the
presence of all living (his promise), "To be to you for a God."

*Cong*.—"I am the Lord your God."

<span id="page_338">p. 338</span>

*Reader*.—And in thy Holy Words it is written, saying,

*Cong*.—The Lord shall reign for ever, thy God, O Zion, unto all
generations. Praise ye the Lord.

*Reader*.—Unto all generations we will declare thy greatness, and to all
eternity we will proclaim thy holiness, and thy praise, O our God, shall
not depart front our mouth for ever, for thou art a great and holy God
and King. Blessed art thou, O Lord, the holy God.

Thou hast chosen us from all peoples; thou hast, loved us and taken
pleasure in us, and hast exalted us above all tongues; thou hast
sanctified us by thy commandments, and brought us near unto thy service,
O our King, and hast called us by thy great and holy name.

*On Sabbath add the words in brackets*.

And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God, \[Sabbaths for rest,\]
appointed times for gladness, festivals and seasons for joy; \[this
Sabbath day and\] this day of

*On Passover say:—*

The Feast of Unleavened Bread, the season of our Freedom;

*On Pentecost:—*

The Feast of Weeks, the season of the Giving of our Law;

*On Tabernacles:—*

The Feast of Tabernacles, the season of our Gladness:

<span id="page_339">p. 339</span>

*On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law*.

The Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly, the season of our Gladness.

\[in love\]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of the departure from
Egypt.

But on account of our sins we were exiled from our land, and removed far
from our country, and we are unable to go up in order to appear and
prostrate ourselves before thee, and to fulfil our obligations in thy
chosen house, that great and holy temple which was called by thy name,
because of the hand that hath been stretched out against thy sanctuary.
May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, merciful
King, that thou mayest again in thine abundant compassion have mercy
upon us and upon thy sanctuary, and mayest speedily rebuild it and
magnify its glory. Our Father, our King, do thou speedily make the glory
of thy kingdom manifest upon us; shine forth and exalt thyself upon us
in the sight of all living; bring our scattered ones among the nations
near unto thee, and gather our dispersed from the ends of the earth.
Lead us with exultation unto Zion thy city, and unto Jerusalem the place
of thy sanctuary with everlasting joy; and there we will prepare before
thee the offerings that are obligatory for us, the continual offerings
according to their order, and the additional offerings according to
their enactment; and the additional offering of \[this Sabbath day with
the additional offering of\] this

*On Passover say:—*

Feast of Unleavened Bread—

<span id="page_340">p. 340</span>

*On Pentecost:—*

Feast of Weeks—

*On Tabernacles:—*

Feast of Tabernacles—

*On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the Law*.

Eighth-day Feast of Solemn Assembly we will prepare and offer unto thee
in love according to the precept of thy will, as thou hast prescribed
for us in thy Law through the hand of Moses thy servant, by the mouth of
thy, glory, as it is said:

\[And on the Sabbath day two he-lambs of the first year without blemish,
and two-tenth parts of an ephah of fine flour for a meal offering,
mingled with oil, and the drink offering thereof; this is the burnt
offering of every Sabbath, beside the continual burnt offering and the
drink offering thereof.\]

*On the first two days of Passover say:—*

And in the first month, on the fourteenth day of the month, is the
Passover unto the Lord. And on the fifteenth day of this month shall be
a feast: seven days shall unleavened bread be eaten. On the first day
shall be an holy convocation; ye shall do no servile work.

And ye shall offer an offering made by fire, a burnt offering unto the
Lord; two young bullocks and one ram, and seven he-lambs of the first
year; they shall be unto you without blemish.

*On Passover, after the first two days, say the last paragraph only*.

<span id="page_341">p. 341</span>

*On Pentecost say:—*

And on the day of the first fruits, when ye offer a new meal offering
unto the Lord in your Feast of Weeks, ye shall have an holy convocation;
ye shall do no servile work; ye shall offer a burnt offering for a sweet
savor unto the Lord; two young bullocks, one ram, seven he-lambs of the
first year.

*On the first two days of Tabernacles say:—*

And on the fifteenth day of the seventh month ye shall have an holy
convocation; ye shall do no servile work, and ye shall keep a feast unto
the Lord seven days. And ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering
made by fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord; thirteen young bullocks,
two rams, fourteen he-lambs of the first year; they shall be without
blemish.

*On all Festivals say:—*

And their meal offering and their drink offerings as hath been ordained;
three-tenth parts of an ephah for each bullock, and two-tenth parts for
the ram, and one-tenth part for each lamb, with wine according to the
drink offering thereof, and a he-goat wherewith to make atonement, and
the two continual offerings according to their enactment.

*On the first of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles say:—*

And on the second day ye shall offer twelve young bullocks, two rams,
fourteen he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal
offering, etc.

And on the third day ye shall offer eleven bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

<span id="page_342">p. 342</span>

*On the second of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:—*

And on the third day ye shall offer eleven bullocks two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

And on the fourth day ye shall offer ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

*On the third of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:—*

And on the fourth day ye shall offer ten bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

And on the fifth day ye shall offer nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

*On the fourth of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles, say:—*

And on the fifth day ye shall offer nine bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

And on the sixth day ye shall offer eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

*On the fifth of the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles (Hoshana Rabba),
say:—*

And on the sixth day ye shall offer eight bullocks, two rams, fourteen
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

And on the seventh day ye shall offer seven bullocks, two rams, fourteen
lie-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

<span id="page_343">p. 343</span>

*On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly, and on the Rejoicing of the Law,
say:—*

On the eighth day ye shall have a solemn assembly; ye shall do no
servile work. And ye shall offer a burnt offering, an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savor unto the Lord: one bullock, one ram, seven
he-lambs of the first year without blemish. And their meal offering,
etc.

\[They that keep the Sabbath and call it a delight shall rejoice in thy
kingdom; the people that hallow the seventh day, even all of them shall
be satiated and delighted with thy goodness, seeing that thou didst find
pleasure in the seventh day, and didst hallow it; thou didst call it the
desirable of days, in remembrance of the creation.\]

Our God and God of our fathers, merciful King, have mercy upon us, O
thou good and beneficent Being, suffer thyself to be sought of us;
return unto us in thy yearning compassion for the fathers’ sake who did
thy will; rebuild thy house as at the beginning, and establish thy
sanctuary upon its site; grant that we may see it in its rebuilding, and
make us rejoice in its re-establishment; restore the priests to their
service, the Levites to their song and psalmody, and Israel to their
habitations: and there we will go up to appear and prostrate ourselves
before thee at the three periods of our festivals, according as it is
written in thy Law, Three times in the year shall all thy males appear
before the Lord thy God in the place which he shall choose, on the feast
of unleavened bread; and on the feast of weeks, and on the feast of
tabernacles: and they shall not appear before the Lord empty. Every man
shall bring according as he is able, according to tile blessing of the
Lord thy God which he hath given thee.

<span id="page_344">p. 344</span>

O Lord our God, bestow upon us the blessing of thy appointed times for
life and peace, for joy and gladness, even as thou hast been pleased to
promise that thou wouldst bless us. \[Our God and God of our fathers,
accept our rest.\] Sanctify us by thy commandments, and grant our
portion in thy Law; satisfy us with thy goodness, and gladden us with
thy salvation; purify our hearts to serve thee in truth; and let us
inherit, O Lord our God \[in love and favor,\] with joy and gladness thy
holy \[Sabbath and\] appointed times; and may Israel who hallow thy name
rejoice in thee. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who hallowest \[the Sabbath
and\] Israel and the seasons.

Accept, O Lord our God, thy people Israel and their prayer; restore the
service to the oracle of thy house; receive in love and favor both the
fire offerings of Israel and their prayer; and may the service of thy
people Israel be ever acceptable unto thee.

And let our eyes behold thy return in mercy to Zion. Blessed art thou, O
Lord, who restoreth thy divine presence unto Zion.

We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our God and the God of
our fathers for ever and ever;

*Congregation in an undertone:*

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small">We give thanks unto thee, for thou art the Lord our
God and the God of our fathers, the God of all flesh, our Creator and
the Creator of all things in the beginning.</span>

</div>

<span id="page_345">p. 345</span>

<div style="margin-left: 32px">

<span class="small"><span class="contnote">\[paragraph
continues\]</span> Blessings and thanksgivings be to thy great and holy
name, because thou hast kept us in life and hast preserved us; so mayest
thou continue to keep us in life and to preserve us. O gather our exiles
to thy holy courts to observe thy statutes, to do thy will, and to serve
thee with a perfect heart; seeing that we give thanks unto thee. Blessed
be the God to whom thanksgivings are due.</span>

</div>

thou art the Rock of our lives, the shield of our salvation through
every generation. We will give thanks unto thee and declare thy praise
for our lives which are committed unto thy hand, and for our souls which
are in thy charge, and for thy miracles, which are daily with us, and
for thy wonders and thy benefits, which are wrought at all times,
evening, morn and noon. O thou who art all-good, whose mercies fail not;
thou, merciful Being, whose lovingkindnesses never cease, we have ever
hoped in thee.

For all these things thy name, O our King, shall be continually blessed
and exalted for ever and ever.

And everything that liveth shall give thanks unto thee for ever, and
shall praise thy name in truth, O God, our salvation and our help.
Blessed art thou, O Lord, whose name is All-good, and unto whom it is
becoming to give thanks.

*At the repetition of the Amidah by the Reader, the following is
introduced:—*

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of
thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by
Aaron and

<span id="page_346">p. 346</span>

his sons, the priests, thy holy people, as it is said, The Lord bless
thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon thee, and be
gracious unto thee: the Lord turn his face unto thee, and give thee
peace.

Grant peace, welfare, blessing, grace, lovingkindness and mercy unto us
and unto all Israel, thy people. Bless us, O our Father, even all of us
together, with the light of thy countenance; for by the light of thy
countenance thou hast given us, O Lord our God, the Law of life,
lovingkindness and righteousness, blessing, mercy, life and peace; and
may it be good in thy sight to bless thy people Israel at all times and
in every hour with thy peace.

Blessed art thou, O Lord, who blessest thy people Israel with peace.

O my God! guard my tongue from evil and my lips from speaking guile; and
to such as curse me let my soul be dumb, yea, let my soul be unto all as
the dust. Open my heart to thy Law, and let my soul pursue thy
commandments. If any design evil against me, speedily make their counsel
of none effect, and frustrate their designs. Do it for the sake of thy
name, do it for the sake of thy right hand, do it for the sake of thy
holiness, do it for the sake of thy Law. In order that thy beloved ones
may be delivered, O save with thy right hand, and answer me. Let the
words of my mouth and the meditation of my heart be acceptable before
thee, O Lord, my Rock and my Redeemer. He

<span id="page_347">p. 347</span>

who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace for us and for
all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

May it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the
temple be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy
Law. And there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and
as in ancient years. Then shall the offering of Judah and Jerusalem be
pleasant unto the Lord, as in the days of old, and as in ancient years.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

##### THE ORDER OF THE BLESSING OF THE PRIESTS

*On Festivals, except on Sabbath, the following Order of the Blessing of
the Priests is added in the Additional Amidah after "acceptable unto
thee," [p. 344](#page_344.md)*.

*The Priests ascend the steps of the Ark*.

*Cong. and Reader*.—And may our prayer be acceptable unto thee as burnt
offering and as sacrifice. O thou who art merciful, we beseech thee, in
thine abundant mercy to restore thy divine presence unto Zion, and the
ordained service to Jerusalem. And let our eyes behold thy return in
mercy to Zion, and there will we worship thee in awe, as in the days of
old and as in ancient years.

<span id="page_348">p. 348</span>

*Reader*.—Blessed art thou, O Lord, whom alone we serve in awe.

*Continue "We give thanks unto thee," [p. 344](#page_344.md), to "it is
becoming to give thanks," [p. 345](#page_345.md)*.

*The Reader says to "and his sons," in an undertone*.

Our God and God of our fathers, bless us with the three-fold blessing of
thy Law written by the hand of Moses thy servant, which was spoken by
Aaron and his sons,

*Reader*.—The priests,

*Cong*.—Thy holy people, as it is said:

*The Priests pronounce the following blessing:*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast
sanctified us with the sanctity of Aaron and hast commanded us to bless
thy people Israel in love.

*Reader followed by the Priests, word for word. Cong*.

The Lord bless thee and keep thee: Amen.

The Lord make his face to shine upon thee and be gracious unto thee:
Amen,

The Lord turn his face unto thee and give thee peace. Amen. Selah.

*Continue "Grant peace," etc., [p. 346](#page_346.md), to the end of the
Amidah*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service for New Year](spb32.md)

</div>
