<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb32)  [Next](spb34.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_357">p. 357</span>

### KIDDUSH FOR NEW YEAR

*When New Year occurs on Sabbath begin here:—*

And it was evening and it was morning, the sixth day.

And the heaven and the earth were finished and all their host. And on
the seventh day God had finished his work which he had made; and he
rested on the seventh day from all his work which he had made. And God
blessed the seventh day, and he hallowed it, because he rested thereon
from all his work which God had created and made.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the
fruit of the vine.

*On Sabbath add the words in brackets*.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast chosen
us from all peoples and exalted us above all tongues, and sanctified us
by thy commandments. And thou hast given us in love, O Lord our God,
\[this Sabbath day and\] this Day of Memorial, a day of blowing the
Shofar \[on Sabbath substitute for the last phrase—a day of remembrance
of blowing the Shofar, in love\]; an holy convocation, as a memorial of
the departure from Egypt. For thou hast chosen us and hast sanctified us
above all nations; and thy word is truth and endureth for ever. Blessed
art thou, O Lord, King over all the earth, who sanctifies \[the Sabbath
and\] Israel and the Day of Memorial.

<span id="page_358">p. 358</span>

*On Saturday night the following is added:*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the
light of the fire.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who makest a
distinction between holy and profane, between light and darkness,
between Israel and other nations, between the seventh day and the six
working days. Thou hast made a distinction between the holiness of the
Sabbath and that of the festival, and hast hallowed the seventh day
above the six working days; thou hast distinguished and sanctified thy
people Israel by thy holiness. Blessed art thou, O Lord, who makest a
distinction between holy and holy.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast kept us
in life, and hast preserved us, and enabled us to reach this season.

*Kiddush and the Blessing over the Bread having been said, an apple,
dipped in honey, is taken, before partaking of which the following is
said:—*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who createst the
fruit of the tree.

*After having partaken of the apple and honey, say:—*

May it be thy will, O Lord our God, and God of our fathers, to renew
unto us a happy and pleasant year.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Additional Service for New Year](spb34.md)

</div>
