<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb39)  [Next](spb41.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_415">p. 415</span>

### ORDER OF COUNTING THE OMER

The Omer is counted from the second night of Passover until the night
before Pentecost.

Lo, I am about to fulfil the affirmative precept of the counting of the
Omer, as it is written in the Law And ye shall count unto you from the
morrow after the day of rest, from the day that ye brought the Omer of
the wave-offering, seven complete weeks they shall be; until the morrow
of the seventh week shall ye number fifty days.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast
sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning
the counting of the Omer.

1\. This is the first day of the Omer.

2\. This is the second day of the Omer.

3\. This is the third day of the Omer.

4\. This is the fourth day of the Omer.

5\. This is the fifth day of the Omer.

6\. This is the sixth day of the Omer.

7\. This is the seventh day, making one week of the Omer.

8\. This is the eighth day, making one week and one day of the Omer.

9\. This is the ninth day, making one week and two days of the Omer.

<span id="page_416">p. 416</span>

10\. This is the tenth day, making one week and three days of the Omer.

11\. This is the eleventh day, making one week and four days of the
Omer.

12\. This is the twelfth day, making one week and five days of the Omer.

13\. This is the thirteenth day, making one week and six days of the
Omer.

14\. This is the fourteenth day, making two weeks of the Omer.

15\. This is the fifteenth day, making two weeks and one day of the
Omer.

16\. This is the sixteenth day, making two weeks and two days of the
Omer.

17\. This is the seventeenth day, making two weeks and three days of the
Omer.

18\. This is the eighteenth day, making two weeks and four days of the
Omer.

19\. This is the nineteenth day, making two weeks and five days of the
Omer.

20\. This is the twentieth day, making two weeks and six days of the
Omer.

<span id="page_417">p. 417</span>

21\. This is the twenty-first, making three weeks of the Omer.

22\. This is the twenty-second day, making three weeks and one day of
the Omer.

23\. This is the twenty-third day, making three weeks and two days of
the Omer.

24\. This is the twenty-fourth day, making three weeks and three days of
the Omer.

25\. This is the twenty-fifth day, making three weeks and four days of
the Omer.

26\. This is the twenty-sixth day, making three weeks and five days of
the Omer.

27\. This is the twenty-seventh day, making three weeks and six days of
the Omer.

28\. This is the twenty-eighth day, making four weeks of the Omer.

29\. This is the twenty-ninth day, making four weeks and one day of the
Omer.

30\. This is the thirtieth day, making four weeks and two days of the
Omer.

31\. This is the thirty-first day, making four weeks and three days of
the Omer.

32\. This is the thirty-second day, making four weeks and four days of
the Omer.

33\. This is the thirty-third day, making four weeks and five days of
the Omer.

<span id="page_418">p. 418</span>

34\. This is the thirty-fourth day, making four weeks and six days of
the Omer.

35\. This is the thirty-fifth day, making five weeks of the Omer.

36\. This is the thirty-sixth day, making five weeks and one day of the
Omer.

37\. This is the thirty-seventh day, making five weeks and two days of
the Omer.

38\. This is the thirty-eighth day, making five weeks and three days of
the Omer.

39\. This is the thirty-ninth day, making five weeks and four days of
the Omer.

40\. This is the fortieth day, making rive weeks and five days of the
Omer.

41\. This is the forty-first day, making five weeks and six days of the
Omer.

42\. This is the forty-second day, making six weeks of the Omer.

43\. This is the forty-third day, making six weeks and one day of the
Omer.

44\. This is the forty-fourth day, making six weeks and two days of the
Omer.

<span id="page_419">p. 419</span>

45\. This is the forty-fifth day, making six weeks and three days of the
Omer.

46\. This is the forty-sixth day, making six weeks and four days of the
Omer.

47\. This is the forty-seventh day, making six weeks and five days of
the Omer.

48\. This is the forty-eighth day, making six weeks and six days of the
Omer.

49\. This is the forty-ninth day, making seven weeks of the Omer.

May the All-merciful restore the service of the temple to its place. May
it be thy will, O Lord our God and God of our fathers, that the temple
be speedily rebuilt in our days, and grant our portion in thy Law. And
there we will serve thee with awe, as in the days of old, and as in
ancient years.

Psalm lxvii., [p. 299](spb24.htm#page_299.md).

We beseech thee, release thy captive nation by the mighty strength of
thy right hand. Accept the joyful chant of thy people, lift us and
purify us, O revered God. O thou mighty One, guard as the apple of thine
eye them that meditate upon thy unity. Bless them, purify them, have
mercy upon them, ever vouchsafe thy righteousness unto them. O powerful
and holy Being, in thine abounding goodness lead thy congregation. Turn,
thou who art the only and exalted God, unto thy people, who are mindful
of thy holiness. Accept our prayer and hearken unto our cry, thou who
knowest all secrets. Blessed be His name, whose glorious kingdom is for
ever and ever.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service for Chanukah](spb41.md)

</div>
