<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb42)  [Next](spb44.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### GRACE BEFORE AND AFTER MEALS

<span id="page_424">p. 424</span>

*On washing the hands, previous to partaking of a Meal, say:—*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who hast
sanctified us by thy commandments, and hast given us command concerning
the washing of the hands.

*The following Blessing is said over the Bread:—*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who bringest
forth bread from the earth.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="smallcaps">Grace After Meals</span>

*On Sabbaths and Holy days, and on those days when Tachanun is not said,
Psalm cxxvi. is said:—*

Psalm cxxvi.

*A Song of Degrees*.—When the Lord turned again the captivity of Zion,
we were like unto them that dream. Then was our mouth filled with
laughter, and our tongue with exultation: then said they among the
nations, The Lord hath done great things for them. The Lord hath done
great things for us; whereat we rejoiced. Bring back our captivity, O
Lord, as the streams in the south. They that sow in tears shall reap in
joy. Though he goeth on his way weeping, bearing the store of seed, he
shall come back with joy, bearing his sheaves.

<span id="page_425">p. 425</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> *The following
Introduction is customary if three or more Males, above the age of
thirteen, have eaten at table together:*

*He who says Grace commences thus:—*

Let us say grace.

*The others respond:—*

Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for ever.

*He who says Grace proceeds:—*

With the sanction of those present,

*If there be present ten or more Males above the age of thirteen, the
words "our God" are added:—*

We will bless (our God) him of whose bounty we have partaken.

*The others respond:—*

Blessed be (our God) he of whose bounty we have partaken, and through
whose goodness we live.

*Persons present who have not partaken of the Meal, say the following:—*

Blessed be his name, yea, continually to be blessed for ever and ever.

*He who says Grace replies:—*

Blessed be (our God) he of whose bounty we have partaken, and through
whose goodness we live. Blessed be he, and blessed be his name.

*If less than three Males above the age of thirteen be present, begin
here:—*

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, who feedest the
whole world with thy goodness, with grace, with lovingkindness and
tender mercy; thou givest food to all flesh, for thy lovingkindness

<span id="page_426">p. 426</span>

endureth for ever. Through thy great goodness food hath never failed us:
O may it not fail us for ever and ever for thy great name's sake, since
thou nourishest and sustainest all beings and doest good unto all, and
providest food for all thy creatures whom thou hast created. Blessed art
thou, O Lord, who givest food unto all.

We thank thee, O Lord our God, because thou didst give as an heritage
unto our fathers a desirable, good and ample land, and because thou
didst bring us forth, O Lord our God, from the land of Egypt, and didst
deliver us from the house of bondage; as well as for thy covenant which
thou hast sealed in our flesh, thy Law which thou hast taught us, thy
statutes which thou hast made known unto us, the life, grace and
lovingkindness which thou hast vouchsafed unto us, and for the food
wherewith thou dost constantly feed and sustain us on every day, in
every season, at every hour.

*On Chanukah and Purim add, "We thank thee also for the miracles," etc.,
pp. [63](spb05.htm#page_63), [64](spb05.htm#page_64.md)*.

For all this, O Lord our God, we thank and bless thee, blessed be thy
name by the mouth of all living continually and for ever, even as it is
written, And thou shalt eat and be satisfied, and thou shalt bless the
Lord thy God for the good land which he hath given thee. Blessed art
thou, O Lord, for the land and for the food.

<span id="page_427">p. 427</span>

Have mercy, O Lord our God, upon Israel thy people, upon Jerusalem thy
city, upon Zion the abiding place of thy glory, upon the kingdom of the
house of David thine anointed, and upon the great and holy house that
was called by thy name. O our God, our Father, feed us, nourish us,
sustain, support and relieve us, and speedily O Lord our God, grant us
relief from all our troubles. We beseech thee, O Lord our God, let us
not be in need either of the gifts of flesh and blood or of their loans,
but only of thy helping hand, which is full, open, holy and ample, so
that we may not be ashamed nor confounded for ever and ever.

*On Sabbath say:—*

Be pleased, O Lord our God, to fortify us by thy commandments, and
especially by the commandment of the seventh day, this great and holy
Sabbath, since this day is great and holy before thee, that we may rest
and repose thereon in love in accordance with the precept of thy will.
In thy favor, O Lord our God, grant us such repose that there be no
trouble, grief or lamenting on the day of our rest. Let us, O Lord our
God, behold the consolation of Zion thy city, and the rebuilding of
Jerusalem thy holy city, for thou art the Lord of salvation and of
consolation.

*On New Moons and Festivals add:—*

Our God and God of our fathers! May our remembrance rise and come and be
accepted before thee, with the remembrance of our fathers. of Messiah
the

<span id="page_428">p. 428</span>

son of David thy servant, of Jerusalem thy holy city, and of all thy
people the house of Israel, bringing deliverance and well-being, grace,
lovingkindness and mercy, life and peace on this day of

*On new Moon say—*

The New Moon.

*On New Year—*

Memorial.

*On Tabernacles—*

The Feast of Tabernacles.

*On the Eighth Day of Solemn Assembly and on the Rejoicing of the
Law*—The Eighth Day Feast of Solemn Assembly.

*On Passover*.—The Feast of Unleavened Bread.

*On Pentecost*—The Feast of Weeks.

Remember us, O Lord our God, thereon for our wellbeing; be mindful of us
for blessing, and save us unto life: by thy promise of salvation and
mercy, spare us and be gracious unto us; have mercy upon us and save us;
for our eyes are bent upon thee, because thou art a gracious and
merciful God and King.

And rebuild Jerusalem the holy city speedily in out days. Blessed art
thou, O Lord, who in thy compassion rebuildest Jerusalem. Amen.

Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, King of the universe, O God, our
Father, our King, our Mighty One, our Creator, our Redeemer, our Maker,
our Holy One, the Holy One of Jacob, our Shepherd, the Shepherd of
Israel, O King, who art kind and dealest kindly with all, day by day
thou hast dealt kindly, dost deal kindly, and wilt deal kindly with us:
thou hast bestowed, thou dost bestow, thou wilt ever bestow benefits
upon us, yielding us grace, lovingkindness, mercy and relief,
deliverance and prosperity, blessing

<span id="page_429">p. 429</span>

and salvation, consolation, sustenance and supports mercy, life, peace
and all good: of no manner of good let us be in want.

The All-merciful shall reign over us for ever and ever. The All-merciful
shall be blessed in heaven and on earth. The All-merciful shall be
praised throughout all generations, glorified amongst us to all
eternity, and honored amongst us for everlasting. May the All-merciful
grant us an honorable livelihood. May the All-merciful break the yoke
from off our neck, and lead us upright to our land. May the All-merciful
send a plentiful blessing upon this house, and upon this table at which
we have eaten. May the All-merciful send us Elijah the prophet (let him
be remembered for good), who shall give us good tidings, salvation and
consolation.

*The following has to be varied according to circumstances:—*

May the All-merciful bless my honored father, the master of this house,
and my honored mother, the mistress of this house, them, their
household, their seed and all that is theirs, us also and all that is
ours, as our fathers Abraham, Isaac and Jacob were blessed each with his
own comprehensive blessing; even thus may he bless all of us together
with a perfect blessing, and let us say Amen.

<span id="page_430">p. 430</span>

Both on their and on cur behalf may there be such advocacy on high as
shall lead to enduring peace; and may we receive a blessing from the
Lord, and righteousness from the God of our salvation; and may we find
grace and good understanding in the sight of God and man.

*On Sabbath:—*

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which shall be wholly a
Sabbath and rest in the life everlasting.

*On New Moon:—*

May the All-merciful renew unto us this month for good and for blessing.

*On Festivals:—*

May the All-merciful let us inherit the day which is altogether good.

*On New Year:—*

May the All-merciful renew unto us this year for good and for blessing.

*On the Intermediate Days of Tabernacles:—*

May the All-merciful raise up for us the fallen Tabernacle of David.

May the All-merciful make us worthy of the days of the Messiah, and of
the life of the world to come.

<span id="page_431">p. 431</span>

*On Week-days:—*

Great salvation giveth he to his king. <span
id="fr_55"></span>[\*](#fn_50.md)

*On Sabbaths, Festivals, and New Moons:—*

He is a tower of salvation to his king; <span
id="fr_56"></span>[\*](#fn_50.md)

And showeth lovingkindness to his anointed, to David and to his seed,
for evermore. He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace
for us and for all Israel, and say ye, Amen.

O fear the Lord, ye his holy ones; for there is no want to them that
fear him. Young lions do lack and suffer hunger: but they that seek the
Lord shall not want any good. O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is
good: for his lovingkindness endureth for ever. Thou openest thine hand,
and satisfiest every living thing with favor. Blessed is the man that
trusteth in the Lord, and whose trust the Lord is. I have been young and
now I am old; yet have I not seen. the righteous forsaken, nor his seed
begging for bread. The Lord will give strength unto his people; the Lord
will bless his people with peace.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_50"></span>[431:\*](spb43.htm#fr_56.md) These changes are
based upon the two readings of this verse in Psalm xviii. 51, and 2 Sam.
xxii. 51 respectively.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Blessings on Various Occasions](spb44.md)

</div>
