<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb53)  [Next](spb55) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_459">p. 459</span>

### THE BURIAL SERVICE

*On those days on which Tachanun ([p. 70](spb05.htm#page_70)) is not
said, Psalm xvi. ([p. 460](#page_460)) is read instead of the
following:—*

The Rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment: a God of
faithfulness and without iniquity, just and right is he. The Rock,
perfect in every work, who can say unto him, What workest thou? He
ruleth below and above; he killeth and maketh alive: he bringeth down to
the grave, and bringeth up again. The Rock, perfect in every deed, who
can say unto him, What doest thou? O thou who speakest and doest, of thy
grace deal kindly with us, and for the sake of him who was bound like a
lamb, O hearken and do. Just in all thy ways art thou, O perfect Rock,
slow to anger and full of compassion. Spare and have pity upon parents
and children, for thine, Lord, is forgiveness and compassion. Just art
thou, O Lord, in killing and in making alive, in whose hand is the
charge of all spirits; far be it from thee to blot out our remembrance:
O let thine eyes mercifully regard us for thine, Lord, is compassion and
forgiveness. If a man live a year or a thousand years, what profiteth it
him? He shall be as though he had not been. Blessed be the true Judge,
who killeth and maketh alive. Blessed be he, for his judgment is true,
and his eye discerneth all things, and he awardeth unto man his
reckoning and his sentence, and all must render acknowledgment unto him.
We know, O Lord, that thy judgment is righteous: thou art justified when
thou speakest, and pure when thou judgest, and it is not for us to
murmur at thy method of judging; just art thou, O Lord, and righteous
are thy judgments. O true and righteous judge! Blessed be the true
judge, all whose judgments are righteous and true. The soul of every
living thing is in thy hand; thy right hand is full of righteousness.
Have mercy

<span id="page_460">p. 460</span>

upon the remnant of the flock of thy hand, and say unto the angel, Stay
thy hand. Thou art great in counsel and mighty in deed; thine eyes are
open upon all the ways of the children of men, to give unto every one
according to his ways, and according to the fruit of his doings. To
declare that the Lord is upright; he is my Rock, and there is no
unrighteousness in him. The Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away;
blessed be the name of the Lord. And he, being merciful, forgiveth
iniquity and destroyeth not: yea, many a time he turneth his anger away,
and doth not stir up all his wrath.

Psalm xvi.

*Michtam of David*.—Guard me, O God, for in thee do I take refuge. I say
unto the Lord, Thou art my lord: I have no good beyond thee. As for the
saints that are in the earth, they are the noble ones in whom is all my
delight. Their sorrows will be multiplied that have gotten unto
themselves another God: their drink offerings of blood will I not pour
out, nor take their names upon my lips. The Lord is the portion of mine
inheritance and of my cup: thou maintainest my lot. The lines are fallen
unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a delightsome heritage. I will
bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel: yea, my reins admonish me in
the night seasons. I have set the Lord always before me: because he is
at my right hand, I shall not be moved. Therefore my heart rejoiceth and
my glory is glad: my flesh also will dwell in safety. For thou will not
abandon my soul to the grave: neither wilt thou suffer thy loving one to
see the pit. Thou wilt make known to me the path of life: in thy
presence is fulness of joy; at thy right hand are pleasures from
evermore.

*The coffin is borne from the Hall to the Burial Ground, Those who have
not visited the Burial Ground for thirty days, say the following:—*

Blessed be the Lord our God, King of the universe, who formed you in
judgment, who nourished and sustained you in judgment, who brought death
on you in judgment, who knoweth the number of you all in judgment, and
will hereafter restore you to life in judgment. Blessed art thou. O
Lord, who quickenest the dead.

<span id="page_461">p. 461</span>

Thou, O Lord, art mighty for ever, thou quickenest the dead, thou art
mighty to save. Thou sustainest the living with lovingkindness,
quickenest the dead with great mercy, supportest the falling, healest
the sick, loosest the bound, and keepest thy faith to them that sleep in
the dust. Who is like unto thee, Lord of mighty acts, and who resembleth
thee, O King, who killest and quickenest, and causest salvation to
spring forth? Yea, faithful art thou to quicken the dead.

*When the coffin is lowered into the Grave, the following is said, the
sentence being varied according to the sex of the departed:—*

May he come to his place in peace.

May she come to her place in peace.

*On quitting the Burial Ground it is customary to pluck some grass, and
to say one of the following sentences:—*

And they of the city shall flourish like the grass of the earth.

He remembereth that we are dust.

*All those who have been present at the Interment wash their hands and
say:—*

He will destroy death for ever; and the Lord God will wipe away tears
from off all faces; and the rebuke of his people shall he take away from
off all the earth: for the Lord hath spoken it.

*They then return to the Hall, and say, "And let the pleasantness of the
Lord our God be upon us," to "my salvation," [p.
439](spb45.htm#page_439)*.

<span id="page_462">p. 462</span>

*The following Kaddish is said by children after the Burial of their
Parents. On those days on which Tachanun is not said ([p.
70](spb05.htm#page_70)) the Kaddish, [p. 94](spb05.htm#page_94), is
substituted*.

*Mourners*.—May his great name be magnified and sanctified in the world
that is to be created anew, where he will quicken the dead, and raise
them up into life eternal; will rebuild the city of Jerusalem, and
establish his temple in the midst thereof; and will up, root all alien
worship from the earth and restore the worship of the true God. O may
the Holy One, blessed be he, reign in his sovereignty and glory during
your life and during your days, and during the life of all the house of
Israel, even speedily and at a near time, and say ye, Amen.

*Cong. and Mourners*.—Let his great name be blessed for ever and to all
eternity.

*Mourners*.—Blessed, praised and glorified, exalted, extolled and
honored, magnified and lauded be the name of the Holy One, blessed be
he; though he be high above all blessings and hymns, praises and
consolations, which are uttered in the world; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—Let the name of the Lord be blessed from this time forth and for
evermore.

*Mourners*.—May there be abundant peace from heaven, and life for us and
for all Israel; and say ye, Amen.

*Cong*.—My help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

*Mourners*.—He who maketh peace in his high places, may he make peace
for us and for all Israeli and say ye, Amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Prayer in the House of Mourning](spb55)

</div>
