<div class="filenav">

[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](spb49)  [Next](spb51.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index.md)  
*The Standard Prayer Book*, tr. by Simeon Singer, \[1915\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_451">p. 451</span>

### GRACE AFTER THE MEAL FOLLOWING A CIRCUMCISION

*He who says Grace begins thus:—*

Let us say grace.

*The others respond:—*

Blessed be the name of the Lord from this time forth and for ever.

*He who says Grace repeats the last sentence, and continues:—*

We will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the Faithful: blessed
are ye of the Lord.

*The last sentence is repeated by the company present:—*

With the sanction of the awful and revered God, who is a refuge in times
of trouble, the God girt with strength, the Lord mighty on high, we will
give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye
of the Lord.

With the sanction of the holy Law, pure and clear, which Moses the
servant of the Lord commanded us to be an heritage, we will give thanks
unto thy name in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

With the sanction of the priests and Levites I will call upon the God of
the Hebrews, I will declare his glory in every region, I will bless the
Lord. We will give thanks unto thy name in the midst of the faithful:
blessed are ye of the Lord.

With the sanction of those present I will open my lips
[with](errata.htm#9.md) song, yea, my bones shall declare, Blessed is he
that cometh in the name of the Lord. We will give thanks unto thy name
in the midst of the faithful: blessed are ye of the Lord.

*Then proceed as on [p. 425](spb43.htm#page_425.md), "We will bless," etc*.

*After "in the sight of God and man," [p. 430](spb43.htm#page_430.md), the
following is introduced:—*

May the All-merciful bless the father and mother of the child: may they
be worthy to rear him, to initiate him in the precepts of the Law, and
to train him in wisdom: from this eighth day and henceforth may his
blood be accepted, and may the Lord his God be with him.

<span id="page_452">p. 452</span>

May the All-merciful bless the godfather who has observed the covenant
of Circumcision and rejoiced exceedingly to perform this deed of piety;
may he requite him for his act with a double recompense, and ever exalt
him more and more.

May the All-merciful bless the tender infant that has been circumcised
on his eighth day; may his hands and heart be firm with God, and may he
become worthy to appear before the Divine Presence three times in the
year.

*If the Mohel says Grace, one of the Company present says the following
paragraph:—*

May the All-merciful bless him who has circumcised the flesh of the
foreskin, duly fulfilling each part of the precept. The service would be
invalid of one who is timid and fainthearted, or who failed to perform
the three essentials of the ceremony.

May the All-merciful, regardful of the merit of them that are akin by
the blood of the circumcision, send us his anointed walking in his
integrity, to give good tidings and consolation to the people that is
scattered and dispersed among the peoples.

May the All-merciful send us the righteous priest, who remains withdrawn
in concealment until a throne, bright as the sun and radiant as the
diamond, shall be prepared for him, the prophet who covered his face
with his mantle and wrapped himself therein, with whom is God's covenant
of life and of peace.

*Continue, "May the All-merciful make us worthy," etc., [p.
430](spb43.htm#page_430.md)*.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Service for the Redemption of the First-Born](spb51.md)

</div>
