[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omtx08)  [Next](omtx10) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_77">p. 77</span>

# INSTALLATION CEREMONY OF THE GRAND LODGE

\[The following Installation Ceremony was prepared by Past Grand Master
John Sayles, in 1879, was approved, and has been since then used by the
M. W. Grand Lodge in installing its officers. By special permission of
his widow, Mrs. Mary E. Sayles, and son, Henry Sayles, of Abilene,
Texas, this form is incorporated in this edition, with the Official
Titles as pre-scribed in the Constitution, and some necessary
preliminary instructions by the compiler.\]

The Grand Master-elect may be installed by a Present, or a Past Grand
Master, and if by the latter, he does so by request of the retiring
Grand Master.

It is the prerogative of the newly installed Grand Master to install the
other Grand Officers; but this right is usually waived, and the officer
who installed him, Proceeds to install the remaining Grand Officers.

The hour for installation having arrived, the Installing Officer takes
the chair, calls the Grand Lodge to order, and states the order of
business. He directs the Grand Marshal to have the jewels and other
insignia of office collected and arranged in proper order, and instructs
the Grand Secretary to call the roll of the Grand Officers elected and
appointed. As the name of each is called, he should come forward and
take his seat according to his rank.

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

The installation then proceeds as follows:

### Installation Ceremony

The Grand Marshal presents the Grand Master-elect, and says:

Most Worshipful Grand Master: I present you Bro. A. B., who has been
duly and constitutionally elected Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of
Texas for the ensuing Masonic year. He has signified his willingness to
accept the office. I therefore ask that he be duly and constitutionally
installed therein.

The Grand Master-elect is then placed at the Altar, facing the East; the
Grand Chaplain is conducted to the Altar, facing the West; the Grand
Lodge is then called up, and the Grand Chaplain says:

Brethren, let us pray:

### Prayer

Eternal source of life and light, we ask Thy blessing upon Thy servant
now before Thee, as he is to enter upon new and responsible duties, and
assume new and important relations to his brethren. Invest him with Thy
choicest gifts; may heavenly wisdom illuminate his mind; may heavenly
power give strength to his exertions; may heavenly goodness fill and
enlarge

<span id="page_79">p. 79</span>

his breast; may his feet rest upon the rock of justice, and from his
hands may streams of beneficence continually flow; may his
administration of the affairs of the Fraternity redound to Thy glory, to
the good of the Craft, and to the welfare of mankind.

Add Thy blessing upon the officers associated with him. May they be
faithful and zealous in upholding the hands of their chief in all good
deeds, and with a just sense of their accountability to Thee, and to the
Craft, may they labor for the advancement of the Institution.

Bless the Grand Lodge and its subordinates, and all the Brotherhood,
wherever dispersed! Make them more helpful and beneficial to each other
and to all Thy children; and inspire them with an ardent love to Thee,
to their brethren, and to the whole human family. In Thee, we place our
trust! Guide us, we pray Thee, through all the vicissitudes of life, and
at last bring us to dwell in Thy presence forever! Amen.

Response: So mote it be.

The Grand Chaplain is conducted to his station, but the Grand
Master-elect remains

<span id="page_80">p. 80</span>

kneeling at the Altar, and the Installing Officer, addressing him, says:

You will repeat after me your official obligation:

"I, A. B., do promise, upon the honor of a Mason, that I will serve as
Grand Master of the Grand Lodge of Texas for the term for which I have
been elected and until my successor is duly and constitutionally
installed, and will perform all the duties of that office to the best of
my ability."

The Brethren are seated.

Installing Officer: Brother Grand Marshal, you will conduct the Grand
Master-elect from the Altar to the East.

Installing Officer: Brother A. B., you having been duly elected Grand
Master of Masons, and having taken on obligation to discharge the duties
of that office, it is with much pleasure that I now invest you with this
Jewel as the badge of your office. It will silently admonish you always
to do justice to the cause of Masonry; and to consult, as the exalted
rank you now hold demands of you, the real interests of the Institution.
It will instruct

<span id="page_81">p. 81</span>

you to infuse into the many Lodges of which you are now the head, the
true spirit of our Order; to make wise decisions for the good of the
Fraternity; to give due commendation to the worthy; and to rebuke those
who act contrary to our laws.

By immemorial usage and the irrevocable landmarks of Masonry, you are
invested, as Grand Master of Masons, with powers and prerogatives which
are well-nigh absolute. The interests of the Craft, for weal or woe, are
placed in your hands during your term of office. The good resolutions
which, I doubt not, you have formed in your mind, that these powers
shall not be abused or perverted by you, I would gladly strengthen by a
word of admonition which it will not become me henceforth to utter. The
very consciousness of the possession of a great power will ever make a
generous mind cautious and gentle in its exercise.

To rule has been the lot of many, and it requires neither strength of
intellect nor soundness of judgment. To rule WELL has been the fortune
of but few, and may well be the object of an honorable ambition. It is
not by the strong arm, or the iron will,

<span id="page_82">p. 82</span>

that obedience and order, the chief requisites of good government, are
secured; but by holding the key to the hearts of men.

The office of Grand Master is of great antiquity and respect, and is one
of the highest dignities to which we may aspire. Its incumbent, to rule
well, should possess and practice several important requisites.

As a man, he should be of approved integrity and irreproachable morals,
freed from the dominion of hasty temper and ill-governed passions; of
good repute in the world, and practicing, as an example to the Craft,
the cardinal virtues of Temperance, Fortitude, Prudence and Justice.

As a citizen, he should be loyal to his government; obedient to its
laws; prompt in the duties he owes to society; and a pattern of fidelity
in all social and domestic relations.

As a Mason, he should cling to the old landmarks and be sternly opposed
to their infringement; be a proficient in the laws, language and
literature of the Fraternity; be desirous to learn, and apt to teach;
though not, for the time, a workman, yet the master of the work, and
qualified to earn his

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

wages; be prompt to give aid, and slow to demand it; be ever mindful,
that though elevated for a time above his fellows, yet he is elevated by
them, and that he is still a Craftsman, more sacredly bound by a
Craftsman's obligation; and that he should cultivate everywhere, and at
all times, the golden tenets of Brotherly Love, Relief and Truth.

As an officer, he should remember, first of all, that he is an
individual Mason, sharing in that respect, a common lot with his
brethren, and therefore interested in the welfare of each and all. He
should be devoid of undue ostentation and haughty overbearing;
accessible to all; cultivating the closest friendship and the most
unlimited confidence with his associate officers; eager to take counsel
with his brethren and ready to give it; patient in investigation and
hearing; deliberate in judgment; prompt in execution; forbearing long
and much with evil-doers; ready to reward good; devoid of favoritism and
wholly impartial; watchful over the treasury; having an eagle-eye upon
every portion of his jurisdiction, and breasting ever the restless
spirit of innovation.

<span id="page_84">p. 84</span>

Such are some of the most important qualifications which a Grand Master
should possess, and the leading errors which he should avoid.

While the tools of operative Masonry (to us the most expressive
symbols), the Book of Constitutions, and the Holy Writings, are all
placed in your charge, I would call your attention specially to the
latter. In this you find the principles upon which Masonry is founded;
from this it derives its Wisdom, Strength and Beauty; this will confirm
your faith, strengthen your hope, encourage your charity, and direct you
to that Temple where all is harmony, love and peace.

I also deliver to you the emblem of that power with which you are now
invested. In your hands it must never be sounded in vain. Use it only
for the good of the Craft.

I now seat you, Most Worshipful, in the Grand East, at the head of an
Order which is calculated to unite men by true friendship, to extend
benevolence, and to promote virtue. And allow me to say that the honor
with which you are invested is not unworthy of a man of the highest
position or most distinguished abilities.

<span id="page_85">p. 85</span>

\[paragraph continues\] May you do honor to your exalted station, and
late, very late, in life, may you be transmitted from the fading honors
of an earthly Lodge, to the mansions prepared for the faithful in a
better world!

The Grand Lodge is called up, and the Installing Officer says:

Brethren, salute your Grand Master!

The Grand Honors are given, after which the following Installation Ode
should be sung:

### Master's Installation Ode

Music--DUNDEE

Behold, O Master, in the East,  
  What glories greet thee there!  
What floods of radiance eastward stream!  
  The sun is rising fair.

Behold, O Master, glorious arts,  
  Were cradled in the East;  
Behold, what sciences came forth  
  Man's waking mind to feast.

O Master, in thy symboll’d East  
  Seek wisdom from above,  
And spread the light which heaven shall send  
  Within thy Lodge in love.

The Grand Marshal is directed to conduct the Grand Officers-elect to the
East, where, standing with the right hand on the left breast, they take
the official obligation as follows:

<span id="page_86">p. 86</span>

"I, A. B., do promise, upon the honor of a Mason, that I will serve the
Grand Lodge of Texas in my office for the term for which I have been
elected and until my successor is duly elected and installed, and that I
will faithfully observe the laws and Constitution of the Grand Lodge of
Texas, all ancient Masonic usages, and perform all the duties of my
office to the best of my skill and ability."

The Installing Officer proceeds as follows:

### Deputy Grand Master

If. W. Sir: You are invested with this Jewel as the badge of the office
of R. W. Deputy Grand Master.

The office to which you have been elected by your brethren is one of
great dignity and importance. In many cases your powers and prerogatives
are co-extensive with those of your chief. At all times, if he be
present, you are to assist him with your counsel and co-operation; and
in his absence, death, incapacity or inability to act, the whole duties
of his office devolve upon you. In case of the Grand Master's absence
from the State, or his disability to act, you are

<span id="page_87">p. 87</span>

empowered by the Constitution of this Grand Lodge to preside, when
present, in any Lodge under her jurisdiction; to grant dispensations for
new Lodges; install and constitute Lodges to whom Charters are ordered
to issue; to suspend Lodges for un-Masonic conduct, and to instruct in
the Ritual of Masonry. But while your powers and privileges are thus
extensive, remember that they will bring with them a heavy share of
responsibility.

The honor thus conferred, and the trust reposed in you, demand a
corresponding fidelity and attachment to the interests of those to whose
kindness and confidence you are indebted for your official elevation.
Let, therefore, no effort of yours be wanting in the faithful discharge
of the duties of your office, so that you may have honor, and the Craft
profit thereby.

The Deputy Grand Master is then conducted to his seat, to the left of
the Grand Master.

### Grand Senior Warden

R. W. Sir: You are invested with the Jewel of Grand Senior Warden. The
position which you occupy in the

<span id="page_88">p. 88</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Grand Lodge and among the Fraternity is one of
no little importance. In the Grand Lodge, to control, practically, under
the direction of the Grand Master, the admission of all visitors; to
announce specially those who are of rank or eminence; to aid in the
preservation of order; and at all times to render counsel and ad-vice to
the Grand Master, are high and responsible duties, requiring
circumspection, vigilance and reflection; but when to these is
super-added the more onerous labor, in conjunction with the Grand Junior
Warden, of diligently preserving the ancient land-marks throughout the
jurisdiction, it then becomes a trust of deep moment to the welfare of
the Craft.

Your fitness for the discharge of such a trust undoubtedly led to your
selection for the office by your brethren, and it will be your duty and
pleasure to so act as to justify their confidence. Look well to the
West.

The Grand Senior Warden is conducted to the West by the Grand Marshal,
and the following words may be sung:

<span id="page_89">p. 89</span>

### Grand Senior Warden's Installing Ode

Music--DUNDEE

O Warden, with thy Level poised,  
  What lesson dost thou give?  
Are all men equal? Shall the worm  
  On king and peasant live?

O Warden, where King Hiram stood,  
  Like him, seek strength above;  
Sustain the East, pay all their dues,  
  Protect the weak in love.

### Grand Junior Warden

P. W. Sir: As the duties of your office and the qualifications for it
are almost identical with those of the Grand Senior Warden, except as it
respects the introduction of visitors, I will only add to the charge
given to that officer, that you be equally vigilant and circumspect, not
only at your station in the Grand Lodge, but in the broader field of
action without, dividing with him his labors, and taking due care that
the great object of your united solicitude shall remain inviolate.

Accept the Jewel of your office, and repair to the South, being ever
watchful, whether in labor, or at refreshment, that the high twelve of
observation do not find you with your work,

<span id="page_90">p. 90</span>

and that of the Craft you superintend, unperformed.

The Grand Junior Warden is conducted to the South by the Grand Marshal,
and the following words may be sung:

### Grand Junior Warden's Installing Ode

Music--DUNDEE

O Warden, with the Plumb upraised,  
What doth thy emblem teach?  
Do all the Craft uprightly walk,  
And practice what they preach?

O Warden, where the Faithful One  
Observed the glorious sun,  
Like him, adorn with beauty still  
The work by him begun.

### Grand Treasurer

R. W. Sir: You are invested with this Jewel as the badge of the office
of Grand Treasurer.

It is your duty to receive all moneys due the Grand Lodge from the Grand
Secretary or other officers, giving your receipt for the same; to enter
all moneys in regular accounts, with the purposes for which they are
intended; to keep regular accounts with all officers, charging them with
all fees, dues or other moneys received by them and known to you; to
make disbursements

<span id="page_91">p. 91</span>

only on legal orders from the Grand Lodge, or of the Grand Junior Warden
on Grand Stewards' accounts, or to Lodges entitled to distribution from
the grand charity fund; and to keep accurate accounts thereof; to make
regular reports to the close of each Annual Communication, and whenever
required by the Grand Lodge.

The keys forming the Jewel of your office have a two-fold significance;
they are instruments to bind as well as to loose; to make fast as well
as to open; they will never, I am confident, be used by you in any other
manner than the Constitution, laws, rules and regulations of the Grand
Lodge shall direct.

The Grand Treasurer is then conducted to his proper place in the Grand
Lodge.

### Grand Secretary

R. W. Sir: Usage as well as positive enactments from time to time have
rendered the duties of Grand Secretary more onerous and varied than
those of any other officer.

Brought by his official position more immediately into communication

<span id="page_92">p. 92</span>

with the whole body of the Fraternity, it is requisite that he should
possess ability, skill and industry, to meet the various demands upon
him. Placed in a position where he holds almost constant correspondence
with our Masonic brethren of every State and country, upon him devolves,
in a large degree, the good name and credit of the Masonic family of
this State.

The Fraternity should enable him to maintain it; he should strive that
it be maintained. Courtesy and patience are to be elements in his
manners and character. Vigilance and fidelity must also be necessary
qualities.

Our Constitutions, my brother, point out to you fully the duties of your
office, and I will not recapitulate them. Your capability for their
prompt and faithful execution has induced your brethren to confide this
trust to you, and I feel assured that it is well placed.

In investing you with your official Jewel, the pens, I am persuaded that
they will make an enduring record, not only to your praise, but to the
welfare of a Craft so largely dependent

<span id="page_93">p. 93</span>

upon your experience and integrity.

He is then conducted to his seat at the Grand Secretary's desk.

### District Deputy Grand Masters

R. W. Sirs: You have been appointed District Deputy Grand Masters of the
Grand Lodge of Texas.

It is your duty to assist the Most Worshipful Grand Master in the
discharge of his duties during the recess of the Grand Lodge; to visit
all the Lodges in your respective districts; to examine their records
and see that they are properly kept; to correct any errors you may
observe, and to make a full report of all your acts and doings to the
Grand Master before the next Annual Communication of this Grand Lodge.

In the discharge of your respective duties you will have many serious
and important questions propounded to you, the solving of which will
require each of you to be well skilled in Masonic jurisprudence. The
office to which you have been appointed embraces an important trust, and
the choice of you by the Grand Master is

<span id="page_94">p. 94</span>

an evidence of the high opinion he entertains of your fidelity and
discretion. Labor, therefore, to discharge the duties of your respective
offices in such a manner as not to bring censure or dishonor upon the
head of your illustrious chief.

They are then [seated](errata.htm#2), and the Grand Marshal presents the
Grand Chaplain, and the Installing Officer proceeds as follows:

### Grand Chaplain

R. W. and Rev. Sir and Brother: The sacred position of Grand Chaplain of
the Grand Lodge of Texas has been intrusted to your care by our Grand
Master, and you are now invested with the Jewel of your office.

It will be your duty to conduct the devotional exercises of our Grand
Communications, and to perform the sacred functions of your holy calling
at our public ceremonies. In faithfully performing these duties, it may
be the means of refining the souls, strengthening the virtues, and
purifying the minds of our Masonic brethren and thereby preparing them
for admission into the society of those above, whose happiness will be
as endless as it is perfect. The profession which

<span id="page_95">p. 95</span>

you have chosen for your lot in life is the best guarantee that you will
discharge the duties of your present appointment with steadfastness and
perseverance in well-doing.

He is then conducted to the Grand Chaplain's desk, to the right of the
Grand Master.

### Grand Orator

R. W. Sir and Brother: You have been appointed Grand Orator of the Grand
Lodge of Texas, and you are now invested with the badge of your office.

It is your duty to attend the Annual Communications of this Grand Lodge,
and at public installations, dedications, or other public occasions, to
deliver a suitable address.

To do this, it is necessary that you should be familiar with the
operations of Masonry, both at home and abroad, and well versed in
Masonic lore. And from your known zeal and attachment to the Order, I
have no doubt but that you will perform your duties with credit to
yourself and pleasure to the Fraternity.

He is then seated.

<span id="page_96">p. 96</span>

### Grand Marshal

R. W. Sir and Brother: You have been appointed Grand Marshal of the
Grand Lodge of Texas. The office with which you are intrusted is one of
great importance, and requires much skill and attention in the discharge
of its duties.

You are to superintend all processions of the Grand Lodge, when moving
as a distinct body, either in public or private; and as the world can
only judge of our private discipline by our public deportment, you will
be careful that the utmost order and decorum he observed on all such
occasions.

You will ever be attentive to the commands of the Grand Master and
always near at hand to see them duly executed. You are now invested with
the badge of your office, and I presume that you will give to your
duties all that study and attention which their importance demands. I
now present you this sword as the appropriate implement of your office.

### Grand Senior and Junior Deacons

W. Sirs and Brothers: You have been appointed Grand Deacons of this

<span id="page_97">p. 97</span>

\[paragraph continues\] Grand Lodge. It is your province to attend upon
the Grand Master and Grand Wardens, and to act as their proxies in the
active duties of the Grand Lodge; to see to the introduction and
accommodation of visitors, and such other duties as may be as-signed you
by these officers.

The badges of your office are intrusted to your care, without doubt of
your vigilance and attention.

### Grand Stewards

W. Sirs and Brothers: You have been appointed Grand Stewards of this
Grand Lodge. The duties of your office are to assist the Deacons and
other officers in performing their respective duties, and to see that
none are admitted into the refreshment rooms but such as are justly
entitled to be there by the regulations of the Grand Lodge.

Your regular and early attendance will afford the best proof of your
zeal and attachment to our Grand Lodge.

### Grand Pursuivant

W. Sir and Brother: You have been appointed Grand Pursuivant of the
Grand Lodge of Texas, and you are

<span id="page_98">p. 98</span>

now invested with the badge of your office.

It is your duty to announce all applicants for admission into the Grand
Lodge by their names and Masonic titles; to take charge of the Jewels
and regalia of the Grand Lodge; to attend all communications of the
Grand Lodge, and to perform such other duties as may be required of you
by the Grand Master or presiding officer. I presume that your respect
and attachment to the Grand Lodge, and your earnest solicitude for the
good of the Order, will prompt you to the faithful discharge of the
duties of your office.

### Grand Tiler

W. Sir and Brother: You have been appointed Grand Tiler of the Grand
Lodge of Texas, and are now invested with the implement of your office.
As the Sword is placed in the hands of the Grand Tiler to enable him to
effectually guard against the approach of cowans and eaves-droppers, and
permit none to pass except those who are duly qualified, so it should
admonish us to set a guard over our thoughts, a watch at our lips, post
a

<span id="page_99">p. 99</span>

sentinel over our actions, thereby preventing the approach of every
unworthy thought or deed, and preserving consciences void of offense
towards God and towards man.

The Installing Officer then calls up the members of the Grand Lodge (and
only the members should rise, as the address is exclusively for them),
and delivers the following:

### Address to the Members of the Grand Lodge

Brethren, Members of the Grand Lodge of Texas: Behold the officers of
this Grand Lodge for the ensuing Masonic year.

Such is the nature of our Constitution, that as some must of necessity
rule and teach, so others must, of course, learn to submit and obey.
Humility in both is an essential duty.

The officers who have been elected and appointed to govern this Grand
Lodge are sufficiently conversant with the rules of propriety and the
laws of this Institution to avoid exceeding the powers with which they
are intrusted, and you are of too generous dispositions to envy their
preferment.

I therefore trust that you will have

<span id="page_100">p. 100</span>

but one aim, to please each other and to unite in the grand design of
being happy and communicating happiness.

Finally, my brethren, as this Grand Annual Communication has been
conducted thus far with so much unanimity and concord, in which we
greatly rejoice, so may it continue to the end. May you long enjoy every
satisfaction and delight which disinterested friendship can afford. May
kindness and brotherly affection distinguish your conduct as men and as
Masons. May your children's children celebrate, with joy and gratitude,
the annual recurrence of this auspicious solemnity. And may the tenets
of our profession be transmitted, through this Grand Lodge, pure and
unimpaired, from generation to generation.

The Installing Officer then calls up the entire Grand Lodge, and the
Grand Marshal, by his direction, makes the following:

### Proclamation

Grand Marshal: I hereby proclaim that the Most Worshipful Grand Master
and other Grand Officers, elected and appointed, of this Grand Lodge,
have been regularly installed into their respective stations.

<span id="page_101">p. 101</span>

This proclamation is made from the East (one blow with gavel), from the
West (one blow with gavel), from the South (one blow with gavel), once,
twice, thrice. All interested will take due notice, and govern
themselves accordingly.

The Installing Officer then surrenders the East and the gavel to the
Grand Master. who seats the Grand Lodge.

\[If the installation is public, a Program, with music and an address,
may be readily arranged. If the time allows, the ceremonies should
always be interspersed with appropriate music.\]

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Installation Ceremony for a Subordinate Lodge](omtx10)
