[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Freemasonry](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](omtx01)  [Next](omtx03) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_9">p. 9</span>

# DEDICATION

Believing that we should endeavor to perpetuate the memory of those
zealous Craftsmen who, at an early day in the history of Texas Masonry,
and since then, labored hard to lay the foundation for the present
unexampled prosperity of our Order, the Committee on Revision feels that
this work would not be complete without an acknowledgment of their
services to the Craft. We therefore desire to enter on perpetual record
this tribute to their memory:

Grand Lecturers from 1837 to 1853: Daniel T. Fitchett, John H. Walton,
Isaiah Call, D. McFarland, J. H. Holland, N. II.' Darnell, Geo. K.
Teulon, A. S. Ruthven, Henry King, W. D. Smith, Wm. M. Taylor, Stephen
H. Darden, Wm. D. Goff, W. D. Woods-worth, Peter W. Gray, J. C. Harrison
of Texas; and R. W. Bro. John C. Gordy of Louisiana.

To all those D. D. G. Masters who, after the Grand Lecturer system was

<span id="page_10">p. 10</span>

abolished, January 20th, 1853, faithfully taught the Lodges in their
Districts the authorized Work.

To M. W. Bro. William M. Taylor, whose zealous and intelligent labors
were appreciated by this M. W. Grand Lodge, as shown in its adoption of
the Monitor prepared by him in 1858, the first Monitor printed for Texas
and used for many years as the only one, and to M. W. Bros. Benjamin A.
Botts, John B. Jones and John Watson, that trio of zealous Craftsmen,
through whose faithful and indefatigable labors the adopted esoteric
work as well as the Monitor, was preserved and safely handed down, in
regular succession, as it were, with the assistance of M. W. Bro. B. F.
Frymier, R. W. Bros. Peyton Nowlin, D. J. Eddleman and others, to
December, 1895.

To the Committees on Work down to this date, special reference being
made to Bros. E. F. Douglass, W. W. Hunnicutt, C. P. Boon, E. B. Reeve,
Geo. F. Morgan, J. L. Miller, M. M. Brush, A. W. Campbell, W. W. Peavy,
Sam R. Hamilton and others, under whose patient and efficient labors the
Ritualistic Work has reached a degree of uniformity second to none.

<span id="page_11">p. 11</span>

Finally, for want of time and space in which to enumerate their names,
to every zealous and devoted Craftsman who has, since the organization
of our Grand Lodge, in 1837, until this good hour, labored faithfully to
promote the best interests of Masonry and the glory of God.

To their memory, one and all, is this tribute now offered by your
co-laborers and brothers,

W. B. PEARSON,  
K. ROBEY,  
J. E. SCOTT,  
    Committee.

I hereby certify that this Monitor was approved and adopted by the Grand
Lodge of Texas on December 7th, 1921.

(Signed) W. B. PEARSON,  
    Grand Secretary.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Opening a Lodge](omtx03)
