[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl403)  [Next](wl405) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### PATRIOTISM

IT is a truism with no pretensions to novelty that there is nothing
sweeter than one's country. Does that imply that, though there is
nothing pleasanter, there may be something grander or more divine? Why,
of all that men reckon grand and divine their country is the source and
teacher, originating, developing, inculcating. For great and brilliant
and splendidly equipped cities many men have admiration, but for their
own all men have love. No man--not the most enthusiastic sightseer that
ever was--is so dazzled by foreign wonders as to forget his own land.

<span class="margnote"><span id="23:2">2</span></span>He who boasts that
he is a citizen of no mean city misses, it seems to me, the true
patriotism; he suggests that it would be a mortification to him to
belong to a State less distinguished. It is country in the abstract that
I delight rather to honour. It is well enough when you are comparing
States to investigate the questions of size or beauty or markets; but
when it is a matter of choosing a country, no one would exchange his own
for one more glorious; he may wish that his own resembled those more
highly blest, but he will choose it, defects and all.

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

It is the same with loyal sons, or good fathers. A young man<span
class="margnote"><span id="24:3">3</span></span> who has the right stuff
in him will honour no man above his father; nor will a father set his
affections on some other young man to the neglect of his son. On the
contrary, fathers are so convinced of their children's being better than
they really are, that they reckon them the handsomest, the tallest, the
most accomplished of their generation. Any one who does not judge his
offspring thus I cannot allow to have the father's eye.

The fatherland! it is the first and the nearest of all names. <span
class="margnote"><span id="24:4">4</span></span> It is true there is
nothing nearer than a father; but a man who duly honours his father,
according to the dictates of law and nature, will yet be right to honour
his fatherland in still higher degree; for that father himself belongs
to the fatherland; so does his father's father, and all his house back
and back, till the line ends with the Gods our fathers.

The Gods too love the lands of their nativity; though they <span
class="margnote"><span id="24:5">5</span></span> may be supposed to
concern themselves with human affairs in general, claiming the whole of
earth and sea as theirs, yet each of them honours above all other lands
the one that gave him birth. That State is more majestic which a God
calls his country, that isle has an added sanctity in which poesy
affirms that one was born. Those are acceptable offerings, which a man
has come to their respective homes to make. And if Gods are patriotic,
shall not men be more so?

For it was from his own country that every man looked his <span
class="margnote"><span id="24:6">6</span></span> first upon the Sun;
that God, though he be common to all men, yet each reckons among his
country Gods, because in that country he was revealed to him. There
speech came to him, the speech that belonged to that soil, and there he
got knowledge of the Gods. If his country be such that to attain true
culture he must seek another, yet even for that culture let him thank
his country; the word State he could never have known, had not his
country shown him that States existed.

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="25:7">7</span></span>And surely men
gather culture and learning, that they may thereby render themselves
more serviceable to their country; they amass wealth that they may outdo
their neighbours in devoting it to their country's good. And ’tis no
more than reason; it is not for those who have received the greatest of
all benefits to prove thankless; if we are grateful, as we doubtless
should be, to the individual benefactor, much more ought we to give our
country her due; against neglect of parents the various States have
laws; we should account our country the common mother of us all, and
recompense her who bred us, and taught us that there were laws.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25:8">8</span></span>The man was never
known who so forgot his country as to be indifferent to it when
established in another State. All who fare ill abroad are perpetually
thinking how country is the best of all good things; and those who fare
well, whatever their general prosperity, are ever conscious of the one
thing lacking: they do not live at home, but are exiles; and exile is a
reproach. Those again whose sojourn has brought them distinction by way
of garnered wealth or honourable fame, acknowledged culture or approved
courage, all of them, you will find, yearn for their native land, where
are the spectators of their triumphs that they would most desire. A
man's longing for home is indeed in direct proportion to his credit
abroad.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25:9">9</span></span>Even the young
have the patriotic sentiment; but in the old it is as much more keen as
their sense is greater. Every old man directs his efforts and his
prayers to ending his life in his own land; where he began to live,
there would he lay his bones, in the soil that formed him, and join his
fathers in the grave. It is a dread fate to be condemned to exile even
in death, and lie in alien earth.

<span class="margnote"><span id="25:10">10</span></span>But if you would
know the true man's feeling for his country, it is in the born citizen
that you must study it. The merely

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

naturalized are a sort of bastards ever ready for another change; they
know not nor love the name of country, but think they may find what they
need in one place as well as another; their standard of happiness is the
pleasures of the belly. Those whose country is their true mother love
the land whereon they were born and bred, though it be narrow and rough
and poor of soil. If they cannot vaunt the goodness of the land, they
are still at no loss for praises of their country; if they see others
making much of bounteous plains and meadows variegated with all plants
that grow, they too can call up their country's praise; another may
breed good horses; what matter? theirs breeds good men.

A man is fain to be at home, though the home be but an <span
class="margnote"><span id="26:11">11</span></span> islet; though he
might have fortune among strangers, he will not take immortality there;
to be buried in his own land is better. Brighter to him the smoke of
home than the fire of other lands.

In such honour everywhere is the name of country that you <span
class="margnote"><span id="26:12">12</span></span> will find legislators
all the world over punishing the worst offences with exile, as the
heaviest penalty at their command. And it is just the same with generals
on service. When the men are taking their places for battle, no such
encouragement as to tell them they are fighting for their country. No
one will disgrace himself after that if he can help it; the name of
country turns even a coward into a brave man.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Dipsas, the Thirst-Snake](wl405)
