[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl408)  [Next](wl410) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### II

*Myrtium. Pamphilus. Doris*

*Myr*. Well, Pamphilus? So I hear you are to marry Phido the
shipmaster's daughter,--if you have not done so already! And this is the
end of your vows and tears! All is over and forgotten! And I so near my
time! Yes, that is all I have to thank my lover for; that, and the
prospect of having a child to bring up; and you know what that means to
us poor girls. I mean to keep the child, especially if it is a boy: it
will be some comfort to me to call him after you; and perhaps some day
you will be sorry, when he comes to reproach you for betraying

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

his poor mother. I can't say much for the lady's looks. I saw her only
the other day, with her mother, at the Thesmophoria; little did I know
then that she was to rob me of my Pamphilus! Hadn't you better see what
she is like first? Take a good look at her eyes; and try not to mind the
colour, and the cast (she has such a squint!). Or no: there is no need
for you to see her: you have seen Phido; you know what a face *he* has.

Pa. How much more nonsense are you going to talk about shipowners and
marriages? What do I know about brides, ugly or pretty? If you mean
Phido of Alopece, I never knew he had a grown-up daughter at all. Why,
now I think of it, he is not even on speaking terms with my father. They
were at law not long ago--something about a shipping contract. He owed
my father a talent, I think it was, and refused to pay; so he was had up
before the Admiralty Court, and my father never got paid in full, after
all, so he said. Do you suppose if I wanted to marry I should pass over
Demeas's daughter in favour of Phido's? Demeas was general last year,
and she is my cousin on the mother's side. Who has been telling you all
this? Is it just a cobweb spun in that jealous little brain of yours?

*Myr*. Pamphilus! You mean to say you are not going to be married?

*Pa*. Are you mad, or what is the matter with you? We did not have much
to drink yesterday.

*Myr*. Ask Doris; it is all her fault. I sent her out to buy some wool,
and to offer up prayer to Artemis for me. And she said that she met
Lesbia, and Lesbia------Doris, tell him what Lesbia said, unless you
invented it all yourself.

*Dor*. May I die, miss, if I said a word more than the truth! Just by
the town-hall Lesbia met me, and 'Doris,' says she, smiling, 'your young
gentleman is to marry Phido's daughter. And if you don't believe me,'
says she, 'look up their street,

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

and you will see everything crowned with garlands, and a fine bustle
going on; flutes playing, and people singing the wedding-song'

*Pa*. Well; and you did?

*Dor*. That I did, sir; and it was all as Lesbia had said.

*Pa*. Ah, now I see! You have told your mistress nothing but the truth;
and there was some ground for what Lesbia told you. However, it is a
false alarm. The wedding is not at our house. I remember now. When I
went back home yesterday, after leaving you, 'Pamphilus,' said my
mother, here is neighbour Aristaenetus's son, Charmides, who is no older
than you, just going to marry and settle down: when are *you* going to
turn over a new leaf? ' And then I dropped off to sleep. I went out
early this morning, so that I saw nothing of all that Doris has seen. If
you doubt my word, Doris can go again; and look more carefully this
time, Doris; mark the house, not the street only, and you will find that
the garlands are next door.

*Myr*. I breathe again! Pamphilus, if it had been true, I should have
killed myself!

*Pa*. *True*, indeed! Am I mad, that I should forget Myrtium, so soon to
become the mother of my child?

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: III](wl410)
