[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl418)  [Next](wl420.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### XV

*Cochlis. Parthenis*

*Co*. Crying, Parthenis! what is it? how do your pipes come to be
broken?

*Par*. Oh! oh! I have been beaten by Crocale's lover--that tall Aetolian
soldier; he found me playing at Crocale's, hired by his rival Gorgus. He
broke in while they were at dinner, smashed my pipes, upset the table,
and emptied out the wine-bowl. Gorgus (the country fellow, you know) he
pulled out of the dining-room by the hair of his head, and the two of
them, Dinomachus (I think they call him) and a fellow soldier,

<span id="page_78">p. 78</span>

stood over thumping him. Oh, Cochlis, I doubt whether he will live;
there was a great rush of blood from his nostrils, and his face is all
swollen and livid.

*Co*. Is the man mad? or was it just a drunken freak?

*Par*. All jealousy, my dear--love run wild. Crocale had asked two
talents, I believe, if Dinomachus wanted her all to himself. He refused;
so she shut the door in his face, I was told, and would not let him in
at all. Instead of him she took Gorgus of Oenoë, a well-to-do farmer and
a nice man; they were drinking together, and she had got me in to play
the pipes. Well, the wine was going, I was striking up one of those
Lydian tunes, the farmer standing up to dance, Crocale clapping, and all
as merry as could be. Suddenly there was a noise and a shout, crash went
the front door, and a moment after in burst eight great strong men, that
brute among them. Everything was upside down directly, Gorgus on the
ground, as I told you, being thumped and kicked. Crocale got away
somehow and took refuge with Thespias next door. Dinomachus boxed my
ears, and 'Go to blazes!' he said, throwing me the broken pipes. I am
running to tell master about it now. And the farmer is going to find
some of his friends in town and get the brute summonsed in the
police-court.

*Co*. Yes, bruises and the courts--that is all we get out of the
military. They tell you they are generals and colonels, and then when it
comes to paying, 'Oh, wait for settling day,' they say; 'then I shall
get my pay, and put everything right.' I wish they were all dead, they
and their bragging. But I never have anything to do with them; it is the
best way. Give me a fisherman or a sailor or farmer no better than
myself, with few compliments and plenty of money. These plume-tossing
word-warriors! they are nothing but noise, Parthenis.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Death of Peregrine](wl420.md)
