[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl412)  [Next](wl414.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# DIALOGUES OF THE HETAERAE

### VIII

*Ampelis. Chrysis*

*Am*. Well, but, Chrysis, I don't call a man in love at all, if he
doesn't get jealous, and storm, and slap one, and clip one's hair, and
tear one's clothes to pieces.

*Ch*. Is that the only way to tell?

*Am*. To tell a serious passion, yes. The kisses and tears and vows, the
constant attendance,--all that only shows that he's beginning to be in
love; it's still coming on. But the real flame is jealousy, pure and
simple. So if Gorgias is jealous, and slaps you, as you say, you may
hope for the best; pray that he may always go on as he has begun!

*Ch*. Go on slapping me?

*Am*. No, no; but getting angry if you ever look at any one else. If he
were not in love with you, why should he mind your having another lover?

*Ch*. Oh, but I *haven't*! It's all a mistake! He took it into his head
that old Moneybags had been paying me

<span id="page_63">p. 63</span>

attentions, because I just happened to mention his name once.

*Am*. Well, that's very nice, too. You want him to think that there are
rich men after you. It will make him all the more angry, and all the
more liberal; he'll be afraid of being cut out by his rivals.

*Ch*. But Gorgias never gives me anything. He only storms and slaps.

*Am*. Oh, you wait. Nothing tames them like jealousy.

*Ch*. Ampelis, I believe you *want* me to be slapped!

*Am*. Nonsense! All I mean is this: if you want to make a man wildly in
love with you, let him see that you can do without him. When he thinks
that he has you all to himself, he is apt to cool down. You see I've had
twenty years' experience: whereas you, I suppose, are about eighteen,
perhaps not that. Come now; I'll tell you what happened to me, not so
many years ago. Demophantus was my admirer in those days; the usurer,
you know, at the back of the Poecile. He had never given me more than
five drachmae at a time, and he wanted to have everything his own way.
The fact was, my dear, his love was only skin-deep. There were no sighs
or tears with him; no knocking me up at unearthly hours; he would spend
an evening with me now and then--very occasionally--and that was all.
But one day when he called, I was 'not at home'; I had Callides the
painter with me (he had given me ten drachmae). Well, at the time
Demophantus said some very rude things, and walked off. However, the
days went by, and I never sent to him; and at last (finding that
Callides had been with me again) even Demophantus began to catch fire,
and to get into a passion about it; so one day he stood outside, and
waited till he found the door open: my dear, I don't know what he didn't
do! cried, beat me, vowed he would murder me, tore my clothes
dreadfully! And it all ended with his

<span id="page_64">p. 64</span>

giving me a talent; after which I saw no one else for eight months on
end. His wife told everybody that I had bewitched him with some drug.
’Twas easy to see what the drug had been: jealousy. Now you should try
the same drug upon Gorgias. The boy will have money, if anything happens
to his father.

F.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: IX](wl414.md)
