[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index.md) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index.md) 
[Previous](wl426)  [Next](wl428.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

# SATURNALIAN LETTERS

### IV

*The Rich to Cronus, Greeting*.

Do you really suppose, Sire, that these letters of the poor <span
class="margnote"><span id="126:36">36</span></span> have gone
exclusively to *your* address? Zeus is quite deaf with their clamour,
their appeals for redistribution, their complaints of Destiny for her
unfairness and of us for refusing them relief. But Zeus is Zeus; *he*
knows where the fault lies, and consequently pays them very little
attention. However, as the authority is at present with you, to you we
will address our defence. Having before our eyes all that you have laid
down on the beauty of assisting out of our abundance those who are in
want, and the delight of associating and making merry with the poor, we
adopted the principle of treating them on such equal terms that a guest
could not possibly have anything to complain of.

On their side, they started with professions of wanting very <span
class="margnote"><span id="126:37">37</span></span> little indeed; but
that was only the thin edge of the wedge. Now, if their demands are not
instantly and literally satisfied, there is bad temper and offence and
talk; their tales may be as false as they will, every one believes them:
they have been there; they must know! Our only choice was between a
refusal that meant detestation, and a total surrender that meant speedy
ruin and transfer to the begging class for ourselves.

But the worst is to come. At table that filling of the stomach <span
class="margnote"><span id="126:38">38</span></span> (of which we have by
no means the monopoly) does not so completely

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

occupy them but that, when they have drunk a drop too much, they find
time for familiarities with the attendants or saucy compliments to the
ladies. Then, after being ill at our tables, they go home, and next day
reproach us with the hunger and thirst they feelingly describe. If you
doubt the accuracy of this account, we refer you to your own quondam
guest Ixion, who being hospitably received by you and treated as one of
yourselves distinguished himself by his drunken addresses to Hera.

<span class="margnote"><span id="127:39">39</span></span>For these among
other reasons we determined to protect ourselves by giving them the
entrée no longer. But if they engage under your guarantee to make only
the moderate demands they now profess, and to abstain from outraging
their hosts' feelings, what is ours shall be theirs; we shall be only
too glad of their company. We will comply with your suggestions about
the clothes and, as far as may be, about the gold, and in fact will do
our duty. We ask them on their side to give up trading on our
hospitality, and to be our friends instead of our toadies and parasites.
If only the' will behave themselves, you shall have no reason to
complain of us.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: A Feast of Lapithae](wl428.md)
