[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl421)  [Next](wl423) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_108">p. 108</span>

### SATURNALIA

*Cronus. His Priest*

*Pr*. Cronus, you are in authority just now, I understand; to you our
sacrifices and ceremonies are directed; now, what can I make surest of
getting if I ask it of you at this holy season?

*Cro*. You had better make up your own mind what to pray for, unless you
expect your ruler to be a *clairvoyant* and know what you would like to
ask. Then, I will do my best not to disappoint you.

*Pr*. Oh, I have done that long ago. No originality about it; the usual
thing, please,---wealth, plenty of gold, landed proprietorship, a train
of slaves, gay soft raiment, silver, ivory, in fact everything that is
worth anything. Best of Cronuses, give me some of these; your priest
should profit by your rule, and not be the one man who has to go without
all his life.

*Cro*. Of course! *ultra vires*; these are not mine to give. So <span
class="margnote"><span id="108:2">2</span></span> do not sulk at being
refused; ask Zeus for them; he will be in authority again soon enough.
Mine is a limited monarchy, you see. To begin with, it only lasts a
week; that over, I am a private person, just a man in the street.
Secondly, during my week the serious is barred; no business allowed.
Drinking and being drunk, noise and games and dice, appointing of kings
and feasting of slaves, singing naked, clapping of tremulous hands, an
occasional ducking of corked faces in icy water,--such are the functions
over which I preside. But the great things, wealth and gold and such,
Zeus distributes as he will.

*Pr*. He is not very free with them, though, Cronus. I am <span
class="margnote"><span id="108:3">3</span></span> tired of asking for
them, as I do at the top of my voice. He never listens; he shakes his
aegis, gets the thunderbolt ready for action, puts on a stern look and
scares you out of worrying

<span id="page_109">p. 109</span>

him. He does consent now and then, and make a man rich; but his
selection is most casual; he will pass over the good and sensible, and
set fools and knaves up to the lips in wealth, gaolbirds or debauchees
most of them. But I want to know what are the things *you* can do.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109:4">4</span></span>*Cro*. Oh, they
are not to be sneezed at; it does not come to so very little, if you
make allowance for my general limitations. Perhaps you think it a trifle
always to win at dice, and be able to count on the sice when the ace is
the best the others can throw? Anyhow, there are plenty who get as much
as they can eat just because the die likes them and does what it can for
them. Others you may see naked, swimming for their lives; and what was
the reef that wrecked them, pray? that little die. Or again, to enjoy
your wine, to sing the best song at table, at the slaves' feast to see
the other waiters <span id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9) ducked for
incompetence, while you are acclaimed victor and carry off the sausage
prize is all that nothing? Or you find yourself absolute monarch by
favour of the knucklebone, can have no ridiculous commands <span
id="fr_10"></span>[1](#fn_9) laid on you, and can lay them on the rest:
one must shout out a libel on himself, another dance naked, or pick up
the flute-girl and carry her thrice round the house; how is that for a
sample of my open-handedness? If you complain that the sovereignty is
not real nor lasting, that is unreasonable of you; you see that I, the
giver of it, have a short-lived tenure myself. Well, anything that is in
my power--draughts, monarchy, song, and the rest I have mentioned--you
can ask, and welcome; *I* will not scare you with aegis and thunderbolt.

<span class="margnote"><span id="109:5">5</span></span>*Pr*. Most kind
Titan, such gifts I require not of you. Give me the answer that was my
first desire, and then count yourself to have repaid my sacrifice
sufficiently; you shall have my receipt in full.

<span id="page_110">p. 110</span>

*Cro*. Put your question. An answer you shall have, if my knowledge is
equal to it.

*Pr*. First, then, is the common story true? used you to eat the
children Rhea bore you? and did she steal away Zeus, and give you a
stone to swallow for a baby? did he when he grew to manhood make
victorious war upon you and drive you from your kingdom, bind and cast
you into Tartarus, you and all the powers that ranged themselves with
you?

*Cro*. Fellow, were it any but this festive season, when ’tis lawful to
be drunken, and slaves have licence to revile their lords, the reward
for thy question, for this thy rudeness to a grey-haired aged God, had
been the knowledge that wrath is yet permitted me.

*Pr*. It is not *my* story, you know, Cronus; it is Homer's and
Hesiod's; I might say, only I don't quite like to, that it is the belief
of the generality.

*Cro*. That conceited shepherd <span id="fr_11"></span>[1](#fn_10)? you
do not suppose he knew <span class="margnote"><span
id="110:6">6</span></span> anything worth knowing about me? Why, think.
Is a man conceivable--let alone a God--who would devour his own
children?--wittingly, I mean; of course he might be a Thyestes and have
a wicked brother; that is different. However, even granting that, I ask
you whether he could help knowing he had a stone in his mouth instead of
a baby; I envy him his teeth, that is all. The fact is, there was no
war, and Zeus did not depose me; I voluntarily abdicated and retired
from the cares of office. That I am not in fetters or in Tartarus you
can see for yourself, or you must be as blind as Homer.

*Pr*. But what possessed you to abdicate?

Cro. Well, the long and short of it is, as I grew old and gouty <span
class="margnote"><span id="110:7">7</span></span>--that last, by the
way, accounts for the fetters of the story--I found the men of these
latter days getting out of hand; I had to be for ever running up and
down swinging the thunderbolt

<span id="page_111">p. 111</span>

and blasting perjurers, temple-robbers, oppressors; I could get no
peace; younger blood was wanted. So I had the happy thought of
abdicating in Zeus's favour. Independently of that, I thought it a good
thing to divide up my authority--I had sons to take it on--and to have a
pleasant easy time, free of all the petition business and the
embarrassment of contradictory prayers, no thundering or lightening to
do, no lamentable necessity for sending discharges of hail. None of that
now; I am on the shelf, and I like it, sipping neat nectar and talking
over old times with Iapetus and the others that were boys with me. And
He is king, and has troubles by the thousand. But it occurred to me to
reserve these few days for the employments I have mentioned; during them
I resume my authority, that men may remember what life was like in my
days, when all things grew without sowing or ploughing of theirs--no
ears of corn, but loaves complete and meat ready cooked--, when wine
flowed in rivers, and there were fountains of milk and honey; all men
were good and all men were gold. Such is the purpose of this my brief
reign; therefore the merry noise on every side, the song and the games;
therefore the slave and the free as one. When I was king, slavery was
not.

<span class="margnote"><span id="111:8">8</span></span>*Pr*. Dear me,
now! and I accounted for your kindness to slaves and prisoners from the
story again; I thought that, as you were a slave yourself, you were
paying slaves a compliment in memory of your own fetters.

*Cro*. Cease your ribald jests.

*Pr*. Quite so; I will. But here is another question, please. Used
mortals to play draughts in your time?

*Cro*. Surely; but not for hundreds or thousands of pounds like you;
nuts were their highest stake; a man might lose without a sigh or a
tear, when losing could not mean starvation.

*Pr*. Wise men! though, as they were solid gold themselves, they were
out of temptation. It occurred to me when you

<span id="page_112">p. 112</span>

mentioned that--suppose any one were to import one of your solid gold
men into our age and exhibit him, what sort of a reception would the
poor thing get? They would tear him to pieces, not a doubt of it. I see
them rushing at him like the Maenads at Pentheus, the Thracian women at
Orpheus, or his hounds at Actaeon, trying which could get the biggest
bit of him; even in the holidays they do not forget their avarice; most
of them regard the holy season as a sort of harvest. In which persuasion
some of them loot their friends' tables, others complain, quite
unreasonably, of you, or smash their innocent dice in revenge for losses
due to their own folly.

But tell me this, now: as you are such a delicate old deity, <span
class="margnote"><span id="112:9">9</span></span> why pick out the most
disagreeable time, when all is wrapt in snow, and the north wind blows,
everything is hard frozen, trees dry and bare and leafless, meadows have
lost their flowery beauty, and men are hunched up cowering over the fire
like so many octogenarians,--why this season of all others for your
festival? It is no time for the old or the luxurious.

*Cro*. Fellow, your questions are many, and no good substitute for the
flowing bowl. You have filched a good portion of my carnival with your
impertinent philosophizings. Let them go, and we will make merry and
clap our hands and take our holiday licence, play draughts for nuts in
the good old way, elect our kings and do them fealty. I am minded to
verify the saw, that old age is second childhood.

*Pr*. Now dry be his cup when he thirsts, to whom such words come amiss!
Cronus, a bowl with you! ’tis enough that you have made answer to my
former questions. By the way, I think of reducing our little interview
to writing, my questions and your so affable answers, for submission to
those friends whose discretion may be trusted.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_9"></span>[109:1](wl422.htm#fr_10) See *Saturnalia* in
Notes.

<span id="fn_10"></span>[110:1](wl422.htm#fr_11) Hesiod.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Cronosolon](wl423)
