[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Classics](../../index) 
[Lucian](../index)  [Fowler Index](../fowl/index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](wl422)  [Next](wl424) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_113">p. 113</span>

### CRONOSOLON

<span class="margnote"><span id="113:10">10</span></span>*The words of
Cronosolon, priest and prophet of Cronus, and holiday lawgiver*.

The regulations to be observed by the poor I have sent expressly to them
in another scroll, and am well assured that they will abide by the same,
failing which, they will be obnoxious to the heavy penalties enacted
against the disobedient. And you, ye rich, see to it that ye transgress
not nor disregard the instructions following. Be it known to him that
shall so do, that he scorneth not me the lawgiver, but Cronus' self, who
hath appeared, in no dream, but these two days gone to my waking senses,
and appointed me to give holiday laws. No bondsman was he, nor foul to
look upon, as painters have limned him after poets' foolish tales. His
sickle was indeed full sharp; but he was cheerful of countenance, strong
of limb, and royally arrayed. Such was his semblance; and his words,
wherein too was divinity, it is fitting you hear.

<span class="margnote"><span id="113:11">11</span></span> He beheld me
pacing downcast, meditative, and straightway knew--as how should a God
not know?--the cause of my sorrow, and how I was ill content with
poverty and with the unseasonable thinness of my raiment. For there was
frost and north wind and ice and snow, and I but ill fenced against
them. The feast was moreover at hand, and I might see others making
ready for sacrifice and good cheer, but for me things looked not that
way. He came upon me from behind and touched and thrilled my ear, as is
the manner of his approach, and spake: 'O Cronosolon, wherefore this
troubled mien?' 'Is there not a cause, lord,' I said, 'when I look on
pestilent loathly fellows passing rich, engrossing all luxury, but I and
many another skilled in liberal arts have want and trouble to our
bed-fellows? And

<span id="page_114">p. 114</span>

thou, even thou, lord, wilt not say it shall not he, nor order things
anew and make us equal.' 'In common life,' then said he, '’tis no light
matter to change the lots that Clotho and her sister Fates have laid
upon you; but as touching the feast, I will set right your poverty; and
let the settling be after this manner. Go, O Cronosolon, indite me
certain laws for observance in the feast days, that the rich feast not
by themselves, but impart of their good things to you.' Then said I, 'I
know not how.'

'But I,' quoth he, 'will teach you.' And therewith he began <span
class="margnote"><span id="114:12">12</span></span> and taught me. And
when I was perfect, 'And certify them,' he said, 'that if they do not
hereafter, this sharp sickle that I bear is no toy; ’twere odd if I
could maim therewith Uranus my father, but not do as much for the rich
that transgress my laws; they shall be fitted to serve the Mother of the
Gods with alms-box and pipe and timbrel.' Thus he threatened; wherefore
ye will do well to observe his decrees.

FIRST TABLE OF THE LAWS<span class="margnote"><span
id="114:13">13</span></span>

All business, be it public or private, is forbidden during the feast
days, save such as tends to sport and solace and delight. Let none
follow their avocations saving cooks and bakers.

All men shall be equal, slave and free, rich and poor, one with another.

Anger, resentment, threats, are contrary to law.

During the feast days, no man shall be called to account of his
stewardship.

No man shall in these days count his money nor inspect his wardrobe, nor
make an inventory.

Athletic training shall cease.

No discourse shall be either composed or delivered, except it be witty
and lusty, conducing to mirth and jollity.

<span id="page_115">p. 115</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="115:14">14</span></span>SECOND TABLE OF
THE LAWS

In good time against the feast every rich man shall inscribe in a
table-book the names of his several friends, and shall provide money to
a tithe of his yearly incomings, together with the superfluity of his
raiment, and such ware as is too coarse for his own service, and a
goodly quantity of silver vessels. These shall be all in readiness.

On the eve of the feast the rich shall hold a purification, and drive
forth from their houses parsimony and avarice and covetousness and all
other such leanings that dwell with the most of them. And their houses
being purged they shall make offering to Zeus the Enricher, and to
Hermes the Giver, and to Apollo the Generous. And at afternoon the
table-book of their friends shall be read to them.

<span class="margnote"><span id="115:15">15</span></span> Then shall
they with their own hands allot to each friend his fitting share, and
send it before set of sun.

And the carriers shall be not more than three or four, the trustiest of
a man's servants, and well on in years. And let him write in a letter
what is the gift, and its amount, that the carriers be not suspect to
giver or receiver. And the said servants shall drink one cup each man,
and depart, and ask no more.

To such as have culture let all be sent in double measure; it is fitting
that they have two portions.

The message that goeth with a gift shall be modest and brief; let no man
humble his friend, nor commend his own gift.

Rich shall not send gifts to rich, nor entertain his peer at the feast.

Of the things made ready for sending, none shall be reserved; let no man
give and un-give.

He that by absence missed his share of yester-year shall now receive
that too.

<span id="page_116">p. 116</span>

Let the rich discharge debts for their friends that are poor, and their
rent if they owe and cannot pay it.

Let it be their care above all to know in time the needs of every man.

The receiver for his part should be not over-curious, but <span
class="margnote"><span id="116:16">16</span></span> account great
whatsoever is sent him. Yet are a flask of wine, a hare, or a fat fowl,
not to be held sufficient gifts; rather they bring the feast into
mockery. For the poor man's return gift, if he have learning, let it be
an ancient book, but of good omen and festive humour, or a writing of
his own after his ability; and the rich man shall receive the same with
a glad countenance, and take and read it forthwith; if he reject or
fling it aside, be it known to him that he hath incurred that penalty of
the sickle, though he himself hath sent all he should. For the
unlearned, let him send a garland or grains of frankincense.

If a poor man send, to one that is rich, raiment or silver or gold
beyond his means, the gift shall be impounded and sold, and the price
thereof cast into the treasury of Cronus; and on the morrow the poor man
shall receive from the rich stripes upon his hands with a rod not less
than twelve score and ten.

LAWS OF THE BOARD<span class="margnote"><span
id="116:17">17</span></span>

The bath hour shall be noon, and before it nuts and draughts.

Every man shall take place as chance may direct; dignities and birth and
wealth shall give no precedence.

All shall he served with the same wine; the rich host shall not say, For
my colic, or for my megrims, I must drink the better.

Every man's portion of meat shall be alike. The attendants shall favour
none, nor yet in their serving shall they be deaf to any, nor pass any
by before his pleasure be known. They shall not set great portions
before him, and small before him, nor give this one a dainty and that
one refuse, but all shall be equal.

<span id="page_117">p. 117</span>

<span class="margnote"><span id="117:18">18</span></span>Let the butler
have a quick eye and ear for all from his point of vantage, and heed his
master least. And be the cups large or small at choice.

It shall be any man's right to call a health; and let all drink to all
if they will, when the host has set the wine a-going. But no man shall
be bound to drink, if he be no strong toper.

It shall not be free to any who will to bring an unpractised dancer or
musician to the dinner.

Let the limit to jesting be, that the feelings of none be wounded.

The stake at draughts shall be nuts alone; if any play for money, he
shall fast on the morrow.

When the rich man shall feast his slaves, let his friends serve with
him.

These laws every rich man shall engrave on a brazen pillar and set them
in the centre of his hall and there read them. And be it known that, so
long as that pillar stands, neither famine nor sickness nor fire nor any
mischance shall come upon the house. But if it be removed--which God
avert!--then evil shall be that house's doom.

H.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: I](wl424)
