[![](../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Atlantis](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](smoa18)  [Next](smoa20) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Selestor's Men of Atlantis*, by Clara Iza von Ravn, \[1937\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_124">p. 124</span>

### CHAPTER XVII

*An Atlantian tradition*.

The fight on Mars? An old Atlantian tale, learned from one who read the
planets with a lens of lightest glass made double, treble, full one
hundred thick by process learned in that great age, but never more
employed because, alas! the method sunk, with him who learned when water
wall engulfed.

One read, and, reading told so plain the tale to eager sage beside him,
that the mood of all upon the island then was turned unto the story.

Story long forgot by men of earth, and we, who dwell where ether makes a
plane of light, remember us that in our youth the tale was told by some
old knight, or nurse, with bated breath and whispered accent. Secrecy
was pledged lest angry gods cast foul disease upon the eye that
pictured—lips which told.

One morn the master mind of him who dwelt in tower made high with marble
columns formed for strength, and steps wound cunningly among the carven
leaves and blossoms rivaling the snow on mountain spur of North, heard
with the inner sense the note preluding conflict. Heard with the inner
sense, which in that age was factor brought to bear on all the speech of
Earth, and taught by science.

Long ago the *tone* was needed not by certain learned men, and in
Atlantis dwelt the art perfected. In this day the men on mountain spur
afar, ye view with scorn, hold simple speech in manner of the Atlantian
sage—through current of the mind.

<span id="page_125">p. 125</span>

The brain casts out an ether potent, all unseen yet swift and subtle as
the lightning's stroke to them who understand; a potency of mind which
dormant hath become in all mankind save favored few who, guided by the
mind, seek not the outward mark to glean, but cultivate the inner force
of man.

I spake, he heard with inner sense the note preluding conflict. Calm he
spake to his attendant: "Swing in line the glass which stands beside the
trident. Make it clear by passing silken substance o’er the face and
wheel it to my couch.

"Throw wide the casement that my eyes may drink the sparkle on the
sea—the forest top that comes unto my casement. Thus my mind grows calm
and clear and I may mark events, so that no dream I name the wondrous
sights that I shall hand adown the line of sons who follow after."

Light-footed slaves brought scented bath, and laved he well his
body—body of a prince whose father sat upon the throne in that Atlantian
isle.

He broke no meat, but drank he long and deep a draught of milk of goat
mixed strong with spice which nourished mind and body; then cast his
length upon a carven seat, with silken screen, beside the casement. Far
below the sea danced in the light of sun just rising. Far below the
gardens, rose-besprinkled, lay; the breath of million blossoms rose to
meet his sense of ecstasy and calm commingled.

He drank the note of warbling buhl that called unto its mate, or
osprey's shriek and thrush's note low-hidden in the rose's nest of
bloom. Afar were ships of fishers toiling in from work of early morn,
and galleys gay with colors wove in silk and fiber of the shrub <span
id="fr_12"></span>[\*](#fn_12) which stronger holds.

The people at their prayers looked like the flies

<span id="page_126">p. 126</span>

which dart from bird or beak of hungry asp; and soldiers in the lines
upon the quays were but as moving dolls—aye, so were they, the puppets
of a king who ruled through judgment of the priests; for in that age of
priest's supremacy fell this tale.

Aye, long before the sea-fight of the northmen bold or Asia's subtle
souls, Zambesi—tool of these, and old Atlantians guarding well their
homes. Nay, after years so long—the sea fight—that I do not count, yet
speak, mayhap, the tale I tell fell many thousand years before Atlantis
sank.

"Wheel to my side the instrument," spake he to his attendant sage, far
younger. The man who learned to read each thought made no reply, but
wheeled well in line with stars, to eye unaided all invisible, the
trumpet-shapen instrument, whose base was metal of that ruddy hue <span
id="fr_13"></span>[†](#fn_13) and gold en-beaten in one gleaming mass,
with stones that studded here and there the base.

Great dull, white pebbles to the eye of ignorance, but holding meaning
to the man so learned, that everything had tongue and speech and mind.

Great pebbles hurled from planets down to Earth in storm-time of that
age. The time of mud from those volcanoes which now lie to sight as
spurs of green, so steep and smoothe to eye they seem a fairy garden
shaped as cone with carpet made from finest mosses spun. Great cones of
beauty yet they worked much harm at seasons.

Slowly bent the sage his eye to instrument and long he gazed. The moon
he sullen saw, worn hollow here, at variance there with all the laws of
symmetry. The lesser stars, mere floating balls of air, yet shot with
rocks from higher zones. At last his

<span id="page_127">p. 127</span>

eyes grew bright with leaping light, as Mars—the great sky war-god swung
on high.

"Behold great Mars!" he cried aloud with joy. “I ne’er before have seen
his fields of green, for higher hath he floated than mine eyes could
reach with all the cunning of this instrument, made from a method
learned at the cost of years of life—of study. Instrument supreme!

“But in this day, oh joy! he swingeth nigh in transit lower down by
reason of the laxity of ether. The gods be praised! This moment cometh
each one thousand years! and I, the blessed, have lived to see this day
which none shall see again till I forgot shall be! And yet the knowledge
and the history gained shall live long after I have passed from earth.

“Behold!“ he cried, all sudden to attending sage, “The Mars men gather
for a battle! Ah! magnificent the armor for each leader. Scales of metal
earth-eye hath not seen but later shall invest. The scales of copper
part, yet part of silver-smoothed the mottled surface by the smith who
welds with beaten stroke, nor forges; metal scales made slow by patient
toil, they seem; Ah, I shall learn the method.

“Behold the tridents, fiery balls are shot from such as those. I see the
fine-wrought spring (by inner sense) the spring which leaps to throw its
missile to the foe. The spears, three-pointed, savage instruments—that
tear so well the breast. A javelin at the belt made of the woven links
and discs and wire of copper hardened.

“Mars men, too, carry spikes of wood like steel; behold the polished
point dipped in the blood of adversary—poisoned! doth the inner sense
contend, and thus is life all quickly ended. And now behold the shield
each bears! a shield en-shaped like leaf of grape; shields made of light
yet toughened stuff

<span id="page_128">p. 128</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> —of hide, so
toughened by a liquid bath (tradition hath), that even steel can
scarcely penetrate.

“About their limbs are tangled cords of silk, each cunningly concealing
fiery veins, I wist, encased in metal which to pierce means death when
foemen clutch, but well the body bath of wearer doth protect so as a ray
of noon-day sun it feels, nor harms.

“Their mode of warfare I as yet see not. Ah! I behold great ships sail
outward—upward; one alone doth man each boat, and he unarmed save for
his deadly dress which burneth foe, but leaveth him unscathed, for
outward point the various tubes and lines concealing deadly methods.
Around his body warm, bathed in fumes of smoke from some rare shrub
which does protect from death, is wound a silken substance soaked in
strong solution of a nitrate which protects, the sages wise have told.

“The ships sail outward from the land and bear a keen-eyed messenger to
spy on foe. The foe? I see them not. O men of Mars, whence comes thy
foe?—Hark! In their hands they bear them trumpets long, such as our
sages spake, their eyes beheld on Mars.

“I hear their music. Nay, alas! I *hear* it not. Too great the distance
for my strained ears to catch, yet I can see the gleam of light on
burnished metal; see the fingers lithe press cunning keys—toy gently
with the stops and pull from pierced sides the chain which carries note
to other portion of the trumpet long—as long as man with outstretched
arms could span.

“The color of their garments? Sanguine hue, a redder than the light
which sun casts ere it sinks behind the hills of Ocean. Men of Mars, ye
learn the meaning well of hues the gods make in the worlds to gladden
orbs of men and make the heart to leap, the blood run quicker yet, and
pulse beat fast which once felt sluggish thrill.

<span id="page_129">p. 129</span>

“White tufts of silk upon each helm are set. Such helms! of scales the
fish might deftly grow, embroidered with each name all set in gems of
azure, yellow, too, I see the noble captains of the host affect—the
color of the shifting light on corn, the yellow symbol, too, of
holiness—the flower's heart—the center of an orb—the pigment pure that
mellows flesh in tint.

“Embroidered robes I see not as our day has fashioned, but behold the
carven lilies as have we. The golden lotus—white, too, they employ.”

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_12"></span>[125:\*](smoa19.htm#fr_12) Cotton.

<span id="fn_13"></span>[126:†](smoa19.htm#fr_13) Copper.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Chapter XVIII. Battle on Mars as described by the watching sage.
The army of shadows](smoa20)
