[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Legends and
Sagas](../../index)  [England](../index)  [Index](index) 
[Previous](tfc05)  [Next](tfc07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Buy this Book on
Kindle](https://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/B002IKKI0C/internetsacredte)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[![](img/tease.jpg)](index)  
*Tales from Chaucer*, by Charles Cowden Clarke, \[1833\], at Intangible
Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_21">p. 21</span>

### The Knight's Tale

IN former days there lived a warrior named Theseus; he was the King of
Athens, and in his time had been so famous in deeds of arms that he was
the most renowned under the sun. He had conquered many a wealthy
kingdom, and by his skill and knightly conduct had subdued the whole
territory of the Amazons, which formerly was called Scythia. He married
the young queen of that country (her name was Ippolita) , and brought
her and her young sister, Emily, home with him to Athens in great pomp
and solemnity. And thus accompanied by song and triumph I leave this
valiant king riding into Athens surrounded by his host in arms.

And here, if it were not tedious to relate, I would describe to you
fully the manner in which Theseus overcame the kingdom of the Amazons;
also the great battle between the Amazons and the Athenians; how
Ippolita, the fair and valiant Queen of Scythia, was besieged; of the
feast that was held at her wedding; and of the temple that was raised
upon her coming home to Athens: but I have other matter in hand, for my
story will be found long enough; and as I would not willingly prevent
every man in turn from telling his tale, I will continue mine, and let
us see who shall win the supper.

This king of whom I made mention, riding along in his pride and
prosperity, as he approached near to Athens

<span id="page_22">p. 22</span>

perceived kneeling in the highway a company of ladies, by two and two,
clad all in black, who made so doleful a weeping and lamentation as the
like was never heard: neither would they cease till they had laid hands
upon his horse's bridle and stopped his procession.

"What people are ye," said Theseus, "who at my return home thus
interrupt my festival with your grievous weeping? Are you envious of my
honour and success that you thus wail and lament? or hath any one
offended you? Let me know if your wrong can be repaired: likewise the
reason of your being clad in this woful black."

The eldest lady of the party, whom it was ruth and pity to see and hear,
then spake: "We do not grieve, my lord, at the success of your victory,
your glory, and your honour; but we beseech of your mercy help and
succour: have compassion upon our woe and our distress! In thy gentle
nature let fall one drop of pity upon us wretched women; for of a truth,
my lord, there is not one of us all but she has been either a duchess or
a queen: now thanks to the falsehood of fortune, with whom no lot is
steadfast, we are both miserable and desolate. For fifteen days past
have we waited your home-coming here in the temple of the Goddess
Clemency: let not our errand fail, but aid us since you have the power.

"I, miserable creature, was formerly wife to King Cassaneus who perished
at Thebes; and all we who thus lament lost our husbands during the siege
of that place: and yet old Creon, who, alas! is now King of Thebes, in
his wrath and wickedness has wreaked his spite and tyranny on the dead
bodies of our lords, which he ordered to be drawn together in a heap,
and with no entreaty will

<span id="page_23">p. 23</span>

allow them to be burned or buried, but has left them a prey to the wild
dogs." And with that speech they grovelled on the ground piteously
weeping.

When this gentle conquerer heard them so speak his heart ached to think
that those who were then before him in such a plight had been persons of
high estate; so, leaping from his horse, he went and raised them from
the ground, bidding them be comforted, for that upon the oath of a true
knight he would so avenge them upon the tyrant Creon that all Greece
should acknowledge the deserved death he would receive from the hand of
Theseus.

Whereupon, without delay, or even entering Athens, he raised his banner,
and with his host rode forth towards Thebes; the queen, Ippolita, and
her young sister, the lovely Emily, he left in Athens awaiting his
return. His broad white banner, embroidered in red with the figure of
the God Mars, and his ensign, rich in gold tissue, embossed with that of
the Minotaur, slain by him in Crete, went glittering through the distant
plains. So rode this valiant chief, the flower of chivalry, till he
arrived before the walls of Thebes. To shorten this part of my story, he
fought with Creon hand to hand, slew him in fair battle, and routed his
forces. Afterwards he carried the city by assault, rased its walls, and
finally restored to the ladies the remains of their murdered husbands,
that they might inter them with the customary rites and solemnity. I
pass over the account of the dirge and lament made by those ladies at
the funeral pyre, as well as the knightly conduct observed towards them
by the noble Theseus when they took their departure.

After the fight Theseus remained all night upon the

<span id="page_24">p. 24</span>

field of battle, and disposed of the conquered territory in vassalage
according to his pleasure. At the same time the plunderers busied
themselves in ransacking the bodies of the slain, stripping them of
their armour and clothes. It so happened that in one heap they found,
grievously wounded, two young knights lying side by side, both dressed
in the same armour, which was richly wrought. Palamon was the name of
one knight and Arcite that of the other. The heralds recognised them as
members of the royal family of Thebes; they were sons of two sisters.
The plunderers drew them forth from the heaps of the slain, and bore
them tenderly to the tent of Theseus, who soon had them conveyed to
Athens and strictly confined in prison, rejecting every offer that was
proposed for their ransom. The campaign being over, the king returned
home with his army, crowned with the conqueror's laurels, and in joy and
honour passed the remainder of his days. But in sorrow and anguish poor
Palamon and Arcite were kept close prisoners in a tower, without hope of
redemption; the power of gold was unavailing.

Thus passed day after day—year after year; till one May morning it
happened that Emily, who was more beautiful to behold than the lily upon
its tall and slender stalk of green, and fresher than the young flowers
in May (for her complexion rivalled the blushing wild-rose), had arisen
according to her custom at break of day to do honour to that sweet
season of the year, for the slothful and ungentle heart claims no
kindred with the lovely May. Her dress was elegant and precise, and her
golden hair, braided in tresses, flowed down her back. As

<span id="page_25">p. 25</span>

the sun was climbing the heavens, she walked up and down the garden,
gathering the many-coloured flowers to weave into a garland for her
head, and like an angel she sang in the clear air of morning. The thick
and strong walls of the tower which formed the dungeon-keep to the
castle that confined these knights adjoined the garden in which Emily
was taking her pleasure.

In that bright sun and clear morning, Palamon, the woful prisoner, had,
as was his custom, with the permission of his gaoler, been taking his
walk in an upper chamber of the castle, from whence he had a view of all
the noble city, and could look immediately down upon the garden and all
its fresh verdure.

The melancholy captive pacing his chamber to and fro, bitterly
regretting his fate, by chance caught a sight of Emily through the massy
bars of his chamber window, and suddenly started as though stung to the
heart. This roused the attention of Arcite, who thinking that he was
affected by some recollection of his former fortune, tenderly inquired
why he had turned so pale. "My beloved cousin," said he, "for the love
of heaven, take in patience our confinement—it cannot be helped; fortune
has laid this adversity upon us, and we must endure it with constancy."

Palamon replied, "My dear cousin, you are mistaken in the cause of my
grief: the bitter restraint of this prison has not wounded me upon the
present occasion, but the beauty of a lady whom I see yonder walking in
the garden has so stricken my heart that it will in all likelihood prove
my bane. Whether she be woman or goddess, I know not; but if, O Venus,"
said he (and then he sunk

<span id="page_26">p. 26</span>

passionately on his knees), "it hath been thy will to be thus
transfigured before me, a wretched and sorrowful creature, assist our
escape from this prison: but if the eternal word of fate has doomed us
here to die, have compassion upon our kindred, brought so low by
oppression and tyranny."

At this moment Arcite also perceived the lady, and was as much affected
as Palamon, and even more, by her surpassing beauty. "If," said he, "I
may not be granted the blessing of even looking upon her again, my doom
is fixed."

When Palamon heard these words he turned upon him fiercely and answered,
"Is this said in soberness or in jest?"

"Seriously by my truth," said Arcite, "or evil befall me."

"Then," replied Palamon, knitting his brows, "it were no great honour to
you to be false, and a traitor to me, your cousin and brother, who have
so deeply sworn to each other that nothing but death should separate us
and dissolve the pledge: that neither in love nor in any event we should
cross each other, but that upon all occasions you should as faithfully
serve me as I should forward your good fortune. This was our oath, and
which you dare not gainsay. You are of my counsel, and yet falsely would
presume to love the lady whom I love, and ever shall so long as I live.
Truly, therefore, Arcite, I first loved her, and made you, my sworn
brother, my confidant: as a true knight, then, are you bound to assist
me according to the extent of your power; or else I dare to pronounce
you false to your honour."

<span id="page_27">p. 27</span>

Arcite haughtily retorted upon him that he was the false one: "And false
you are," said he; "I tell you utterly false. I first loved her. What!
you, who even now could not say whether she were a woman or a goddess!
Yours is a holy affection, mine for an earthly creature, and I therefore
disclosed to you my mind, as to my cousin and sworn brother. Grant it
even that you first loved her, have you forgotten that saying of the old
writer, 'Who shall give laws to a lover? Love is itself a higher law
than any framed by man!' All decrees, therefore, however stern, are
daily broken in favour of the more positive commands of love. Whether
maiden or widow, a man must needs love in spite of his head; he cannot
help himself. There is no likelihood that you, any more than myself,
shall ever stand in her favour, seeing that we are condemned to
perpetual imprisonment without hope of ransom. We are but like the two
hounds striving for a bone which, when they were spent with rage, a kite
bore away from both. At the king's court, therefore, my brother, 'each
man for himself,' say I. Love, if you are inclined, for I love, and ever
shall. Here in this prison must we remain, and take what may befall us."

Great was the strife between them, which lasted longer than I have
leisure to tell: but to my story. It happened one day that a worthy king
named Perithous, who had been the companion of Theseus from their
childhood, came to Athens upon a visit to his friend: for so great was
the affection between them that, according to the old tradition, when
one died, the other went down into Tartarus to seek him there. But this
is beside my tale.

King Perithous entertained a strong regard for Arcite,

<span id="page_28">p. 28</span>

and had known him some years in Thebes. At the earnest entreaty,
therefore, of Perithous, Theseus granted the young prisoner his liberty
without ransom, to go where-ever he pleased, with this express
provision, that if he ever after were discovered for one moment by day
or by night, within any district of the territory belonging to Theseus,
that he should lose his head without redemption.

Now were the perplexity and sorrow of Arcite at their height. Release
from affliction had now become his bane: "Had I never known Perithous,"
said he, "I might still have been dwelling with Theseus, though fettered
in his prison: I had then been in bliss, for the simple sight of her
whom I serve, although I might never have merited the favour of her
regard, would have been sufficient recompense to me. Yours is the
victory, my dear Palamon, in this adventure: for you will remain in this
blessed prison—prison did I call it?—a paradise. And now, since fortune
has been so adverse to me, that I am to endure the absence from her,
while you enjoy her sight, the possibility is that, being an honourable
and valiant knight, you may hereafter by some farther favour of fortune
be placed in the full attainment of all you desire, while I am exiled,
and barren of her sweet favour. Farewell, dear lady! my life, my
comfort, my gladness!"

Palamon, on the other hand, when he found his companion in durance gone
from him—his cousin, brother, counsellor, and friend—grievously lamented
his own fate, and made the great tower resound with lamentation: the
very fetters on his legs were wet with bitter tears. "Alas!" said he,
"Arcite, heaven knows that you

<span id="page_29">p. 29</span>

are now reaping the fruit of our contention. You are now wandering at
large in your native Thebes, little heeding my distress. You may, in
your wisdom and manhood, assemble all our kindred, and make so fierce an
attack upon this country that, either by chance or treaty, you may be
able to win my lady to wife. For, since you are now from bondage free,
and a lord again, all the advantage is yours, while I am pining away in
captivity."

With this the fire of jealousy burst forth, and so maddened his brain
that his hue became pale as dead ashes: and he cried aloud, "O ye
implacable gods! that govern this world by the bond of your eternal
word, and whose will and ordinances are graven on tables of adamant,
what more in your sight are the race of mankind than sheep huddled in
the fold? For, like another beast, man is slain and pounded in prison,
and tormented: he suffers sickness, and great adversity, and often with
a guiltless and unupbraiding heart." Many such impatient complaints did
he continue to pour forth, but I must leave him for a time, and give you
some tidings of Arcite.

The summer had passed away, and the long nights increased the distresses
both of the lover and the prisoner. It were hard to say whose condition
was the more deplorable. Palamon condemned to perpetual imprisonment,
loaded with chains and fetters: Arcite exiled evermore from the country
where his lady dwelt, and never again to behold her face. I put the
question to you, who are lovers, which of these two had the harder lot;
the one who is able to see his lady day by day, yet must ever remain in
prison; or the other, who can go whither he pleases, but must never
again look upon her whom he loves?

<span id="page_30">p. 30</span>

When Arcite returned to Thebes, his loss so pressed upon his heart that
he became estranged from sleep and food: he grew lean and hollow-eyed,
and his complexion was sallow and pale as ashes. Comfortless and
desolate, he always remained alone, and if he happened to hear a song or
instrument he would weep without avail, so feeble were his spirits, and
he altogether so changed that his voice was strange to those who knew
him.

After enduring for some time this distraction, he one night, in sleep,
thought that the winged Mercury stood before him, and bid him be of good
cheer. The god was arrayed as when he closed the eyes of Argus; his
sleep-compelling wand he held upright before him, and upon his shining
locks he wore a winged cap. "To Athens," said he, "shall you go; there
will you see an end to all your grief."

With that word Arcite started and awoke. "Whatever ill befall me," said
he, "to Athens will I go: no dread of death shall prevent my seeing the
lady whom I love and serve: in her presence I care not to die." Then
observing how much he was changed, both in appearance and colour, he
thought that if he bore himself in lowly condition he might live unknown
in Athens, and thus behold his lady almost every day. With this he
changed his suit for that of a poor labourer, and all alone, except with
one attendant who knew his secret and all his fortune, and was disguised
as poorly as himself, to Athens he travelled straightway. One day he
went to court, and at the gate proffered his services to do such menial
work as might be required. To cut the matter short, he fell in with the
chamberlain to the Lady Emily, who hired him

<span id="page_31">p. 31</span>

to hew wood and draw water, being young and large of bone.

Having served a year or two as page of the chamber to the fair Emily,
under the name of Philostrate, he so wrought upon all who knew him at
the court by the gentleness of his condition that all said it would be
advisable for Theseus to raise him in his degree and give him honourable
service in which he might prove his quality. And thus so enhanced was
the fame of his conduct and fair speech, that Theseus promoted him to be
near his person, and appointed him squire of his chamber, at the same
time giving him gold to maintain his dignity. He also secretly received
his rent from his own country, but he used it honourably and with such
discretion that no man wondered how he had it. Three years he passed in
this manner, and so conducted himself both in peace and war that Theseus
prized no one more dearly than him. Having brought Arcite to this state
of happiness, I will now return awhile to Palamon.

In a strong prison, and in horrible gloom, Palamon had sat for seven
long years, wasting with love and sorrow. In the seventh year, however,
during a night of May, it happened (whether by chance or destiny) that,
through the aid of a friend, he broke from prison soon after midnight.
He had so plied his gaoler with wine, drugged with narcotics, that he
slept like death, and thus he was enabled to escape.

The night being short, and the day near at hand, he was compelled to lie
hidden; his purpose being to remain close all day, and in the night to
journey on towards Thebes, where, having arrived, he would rouse his

<span id="page_32">p. 32</span>

friends to help him war on Theseus, in which attempt he resolved either
to die or win his Lady Emily. To a grove, then hard by, Palamon stalked
with fearful foot.

The lark, the active messenger of day, had welcomed the grey dawn with
its song, and the flaming sun had risen, rejoicing the whole heaven, and
drying up with his fiery streams the silver drops that hung upon the
leaves, when Arcite, who was then, as I have told you, principal squire
in the royal court of Theseus, arose and looked upon the cheerful day.
Ever pondering on the object of his love, he mounted his steed, restless
and starting like flame, and rode forth from court a mile or two till he
came to the grove already mentioned for the purpose of weaving a garland
of woodbine and hawthorn in honour of the merry month, and all the way
he sang a roundelay in the clear sunshine. Having dismounted, he
wandered up and down near the spot where Palamon, alarmed lest he should
be discovered, lay cowering in a bush. Little was he aware that Arcite
was so nigh at hand, and the other was as unmindful as his companion of
the close witness to all his words and actions that was there. Well may
it be said that fields and woods have eyes and ears.

When Arcite had roamed about to his satisfaction, and finished his
May-morning carol, he suddenly lapsed into a thoughtful study. These
lovers, in their fantastic moods, are ever wavering. One minute they are
swaying and dancing on the tip-top spray of ecstasy, the next grovelling
among the thorns and briars: now up, now down, like a bucket in a well.
They are like Friday, which seldom resembles the other days in the
week—now rain, now shine. So the Goddess of Love overcasts the hearts

<span id="img_03200"></span> <span align="CENTER"> [![The
Knight](tn/03200.jpg)  
Click to enlarge](img/03200.jpg)  
The Knight  
</span>

<span id="page_33">p. 33</span>

of her worshippers, and makes them as variable as the complexion of the
day devoted to her worship. <span id="fr_17"></span>[\*](#fn_17)

When Arcite had sung his song he began thoughtfully to sigh at the
remembrance of his native Thebes, warred on by the revengeful Juno.
"Alas!" said he, "the royal blood of Cadmus and Amphion is confounded
and scattered abroad—Cadmus, the founder of Thebes, and its first
crowned king! and here I, who am descended from him, and am of the royal
stock, am now so thralled a wretch as to be the mere squire of my mortal
enemy, and am moreover compelled to conceal my real name. All my
lineage, alas! are gone, with the exception of poor Palamon, whom
Theseus keeps a martyr in bondage. And, to crown all my griefs, love for
the fair Emily has so possessed my heart that these would fade away
could I but render myself acceptable in her eyes."

At these words up started Palamon, like one who had suddenly felt a cold
sword glide through his heart. With a face pale from rage (as a
maniac's) he rushed from the thick brake, and cried, "Now you are
caught, false Arcite! wicked traitor! You, who are of my blood, and my
sworn counsellor, still hold your affection for my Lady Emily, that has
caused my greatest sorrow. You have deceived King Theseus and changed
your name. Either I or thou shalt die; for no one but myself, while I
live, shall love my lady. I, Palamon, your mortal foe, swear this; and
though I have no weapon in this place, having newly made my escape from
prison, either relinquish the Lady Emily or die. Choose at once, for
there is no escape for you."

<span id="page_34">p. 34</span>

When Arcite had recognized him, and listened to his speech, with a
lion's rage he drew his sword and said, "By the great Jove, who sitteth
above us, were it not that you are mad for love, and are weaponless, you
should never quit this grove alive. I deny the pledge and bond which you
pretend I made with you. Fool! again I tell you, love is free; and, in
your despite, love her I will. But as you are a worthy knight, and of
gentle <span id="fr_18"></span>[\*](#fn_18) blood, and desire to win her
by battle, I here give you my word of honour that to-morrow, without
disclosing the affair to any other being, I will not fail to be found
here equipped as a knight, and I will bring accoutrements for you, and
you shall select according to your pleasure. Moreover, I will now bring
you food and covering for the coming night. If, in this wood, you slay
me and win my lady, the prize is your own." Palamon accepted his
challenge, and so they separated until the morrow. Truly is it said that
neither love nor royalty can endure fellowship in dominion: and so found
Palamon and Arcite.

The younger knight had ridden back into the town, and on the morrow,
before daybreak, having secretly provided two complete equipments of
armour, ready for their contest, he rode forth alone, carrying the whole
on his horse before him. In the grove, and at the time and place
appointed, they met. The colour fled from their faces at the first
exchange of looks—like a Thracian hunter, who stands in a gap with his
spear, waiting for the roused bear or lion, and hears him coming through
the underwood, crushing boughs and leaves in his passage,

<span id="page_35">p. 35</span>

and thinks, "Here comes my mortal enemy, whom without fail I must kill,
or he will take my life": so it was with these from the moment either
caught sight of the other. No salutation, no compliment, passed at
meeting, but each helped to arm his antagonist as friendly as he would
his own brother; and then, with their sharp strong spears they long
lashed and strove for victory. Palamon fared in the fight like a raging
lion and Arcite a hungry tiger. They rushed together with the obstinate
fury of wild boars, panting and foaming, while the blood flowed to their
feet. And so I leave them fighting while I bring you the news of
Theseus.

This famous king had so great a love for hunting that scarcely the day
dawned which did not find him ready with hounds and horn to follow the
stag of largest limb: it was his chief delight. Having fulfilled his
duty to the god of battle, he joined the train of Diana.

On this same day then, Theseus, with his Queen Ippolita and the fair
Emily, all clad in green, had ridden forth to the chase, and towards
this very grove where he had heard of some game. He therefore made for
an open plain through which the deer was wont to take flight, and over a
brook, and so right on his way. When the king had arrived at this open
space, he looked under the level beams of the morning sun and beheld the
combatants, like two bulls, fighting furiously. Their bright swords
glanced to and fro like lightning, and fell with hideous might. He,
ignorant of their quality, put spurs to his horse, and at a start was
between them both. "Ho!" cried he, drawing his sword, "no more, on pain
of death. By mighty Mars, he that strikes another blow does it with

<span id="page_36">p. 36</span>

penalty of his head. But say, who are ye who are thus boldly fighting
here, as if in the actual lists, without judge or other officer?"

To whom Palamon answered hastily, "Sir, there need few words. We have
both deserved death: we are two unfortunate wretches burthened with our
lives; as, therefore, you are a just judge, grant us neither refuge nor
mercy. Slay me first, but let him follow—or rather let him first die;
for, though you little know it, this is Arcite, your mortal foe, whom
you banished from Athens: this, his return, alone merits death. This
same Arcite came to your gate and passed under the name of Philostrate.
For years has he put this deceit upon you; he has been promoted to be
your chief squire, and presumes to love the fair Lady Emily. And since
the day is come that I myself shall die, I plainly confess that I am
that woful Palamon who has just broken from bondage—your mortal enemy,
and the devoted lover of the Lady Emily, in whose sight and service I
could at this moment yield my breath. Give me therefore present judgment
and death; yet let not my companion go free, for both merit this
reward."

The king answered him, "This matter has been quickly concluded: the
confession of your own mouth has condemned you, and it shall be so
recorded. You shall not, however, die the felon's death, but, by the
blood-red Mars, the sword shall fulfil your destiny."

Then did the queen, the Lady Emily, and their train, in their womanly
hearts, begin to weep; for they thought it a grievous chance to befall
two gentlemen of so high estate, whose only misfortune was that they had
loved too well. And when they looked upon their gaping

<span id="page_37">p. 37</span>

wounds, they implored his mercy upon their knees, till his mood began to
soften (for pity soon finds its way to the noble heart); and though he
at first trembled for wrath, yet when he shortly considered with himself
the cause of their trespass, his reason excused them, however his anger
had chafed at their offence. He thought that every man will, if
possible, help himself in love, and that he will seize the chance of
escape from prison. Moreover, he had compassion on the weeping women,
and he concluded that it were a shame to a lord of gentle heart, who
will have no mercy, but still maintains a lion-heart both in word and
deed, as well towards him who repents as to the unrelenting man that
stiffly maintains his first determination: he can have little discretion
who would confound pride and humility. When therefore the clouds of his
anger had passed away, he looked up with light and beaming eyes, and
thus addressed the assembly.

"Hail to the mighty God of Love!—nothing can withstand his power. The
wonders he achieves proclaim him a god, for he makes all hearts
subservient to his will. This Palamon and Arcite, who had wholly escaped
from my prison, have lived here, in Athens, knowing me to be their
mortal enemy and that their lives were in my power; yet hath love, in
spite of their heads, brought them both here to die. Who but a fool
would be in love? Look at their wounds, see how they bleed: thus hath
the god they worship rewarded them for their service: and yet they, in
their wisdom, will obey his dictates, happen what may. But the greatest
folly of all is, that she, for whom there has been all this hot fare,
knew as little of it as myself. But, young or old, man will at one time
be a

<span id="page_38">p. 38</span>

fool. As I have myself, however, in times past, engaged in the same
service, and know the sore straits to which one may be brought through
love, I here, at the request of my kneeling queen, and dear sister
Emily, wholly acquit you, knights, of your trespass; and in return you
both shall swear to me that you will never more disturb my dominion by
night or by day, but to your utmost be my friends and allies." They
accepted his oath, and in granting their pardon he thus said to them:

"As regards my sister Emily, on whose account you maintain this jealousy
and strife, though she were a queen or princess, either of you, by
virtue of royal descent or wealth, is worthy to wed her. Since, however,
she can marry but one, and that the other must be doomed to pipe his
loss under an ivy leaf, each of 'you shall abide the fate destined for
him, and after the following fashion. You shall go forth freely wherever
you list, without ransom or danger from me; and by this day fifty weeks
each shall have collected from far and near a hundred knights, armed
'all in proof' for the lists, ready to contend in battle for the hand of
the lady: and this promise I hold you upon the truth of my knighthood,
that whichever shall slay his opponent, or drive his hundred from the
lists, on him will I bestow the hand of Emily to wife."

Who was now light of heart but Palamon? who bounded for joy but Arcite?
and who can describe the rejoicings which were made when Theseus granted
this fair favour? All, as well as the two Thebans, went on their knees
and thanked him with grateful hearts. And so blithely the knights took
leave, and rode home towards Thebes.

<span id="page_39">p. 39</span>

I must not omit to recount the great expense at which Theseus erected
the lists. A nobler theatre I may say the world never beheld. It was a
full mile in circuit, walled with stone, and without the wall ran a
moat. The shape was circular, with seats all round, sixty feet in
height, raised one above another, so that no one could deprive his
neighbor of beholding the spectacle. Eastward and westward in the circle
was erected a gate of white marble. Every craftsman and artisan, even to
the sculptor of images, was employed by Theseus to raise and adorn this
structure, so that in the like space the earth did not contain so fair a
theatre. Upon the east gate were raised an altar and an oratory to
Venus, the Goddess of Love; and upon the western one another in honour
of Mars: northward also, in a turret on the wall, was a rich oratory of
alabaster and white and red coral, in worship of Diana the chaste.

Nor should I leave out the noble carving and the paintings in these
three oratories. First, in the temple of Venus might be seen displayed
upon the wall, personified in piteous array, the broken sleeps, cold
sighs, the sacred tears and lamentings that love's servants endure in
this life: pleasure, hope, desire, fool-hardiness, youth and beauty,
riches, jealousy, and flattery; feasting and dancing, carols and
instruments, and many more than I can enumerate. And there was painted
her famed dwelling on Mount Citheron: nor were forgotten the histories
of fair Narcissus, the folly of King Solomon, Hercules’ might, the
enchantment of Medea and Circe, the fierce courage of Turnus, or the
base servitude of Croesus. The figure of the goddess, glorious to
behold, was seen naked

<span id="page_40">p. 40</span>

floating in the wide sea: half her form hidden by the bright green
waves. In her hand she bore a harp, and on her head a fresh garland of
roses: above it were her doves hovering. Before her stood her son Cupid,
winged and hoodwinked. He carried a bow with bright and keen arrows.

The interior of the mighty Mars’ temple was painted like the famous one
in Thrace, that frosty region where the god holds his chief dwelling.
First upon the wall was depictured a forest, that harboured neither man
nor beast, full of old barren trees, gnarred and stubby; through which a
storm was roaring as if it would crash every bough. At the bottom of a
hill stood the temple of the god, wrought of tempered steel, the
entrance to which was long, narrow, and dreary. The light shone in at
the door, for there were no windows. The door was of adamant, clamped
with iron, and the pillars were iron, massive and shining.

There was to be seen the dark imagining and completion of Felony; cruel
Wrath, red as a conflagration; pale Fear; the Smiler with the knife
under his cloak; buildings in flame; murderings treacherously in bed;
open war; ghastly wounds; contention with its sharp menace and bloody
knife. There was the suicide, his hair bathed in gore; and cold death,
with the mouth upright, gaping. In the midst of the temple, and over
all, sat Mischance, with sorry aspect. Madness was also there, laughing
in his rage; injustice, complaint, and fierce outcries: the tyrant with
his prey carried off by force: the town destroyed, and nothing left.

The statue of Mars, armed and of grim aspect, was

<span id="page_41">p. 41</span>

standing upright in a chariot, and at his feet was a wolf, with fiery
eyes, eating the body of a man.

And now to finish shortly with the temple of the chaste Diana. The walls
were adorned with deeds of hunting and shamefaced chastity. There was
the unfortunate Calistope, whom for wrath Diana changed into a bear, and
afterwards she became the polar star. Dane, also, turned to a tree.
Acteon, too, changed by Diana to a deer, in punishment for his having
surprised the goddess. His own hounds were worrying him, not knowing
that he was their master. Then followed the description of Atalanta
hunting the wild boar, with Meleager, and many besides, for which Diana
wrought them sore affliction.

The goddess was seated on high upon a hart, surrounded by a pack of
hounds, and underneath her feet was the moon. Her statue was clad in
bright green, and she had a bow in hand with a quiver of arrows. Her
eyes were bent downwards towards the dark region of Pluto (of which
dominion she was also queen). A woman in great need lay before her,
imploring the aid of Lucina. <span id="fr_19"></span>[\*](#fn_19)

The lists, with the temples and theatre, being finished at a great cost,
I will leave speaking of Theseus for a time, and turn to Palamon and
Arcite.

The day draws near for their returning, when each should bring his
hundred knights to Athens to try the battle, as I have already said.
Those who accompanied Palamon were variously appointed according to
their several fancies. Some were clad in a light coat of mail, with a
short cassock and breastplate; some in two simple plates of armour and a
shield; others well defended their

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

limbs, and were armed with an axe or mace of steel. In his train also
was seen Lycurgus, the great King of Thrace, of manly aspect, with thick
black beard and piercing eyes, that glowed in his head like stars. He
was large of limb, broad-shouldered, and his arms were round, long, and
firm. Aloft upon a golden chariot he stood, drawn by four white bulls,
and as he passed along he-looked about him like an eagle. Instead of
coat-armour he wore a bear-skin, coal-black. His long hair flowed behind
his shoulders and shone against the sun like a raven's wing. A golden
coronet of enormous weight, studded with diamonds and rubies, circled
his brows. About his chariot went twenty or more mastiff-hounds that he
employed in lion-hunting. They followed in leashes, muzzled, and
collared with golden collars. A hundred lords were in his company, armed
cap-à-pie and stout of heart.

The great Emetrius, King of India, accompanied Arcite. He came riding
like the God Mars upon a bay steed clad in steel, covered with cloth of
gold: the saddle was inlaid with finely-wrought gold. His coat armour
was made of silk, trimmed with fair large pearls, and from his shoulders
hung a short mantle thickly embroidered with rubies glowing like fire.
His crisp yellow hair danced in ringlets around his neck like sunbeams.
He had a high and arched nose, eyes of a bright hazel colour, full and
round lips, and a sanguine complexion. Moreover, his face was sprinkled
with a few freckles of a mingled dark and light yellow hue. His manner
of looking round him was like that of a lion. His beard was young and
vigorous (he appeared to be about five and twenty years of age),

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

and the tone of his voice pierced the air like a trumpet. He was crowned
with a fresh and lusty garland of laurel, and upon his fist sat a tame
eagle, purely white as a lily. A hundred knights attended him, all
richly caparisoned and, save their heads, in complete armour: for earls,
dukes, and kings joined in this train through love, and for the increase
of chivalry. Tame lions and leopards also gamboled around the royal car.
After such fashion and order did all these nobles arrive at the city
early in the morning, and alight within its walls.

Theseus entertained them, each according to his rank, with full honour
and knightly courtesy. If I did not wish to bring you to the effect and
point of my tale, I would describe to you all the service at the high
feasting, the minstrelsy, the rich presents and the largess to both high
and low, the appointment and rich array of the palace, the falcons
disposed around on their perches, and the hounds lying here and there
upon the floor, quietly expecting the feasters’ casual superfluity: I
would tell you of the fairest dames and the best dancers; the songs, the
gallantry, and the more earnest love-making.

Before daybreak, and as soon as the lark had begun to sing, Palamon,
with a devout and courageous heart, bent his steps towards the Temple of
Venus that was erected in the lists: where he knelt down and besought
her help to gain him possession of his Lady Emily, in whose service he
fain would die. "And if, O goddess! mine," said he, "thou grant that I
may have my love, I will evermore worship in thy temple, and offer daily
sacrifice upon thine altar. But if thou turn thy face from me, lady
sweet! I pray that on the morrow Arcite's spear may cleave my

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

heart; for, my life being gone, I reck not his better fate in winning
her to wife." When his prayer and sacrifice were concluded, the statue
of the goddess shook, and made a sign which, although somewhat delayed,
he accepted as a boon that his prayer had been heard favourably: so home
he went, light of heart.

At sunrise Emily arose and, attended by her maidens, went forth to the
Temple of Diana, taking with them the fire and the incense, the garments
and the horns of mead, fit to perform sacrifice. The preparation for the
holy ceremony, by the purifying of her body at a well-spring, being
attended to, and the sacred place being fumed with odorous gums, the
maiden princess (gentle and debonair of heart) , having her head crowned
with a garland of oak and her bright hair untressed and flowing down her
back, proceeded to kindle two fires on the altar. After, she addressed
the goddess of the green woods, the protectress of maidenhood and queen
of the deep dark realm of Pluto. "O chaste goddess!" said she, "thou
knowest the desire of my heart, that I should all my days remain a
maiden, taking delight in the wild woods and the cry of the hunters.
Help me now, lady queen of night, since thou canst help; send peace
between this Palamon and Arcite, who now strive for love of me. Quench
the busy torment and fire of their hearts, and turn their love towards
another. Behold, O goddess of bright maidenhood, and consider the tears
upon my cheeks: I would still follow in thy train, and end my life a
maiden in thy service. But if my destiny have so befallen that I am
doomed to be the wife of one, then grant me him who most sincerely
loveth me."

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

While she was in her prayer the fires upon the altar were burning
clearly: but, suddenly, a strange sight arose to her view; one of the
fires sank and kindled again; the other became extinct, with a whistling
noise like the burning of moist brands, and at their ends ran forth as
it were drops of blood. Emily, aghast at the sight, shrieked like one
distracted, not knowing how to divine the manifestation of the oracle.
At this moment the goddess herself appeared, with her bow in hand and
dressed like a huntress. "Daughter," said she, "stay thy sorrow. The
eternal word of the great gods hath confirmed that thou shalt be wedded
to one of those who for thy sake have undergone so much care and pain.
To which of them I may not tell thee. The fires upon the altar have
already signified the conclusion and manner of thine adventure."

Thus having spoken, at the quick clattering of her quivered arrows, she
vanished from the view of the astonished Emily, who, placing herself
under the protection of the goddess, returned home pondering the mystery
of the oracle and of the vision.

Closely following upon Emily, Arcite went to the Temple of Mars to
perform his sacrifice. Having finished all the rites, he intreated the
god of arms, whom he constantly served, to grant him the victory on the
ensuing day; in the event of which he vowed to offer at his shrine his
flowing hair and beard, that had never felt the edge of shears or razor.
"This will I dedicate to thee, O strong god of arms! together with my
banner and the accoutrements of all my company, which I will hang up in
thy temple, and until the day of my death will I burn before thee
eternal fire upon thine altar."

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

His petition being ended, the rings upon the temple doors clattered, the
fire upon the altar burned with a strange brightness, and a sweet smell
steamed forth from the ground: when in acknowledgment of the omen,
having cast fresh incense upon the flame and performed other rites, the
statue of the god rang upon his hauberk, after which a low dim sound
murmured "Victory!"

Arcite gave glory and honour to Mars, and returned home as glad as a
bird is of the bright sun.

This day was passed in Athens in great feasting, jousting, and dancing:
but as the revellers were to rise early on the morrow to behold the
fight, they were early at rest. And by day-spring in the morning the
noise of horses and harness was heard in every quarter, and lords upon
their palfreys were thronging to the palace.

There might be seen the arranging of armour, uncommon and rich, wrought
with steel and gold-smithry; bright shields, head-pieces, trappings,
golden helmets, hauberks, and coat-armoury; lords in gay furniture on
their coursers; knights and squires in retinue; the fixing of
spear-heads, and buckling of helmets, polishing of shields, and lacing
of thongs: foaming steeds, gnawing their golden bits. The armourers,
too, riding hither and thither with files and hammers "to accomplish the
knights"; yeomen on foot and commoners in throngs with short staves;
pipes, trumpets, and clarions, that blow the bloody sounds of war; the
palace full of people driving to and fro, or standing in dozens,
discussing the merits of the Theban knights; some favouring him with the
black beard, others with the thick; the one they said had a fierce look
and would fight bravely, and that the

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

other wielded an axe with a weight of twenty pounds.

Thus was the hall full of surmises and conjectures long after sunrise.
The great Theseus, who had been awakened by the music and the thronging,
remained in private till the two Theban knights had been brought to the
palace, and both received due and equal honours.

The king was seated at a window, and looked like a god enthroned. When
the people had assembled round, a herald commanded silence, and thus
signified the royal will.

"To prevent the needless destruction of gentle blood by fighting after
the manner of mortal battles, the king decrees that no man, upon pain of
death, shall take into the lists any halberd, short sword, or knife;
that no one shall ride more than one course, with a sharp spear, against
his antagonist; that if he choose, he may defend himself on foot; and
any one who by mischance shall be taken alive, and brought to the stake,
agreed upon by both sides, shall remain there till the strife be
concluded: and lastly, if the chieftain on either side be taken or
slain, the tournament shall straightway cease."

Up went the trumpets with their rousing tones, and the whole company
rode forth to the lists, which were hung all round with cloth of gold.
Theseus went first, and on either side the two Thebans; the queen and
Emily followed, and after them the company according to their rank.

When these were all seated, the populace. crowded in and were ranged in
order. Then from the west gate, under Mars, entered Arcite and his
hundred partisans, bearing a red banner; at the same moment, on the east

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

side, under Venus, and bearing a white banner, Palamon entered, with
confident and courageous bearing. Never were two companies so matched,
both in worthiness of deeds, estate, and age. After they had been
arranged in order, and their names called over to prevent the taking of
undue advantage, the gates were shut and the cry was made, "Now, young
and proud knights, do your duty."

The heralds ceased riding up and down, and now the trumpets and clarions
sound to the charge. In went the spears sadly to their rests, and the
sharp spurs were dashed into the horses’ sides. Now might be seen shaft
handles shivered upon the bucklers, and spears whirled aloft into the
air. Out flew the swords, gleaming like polished silver, and helmets
were hewn or rolled upon the earth. Some force their passage through the
thickest ranks with mighty maces, smashing skulls and limbs. Here lay
one stark dead, pierced to the heart; another sobbing out his life with
the stern tide of blood. The strongest chargers are overthrown, and men
and horses are hurtling together upon the ground in mad confusion.

Frequently during the conflict the two Theban encountered, and like wild
beasts bereft of their young, or mad with hunger, thirsted for each
other's blood. But while they were engaged, the King Emetrius seized
hold of Palamon, whose sword had made a bitter wound in Arcite's flesh,
and with the strength of twenty men was dragging him to the stake.
Lycurgus, in rushing to his rescue, was borne down; and Emetrius
himself, notwithstanding all his might, was borne a sword's length from
his saddle by a blow from Palamon before he could be taken. Yet all was
in vain—his hardy heart could not

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

bestead him, and he was brought by force to the stake.

When Theseus beheld this event, he arose and put an end to the conflict,
declaring that Arcite of Thebes had won the fair Emily. At this, the
shouting of the multitude burst forth, and seemed to rock the lists to
their foundations. When the noise of these, the sounding of the
trumpets, and the proclamation of the heralds had ceased, a wondrous
event happened which changed the fortune of the victor.

As Arcite, with his helmet off to show his face, was pacing down the
lists, and looking upward at his prize, the lovely Emily—who on her
side, by a favouring glance, gave him to heed that she was all his own,
both in heart as well as by the fortune of battle—suddenly a fury, sent
from the infernal regions by Pluto, started out of the ground before his
horse, which made him leap aside for fear; and foundering as he leaped,
Arcite was thrown upon his head, and his breast was crushed with the
saddle-bow. Being carried to the palace of Theseus, and his armour cut
off, he was softly laid upon a bed, the name of Emily all the while
hanging upon his lips.

Meantime the king, with all his company, returned to the city, and were
feasted by him three days; during which time the wounded were dressed;
and when the time for parting arrived, he accompanied them a long
journey from his town, every one turning his own way home.

Arcite's injury continued to increase, for the inward bleeding could not
be stopped on account of the bursting of the blood-vessels in his lungs.
When he found that his death was near, he sent for Emily and his dear
cousin,

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

<span class="contnote">\[paragraph continues\]</span> Palamon, and
addressed to them the following tender and noble farewell.

"My woful heart cannot declare to you the sum of the sorrows it has
endured in your behalf, my best beloved lady! but I bequeath to you,
above all the world, my spirit's service, since my life here may no
longer remain. Alas the woe! alas the sharp trials that I have so long
suffered for you! alas the death! alas my Emily! alas the departing of
our company! alas, queen of my heart! alas my wife! lady of my heart!
closer of my days! What is this world? and what doth man desire?—now
with his love, and now in his cold grave—alone—without any company.
Farewell, my sweet! farewell my Emily! And now, for the love of heaven,
take me softly in your arms, and hearken to what I say.

"For a long time I have been at strife and rancour with my cousin
Palamon here, and all through love and jealousy on your account: now,
Jove guide my mind to speak properly and truly of a rival, and with all
circumstance: that is to say, with a feeling of all that belongs to
truth, honour, and knighthood, wisdom, humility, estate, and lofty
kindred; so Jove receive my spirit, as I know no man now in this world
so worthy to be beloved as my cousin Palamon, who has served you, and
will do till his death: if therefore you ever resolve to become a wife,
do not forget Palamon the gentleman."

And with that word his speech began to fail; for the chill of death was
rising from his feet up to his breast. His arms too were losing their
vital power; the intellect alone remained, when his sighing heart began
to fail with the sense of death: his breath shortened, his eyes

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

became dim, yet still he kept them fixed on her, and his last words
were, "Mercy! Emily!"

Theseus bore his fainting sister from the corpse. Palamon wept, and all
the city lamented the untimely death of this unfortunate and brave young
knight.

In due time the king gave orders for the funeral, and commanded that the
ceremony should be performed at that same grove where he and Palamon had
striven for love of Emily. A funeral pile was raised of many trees,
felled for the purpose, and upon a bier, covered with cloth-of-gold,
Arcite was laid (his face uncovered) clad in a suit of the same
material. His head was crowned with green laurel, his white gloves were
upon his hands, and one of them held his own good sword.

Then came the mourner Palamon, with dishevelled hair and beard, in a
black suit, bedropped with his tears, and, excepting Emily, the
ruefullest of the train.

After these came three steeds, caparisoned with glittering steel,
adorned with the arms of Arcite. Their riders bore his shield, his
spear, and his bow, the case and furniture of which were of burnished
gold. They rode forth towards the grove at a solemn pace. The bier was
supported upon the shoulders of the noblest Greeks, and the great street
of the city through which they passed was hung with black. Theseus,
accompanied by old Egeus, followed the train, bearing golden vessels
containing money, milk, blood, and wine. Emily, in accordance with the
custom of the time, carried the fire for the funeral service. I need not
tell you all that was done at the ceremony. Of the felling of the trees,
of the spicery and the garlands, the myrrh and the incense: how Arcite
lay

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

among all this; nor what store of costliness was heaped about his body;
and how Emily set fire to the pile; nor what she said, nor how she
swooned; nor of the jewels, the shields, the spears, and the vestments,
the cups of wine, and milk, and blood which were cast into the fire; nor
how the Greeks with loud shouts rode three times round the pile on the
left hand; three times clashing their spears; or the three wails of the
women; the burning of the body to ashes, and the funeral games of the
Greeks when all was over. Therefore, to bring my long story to an end:
after a decent process of time, when the mourning for Arcite had ceased,
Theseus sent for Palamon who, unmindful of the cause, appeared in his
sable dress. Emily also came at the same message. After fixing his eyes
upon them for some time, and that all the company was hushed, he made a
grave discourse, which he concluded in the following manner. "Why are we
sad, that good Arcite, the flower of chivalry, has departed with high
honour from the thraldom of life? Why do his wife and cousin here regret
his welfare?—they who loved him so well. My purpose before we leave this
place is to convert this double sorrow into a perfect and lasting joy:
and therefore, dear sister, with the assent of my whole council here, it
is my full wish that your own knight, the gentle Palamon, who, from the
time he first saw your face, hath served you with good will and faithful
heart, receive your favour and become your lord and husband. He is son
to a king's brother, and therefore not unworthy of you; but if he were
no more than a poor bachelor, since he hath served you for so many years
through sharp adversity you should consider and recompense

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

his deserts. Give me here your hand." Then turning to Palamon, he said,
"Methinks there is little need to entreat your assenting to my purpose.
Draw near and take your lady by the hand."

Then was the bond of marriage drawn up by the council, and Palamon
wedded his Emily. Long did he live in bliss, health, and riches, Emily
loving him tenderly, and he serving her with so much gentleness that no
word of strife or jealousy was ever heard between them.

So ends the history of Palamon and Arcite, and God save all this fair
company.

HERE ENDS THE KNIGHT'S TALE;

AND NEXT BEGINS

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_17"></span>[33:\*](tfc06.htm#fr_17) Friday was devoted to
the worship of the Goddess Venus. The Romans entitled it "The day of
Venus"—"Dies Veneris."

<span id="fn_18"></span>[34:\*](tfc06.htm#fr_18) The ancient term gentle
was used only to imply high breeding. A gentle knight was a knight of
high family. In some parts of England, to this day, the best white bread
is called "gentle bread," to distinguish it from the brown or common.

<span id="fn_19"></span>[41:\*](tfc06.htm#fr_19) Diana, in the old
mythology, passed also under the name of Lucina.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: The Lawyer's Tale](tfc07)
