[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmm01)  [Next](tmm03.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_1">p. 1</span>

# THE MIDRASH

### INTRODUCTION

JUST as the Written Law given by Moses emanates from God, whilst He
Himself only proclaimed the first two commandments of the Decalogue,
owing to the Israelites being too terrified to hear God's voice (Deut.
20. 19), and the whole of the Torah was then conveyed to Israel by
Moses, so he likewise received the Oral law, which he was not allowed to
commit to writing. This Oral law had to be taught by word of mouth side
by side with the Written law, and thus the former became an unfolding
and sequel to the latter.

This, says the Midrash, <span id="fr_0"></span>[1](#fn_0.md) is meant by
the words: 'Only take heed to thyself and keep thy soul diligently lest
thou forget the words--דברים meaning "words" as well as "things"--which
thine eyes have seen, and lest they depart from thy heart all the days
of thy life' (Deut. 4. 9). 'The words which thine eyes have seen' means
the *Written* words which can be seen, and 'lest they depart from thy
heart' refers to the Oral law, words committed to memory, laid up in the
heart.

From time immemorial, during the time of the prophets and even earlier,
the Israelites had established schools or assemblies for the teaching of
the Torah. To the places of worship schools were invariably attached in
which religion was taught, the Torah was read and exegetically
expounded. Whenever a portion of Holy Writ was read a דרש (Drash)--a
*searching* 

<span id="page_2">p. 2</span>

inquiry--into the meaning of every sentence was made, with explanations
drawn therefrom, based on the Oral law. Not only was this the case on
Sabbaths and Festivals, but on week-days too, especially so on Mondays
and Thursdays, when a small portion of the Torah was read, an
institution ascribed to Ezra. <span id="fr_1"></span>[1](#fn_1.md) Later
on--probably in the time of the Maccabees--the reading of the prophets
was also introduced.

The dissertations and expositions which were held were known as מדרש
(Midrash), and this term was originally applied to both the הלכה
(Halacha) and the אגדה (Agada).

The sermons, dissertations and expositions of whatever nature--whether
exegetical, homiletical or ethical--were always given by word of mouth,
but were after delivery reduced to writing. A knowledge of the
Scriptures on the part of the audience was assumed, as the study of the
Law was looked upon as one of the highest religious duties. There was
great anxiety on the part of these teachers that nothing should be added
to the Written law, which is known to us as the עשרים וארבע--the Canon
of the twenty-four books.

There is this line of demarcation betweenהלכה (Halacha) and אגדה
(Agada), which in course of time were separated from one another, though
the former contains now and then a little of the latter, and vice
versâ. <span id="fr_2"></span>[2](#fn_2.md) Halacha, derived from הלך (to
go, walk), is a term denoting laws regulating man's walk in life--the
performance of his religious duties. The Aramaic translation of Onkeles
(Exod. 21. 9) gives הלכה as an equivalent of משפט. Halacha, when decided
by a majority of the school, became incontrovertible, law that could not
be gainsaid; and any one, no matter how great his reputation for piety
and learning, who might attempt

<span id="page_3">p. 3</span>

to impugn it, would be excommunicated. Thus we find such lights amongst
the Rabbis as Eleazer B. Hanoch, who, having questioned the Halacha on
'Purity,' was put under the ban, in which he remained all his life, and
a stone was thrown on his coffin, since he had died under sentence.
Akabyah b. Mahalalel was similarly excommunicated for refusing to accept
the decision of the majority on four questions, and Rabbi Eliazar b.
Horkynas, too, was put under the ban for declining to recognize the
decision of the majority on some points. The names of the respective
authorities in the Halacha were always retained.

The Agada, on the other hand, is a free interpretation of the
Scriptures. As its name implies: 'It was said.' Its assertions were not
incontrovertible or not to be gainsaid. There was, on the one hand,
strong opposition to the Agada; but, on the other hand, it was very
highly esteemed by most, and not every one was considered qualified to
handle it. Even Rabbi Akiba received a mild rebuke when he tried to dive
into the depths of this method of teaching. <span
id="fr_3"></span>[1](#fn_3.md) There grew up in the course of time a
saying: 'If you desire to find the greatness of the Creator, study the
Agada.' The names of the Agadic teachers were not always mentioned, yet
certain rabbis were known to have possessed an enviable capacity for
this branch of religious instruction, such as Rabbis Abahu, Ishmael,
Eliazar b. Azaryah, Eliazar b. R. José the Galilean, and others, and
they were known as the Rabbis of the Agada.

The Agada, of which the various Midrashim contain collections, and which
some of the Apocrypha have for their source, was written in the time of
the Tanaim, and consequently before the Halacha, which was only taken in
hand by the school of Rav Ashé.

Whilst the Agada seeks but free scope in its own

<span id="page_4">p. 4</span>

teachings and in its own interpretation of Scripture, and does not
intend to invade the domain of Halacha, it yet occasionally touches some
legal points. It is the oldest exegesis of the Scriptures, and contains
in its elevating teachings, sermons, prayers, homilies, historical
records, exhortations, admonitions and consolations, conveyed frequently
in allegories, legends, parables and similes.

From the time of Ezra there were many institutions for the diffusion of
this kind of teaching by the Scribes and priests. It formed the vital
element in the nation's morality. When the Scribes took the place of the
prophets, their interpretation and exposition of the Scriptures also
took the place of prophetic utterances. In prosperity the people's
favourite was the Halacha, <span id="fr_4"></span>[1](#fn_4.md) but in
adversity they preferred attending Agadic expositions, containing as
they did--among much else--words of comfort and consolation, instilling
faith in God and hope in His help and protection.

Rabbi Abahu and Rabbi Chanina b. Abbé were holding discourses at the
same time; the former preaching on Agada and the latter on Halacha.
Rabbi Chanina's audience, hearing of Rabbi Abahu's Agadic discourse,
rudely left him, and went to hear the latter. This gentle sage,
distinguished for his meekness and piety, felt aggrieved at the slight
shown to his colleague, of which he was the innocent and unwilling
cause. He went to see Rabbi Chanina and tried to assuage the grief
caused him. 'It is hardly to be wondered at,' he said, 'that the people
come to hear me instead of craving for your words. For do we not find
this folly in almost every walk of life? Let a man offer cheap and
flimsy finery for sale, and he will find far more buyers than he who
offers choice pearls and precious stones.' <span
id="fr_5"></span>[2](#fn_5.md) The Rabbis knew well how to make their

<span id="page_5">p. 5</span>

Agadic discourses as attractive as possible, and to awaken their
audience from their lethargic condition when occasion arose. One device
was to use words of foreign languages, Latin, Greek, Persian, etc., in
order to provoke questions and further interest, and so well was the
Agada known for its foreign words, that if one found in the Mishna a
word of doubtful meaning, recourse was had to the written Agada for its
elucidation. <span id="fr_6"></span>[1](#fn_6.md)

Rabbi Akiba, once finding his audience drowsy and inattentive, used the
following device: 'What,' he asked, 'induced Esther to reign over 127
provinces?' The question at once roused the attention of the whole
assembly, who expected some subtle arithmetical solution, with which the
Rabbi had no intention of edifying them. But finding his device
successful and attention awakened, he answered the question by saying
that 'it was proper for the descendant of Sarah, who lived 127 years, to
reign over 127 provinces.' <span id="fr_7"></span>[2](#fn_7.md)

Rabbi Judah Hanasi, too, had recourse to enigmatical sayings: 'I know of
a woman,' he said, 'who bore 600,000 children at one time.' This was
enough to excite the curiosity of his congregation, who were depressed
and in a dejected spirit owing to the havoc wrought by the ruthless
Hadrian. Seeing that the assembly was quite puzzled at such a wonderful
event, Rabbi Ishmael b. José explained that that woman was no other than
Jochabad, the mother of Moses, who was not only a host in himself, but
also delivered 600,000 men from slavery. <span
id="fr_8"></span>[3](#fn_8.md)

Some of the Rabbis wrote down their notes on Holy Writ as they occurred
to them. Rabbi Meir, who was a skilful Scribe and wrote a scroll of the
Pentateuch for his own use, is said to have written on the margin
thereof short notes for his discourses. A great many Agadic and other
teachings were developed in the

<span id="page_6">p. 6</span>

school of Yabné, or Jamnia, granted by Vespasian to Rabbi Jochanon b.
Zakkai, the last pupil of Hillel, and to his friends as well as to
Gamliel's descendants. This truly great load-star of the Jewish religion
established his school there, and the place became a new Jerusalem and
the new seat of a highly learned assembly. <span
id="fr_9"></span>[1](#fn_9.md) Of the Midrashic writings of the period
between the Hashmoneans and Hadrian, a period of some three hundred
years, we possess but fragments, although that period may be said to
have levelled the path from the Canon of the Bible to that of tradition.

What is known as the New Agada had its rise for the most part from the
first to the fifteenth century. The reopening of the schools in
Palestine in the year 520 c.e., and in Babylon in the year 589, gave
rise to Midrash Rabba on Genesis, followed by that on Leviticus, then
Exodus and Deuteronomy, the last of the five books being Numbers. Of the
Midrashim on the five Megilloth, that on Lamentations was the first, and
that on Ecclesiastes was the last.

Midrash Tanchuma, or Yelamdenu, was most probably written in the last
century of the Gaonim in Italy, about the ninth century c.e. These
Gaonim were in constant communication with Palestine. Tanchuma was
followed by Midrash שוחר טוב on Psalms, Midrash on Proverbs and on
Samuel.

I do not pretend to have explored for this little work (which I
commenced in my sixty-ninth year, and hope to see published on or before
my seventieth birthday) the Midrash in the whole of its scope. I have
not even as much as touched the Pesikta (the oldest of all Midrashim)
Mechilta, Yalkut, Sifra or Sifré; but have restricted myself to about
nine hundred quotations from the following Midrashim, viz. Rabba on the
five books of Moses and the five Megilloth, Tanchuma on

<span id="page_7">p. 7</span>

the Pentateuch, and the Midrash on Psalms, Proverbs and Samuel.

Moreover, whilst I have here and there ventured to 'dress up' the mere
'dry bones' of simple quotations with a word or two of my own, according
to the (dim) light that is within me, I have chiefly confined myself to
the mere quotations only. I hope that the Eldorado which the intelligent
reader will at once detect to exist in the somewhat untraversed highway
of this wonderland of Rabbinical literature, may encourage an exploring
thereof, and one is sure to find an inexhaustible deposit peppered with
gold, to use the miner's phrase. The acquisition of a claim in this may
not secure a residence in Park Lane, but it will ensure a habitation in
the spheres which do not pass away. The whole realm of the moral code is
represented in the Midrash; and there is not a point, whether on
prudence, life's experience, or worldly wisdom, which the Midrash has
left untouched.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_0"></span>[1:1](tmm02.htm#fr_0.md) Exod. Rabba, 46. 1-6 and
12.

<span id="fn_1"></span>[2:1](tmm02.htm#fr_1.md) Baba Kamma, 82.

<span id="fn_2"></span>[2:2](tmm02.htm#fr_2.md) In the Mechilta, Sifra and
Sifré, Halacha and Agada go together.

<span id="fn_3"></span>[3:1](tmm02.htm#fr_3.md) Sanhedrin 16/11.

<span id="fn_4"></span>[4:1](tmm02.htm#fr_4.md) Midrash Song of Songs 2/14.

<span id="fn_5"></span>[4:2](tmm02.htm#fr_5.md) Sota 40.

<span id="fn_6"></span>[5:1](tmm02.htm#fr_6.md) Gen. Rabba 58. 3.

<span id="fn_7"></span>[5:2](tmm02.htm#fr_7.md) Midr. Cantls. 1. 27.

<span id="fn_8"></span>[5:3](tmm02.htm#fr_8.md) Midrash Eccles. 4, and
Lamentations 1.

<span id="fn_9"></span>[6:1](tmm02.htm#fr_9.md) See Dr. Yost's *Geschichte
des Judenthums und seine Sekten* vol. ii. pp. 13, etc.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Alexander of Macedon](tmm03.md)
