[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmm05)  [Next](tmm07) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_42">p. 42</span>

# MESSIAH

OF the six things which existed before creation, when only 'the spirit
of God moved upon the face of the waters,' two, the Torah and the throne
of God, were complete in every detail. The remaining four, however,
viz., the Patriarchs, Israel, the Temple, and the name of Messiah,
existed prior to the creation only in an incomplete form.--Gen. Rabba 1.

From the time of creation constant reference is made in Holy Writ to
Messiah and the Messianic hope of Israel. 'The Spirit of God moved upon
the face of the waters'; the Spirit of God means Messiah.--Gen. Rabba 2;
also Levit. Rabba 14.

When Eve at the birth of Seth exclaimed, 'God hath appointed me another
seed.' her underlying thought was the King Messiah.--Gen. Rabba 23.

He who knows how long the Israelites worshipped idols can learn
therefrom when the Son of David--Messiah--will come. Three different
prophets tell us this: (1) 'Like as you have forsaken Me, and served
strange gods in your land, so shall ye serve strangers in a land that is
not yours' (Jer. 5. 19); (2) 'And I will visit her the days of Baalim,'
etc., (Hos. 2. 13); (3) 'Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone
lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord hath sent in
his spirit by the prophets. Therefore it is come to pass that as he
cried and they would not hear, so they cried and I would not hear, saith
the Lord' (Zech. 7. 12, 13).--Lament. Rabba 1.

The great mountain spoken of by the prophet

<span id="page_43">p. 43</span>

Zechariah (4. 7) is no other than Messiah, Son of David, and he is
called 'the Great Mountain,' because he towers above the Patriarchs, is
greater than Moses, and is above the ministering angels. As Isaiah says
(52. 10), 'Behold, my servant shall deal prudently, he shall be exalted
and extolled and be very high.'--Midr. Tanchuma Toldos.

The word הדרך (Hadrach), used by the prophet Zechariah (9. 1), is one of
the titles of Messiah. It is connected with the word דרך (leading), and
is therefore applied to him who will lead man to repentance.--Midr. Song
of Songs 7.

The 'four carpenters' to whom the prophet also refers, are Elijah,
Melchizedek, the Messiah of war, called by some Messiah son of Joseph,
and the true Messiah. These Messiahs are referred to in the 32nd chapter
of Isaiah, and their existence is constantly mentioned. Seven or eight
Messiahs are sometimes said to be promised in the words of the Prophet
Micah (5. 5), 'Then shall we raise against him seven shepherds and eight
principal men,' but it is held that there will be but four (Zech. 1.
20), and these are they: Elijah the Tishbite, an unnamed man of the
tribe of Manasseh, Messiah of war--an Ephraimite, and Messiah the Great,
the descendant of David.--Midr. Song of Songs 2.

Two of King David's descendants were destined for universal dominion:
King Solomon and King Messiah, to whom David refers in his
seventy-second Psalm.--Numb. Rabba U

The whole of the 27th chapter of Isaiah refers to the Messiah.--Exod.
Rabba 1.

Solomon's Song has also reference to Messiah. 'The voice of the turtle
is heard in our land' means the voice of Messiah.--Midr. Song of Songs
2.

When King Solomon speaks of his 'beloved,' he usually means Israel the
nation. In one instance he compares his beloved to a roe, and therein he
refers

<span id="page_44">p. 44</span>

to a feature which marks alike Moses and the Messiah, the two redeemers
of Israel. just as a roe comes within the range of man's vision only to
disappear from sight and then appear again, so it is with these
redeemers. Moses appeared to the Israelites, then disappeared, and
eventually appeared once more, and the same peculiarity we have in
connexion with Messiah; He will appear, disappear, and appear
again.--Numb. Rabba 11.

The fourteenth verse in the second chapter of Ruth is thus explained.
'Come thou hither' is the prediction of Messiah's kingdom. 'Dip the
morsel in the vinegar,' foretells the agony through which Messiah will
pass, as it is written in Isaiah (cap. 51), 'He was wounded for our
sins, He was bruised for our transgressions.' 'And she set herself
beside the reapers' predicts the temporary departure of Messiah's
kingdom. 'And he reached her a parched corn' means the restoration of
His kingdom.--Midr. Ruth 5.

To three individuals God said, 'Ask, and it shall be given to thee.'
These are Solomon, Ahaz, and Messiah, to the last of whom it was
promised, 'Ask of Me, and I shall give Thee the heathens for Thine
inheritance.'--Gen. Rabba 44.

In a similar strain we read, Israel is to overcome ten of the heathen
nations of the world; seven of them have already been conquered; the
remaining three will fall at the advent of Messiah.--Gen. Rabba 44. But,
despite all this, Messiah will not come till all those who are to be
created have made their appearance in the world.--Gen. Rabba 24.

In tracing the descent and history of the Israelites, the Bible
enumerates the generations of the heads of the families of the earth
whose history touched that of the chosen people. 'These are the
generations of the heavens and the earth' is the first instance of the
use of the word תולדות in such a connexion. If regard

<span id="page_45">p. 45</span>

be had to the Hebrew text of the verse, it will be found that here the
word referred to is written in full, i.e. spelt תולדות, with the
additional ו, whilst in all other places where the word occurs the word
is always spelt with one ו, thus, תלדות. This, it will be found, is the
invariable usage until we come to, 'Now these are the generations of
Perez' (Ruth 4. 18). Here we once again find the word תולדות spelt in
full. These are the only two instances in the whole of the Bible. The
first refers to the time before the sin and fall of Adam, which brought
death into the world, and, inconsequence, all succeeding תלדות,
'generations,' were deprived of some of the possibilities of life, and
this is indicated by the omission of the ו. But the enumeration of the
descendants of Perez, bringing appreciably nearer the promised abolition
of death through the agency of his descendant, the Messiah, is hailed as
the occasion to celebrate the restoration to perfect man of what he had
lost through the imperfection of the first of his kind, and hence the
word תולדות is here spelt in full.--Exod. Rabba 30.

A similar deduction is made with reference to the spelling of the word
עתודים 'he-goats.' Each of the princes of Israel brought as a sacrifice
at the dedication of the tabernacle five he-goats. This word is spelt
without the ו, thus, עתדים in all the numerous repetitions of the
details of the offerings, which are identically the same in all
instances. There is but one exception, and that is (Numb. 7. 17) in the
account of the offerings brought by Nachshon, son of Aminadab, because
from him were to spring six (the numerical value of ו) of the great men
of Israel, who were each to be distinguished by six special attributes.
The Messiah and his ancestor David are among the six, and Isaiah thus
enumerates the six distinguishing traits in the character of the
descendant of Jesse, whose coming he foretells. 'And there shall rest
upon him (1) the

<span id="page_46">p. 46</span>

Spirit of the Lord, (2) the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, (3) the
Spirit of counsel, (4) and might, (5) the Spirit of knowledge, and (6)
the Spirit of the Lord.'--Numb. Rabba 13.

Abraham, Job, Hezekiah, and Messiah found God out for themselves without
being previously instructed.--Numb. Rabba 14.

The great gifts of God, of which Adam was deprived by reason of his sin
and fall--light being one of them--will all be restored through Messiah,
who will appear from the North and rebuild the Temple in the
South.--Numb. Rabba 13.

The prophecy of Isaiah concerning Jerusalem, 'Behold, thy sons shall
come from afar and thy daughters shall be nursed by thy side,' could not
be hailed with the same satisfaction as the words of Zechariah, 'Behold,
thy King cometh unto thee; he is just and having salvation, lonely and
riding upon an ass.' This latter prophecy will bring it about that the
daughter of Zion shall greatly rejoice in the Lord, her soul shall be
joyful in her God.--Midr. Song of Songs 1.

So greatly shall Zion rejoice and so glorious will be the restoration of
the Temple service in the days of Messiah, that three additional strings
will be required besides the seven that were formerly upon the harps
used by the Levites. In this way only will it be possible for the whole
people to give expression to the depths of reverence for their God that
shall then stir their hearts.--Numb. Rabba 15. and Tanchuma Behaloscho.

It was indeed pre-ordained that Jerusalem should be lost to the
Israelites, but only until the coming of him concerning whom it was
said, 'Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion.'--Gen. Rabba 56.

And so the destruction of Jerusalem is to be locked upon as an event
bringing joy in its train rather than as an irreparable loss or sorrow,
for through it the coming of the Messiah and consequent expiation of

<span id="page_47">p. 47</span>

Israel's sin were rendered possible. For, just as all sacrifices were
formerly brought to Jerusalem, so in future shall messengers come with
offerings to Messiah, and all kings shall prostrate themselves before
him.--Midr. Esther 1.

As you brought Me the perpetual light in the Temple, says God unto
Israel, so will I bring unto you Him, Messiah, who is the
personification of light, 'the sun of righteousness' promised through
Malachi.--Midr. Tanchuma Tetzava.

Our father Abraham, by his meritorious life, won for himself the
blessing. 'Tell the stars, if thou art able to number them,' He said
unto him; 'so shall be thy children.' Isaac's ready compliance with
God's demand to sacrifice his life evoked the promise, 'I will multiply
thy seed as the stars of heaven.' Jacob was heartened with the prospect,
'And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth.' That which God
promised to Abraham He has already fulfilled in that Moses was able to
address to his people the words, 'The Lord your God hath multiplied you,
and behold, you are this day as the stars of heaven for multitude.'

Balaam was constrained to acknowledge the impossibility of 'counting the
dust of Jacob,' and it might seem as if the prophet Hosea looked forward
to the speedy realization of the promise made to Isaac when he gave
utterance to the sentiment, 'Yet the number of the children of Israel
shall be as the sand of the sea, which cannot be measured or numbered.'
The fulfilment, however, will not come about until the time of the
Messiah, when the heathen shall be altogether absorbed and God will pour
out His Spirit upon all flesh.--Numb. Rabba 2.

The honour and majesty with which David tells us (Ps. 104.) that God is
clothed, He will bestow on Messiah. As it is said, 'His glory is great
in Thy salvation, honour and majesty hast Thou laid upon Him.'--Numb.
Rabba 14.

<span id="page_48">p. 48</span>

Seeing in his spirit of prophecy that the time would come when the משכן,
'Mishkan' (the Sanctuary) would cease to exist and the Shechinah dwell
no more in Israel's midst, Moses was anxious to know by what means the
sins of his people would then be expiated. The Almighty vouchsafed the
information that He would choose a righteous man from their midst, and
make him a משכן (pledge) for them, and through him their sins would be
forgiven.--Exod. Rabba 35.

The prophets formerly recorded the good deeds performed by man, but now
Elijah and Messiah record them and God puts His seal on the
record.--Levit. Rabba 34.

'Fear not, Abraham; I am thy shield and thine exceeding great reward,'
refers to the glorious epoch of Messiah. The Patriarch was apprehensive
lest the covenant made with him might not prove lasting because of the
sins of his descendants. God here gave him the assurance that, though
his descendants fall into sin, there shall be one great and noble
amongst them, who will be qualified to say to the avenging angel, 'Stay
thy hand.' 'Him will I accept and he shall be a pledge for my
people.'--Midr. Song of Songs 1.

'The sceptre shall not depart from Judah nor a lawgiver from between his
feet until "Shiloh" come,' refers also to Messiah, who is to enlighten
Israel on the words of the Torah, and point out the errors of the
people. Rabbi Chanan, on the other hand, holds that the teaching of
Messiah will not be addressed to Israel, whose knowledge of the law of
God will be all-sufficient. Rather will his task be to instruct the
Gentiles: in the words of the prophet Isaiah (11. 10), 'To him shall the
Gentiles seek, and he shall assemble the outcast of Israel.'--Gen. Rabba
98.

The faithful of Israel are desirous of sepulture in the land of
Palestine because, at the advent of Messiah, the resurrection will take
place there before any other part

<span id="page_49">p. 49</span>

of the world, but that will be the resurrection of the righteous
only.--Gen. Rabba 96.

The general resurrection of the dead is appointed for the day of
judgment, and when it takes place the revived souls will sing angelic
songs.--Midr. Eccles. 1.

The death of the righteous is even like the Day of Atonement, in that
each secures forgiveness for the sins of Israel.--Levit. Rabba 20.

A time has been appointed by God for the coming of Messiah. Yet if
Israel but repent his sins, the glorious redemption will be hastened,
and Messiah will make His appearance before the appointed time.--Exod.
Rabba 25.

Great indeed will be the time of the approaching advent of Messiah. The
wicked will be trodden down as ashes under the feet of the righteous,
the trees will send forth their fragrance, and concerning the righteous
it will be said, 'He that is left in Zion and he that remaineth in
Jerusalem shall be called holy.'

The seven years preceding the coming of the Son of David will be
distinguished by the following signs: The first year rain will be scarce
and partial; in the second year pangs of hunger will be felt; during the
third year a severe famine will be experienced, and many human beings
will die; men of renown and piety will perish, so that the Torah will be
forgotten in Israel. This famine will be the last of the ten predestined
for the world; the other nine occurred during the lives of Adam, Lemech,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Elijah, Elisha, the Judges, and King David. The
fourth year will be marked neither by famine nor by plenty, but the
fifth year will be one of prosperity, when the earth will bring forth
abundance. There will then be joy in all parts of the earth, and a
revival of study and knowledge of the Torah will be noticeable in the
ranks of Israel. The sixth year will be full of rumours of war, and the
seventh year will see the actual dread visitation of war. After all
these signs have come to pass, at the end of

<span id="page_50">p. 50</span>

the seventh year, the Son of David will make His appearance. According
to other opinions, prior to the coming of Messiah the world will be
terribly corrupt; there will be no compassion amongst men, great
derision and contempt for the Torah and for piety will be universal, and
truth will be almost unknown. Men will be as shameless of their evil
doings as the very animals, and the few righteous who still exist will
be in exceeding great distress. Persecution will be rife everywhere, the
youth will have no respect for the aged, so that the aged will even rise
before the presence of the young. The daughter will rebel against her
mother, and a man's worst enemies will be those of his own household.
The reigning powers will become infidel, and none will be found to raise
his voice in protest, so that mankind will seem to merit nought but
extermination. If, therefore, we behold the generations becoming ever
more corrupt, there is therein good reason to anticipate the advent of
Messiah.--Midr. Song of Songs 2.

The צמח ('Zemach'), mentioned by Jeremiah (23. 5) and by Zechariah (6.
12) is the Messiah.--Numb. Rabba 18.

Unlike the kings of this earth, God bestows some of His possessions and
dignities upon beings of flesh and blood. He set Solomon upon His own
throne (1 Chron. 29. 23). He caused Elijah to ride upon His own horse;
that is to say, upon the storm and whirlwind. To Moses, He gave God's
rod, and upon the head of Messiah He placed His own crown.--Exod. Rabba
8. and Tanchuma Voera.

Many and varied are the things that in the Bible are designated 'the
first.' The month of the Egyptian exodus God named the first month of
the year (Exod. 12. 2). He revealed Himself as 'the first' to the
prophet Isaiah (44. 6). Zion, too, is styled 'the first' (Jer. 117). Of
Esau also the epithet is used (Gen. 25.) And, lastly, Messiah is
mentioned as 'the first' (Isa. 41. 27).

<span id="page_51">p. 51</span>

There is this intimate connexion between them, that God, who is the
first, will rebuild Zion the first, and bring retribution on Esau (=
Rome), known as the first, at the time of the advent of Messiah the
first, in the month (= Nissan) which was appointed as the first.--Exod.
Rabba 15.

Five things brought about the redemption of the Israelites from Egypt:
(1) The sufferings of the people (2) their repentance; (3) the merits of
their ancestors (4) the expiration of the time fixed for their captivity
(5) the mercy of their God. These same causes will operate towards the
realization of Israel's Messianic hopes and lead to the last redemption
through Messiah.--Deut. Rabba 2.

There will be a great difference between the Egyptian and the last
redemption. 'When you were delivered from Egypt,' says God to Israel,
'you had to depart in haste; at the last deliverance you shall not go in
haste nor by Right, (Isa. 52. 12). At the Egyptian deliverance I, in my
manifestation, went before you (Exod. 13. 21). At the last deliverance
'the Lord will go before you and the God of Israel will be your reward.'
(Isa. 52. 12).--Exod. Rabba 19.

'All your former redemptions,' God says to Israel, have been
accomplished through the instrumentality of men, and were, consequently,
not lasting in their effect. You were delivered from Egypt through Moses
and Aaron; you were rescued out of the hands of Sisera by Deborah and
Barak; from the power of Midian you were saved by Shamgar. I myself will
be your last and your everlasting Redeemer.'--Tanchuma Achray.

Great chariots, precious stones and other valuable gifts will the
nations bring to Messiah. This means that the nations will bring Israel
as a present to Messiah.--Midr. Song of Songs 4.

Just as Judah, though not the eldest, had always

<span id="page_52">p. 52</span>

precedence of Reuben and the other tribes (as is to be seen in various
parts of the Bible--Numbers 2. 3, 2. 9, 7. 12; Judges 1. 2, 20. 18), so
he will have precedence in announcing the coming of Messiah, as foretold
by the prophet Nahum (1. 15).--Numb. Rabba 2.

To Judah were revealed all the great men and what will happen to them
from the time of Jacob till the coming of Messiah.--Numb. Rabba 13.

The perpetual light in the Mishkan was typical of the light of King
Messiah.--Levit. Rabba 31.

All the gifts which Jacob felt himself constrained--out of fear--to
present to Esau, will be restored to Israel at the advent of
Messiah.--Gen. Rabba 75.

Moses, the first redeemer, rode on an ass, gave the Israelites manna for
food, and brought up the water. So also shall Messiah be seen riding on
an ass (Zech. 9), shall bring down manna from on high (Ps. 70. 16), and
cause the rivers of Judah to flow with water (Joel 4. 18).--Midr.
Eccles. 1.

'The envy of Ephraim shall depart and the adversaries of Judah shall be
cut off' (Isa. 11. 13). That means that amongst the Jews themselves, at
the time of Messiah, there will be perfect peace and harmony.--Tanchuma
Vayeegash.

There is no redemption without faith.--Tanchuma Beshallach.

Three things Israel despised, viz., the kingdom of heaven, the kingdom
of the house of David, and the Temple, and God withholds His blessings
from them till they mend their ways in these things. That they will do
so the prophet Hosea (3. 5) tells us. 'Afterwards shall the children of
Israel return and seek their God' means that they will again accept the
kingdom of heaven, 'and David their king' obviously means the formerly
rejected House of David, 'and shall fear the Eternal and his goodness'
refers to the Temple.--Midr. Samuel 13.

<span id="page_53">p. 53</span>

Messiah will be asked which place He selects as His residence. His reply
will be, 'Need you ask Me? Surely Zion, my holy mountain.'--Midr. Samuel
19.

Amongst the various names of Messiah, who was born on the day on which
the Temple was destroyed, is that of מנחם בן עמיאל (Menachem ben Amiel)
-Numb. Rabba 13.

The proper name of Messiah is ה׳ צדקנו (the Lord our
righteousness).--Midr. Lament. 1.

<span id="page_54">p. 54</span>

IT is neither desirable nor consistent with the teachings of Judaism, or
with present day sentiment, to make attacks or adverse reflections on
any religious creed. But, while disclaiming any desire to provoke
theological controversy, or to accentuate religious differences, I
should like to append a few observations to this collection of excerpts
from the Midrash on the subject of Messiah.

What impels me to do this is the existence of organizations for the
conversion of the Jews to Christianity, and the possibility of attempts
being made to make capital out of some of the Rabbinic passages which I
have cited.

It has been my privilege to come into contact with many Christian
clergymen, both in England and in the Cape Colony, during more than
forty years, and I have reason to know, and am glad to acknowledge, that
there could not be a body of men more learned and pious, and more free
from religious rancour and intolerance. My own experience has abundantly
proved that it is possible for sincere Jews and Christians to associate
on terms of friendship and mutual respect, and that no friction need
arise from their differences of opinion on certain matters, But, at the
same time, these differences do exist; and if a Jew refuses to adopt
Christianity on the strength of arguments drawn from Jewish writings, he
must be prepared to justify his attitude. I will therefore touch very
briefly on one or two of the

<span id="page_55">p. 55</span>

arguments brought forward in support of the belief in Jesus as the
Messiah.

The prophetic utterances which Christians quote as foreshadowing the
coming of Messiah are quoted repeatedly by the Rabbis, and, in my
opinion, have been largely borrowed by Christians from that source.
These prophecies cannot be assumed without further proof to refer to the
founder of Christianity.

I do not wish to go into the question whether the term 'Messiah' means
an epoch of time or a personal Messiah--a matter on which Jews are by no
means unanimous.

But it must be apparent to every thinking and unbiassed mind that not
one of the prophetic utterances and predictions or of the Midrashic
sayings can apply to the founder of Christianity any more than to the
other numerous claimants to the Messianic dignity who have appeared from
time to time. Jesus of Nazareth, no less than the other claimants,
utterly failed to answer to the description of the Messiah in the
prophets, and to accomplish the work which the prophets predicted.

One has but to glance at the present condition of the world--not the
heathen, but the Christian world--after more than nineteen hundred years
from the supposed advent of the Messiah; one has but to observe how
anxious, for instance, nations are to convert their Krupp guns into
ploughshares and their machine guns into pruning hooks. One has but,
amongst very many other things, to consider the peace on earth which now
exists throughout the world! I would also remind those who see in the
name ה׳ צדקנו as applied to Messiah, a convincing proof of the divinity
of Jesus, that Jerusalem is also called ה׳ צדקנו (Jer. 33. 16). In a
similar way, the altar which Moses erected--in commemoration of his
victory over Amalek--he dignified by naming it ה׳ נסי (Exod. 17. 15).

And there is, in my humble opinion, amongst other

<span id="page_56">p. 56</span>

arguments, one argument against the belief in Jesus as the Messiah,
which is unanswerable.

The Messiah, according to all who believe in a personal Messiah, Jews
and Christians alike, is to be a descendant of David. Now, according to
Christianity, Jesus, the son--though not the only son--of Mary, was the
offspring of immaculate conception, and had no earthly father from whom
to take his pedigree. Even assuming that (as some of my Christian
friends assert, but without proof) Mary was a descendant of David, that
would not make Jesus a descendant, because pedigrees are reckoned from
the father's, and not the mother's, side. God being the Father of Jesus,
and God *not* being a descendant of King David, it follows that Jesus,
His alleged son, cannot be King David's descendant.

In support of my argument I may state that in the first four chapters of
Numbers, the words לבית אבתם למשפהיתם 'After their families by the house
of their fathers,' occur more than twenty times. There is not in the
whole range of Holy Writ an instance where we find a phrase repeated so
many times in so short a space.

And this tends to show Moses' anxiety to impress us with the fact that
descent is to be reckoned on the father's side. On his father's side
Jesus is not a scion of David, and consequently he cannot be the
Messiah.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Rabba](tmm07)
