[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../index)  [Judaism](../index.md) 
[Index](index)  [Previous](tmm12)  [Next](tmm14.md) 

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_167">p. 167</span>

# MIDRASH SONG OF SONGS

ELISHA B. ABUYA used to make it his duty to call at infant schools and
endeavour by his idle talk to divert the children's attention from
religious instruction and direct them to frivolous matters.--Mid. Song
of Songs 1.

Scrupulousness causes cleanliness, which again leads to purity, and
purity brings holiness, holiness meekness, and this prompts a fear of
sin, a fear of sin begets saintliness, and saintliness brings the Holy
Spirit.--Mid. Songs 1.

Moses, Aaron and Miriam died by having their souls drawn out by God's
kiss. <span id="fr_21"></span>[1](#fn_21.md)--Mid. Songs 1.

The nations of the world are not justified in thinking that, because
Israel is rebellious, God will change them for another nation. It is as
though a black maid should expect her master to divorce his wife and
marry her, because her mistress's hand had turned black.--Mid. Songs 1.

'I am black but comely' (Songs 1. 5). So says the house of Israel: I am,
to my knowledge, black, yet my God considers me comely. I am truly black
with my deeds, but I am comely if the acts of my Patriarchs are
accounted to me. And in Egypt I was at times black and at times comely.
The same may be said about me concerning my position at the Red Sea;
there too I was both black and comely. Black, as the Psalmist says: 'Our
fathers understood not thy wonders in Egypt, they remembered not the
multitude of thy mercies, but provoked at the sea, even the Red Sea'
(Ps. 106.). But I was

<span id="page_168">p. 168</span>

comely at the Red Sea when I said, 'He is my God, and I will prepare Him
an habitation' (Exod. 15.).

The same maybe said regarding myself in Marah, when the people murmured
against Moses saying, 'What shall we drink?' (Exod. 15.); but we were
yet comely when Moses cried unto the Lord, who showed him a tree to
sweeten the water for us. Or in Rephidim, when in consequence of our
rebellion the place was named Massa and Meriba; yet we may be called
even there comely, when Moses built an altar and called it Adonoi Nissi.
We were black in Horeb, where the golden calf was made, but are we not
comely even there when we say, 'All that the Lord hath said we will do
and be obedient'? (Exod. 24.). We were black in the wilderness: 'How oft
did they provoke in the wilderness?' (Ps. 78.), and yet I am not devoid
of comeliness there, if we see that the cloud covered the Tabernacle on
the day the Mishkan was reared up (Numb. 9.). Further, I am surely black
in the history of the spies when they brought up an evil report (Numb.
13.), but there is my comeliness in Joshua and Caleb. I am verily black
in Shittim (Numb. 25.), yet there is my comeliness in Phineas. If I am
made black by Achan (Joshua 7.) I am made comely by Joshua. The kings of
Israel rendered me black, but the kings of Judah rendered me comely. And
though I am a mixture of blackness and comeliness through all these
enumerated events and conditions of things, I am perfectly comely in my
prophets.--Mid. Songs 1.

What wisdom considers to be her very crown, meekness looks upon as her
mere sandal.--Mid. Songs 1.

Do not look upon a parable or simile lightly, for some difficult
passages of Scripture may be explained through them; just as one may
find anything lost in a dark place by the aid of a candle.--Mid. Songs
1.

The consecratory Psalm (30.) was actually Solomon's composition,
although it bears David's name.--Mid. Songs 1.

<span id="page_169">p. 169</span>

The Torah has been compared to wine, water, oil, and honey and milk.
Just as we find water all over the earth's surface, so do we find the
Torah; water will never cease from this globe, neither will God's laws
cease. Water comes from the heavens, and the Torah came from heaven.
There is a noise when water descends, and the Torah descended amidst
thunders. Water quickens the thirsty soul; so does the Torah quicken him
who is thirsty for knowledge. Water cleanses impurities, and God's laws
do the same. Water coming down by drops can form a river; so if a man
acquires Torah bit by bit he may eventually become a great scholar.
Water, unless one is thirsty, cannot be drunk with any degree of
pleasure; in the same way, unless one has a craving for the Torah, its
study, if enforced, will become a burden. Water runs from high places
and seeks the lower portions of the earth; so the Torah will not remain
with the haughty man, but rather seeks out the lowly. Water is not kept
in golden or silver vessels, but is best kept in earthenware; so the
Torah will not be retained except by him who is meek of spirit. A man of
distinction will not think it beneath his dignity to ask for water from
the meanest individual, neither is any one too great to despise
instruction from the most insignificant person. One may drown in water
if one cannot swim; so, unless one possesses a thorough knowledge of the
Torah and all its meanings, one may be drowned in it. But it may be said
that water gets stale if kept for a time in a vessel, and that the same
should apply to the Torah. Remember therefore that it is also likened to
wine, which improves with age. Again, water leaves no trace on him who
tastes it, and the same, it might be said, must be the case with the
Torah. But here again we must remember the comparison of the Torah to
wine. just as wine has a visible effect on one who drinks it, so the
studious man is at once known when one looks at him. Water does not
rejoice the heart, and it might be concluded that the

<span id="page_170">p. 170</span>

same is true of the Torah; hence it is likened to wine, since each
rejoices the heart. Yet wine is sometimes injurious; not so the Torah,
which is compared with oil. As oil is capable of anointing any part of
the human body, so is the Torah an anointment to its possessor. But oil
again has a bitter taste before it is purified; is this, then, equally
true of the Torah? No; for the Torah is compared to milk and honey, each
of which has an agreeable taste, while when blended they have healing
properties as well as sweetness.--Mid. Songs 1.

Israel is compared to oil. As berries do not yield their oil except when
they are crushed, so Israel will not show his greatness except under the
stress of persecution. As oil will not mix with other liquids, so Israel
will not assimilate with other nations. Oil does not effervesce; so
Israel is modest in speech. If a drop of water is put into a vessel full
of oil, a drop of oil will fall out; so if an atom of levity is put into
the heart of a wise man, an atom of his knowledge will be lost. Oil
brings light; so Israel is the light of the world (Isa. 60.). Oil has no
echo, neither has Israel in this world.--Mid. Songs 1.

Any one who brings another under the wings of the Shechinah may be said
to have created him. So it was said concerning Abraham and Sarah, 'The
souls they have made in Haran' (Gen. 12.) because of the souls they had
rescued from idolatry and brought to the knowledge of God.--Mid. Songs
1.

The Israelites were asked what security they could offer that the Torah
about to be intrusted to them would be strictly observed by them. All
proffered security, such as the Patriarchs, was rejected; but when they
mentioned their children as security these were accepted. Therefore the
prophet is charged to tell them, 'Thou hast forgotten the Torah of thy
God, so will I also forget thy children' (Hosea 4.).--Mid. Songs 1.

From the point of view of religious observance one may say that poverty
becomes the Jew; in poverty

<span id="page_171">p. 171</span>

he is an observant Jew. Rabbi Akiba used to say, Poverty becomes a Jew
as a red bridle becomes a white horse.--Mid. Songs 1.

King Solomon's mind may well be compared to a hidden treasure, of the
existence of which no one was aware until an expert pointed out the spot
and its contents. His was a most brilliant mind, lying dormant till it
was inspired from above, and then he became a veritable light to the
Torah in his exposition, by prose, poetry, and simile, of many of its
obscure passages.--Midrash Songs I.

Israel is justified in pleading for God's special protection, since
concurrently with God's work on their behalf the light of the knowledge
of God is brought about. The redemption from Egypt had the effect that
such as Jethro, Rahab, and others were brought under the wings of the
Shechinah. The miracles wrought on behalf of Hananiah, Mishael, and
Azariah also caused a large number of proselytes to Judaism.--Mid. Songs
1.

Rabbi Simeon b. Jochuah made it a point to cement affection between man
and wife. A man came to him once from Sidon and asked him to grant him a
divorce from his wife, as his ten years of conjugal bliss had brought
him no offspring. The wise Rabbi, who read impulsiveness in the man's
character, told him to go home and make a sort of a feast in
commemoration of the coming event. 'I see no reason,' he said, 'why, a
divorce should not be celebrated in some way, similar to the tying of
the marriage knot.' The man, in expectation of his approaching freedom,
was right glad of the opportunity of making merry, and gave a banquet;
and being in good spirits be said to his wife: 'See, I am prepared to
give you the most valuable thing in my house to take with you if you
offer no obstacle to our divorce, and will return to your father's
house.' When, after the banquet, he fell into a deep slumber, she got
her servants to carry him to her father's house, whither she went
herself.

<span id="page_172">p. 172</span>

On awakening and finding himself in the house of the man with whom he
was about to sever his relationship he asked his wife who was by his
side the meaning of all this. 'I have done nothing against your
expressed wish,' said his spouse it was only last evening that you
offered me the most precious thing in your house.' The man was very much
touched by this manifestation of true affection on the part of his wife,
and when they appeared again before the Rabbi the following day, the sly
sage could not conceal a smile as he asked the man what he could do for
him. 'My wife and I have come to ask your prayers on our behalf, so that
the Lord may grant us an heir or heirs.' The good man prayed to God to
grant their desire, if in his wisdom it seemed good for them, and the
couple did not remain childless for very many days.--Mid. Songs 1.

Ben Azai was in a deep study, and to those who passed him it seemed as
if he was sitting in the midst of a flame. They told Rabbi Akiba of it,
who went to him and asked him whether he was studying any mystery. 'Not
at all,' said Ben Azai. 'I was looking up the Pentateuch, the Prophets
and the Hagiographa, and rejoiced over their contents as though I had
been one of those who received the Torah at the foot of Sinai when God
proclaimed His word in the midst of fire.'--Mid. Songs 1.

On the day on which Solomon married Necha, Pharaoh's daughter, the
foundation of Rome-Israel's persecutor and oppressor--was laid by the
angel Michael.--Mid. Songs 1.

When Jeroboam erected the two golden calves, they tried likewise to
erect two cottages in Rome, but they fell in as often as they were put
up. There was near by an old man, named Abbé Kolon, who told the
builders that unless water were brought from the river Euphrates to Mix
With the lime, no building would stand there, and he offered to fetch
the water from the Euphrates. He took large casks, and posing as a wine
merchant made his

<span id="page_173">p. 173</span>

way unopposed to the river Euphrates, where he filled his casks with
water of that river and returned to Rome. The water being used for the
mixing of the lime and sand, the houses were successfully erected. <span
id="fr_22"></span>[1](#fn_22.md)--Mid. Songs 1.

Jacob went to Beersheba for the purpose of hewing down the groves which
Abraham had planted there. When on his deathbed Jacob was inspired by
the Holy Spirit and told that the Shechinah would dwell amongst his
descendants when they returned to their fatherland. The middle beam of
the Mishkan had to reach from one end to the other, and measured
thirty-two cubits (Exod. 26. 28), and was made of the timber which Jacob
had hewn down in Beersheba. The Israelites had carried this timber with
them to Egypt and preserved some during their captivity. Subsequently
they took this timber with them at the Exodus. Thus we have it stated:
'and every man with whom was found shittim wood for the work of the
service brought it.'--Mid. Songs 1.

Formerly learning was a thing sought after, but now we are become
spiritually sick we grow dainty, and choose only light reading or what
we consider comforting and promising words. So a man when in robust
health does not pick and choose his food, but when less robust he must
have light morsels such as will tempt his appetite.--Mid. Songs 2.

Israel at the Exodus may well be compared to a prince just recovered
from illness. When his tutor suggests study, the king decides to allow
his son some time after his convalescence to recover his strength before
he begins

<span id="page_174">p. 174</span>

to read. Israel did not at once recover from the sufferings they had
endured in Egypt, and their Heavenly Father decided to let them have a
three months' rest, and feed them with manna and quails, before they
approached their school, Sinai, to receive instruction.--Mid. Songs 2.

Nebuchadnezzar was indeed the proverbial gale coming from the north, and
sweeping everything before it in the south.--Mid. Songs 3.

Sleep is most agreeable and beneficial in the earlier part of the
night.--Mid. Songs 3.

In the plague of hail which was sent on Egypt there were two opposite
elements mingled together. There was hail, and fire mingled with the
hail (Exod. 9.). It is like a king ruling over various nationalities
which are enemies to one another, yet the legions the king sends against
an enemy bury their opposition and unite to fight for the king's
cause.--Mid. Songs 3.

A preacher must be well conversant with the whole twenty-four books of
the Bible. If he is deficient in the knowledge of one of these books it
is as bad as if he had no acquaintance with any of them. He must be
meek, and even humble; every act of his life should testify to his
worth, and withal if his hearers do not like his preaching he is to
desist from it.--Mid. Songs 4.

The Psalms were composed by ten individuals: Adam, Abraham, Moses,
David, Solomon, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, Korah's three sons (taken as one
of the composers), and Ezra. But although they were composed by ten
different individuals, David's name alone is connected with them. It is
like a company of musicians who appear before a king, and are told:
'Although you are, everyone of you, efficient in your art, yet I wish
the one with the sweetest voice to sing before me.'--Mid. Songs 4.

The Sanhedrin were known by the designation, 'The eyes of the
community.'--Mid. Songs 4.

During the existence of the Temple there were plenty

<span id="page_175">p. 175</span>

of wicked men such as Ahaz and his followers, Manasseh and his
associates, and Amon and his companions. On the contrary, when the
Temple was destroyed, the people were conspicuous for the good men
amongst them, like Daniel and his associates in righteousness, Mordecai
and his followers, and Ezra and his people.--Mid. Songs 4.

Do not, like a simpleton, be deterred from study by thinking 'How can I
meet the formidable task of acquiring all that is to be known?' Rather
argue like a wise man, 'Others have done it, so it can be done.' Try a
little by day and a little by night, and in the course of time your task
will be accomplished.--Mid. Songs 5.

The Torah or knowledge increases, and the intellect becomes keener by
proper study, and any difficult matter submitted to scholars will find
solution; as a structure will be satisfactorily erected by skilful
workmen each contributing his skill.--Mid. Songs 5.

The second Temple was deprived of the following five blessings which the
first Temple had enjoyed: (1) The fire that came down from heaven for
the altar. (2) The anointing oil. (3) The ark. (4) The Holy Spirit. (5)
The Urim and Thummim.--Mid. Songs 8.

With the death of the three last of the latter prophets, viz. Haggai,
Zechariah and Malachi, the Holy Spirit (prophecy) ceased, but use was
made of the בת קל echo. Once at the assembly of the wise men in Jericho
they heard the echo proclaim, 'There is one amongst you who is well
worthy of the Holy Spirit, but alas the present generation is unworthy
of it.' They thought of Hillel the elder. At his death they lamented him
with the words, 'Oh that saintly man, that meek man, that pupil of
Ezra.'--Mid. Song of Songs 8.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="fn_21"></span>[167:1](tmm13.htm#fr_21.md) See also *Moreh
Nebuchim*, vol. 3, cap. 51.

<span id="fn_22"></span>[173:1](tmm13.htm#fr_22.md) This narrative is
seemingly uninteresting, but it seems to me to be given in connexion
with what is said about the building of Rome owing to Solomon marrying
Pharaoh's daughter. The Midrash proceeds to show how the building of
Rome extended as the Israelites sunk deeper in sin. Jeroboam having
erected the idols caused a further development of Rome. The houses there
only became firm when the water of Euphrates, near Jeroboam's wicked
monuments, was mixed with the building materials.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Midrash Ecclesiastes](tmm14.md)
